@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Supporting healthcare management decisions via robust clustering of event logs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present an effective way to summarize patients’ pathways.A new spectral approach that emphasizes robustness is proposed for trace clustering.The method is applied to the emergency department of a public hospital.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Process mining,Clustering,Robustness,Knowledge discovery,Healthcare management,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Business processes constitute an essential asset of organizations while the related process models help to better comprehend the process and therefore to enable effective process analysis or redesign. However, there are several working environments where flows are particularly flexible (e.g., healthcare, customer service) and process models are either very hard to get created, or they fail to reflect reality. The aim of this paper is to support decision-making by providing comprehensible process models in the case of such flexible environments. Following a process mining approach, we propose a methodology to cluster customers’ flows and produce effective summarizations. We propose a novel method to create a similarity metric that is efficient in downgrading the effect of noise and outliers. We use a spectral technique that emphasizes the robustness of the estimated groups, therefore it provides process analysts with clearer process maps. The proposed method is applied to a real case of a healthcare institution delivering valuable insights and showing compelling performance in terms of process models’ complexity and density.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Business processes are valuable assets of every organization. They control the revenue potential as much as they shape the cost profile of an organization. Processes directly affect the attractiveness of products and services as perceived by the market and they define the ability of organizations to adapt to new circumstances [10]. Therefore, it is no surprise that organizations strive to model, revise, and optimize their internal business processes, as well as the processes shared with other organizations.In working environments with strong behavioural diversity (i.e., environments where deviations in the process control flows are common), business models are usually ambiguous [13]. In such environments, the problem concerning business process awareness can be defined as follows: are there any dominant patterns of process behaviour? Is it possible to identify groups of cases with similar behaviours? The objective of this paper is to propose a method that delivers compact and comprehensive synopses of flexible behaviours, keeping in mind the end goal to best support their analysis and improvement.As an example, in this paper we consider a case study involving the clinical pathways of patients in a hospital, where there is a diverse set of paths followed depending on the peculiarities of each patient. The resulting complex behaviour of the business processes in such an environment can be observed through the trace that every patient leaves. On that account, a process mining perspective is followed in this study. The idea of process mining is to discover, monitor and improve real processes by extracting knowledge from event logs, which are readily available in business information systems [37]. Event logs may store additional information about events (like the timestamp and the resource performing the activity). In other words, each case is leaving a trace, which corresponds to the observed behaviour.When it comes to clinical pathways analysis, process mining techniques face a critical challenge: Patients routes vary significantly and in order to deliver comprehensive models, the event log should be someway summarized [34]. The authors in [17] propose a horizontal summarization, by partitioning the event log into time intervals. In [16], the authors exploit a rich dataset of patients’ traces to summarize the clinical pathways based on a behavioural topic analysis. Indeed, as the authors in [19] discuss, the integration of medical knowledge can significantly improve the comprehensibility of the results.Often, however, such medical knowledge is not available (e.g., relevant data are not recorded, or data are considered too sensitive to be provided, or even medical experts are not available for the process analysis project). In this paper, we focus on such cases; therefore, we follow a trace clustering approach that mostly relies on the control-flow features of the cases.Trace clustering aims at discovering clusters with related behaviours. However, considering the set of traces in the event log all at once often leads to ambiguities because the event log contains traces of cases that may refer to very different behaviours (i.e., potentially unique or infrequent cases). By identifying clusters of diverse traces, process discovery techniques could be connected to subsets of behaviours and subsequently deliver more clear, coherent and comprehensible process models.In this framework, this study contributes by proposing a method that relegates the effect of infrequent behaviours (without ignoring them) and eventually provides effective summarizations of the event log. This is achieved through clustering the traces using a more stable similarity metric. The stability of the metric is reached by introducing the concept of neighbourhood. This addition allows promoting any prevalent patterns, while it reduces the impact of isolated cases to the clusters’ formation. In this way the proposed methodology provides compact information and meaningful insights to managers as it facilitates the derivation of a simple interpretation of a complex business process, thus allowing process stakeholders to communicate on an evidence-based ground.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section provides a brief overview of related works. In Section 3, we describe the case study of a public hospital and the proposed methodology. The approach is analytically presented in Section 4, while the obtained results are discussed in Section 5. Finally, a short discussion concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
