@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A semantic approach for text clustering using WordNet and lexical chains

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A modified WordNet based similarity measure for word sense disambiguation.Lexical chains as text representation for ideally cover the theme of texts.Extracted core semantics are sufficient to reduce dimensionality of feature set.The proposed scheme is able to correctly estimate the true number of clusters.The topic labels have good indicator of recognizing and understanding the clusters.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Text clustering,WordNet,Lexical chains,Core semantic features,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Traditional clustering algorithms do not consider the semantic relationships among words so that cannot accurately represent the meaning of documents. To overcome this problem, introducing semantic information from ontology such as WordNet has been widely used to improve the quality of text clustering. However, there still exist several challenges, such as synonym and polysemy, high dimensionality, extracting core semantics from texts, and assigning appropriate description for the generated clusters. In this paper, we report our attempt towards integrating WordNet with lexical chains to alleviate these problems. The proposed approach exploits ontology hierarchical structure and relations to provide a more accurate assessment of the similarity between terms for word sense disambiguation. Furthermore, we introduce lexical chains to extract a set of semantically related words from texts, which can represent the semantic content of the texts. Although lexical chains have been extensively used in text summarization, their potential impact on text clustering problem has not been fully investigated. Our integrated way can identify the theme of documents based on the disambiguated core features extracted, and in parallel downsize the dimensions of feature space. The experimental results using the proposed framework on reuters-21578 show that clustering performance improves significantly compared to several classical methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Text clustering is a useful technique that aims at organizing large document collections into smaller meaningful and manageable groups, which plays an important role in information retrieval, browsing and comprehension. Traditional clustering algorithms are usually relying on the BOW (Bag of Words) approach, and an obvious disadvantage of the BOW is that it ignores the semantic relationship among words so that cannot accurately represent the meaning of documents. As the rapid growth of text documents, the textual data have become diversity of vocabulary, they are high-dimensional, and carry also semantic information. Therefore, text clustering techniques that can correctly represent the theme of documents and improve clustering performance, ideally process data with a small size, are greatly needed. Recently, a number of semantic-based approaches are being developed. WordNet (Miller, 1995), which is one of the most widely used thesauruses for English, has been extensively used to improve the quality of text clustering with its semantic relations of terms (Amine, Elberrichi, & Simonet, 2010; Bouras & Tsogkas, 2012; Chen, Tseng, & Liang, 2010; Dang, Zhang, Lu, & Zhang, 2013; Fodeh, Punch, & Tan, 2011; Hotho, Staab, & Stumme, 2003; Jing, Zhou, Ng, & Huang, 2006; Kang, Kim, & Lee, 2005; Recupero, 2007; Sedding & Kazakov, 2004; Song, Li, & Park, 2009).However, there still exist several challenges for the clustering results. (1) Synonym and polysemy problems. There has been much work done on the use of ontology to replace the original terms in a document by the most appropriate ontology concept for the solution of these problems; this process is known as word sense disambiguation (WSD). This approach, however, has not proven to be as useful as first hoped. For example, approaches that expand the feature space by replacing a term with its potential concepts only increase the feature space without necessarily improving clustering performance (Fodeh et al., 2011; Hotho et al., 2003). (2) High-dimensional term features. High dimension of feature space may increase the processing time and diminish the clustering performance, which is a key problem in text clustering. Most current techniques usually rely on matrix operation methods such as LSI (Deerwester, Dumais, Landauer, Furnas, & Harshman, 1990), ICA (Hyvärinen & Oja, 2000), and LDA (Martínez & Kak, 2001) to deal with this problem. Unfortunately, these models need too much computation. Although there also exist a few techniques have considered semantic information (Recupero, 2007; Termier, Sebag, & Rousset, 2001), they have various weaknesses. For example, they do not explicitly and systematically consider the theme of a document. (3) Extract core semantics from texts. Existing dimension-reduced methods may remove some topic features, which results in the semantic content of a document is decomposed and cannot be reflected. It is desirable to extract a subset of the disambiguated terms with their relations (known as the core semantic features) that are “cluster-aware”, which leads to improving the clustering accuracy with a reduced number of terms. (4) Assign distinguished and meaningful description for the generated clusters. In order to conveniently recognize the content of each cluster, it is necessarily to assign concise and descriptive labels to help analysts to interpret the result. Nevertheless, good solutions of assigning topic labels to clusters for ease of analysis, recognition, and interpretation are still rare.This paper attempts to alleviate mentioned above problems, its contributions can be summarized as follows.(1)We propose a modified similarity measure based on WordNet for word sense disambiguation. This is based on the idea that the explicit and implicit semantic relationships between synsets (concepts) in WordNet impose equally importance factors in the word similarity measure. Previous works have showed that exploiting the structural information of WordNet can improve the accuracy of similarity measurement, but the effects of adding textual data to structural information are still not very extensively researched. In this paper, we explore if the combination of the structural information and the glosses of synsets can provide a more accurate assessment of the similarity between terms for word sense disambiguation.We introduce lexical chains to capture the main theme of texts. Although lexical chains have been extensively used in text summarization, their potential impact on text clustering problem has not been fully investigated. In our work, we investigate the identification of lexical chains for text representation. We have observed that the concepts extracted from lexical chains as a small subset of the semantic features can ideally cover the theme of texts, and sufficient to reduce the dimensions of feature set, potentially leading to better clustering results.We show that our method can estimate the true number of clusters by observing the experimental results, which is valuable for determining the value of k in K-means clustering algorithms.We also demonstrate that our generated topical labels have good indicator of recognizing and understanding the content of clusters. Since lexical chains represent the most of semantic content of texts, we believe that topic labels which describe and interpret the content of a cluster should be selected from the words of lexical chains. In this paper, we use the disambiguated concepts (word senses) from lexical chains in the selection of topic labels for the generated clusters, this solution is especially important when the concept title is ambiguous.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews some related works. Section 3 presents a modified similarity measure based on WordNet for word sense disambiguation. In Section 4, we describe how to extract core semantics by using lexical chains. Section 5 details the experiments that evaluate our method and the analysis of results. Finally, we conclude this work and show its implications in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presents a methodology for clustering using WordNet and lexical chains. A modified WordNet-based semantic similarity measure is proposed for word sense disambiguation, and lexical chains are employed to extract core semantic features that express the topic of documents. We have mainly solved four problems in document clustering. The problems are disambiguating the polysemous and synonymous words, overcoming high dimensionality, determining the number of clusters, and assigning appropriate description for the generated clusters. Most previous researches tried to address only one of these four problems. But, we study on a hybrid method for solving these problems in text clustering at the same time. We show that the combination of explicit and implicit semantic relationships in WordNet pays a positive role to the assessment of word sense similarity. Furthermore, our proposed approach can estimate the true number of clusters by observing the obtained results, which is valuable for deciding the value of k in K-means clustering algorithms. In addition, we can use the top ranked concepts of each cluster to define the clusters for ease of human recognition and analysis. More importantly, we show that the lexical chain features (core semantics) can improve the quality significantly with a reduced number of features in the document clustering process. Although lexical chains have been widely used in many application domains, this study is one of the few researches which try to investigate the potential impact of lexical chains on text clustering.However, there are still some limitations in our research. Some important words which are not included in WordNet lexicon will not be considered as concepts for similarity evaluation. In addition, the proposed method can obtain better clustering results only if the explicit and implicit relationships between words are thoroughly represented in WordNet.In future work, we would like to perform our method on a larger knowledge base, such as Wikipedia. Moreover, since we have demonstrated that the lexical chains can lead to improvements in text clustering, the next work we plan to explore the feasibility of lexical chains in the text mining task.