@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A heuristic approach to effective and efficient clustering on uncertain objects

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We reduce UK-means to K-means.We experimentally show that K-means performs much faster than existing pruning algorithms.We propose Approximate UK-means to heuristically identify boundary objects and re-assign them to better clusters.We propose three models for the representation of cluster representative. To our knowledge, this is the first time to introduce uncertain model of cluster representative.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Clustering,Uncertain objects,UK-means,Expected Euclidean distance,Expected squared Euclidean distance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We study the problem of clustering uncertain objects whose locations are uncertain and described by probability density functions (pdf). We analyze existing pruning algorithms and experimentally show that there exists a new bottleneck in the performance due to the overhead of pruning candidate clusters for assignment of each uncertain object in each iteration. In this article, we will show that by considering squared Euclidean distance, UK-means (without pruning techniques) is reduced to K-means and performs much faster than pruning algorithms, however, with some discrepancies in the clustering results due to using different distance functions. Thus, we propose Approximate UK-means to heuristically identify objects of boundary cases and re-assign them to better clusters. Three models for the representation of cluster representative (certain model, uncertain model and heuristic model) are proposed to calculate expected squared Euclidean distance between objects and cluster representatives in this paper. Our experimental results show that on average the execution time of Approximate UK-means is only 25% more than K-means and our approach reduces the discrepancies of K-means’ clustering results by up to 70%.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
While there has been a large amount of research on mining and queries on relational databases [1], the focus has been on databases that store data in exact values. In many real-life applications, however, the raw data (for example, in the case of sensor data) are not precise or accurate when they were collected or produced. The clustering of such “uncertain” data can be illustrated by the following simple realistic example. Considering sensors on wild animals that update their locations periodically, the sample locations of an animal over a period generate a (discrete) probability distribution function (PDF) describing the possible locations of the animal. Clustering results on those animals may reveal the possible groups and interactions between them. In our work, we consider the problem of clustering objects with multidimensional uncertainty where an object is represented by an uncertain region over which a discrete probability distribution function (PDF) or a probability density function (pdf) is defined. Formally, there is a set of n objectso1,…,oi,…,on,1<i<nin an m-dimensional space. An objectoiis represented by a pdffi:Rm→R(Rrepresents real number space) that specifies the probability density of each possible location of objectoi. The method discussed in this paper does not rely on any special forms offi, but only requires that for each objectoi, the uncertain regionAiof objectoiis finite, i.e.∀x∉Ai,fi(x)=0. Thus, each object can be bounded by a finite bounding box (Aiis bounded by a finite region, but it does not mean that the number of samples is finite). This assumption is convincing because in practice the probability density of an object is high only within a very small region of concentration.The goal of UK-means is to group n objects into K clusters so that the sum of expected Euclidean distances (EED) [2] between the uncertain objects and their cluster centers is minimized. Thus,C(oi)=cjis used to represent that objectoiis assigned to clustercj, andpC(oi)is the cluster’s representative point. K cluster representatives should be found such that the objective function∑i=1nEED(oi,pC(oi))=∑i=1n∫fi(x)ED(x,pC(oi)dx)is minimized where ED is Euclidean distance function based on a metric d (i.e. Euclidean distance in UK-means and pruning algorithms, squared Euclidean distance in our approach).In UK-means, the calculation of expected Euclidean distance is time consuming. Pruning UK-means [3,4] improves the efficiency of UK-means by pruning candidate clusters. However, existing algorithms are still undesirably slow due to the overhead of pruning candidate clusters for each object in each iteration. In this paper, UK-means is improved by using squared Euclidean distance and heuristically reduce the discrepancy generated by using different distance functions. Three models for the representation of cluster representative (certain model, uncertain model and heuristic model) are also proposed to calculate expected squared Euclidean distance between objects and cluster representatives. Heuristic model is a combination of certain model and uncertain model for clustering uncertain objects heuristically.Our contributions of this work include:(i) After applying the analytic solution [5,6] to reduce UK-means to K-means, we experimentally show that K-means performs much faster than existing pruning algorithms proposed in [3,4] with some discrepancies in the clustering results due to using different distance functions.(ii) We propose Approximate UK-means to heuristically identify objects of boundary cases and re-assign them to better clusters. Our experimental results show that on average the execution time of Approximate UK-means is only 25% more than K-means (while pruning algorithms are 300% more) and our approach reduces the discrepancies of K-means’ clustering results up to 70% with assuming the results of pruning algorithms [3,4] to be the ground truth.(iii) Different from previous work in [7], we propose three models for the representation of cluster representative (certain model, uncertain model and heuristic model) to calculate expected squared Euclidean distance between objects and cluster representatives. From the experiments, Approximate UK-means based on the uncertain model can additionally reduce the discrepancy of the certain cluster representative model up to 77% with only a little execution time increased.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly describes related work on uncertain objects. In Section 3, we introduce expected squared Euclidean distance by using three different models of cluster representative. Section 4 proposes a heuristic Approximate UK-means to identify objects of boundary cases and re-assign them to better clusters. Section 5 demonstrates the efficiency and effectiveness of Approximate UK-means by extensive experiments. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we studied the problem of clustering objects whose locations are presented by probability density functions (pdf). Existing pruning techniques have improved the efficiency of UK-means by reducing the number of expected distance calculations. However, these techniques introduce new overhead and become the performance bottleneck. UK-means can be reduced to K-means by using expected squared Euclidean distance instead of expected Euclidean distance to overcome the bottleneck of existing pruning techniques (MinMax-SHIFT and VDBi-SHIFT).Our experiments show that K-means by using squared Euclidean distance is much faster than UK-means (even with pruning techniques, i.e. MinMax-SHIFT and VDBi-SHIFT). The significant improvement in the speed is due to (i) the distance calculations are done much faster, (ii) the overhead is much reduced as no pruning is necessary, and (iii) it only needs to load samples in the beginning while pruning algorithms need to load them for every expected distance calculation. K-means generates clustering results with discrepancies from the original clustering results of UK-means, which can be reduced by our proposed approach (Approximate UK-means). In addition, the uncertainty of cluster representative is considered in our work. To our knowledge, this is the first time to introduce the uncertain model of cluster representative. The uncertain model used in Approximate UK-means can reduce the discrepancy caused by large difference between the uncertainty of cluster representatives. The best reduction of discrepancy of the uncertain model with respect to the certain model is 21.9% and 77.0% on random data sets and Gaussian data sets respectively.