@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A prioritization model for locating relief logistic centers using analytic hierarchy process with interval comparison matrix

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Novel multi-criteria decision making for prioritizing disaster relief centers.A case study is used to show the applicability of the proposed optimization model.Sensitivity analysis as regards key parameters is performed in the case study.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Disaster,Relief logistic centers,AHP,Lexicographic goal programming,Two-step logarithmic goal programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
When natural disasters happen, relief logistic centers (RLCs) and the quality of their services become absolutely important. In other words, choosing proper locations for RLCs has a direct impact on operating costs and timeliness of responses to the rising demands. This paper aims at proposing a decision support system for prioritizing RLC’s locations to facilitate providing emergency helps when natural disasters occur. The present study, focuses on considering availability, risk, technical issues, cost and coverage in locating RLCs. It is assumed that applying analytic hierarchy process (AHP) can facilitate the problem of locating these centers. The most important step in this process is establishing pair-wise comparisons for the criteria and alternatives. As it is more logical to use interval comparisons instead of crisp ones in real-world problems due to some considerations, this paper has used two decision-making methods known as lexicographic goal programming (LGP) and two-step logarithmic goal programming (TLGP) to derive priorities from pair-wise matrices. To assess the proposed method, a case study of Tehran, the capital city of Iran has also been discussed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The term “disaster” is defined as a breakdown in the normal functioning of a community that has a noticeable adverse impact on people, their works, and their environment, and disrupts local response capacity as a result of a natural event such as a hurricane or earthquake or as the result of human activities [18].Disaster management is the discipline of avoiding and dealing with risks [10]. Although disasters may threaten every community, it is possible to prepare for, respond to and recover from them and alleviate the destructions to a certain degree. Disaster management involves preparing for disasters before they happen, responding to them immediately, as well as supporting, and rebuilding societies following them. The purpose of disaster management is rapid provision of relief (emergency food, water, medicine, shelter, and supplies) so as to minimize human suffering and death.Not only is it the responsibility of the governments to take pre-disaster and post-disaster actions to reduce destructions and casualties, but also non-governmental organizations (NGOs) should participate in different phases of disaster management [26].The efficiency of relief operations has a close relation with distribution of RLCs. Response to disaster commences with post-disaster rescue and relief operations, continues with recovery and reconstruction, and is followed by preventive actions such as determining indexes for measuring preparedness for disasters [25].In recent years, the number of catastrophic disasters has significantly increased and the resulting sufferings, casualties, costs and social problems highlight the importance of preparedness for them. An important factor in the effectiveness of post disaster relief operations is the locations of RLCs. RLCs are used for safeguarding the emergency commodities in the preparation phase of the disaster management. These commodities are used for securing injured people after a disaster happens. As a result, such commodities must be stored in properly located RLCs to remain safe. Therefore, there is a critical need to propose a decision support system for prioritizing RLCs for providing post disaster relief and minimizing sufferings and fatalities.As the nature of disaster and its unpredictability implies, different attributes can contribute to determining the location of RLCs and multiple criteria should be taken into consideration. Hence, locating RLCs should be treated as a multi-attribute decision-making problem. However, previous studies in the area of humanitarian logistics have just taken some aspects of the problem of locating RLCs into consideration (mostly two or three factors). Moreover, there are a few papers which have proposed more factors for this purpose. The gap between real-world requirements of disaster logistics and previous studies motivated us to explore multiple criteria associated with locating RLCs.The limited number of researches which have considered multiple factors in locating RLCs on the one hand, and the importance of location of RLCs in decreasing post disaster sufferings and casualties on the other, led the present researchers to establish a decision support system (DSS) for ranking the potential location of RLCs.An important issue associated with multiple criteria decision-making is human judgment and formation of a decision matrix which reflects the relative importance of criteria and alternatives regarding each criterion. In real-world problems, it seems more logical to form interval pair-wise comparison matrices instead of crisp ones. As regards the natural uncertainty and vagueness involved in human judgments, the concept of interval pair-wise comparison would probably fit the case of the present study.Many of the real-world problems are multifaceted and have conflicting natures. Therefore, it is essential to consider the trade-offs between them. Based on this, obtaining the relative weights of our criteria is of great importance. Interval comparison matrices are used as an effective framework for estimating weights of criteria. According to the uncertainty which is inherent in human judgments and the subjective nature of the judgments, it is not reasonable to make definitive judgments and it seems more logical to form interval judgments. Considering interval comparisons in the concept of ranking and in selecting RLCs can be regarded as one of the unique features of the present paper.A number of techniques have been proposed and have been widely used for dealing with interval priorities. In this paper, two different methods including lexicographic goal programming and two-step logarithmic goal programming, which use interval pair-wise comparison, are employed to solve this problem. Apparently, these two approaches have never been used in determining the location of RLCs before.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: a literature review is provided in Section 2. Section 3 includes definitions of LGP and TLGP. The proposed decision support system is described in Section 4 In Section 5, a real world example from Tehran, capital of Iran is considered. Conclusion and future researches are provided in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
