@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Data mining for fuzzy diagnosis systems in LTE networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A Knowledge Acquisition learning algorithm is proposed for troubleshooting in LTE.A sensitivity analysis is performed on the proposed algorithm.The algorithm is tested with a live network scenario.The performance has been compared with a Bayesian Network based algorithm.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Self-healing,Self-Organizing Networks,LTE,Data mining,Data driven learning,Supervised learning,Fault management,Fuzzy systems,Big Data,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The recent developments in cellular networks, along with the increase in services, users and the demand of high quality have raised the Operational Expenditure (OPEX). Self-Organizing Networks (SON) are the solution to reduce these costs. Within SON, self-healing is the functionality that aims to automatically solve problems in the radio access network, at the same time reducing the downtime and the impact on the user experience. Self-healing comprises four main functions: fault detection, root cause analysis, fault compensation and recovery. To perform the root cause analysis (also known as diagnosis), Knowledge-Based Systems (KBS) are commonly used, such as fuzzy logic. In this paper, a novel method for extracting the Knowledge Base for a KBS from solved troubleshooting cases is proposed. This method is based on data mining techniques as opposed to the manual techniques currently used. The data mining problem of extracting knowledge out of LTE troubleshooting information can be considered a Big Data problem. Therefore, the proposed method has been designed so it can be easily scaled up to process a large volume of data with relatively low resources, as opposed to other existing algorithms. Tests show the feasibility and good results obtained by the diagnosis system created by the proposed methodology in LTE networks.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, mobile communications have grown both in traffic volume and offered services. This has increased the expectations for quality of service. In this scenario, service providers are pressed to increase their competitiveness, and therefore to increase quality and reduce costs in the maintenance of their networks. This task can only be achieved by increasing the degree of automation of the network. The Next Generation Mobile Networks (NGMN) Alliance (NGMN, 2006) defined Self-Organizing Networks (SON) as a set of principles and concepts to add automation to mobile networks. Recently, these ideas were applied to Long Term Evolution (LTE) networks by the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) (3GPP, 2012) in the form of use cases and specific SON functionalities. The SON concept is composed by three fields: self-configuration, self-optimization and self-healing. This paper is focused on self-healing, which includes all the functionality targeted towards automating troubleshooting in the radio access network (RAN). Currently, the task of RAN troubleshooting is manually done, so the ability of automating it is a great competitive advantage for operators. The benefits of self-healing are numerous, since it will offload troubleshooting experts of repetitive maintenance work and let them focus on improving the network. It also reduces the downtime of the network, therefore increasing the quality perceived by the users.Self-healing is composed of four main tasks: fault detection, root cause analysis (diagnosis), compensation and fault recovery (Barco, Lázaro, & Muñoz, 2012). Currently there are no commercial implementations of these functions, although some research effort has been recently made.The reason of this shortage of implementations, according to the COMMUNE project (COMMUNE, 2012) is the high degree of uncertainty in diagnosis in the RAN of mobile networks. The COMMUNE project uses a case based reasoning algorithm (Szilagyi & Novaczki, 2012) where a vector of Performance Indicators (PIs) is compared against a database of known problems. The cause will be the same as the case of the nearest stored problem.In Barco, Díez, Wille, and Lázaro (2009) a Bayesian Network (BN) is used to do the diagnosis. To implement the system, it is required that an expert sets the parameters of the BN, so a Knowledge Acquisition Tool is also presented in Barco, Lázaro, Wille, Díez, and Patel (2009).The UniverSelf project (Univerself, 2012) combines BNs with case-based reasoning (Bennacer, Ciavaglia, Chibani, Amirat, & Mellouk, 2012; Hounkonnou & Fabre, 2012) for the diagnosis process. Apart from the previous references in diagnosis, research in self-healing has also been extended to detection (Asghar, Hamalainen, & Ristaniemi, 2012; Barreto, Mota, Souza, Frota, & Aguayo, 2005) and compensation (Eckhardt et al., 2011; Razavi, 2012), which are out of the scope of this paper.This paper proposes a method for learning troubleshooting rules for diagnosis methods based on Fuzzy Logic Controllers (FLCs) (Lee, 1990). FLCs use fuzzy logic (Zadeh, 1965) to assign fuzzy values to numerical variables, and by applying fuzzy rules, they obtain the value of an output variable (e.g. a parameter value) or a given action. FLCs have been used for diagnosis in other fields, such as industrial processes (Serdio, Lughofer, Pichler, Buchegger, & Efendic, 2014), machinery operation (Serdio et al., 2014; Lughofer & Guardiola, 2008) or medical diagnosis(Innocent, John, & Garibaldi, 2004). Although FLCs have been used in mobile networks for self-optimization (Muñoz, Barco, & de la Bandera, 2013a; Muñoz, Barco, & de la Bandera, 2013b), there are no previous references proposing its application to self-healing.The implementation of the diagnosis process is done by Knowledge-Based Systems (KBS) (Akerkar & Sajja, 2010; Triantaphyllou & Felici, 2006) such as BNs and FLCs. KBS are composed of two main parts: the Inference Engine (IE) and the Knowledge Base (KB). This separation permits the algorithm to be used in a variety of situations by changing only the KB. Still, the construction of the KB, or Knowledge Acquisition (KA) (Triantaphyllou & Felici, 2006; Maier, 2007) is a major research topic. This is where the previous KA proposals in literature for diagnosis in wireless networks fail to deliver convincing results. The KA process involves the troubleshooting experts in a time consuming process (Studer, Benjamins, & Fensel, 1998; Ruiz-Aviles, Luna-Ramírez, Toril, & Ruiz, 2012; Chung, Chang, & Wang, 2012; Barco et al., 2009). It is based on the fact that the knowledge is contained in the experience of the expert. An alternative approach (Triantaphyllou & Felici, 2006) considers that the knowledge applied by the experts in the troubleshooting process will also be contained in its results. Every pair composed of the PIs and the fault cause and/or action(s) to be taken provided by the expert contains information about what aspects are observed by the expert and how they are related to each other. Therefore, a problem database (Hatamura, Ilno, Tsuchlya, & Hamaguchi, 2003) can be created, where each problem is saved along with its diagnosis; and this database will hold the expert’s knowledge implicitly.Data mining (DM) consists of the discovery of patterns in large data sets through the application of specific algorithms (Kantardzic, 2011; Witten, Frank, & Mark, 2011; Han, Kamber, & Pei, 2012). The result of DM is a model of the studied system. DM is used to process information from sensor networks (Papadimitriou, Brockwell, & Faloutsos, 2003), in scientific data collection (Ball & Brunner, 2010) or computer science (Ektefa, Memar, Sidi, & Affendey, 2010). DM is also used in commercial applications to find marketing trends (Linoff & Berry, 2011). Modern data collection and monitoring systems produce large amounts of data containing valuable knowledge, but due to the huge amount of information, this knowledge is hidden and needs to be extracted and easily visualized. In fact, the traditional DM techniques are often insufficient or ineffective for the large amount of available data. This leads to the development of Big Data techniques (Russom, 2011), which deal with databases that have special requirements due to one or more of the following factors, known as the 3 Vs of Big Data:•Volume: the amount of data generated may require new transmission, storage and processing techniques. In the case of mobile networks, data is produced by each network element (e.g. eNodeB) over all the network, but also by each connected terminal.Velocity: usually there are constraints on the time when the analysis results must be available, so that the information can be used in real time. In mobile networks, part of the data is produced in streams, that is, continuously as new events happen while the users access the services. In order to reduce processing times, heavy parallelization is very often the best solution.Variety: data is not always normalized and clearly structured. Also, formats vary depending on the nature of the data and the element that produces it.In this work, a DM algorithm for obtaining fuzzy rules in the “if … then …” form for the diagnosis of the RAN of LTE networks is proposed, which relates certain behaviors in the PIs of a sector at a given time to the possible problem that is present in it. The rules reflect the knowledge of the experts that is implicitly contained in the results of their work (a database containing the solved problems). Other learning algorithms have been proposed for fuzzy rules in other fields, but none of them have been adapted to mobile communication networks (Wang & Mendel, 1992; Cordon, Herrera, & Villar, 2011; Lughofer & Kindermann, 2010; Pratama, Anavatti, Angelov, & Lughofer, 2014; Chen, 2013; Babuska, 1998). This algorithm has been designed to be easily parallelizable in order to fit the velocity requirements described earlier and to minimize the memory footprint so a large volume of data can be processed.The remaining of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 the traditional processes of troubleshooting is presented, along with the use of KBS for automating it. In Section 3 the proposed DM algorithm for automating the KA process is presented. Afterwards, in Section 4, the system is tested and its performance is compared with another learning algorithm. Finally, the conclusions are discussed in Section 5.The process of troubleshooting is made up of four main tasks:•Detection: determining that there is a problem in the network and isolating its origin, that is, the sectors that are degrading the performance of the whole network.Compensation: reconfiguration of the neighboring sectors to cover the affected users.Diagnosis: determining the cause of the problem.Recovery: actions to restore the affected sector to a normal state.This process is usually manually done. Experts monitor a reduced set of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs), aggregated over the whole network. KPIs are composite variables that contain the information of several low-level PIs and reflect the general behavior of the sector. When one (or several) of those KPIs is degraded (e.g. it is lower than a certain threshold), a list of the worst offenders is obtained, showing the sectors that more strongly degrade the KPI. Those sectors are then diagnosed by observing further symptoms (i.e. abnormal values of PIs and other low-level metrics, such as counters, measurements and alarms). The relations among these symptoms, described by heuristic “if … then …” rules, determine the diagnosis. This task is a classification process, where each case (a set of PIs of a sector on a given time interval) is assigned a class describing a specific cause. With the result of the diagnosis, corrective actions are taken and the process is repeated if the sector is not fixed.The process of diagnosis, as explained above, can be replicated with an FLC that applies fuzzy rules over a subset of PIs of the sector in order to classify the case. Since FLCs are KBS, they have a separation between the IE and the KB. The KB is divided in two parts:•Data Base (DB): information about the variables that the system works with. In the case of mobile network troubleshooting, it contains the descriptions of the PIs and the diagnosed causes.Rule Base (RB): information about the relations between the variables and the output. The heuristic rules used for troubleshooting compose the RB.In this work, we will use DM only to obtain the RB. The DB is usually provided by the experts or by the specifications of the individual PIs. Typically, there are two ways for acquiring the knowledge needed in the RB from the experts:•By interviewing them. This option involves a knowledge engineer (Maier, 2007) who has the knowledge about the expert system operation and translates the knowledge that the expert provides into the appropriate format. It is both a time consuming and intrusive process for the expert and it requires an additional specialist.By teaching the expert the particularities of the expert system so the knowledge is directly coded by him. It is even more intrusive than the previous option and involves a steep learning curve.These methods of KA rely heavily on the experts involvement. Unfortunately, in the industry of mobile communication network management, the time of the experts is a scarce resource. Therefore, the attempt of creating a RB by traditional KA is bound to failure. In Section 3.2 an algorithm for extracting the knowledge from a set of solved troubleshooting cases is proposed. The output of the algorithm is a RB that can be used in an FLC to classify cases and therefore automate the diagnosis process.FLCs imitate the process of human thinking, focusing on two of its main aspects:•Humans perceive and operate with fuzzy values. Instead of numerical values, human thought tends to classify the value of a variable in a fuzzy set.Human thought uses heuristic “if … then …” rules for inference of new concepts based on existing fuzzy values.A properly configured FLC can be easily interpretable (Casillas, 2003; Lughofer, 2013; Gacto, Alcalá, & Herrera, 2011), that is, it is given in a simple and understandable way. Interpretability of a model is important since it can be more easily used and modified when needed. Also, an interpretable FLC may offer information about the inner workings of the modelled system, helping to expand human understanding about it.FLCs have three parts; a fuzzification block, that translates from numerical crisp values to fuzzy values, an inference block, that applies fuzzy rules on the fuzzified input variables to obtain a fuzzy output, and a defuzzification block that transforms the fuzzy output of the inference block into a crisp value or a specific action. Fig. 1depicts the typical contents of an FLC.Knowledge is used in the process of fuzzification in the form of fuzzy set definitions (the DB) and in the form of rules (the RB) in the IE.The diagnosis process in troubleshooting of LTE networks is basically a process of applying heuristic rules on PIs, alarms, counters, configuration parameters, etc. to obtain a diagnosis. Therefore, the process will start with the fuzzification of the input variables to, typically, two fuzzy sets such as high/low or true/false. The membership functions of these sets will be trapezoidal (Fig. 2), since only two thresholds are needed. Experts use this two threshold classification for the KPI values very often, so the use of trapezoidal sets is the most natural choice for the task of diagnosis. Subsequently, the fuzzy rules will use the fuzzified values to assign a validity to each of the possible causes, depending on the degree of activation. Finally, in the process of defuzzification the most likely cause will be selected. The validity assigned in the previous step indicates the confidence that the chosen diagnosis is correct.The fuzzy rules are composed of two parts: the antecedent (the “if …” part) and the consequent (the “then …” part). The antecedent is made up of individual assertions about the fuzzy variables (such as “accessibility is low”). Each assertion has a degree of truth equal to the degree of membership of the value of the variable to the assigned fuzzy set. Assertions are joined by AND (t-norm) or OR (s-norm) operators. In the scope of this study, only AND (Klement, Mesiar, & Pap, 2010) operators are used, since they provide the basic functionality for pattern recognition on the PI observations, whereas the OR operator can be omitted safely. The only case where the OR operator would be needed is where two different combinations of PI values in the antecedent identify the same problem. In that case, two separate antecedents can be created, thus sparing the use of OR operators and simplifying the learning process. With the AND operator, the degree of truth of the whole antecedent is either the minimum (in this work, this option is chosen) or the product of the degrees of truth of its assertions (in the case of OR operators, it would be the maximum). The consequent assigns the degree of truth of the antecedent to an assertion about the diagnosis belonging to a certain class (such as “diagnosis is overload”).A full example of the application of several rules on an input vector of KPIs is shown in Fig. 2. An input vector with four variables is introduced in the FLC. In this example, each variable takes values between 0 and 1. The variables are then fuzzified, each of them in two sets, either High or Low. The membership functions defined on the variables are the same for simplicity in this example. Once the vector has been fuzzified, the rules are applied. Note that for each rule, the degree of activation is given by the minimum value of the membership degrees in the antecedent. The second rule has the biggest degree of activation, therefore, its consequent will be the diagnosis. The degree of activation expresses the confidence of the diagnosis; therefore, the higher the degree of activation, the lower the uncertainty of the result. For simplicity, only the diagnosis with the highest score is used, although in cases where more than one root cause is present, several rules should have the same score. Even if only one diagnosis has the maximum score, it is still useful to provide a list of all the activated diagnoses ordered by descending score so the experts have a broader picture of the state of the sector. Another alternative to the scoring approach used in this study is weighted voting (Lughofer & Buchtala, 2013), where each diagnosis is compared individually with each of the other diagnoses through a single rule with two possible outcomes. Each rule will then vote for one of two possible diagnoses.DM is the process that extracts a model out of a data set by exploring the underlying patterns. Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD) (Maimon & Last, 2001) is the larger process extending from the collection of the relevant data saved into a data base to the interpretation of the knowledge contained in it.The DM algorithm proposed in this work obtains fuzzy rules from a set of solved cases (training set). These rules will take a set of PIs as input and produce a diagnosis (they will classify the cases). Therefore, the DM algorithm will solve a classification problem. The learned model (the fuzzy rule set) is a classifier. Ideally, the learned rules will be similar to those used by the experts. Each entry in the training set (case) is a tuple formed by an n-dimensional attribute vector (in this case, the values of PIs) and a class label that identifies the class to which the case belongs (in this study, this is the diagnosis). Since the training set contains the class label, the DM algorithm is a supervised learning algorithm.To obtain the required vectors, a previous process of data reduction (Khatib, Barco, Serrano, & Muñoz, 2014) must be carried out. The data extracted from the network will be a set of time-dependent arrays representing time series for each PI. This time series covers the time interval where the problem occurred, but also the surrounding time intervals where the fault did not show up in the data. Therefore, two steps must be achieved:•Isolating the problem in time, so the data reflects only the influence of the root cause.Converting the set of time series to a vector with one value per PI. Once the problem is isolated, this can be done with an average value of the PI for the affected time interval.The issue of data reduction is out of the scope of this article, but it is a necessary prior step to the data driven learning process.In this study, a novel supervised data driven learning algorithm for wireless networks based on the WM (Wang & Mendel, 1992) method is described. It introduces some modifications in order to better adapt to the obtention of the rules used in troubleshooting of LTE networks. The WM method is a well known algorithm that can easily be parallelized since the creation of new rules from the data is independent from the creation of previous rules. Therefore, the data can be divided among several processes arbitrarily without loss of information. Another advantage of the WM method is that it is deterministic, that is, the results of two equal training sets are always equal, independently from the order that the data is provided or how it is divided among parallel processes. Other learning algorithms have been proposed (Cordón, Herrera, Gomide, Hoffmann, & Magdalena, 2001; Khatib, Barco, Góomez-Andrades, & Serrano, in press; Angelov, Lughofer, & Zhou, 2008; Ishibuchi & Nakashima, 2001), but the WM method was found the best for parallelization and for its deterministic behavior, which helps understanding the results of the learning process.The algorithm obtains the RB of an FLC from a training set composed of labeled cases. The learning cases are tuplesC=(k‾,d)composed of a vectork‾={k1,k2…kN}as the attribute vector representing the values of PIsPI‾={PI1,PI2…PIN}and a label d as the class label among possible root causesRC‾={RC1,RC2…RCM}. The algorithm has three consecutive steps:1.Generate fuzzy rules from training tuples: the variable values ink‾are assigned the fuzzy sets where their truth degree is the highest, creating a vectorkF‾; that is, for eachkn∈k‾a new fuzzy valuekFn=Tn|μTn(kn)=max(μT1n(kn),μT2n(kn))is defined, whereT1nandT2nare two fuzzy sets identifying opposing qualitative states (such as high or low) ofPIn,μT1n(kn)andμT2n(kn)are the membership functions ofT1nandT2ndefined over the domain ofPInand evaluated forknandTnis the chosen state. In the unlikely case that both membership functions have the same value forkn, two different antecedents will be created, in order to cover both cases. The label d is also assigned the setRC|μRC(d)=max(μRCm(d))∀RCm∈RC‾representing the root cause. This process is depicted with an example in Fig. 3. A training set with two variables (PI1andPI2) and a class label (d) is depicted. The variables take valuesk1andk2respectively. The truth degree for each fuzzy set is calculated for these values, and the variables and the label are assigned the set with the highest truth degree. In classification, the consequent will always have a membership degree of 1 in the set representing the class and 0 in the others.With the fuzzy linguistic labelsR=(kF‾,RC)established in this step, an AND rule is created: “ifPI1iskF1andPI2iskF2… andPINiskFNthen root cause is RC”. Once the rule is created, the training set is explored for cases that are covered by the same rule (that is, cases that are identical once fuzzified) with a certain degree of activationa=min(μTn(kn))∀kn∈k‾whereTnis the fuzzy set assigned by the rule forPIn. A list keeps track of the cases that have been covered by a rule. The marked cases are not used for generating rules in future iterations, so the same rule is not generated more than once and also to reduce the computation time and memory footprint. The list is a boolean indexed list, so there is one entry for each rule. Each entry is started with a False value, since no case is covered in the beginning. Once a case is used for generating a rule, or is found to be covered by a rule, the corresponding entry in the list is changed to True. This step can be parallelized by dividing the learning set. This may lead to repeated rules among different worker processes, but this will be solved in the next step.Assign a score to each rule representing its confidence. The score of each rule is composed of two terms: the base and the success rate. The base represents the statistical significance of the antecedent of the rule. Rules that cover few cases get a lower score, so spurious cases (or human errors) are filtered out. The base is given byB=1-(1/(1+αnc)), wherencis the number of cases covered by the antecedent and α is an adjustable parameter that can take values in the(0,+∞)interval. The success rate is the number of successfully diagnosed casesnsover the number of covered cases in the training setS=ns/nc. In the first pass through the training set,S<1only if there are contradicting cases (same fuzzified KPI vector, different diagnosis). The score is given byD=B·S. Thus, when the number of covered cases is small, the score of a rule is limited by the base term; and if it gets statistical significance, the score is determined mostly by the success rate. To compute the score of each rule, it is required that the equal rules found by different workers have their bases aggregated withB=∑w=1WBwwhere W is the total number of workers andBwis the base found for worker w. Their success rates must conversely be aggregated byS=∑w=1WBwBSw, whereSwis the success rate found by worker w. The rules, along with their total scores, are stored in a common rule base prepared for the next step.Reduce the number and complexity of the rules: the rules obtained so far are complete rules. In troubleshooting of LTE networks, it is common that the experts use incomplete rules, that is, rules that only focus on a subset of available PIs and ignore the values of the rest. Incomplete rules are also more comprehensive and therefore more interpretable. To obtain these types of rules, several complete rules are fused together. The rules to be fused are required to have the same consequent and a score higher than a minimal threshold, to avoid the inclusion of spurious or incorrect rules. Given two rulesR1andR2with the same consequentRCC, a new ruleR1+2=(kF1+2‾,RCC)is defined wherekF1+2‾=kF1‾∩kF2‾. Once two rules meet the requirements and are fused, the score is calculated again by testing over the training set. This process is depicted in an example in Fig. 4, where variablePI1has two sets (T11andT12). As both rules are exactly equal with the exception of the values assigned toPI1, this variable can be safely ignored. This step can also be parallelized if each worker takes a subset of the original rules and a subset of the data to calculate the score of the fused rules that it calculates. Once all the rules that comply with the conditions for rule fusion are fused, the scores are aggregated over all the workers as explained in Step 2, and a new reduced rule base is created. This step is iteratively repeated until there are no more possible rule fusions.In the case that successive fusions generate an empty antecedent, it is considered that the particular root cause is not diagnosable with the current set of PIs, since there are occurrences of the problem with every possible combination of fuzzy values of the PIs.The rules that do not meet a minimum score requirement are also removed from the RB in this step. The possible conflicts between rules (same antecedent, different consequents) are solved by selecting the rule with the highest score.In Fig. 5the flowchart of the algorithm is depicted.The algorithm has three parameters:•Uncommon case sensitivity (α)∈(0,+∞): it adjusts the sensitivity of the algorithm to rare cases. A low value will make the algorithm more robust to spurious training errors, but may also make it ignore relevant (but uncommon) cases, therefore producing an output RB that will fail to detect these situations.Minimum inclusion score (MIS)∈(0,1): minimum score for a rule to enter the final fusion step and be part of the RB (as a contribution to a general rule).Minimum degree of activation (MDA)∈(0,1): minimum degree of activation of a rule on a case to consider it covered, that is, that the rule antecedent is activated by the case.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A novel DM algorithm for obtaining the RB of FLCs from a set of solved cases for mobile network troubleshooting has been presented. The proposed method is a supervised, data driven learning algorithm, that uses vectors of PI values, alarms and configuration parameters labeled with the problem present at that time, as diagnosed by experts. There are currently no learning algorithms devoted to extracting troubleshooting rules from real troubleshooting cases. In the case of LTE mobile networks, the task of extracting troubleshooting rules is a Big Data problem, due to a high volume of data, a high speed of data generation and the high variability in the format and values of the variables. The presented algorithm is designed to be easily parallelizable, so it can perform the learning process over a large dataset in a limited time.The described learning algorithm must be embedded in a data processing pipe that includes a prior step of data reduction and formatting, since the inputs to the algorithm do not follow any standard data format that is used in PI collecting systems.Experiments that cover the three main configuration parameters of the algorithm and the presence or absence of normal cases in the training set have been performed. The results show that the parameters should allow diversity in the RB; that is, they must not filter rare cases or cases that loosely follow a rule. If the parameters are too restrictive, the output RB is unreliable, in the sense that it will often be unable to diagnose (or even detect, if the FLC is assigned this task) a proportion of the problems. On the other hand, the increase in reliability comes at a cost; the fuzzy rule set will detect some normal cases as problems. This problem is solved if there is a detection stage, which is normally the case, that filters out normal cases prior to its analysis by the diagnosis stage. In addition, it has been demonstrated that in a wide range results are quite insensitive to the selection of the parameters, so the algorithm is fairly robust and does not require a very complex fine tuning. The algorithm has also been compared with another supervised learning algorithm based on BN, showing that the proposed method outperforms that based on BN. Finally, the algorithm has been tested in a live LTE network, showing promising results.