@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Intellectual capital and national innovation systems performance

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We utilize a two-stage data envelopment analysis (DEA) production process.We evaluate the R&D efficiency and economic efficiency of the national innovation system (NIS) in 30 countries.R&D efficiencies of the NIS are better than the economic efficiencies.We examine the effect of intellectual capital on the NIS performance through truncated regression.We present a managerial decision-making matrix and a performance improvement strategy map.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
National innovation system,Network DEA,Intellectual capital,Performance evaluation,Data envelopment analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Innovation is a key resource for the well-being of national economies and international competitive advantages. First, this study develops a network data envelopment analysis (DEA) production process to evaluate the R&D efficiency and economic efficiency of the national innovation system (NIS) in 30 countries. Our findings show that the R&D efficiencies of the NIS are better than the economic efficiencies. Second, this study examines the effect of intellectual capital (IC) on the NIS performance through truncated regression. Our findings indicate that IC does play an important role in affecting the NIS performance. Finally, this study presents a managerial decision-making matrix and makes suggestions through a performance improvement strategy map to help government and managers improve the NIS performance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the survey of 2007 global industrial technology innovation policy development, the Science, Technology and Industry Scoreboard of Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) finds that a large majority of OECD countries emphasize technological system and innovation because these two factors affect not only domestic and international competition, but also economic growth [61]. A technological system is the system that affects specific technology or industry. According to Carlsson and Stankiewicz [13], technological system is a dynamic network among economic entities in a specific technological area that aim to create, transmit, and apply technology. In contrast, a national innovation system (NIS) affects the overall development of innovation. That is, a NIS is the network of institutions in the public and private sectors whose activities and interactions initiate, import, modify, and diffuse new technologies [28]. Technological system differs significantly from NIS on the following three perspectives. First, technological system emphasizes creations of new technology, while NIS focuses on the transmission and application of technology. Second, the strength of technological system in each technological area differs significantly within a country. Third, the classification of technological system is based on technology rather than national boundaries.Since the seminal work of Freeman and Christopher [29], which studies Japanese technological development, NIS research has evolved into an important research agenda. NIS is formed by the interaction among innovation creation, transmission, and application of various institutions. In other words, NIS is an important contributor for economic growth when the interactions among various institutions are well organized. NIS not only offers recommendations on innovation planning and competitiveness enhancement on technological front to policy makers, but also attracts the attention of researchers in the field of economic and innovation. The establishment of NIS thus becomes more important because the interaction among government, research institution, academia, and industry could result in commercialization of technological research outputs, which in turn would increase national competitiveness.The innovation of a country or an industry does not originate from a single economic entity; rather, it is a combination of a composite and systematic mechanism. According to OECD [60], the development of technology and innovation is the outcome of the interaction among corporations, academia, and government research institution. The knowledge and technology possessed by the personnel and institutions are the key factors in the innovation process. The development of NIS is to improve the network relationship among the system members, which leads to enhancement in the overall national innovative capability [59]. As noted earlier, the NIS performance is the primary determinant of national competitiveness. A holistic assessment that considers overall industrial effects would enable a greater understanding on the impact of NIS on national competitiveness. Besides, this can be guidance for technological policies and research resource allocation in a country.To determine its own global positioning, a country can obtain the recent NIS performance of other countries from the historical data of NIS development. However, it remains a challenge to evaluate NIS, which is characterized by multiple dimensions, especially in a cross-country setting. To dates, there is no consensus about the NIS measurement. The common problems include the lack of consensus in the measurement model, ambiguous measurement indicators, and the lack of an effective holistic measurement model. These situations suggest that there is a critical need for a more objective and reliable measurement to express the relative efficiency of cross-countries NIS.To ensure proper decision making, the performance of an institution needs to be measured using multiple indicators [16]. Most studies have recommended the use of multi-factor performance measure model to measure organizational operating performance [2,4,6]. Data envelopment analysis (DEA) is an approach that simultaneously evaluates multiple inputs and multiple outputs via linear programming technique to determine the production frontier as a basis of efficiency measure [3,33]. Traditional DEA models, however, ignore intermediate measures or interconnecting activities in a production process. Therefore, this study does not apply the traditional DEA that ignores the connectivity of internal economic activities. Set in a slightly different research setting, this study employs a network DEA model that is able to explore the ‘black-box’ process of NIS in estimating the performance of NIS, the R&D and economic efficiencies.The comprehensiveness of NIS cannot be assessed merely through the performance. Other measurement methods should be employed to provide an overall assessment on NIS. In this globalized knowledge-based economy, knowledge, an important factor of production, has gradually replaced machinery, equipment, capital, raw materials, and labors. The concept of intellectual capital (IC) dates back to the work of Galbraith [31], where IC is interpreted as the difference between market value and book value. Stewart [72] suggests that IC can be deemed as a major source of enhancing or creating competitive advantage for an institution and it is also the most important resource of overall value creation.Many scholars employ Tobit regression to examine the impact of a variety of external environmental factors on organizational operating efficiency [8,18,64,65,74,78]. Simar and Wilson [71], however, utilize truncated regression with bootstrapping approach and find that truncated regression provides greater validity than Tobit regression. Consistently, this study employs Simar and Wilson [71] truncated regression to investigate the impact of IC on the NIS performance of 30 countries.The purposes of this study are threefold. First, we develop a network DEA model that comprises R&D efficiency and economic efficiency to measure the NIS performance. Second, we examine the relationship between IC and NIS performance using truncated regression with the aim to provide recommendations for improving NIS performance. Third, we construct a decision-making matrix and a performance improvement strategy map to assist countries to enhance their competitiveness through the integration of the network efficiency and IC dimensions.The remaining sections of this study are organized as follows. Section 2 provides literature review. Section 3 describes data collection and research methodology. Section 4 presents the findings. Section 5 provides conclusions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
