@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A comprehensive review of multi criteria decision making approaches based on interval type-2 fuzzy sets

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A literature review of IT2FSs based MCDM approaches is presented.The systematic classification covers 35 MCDM approaches as single and hybrid.It provides an insight for researchers on IT2FSs based MCDM approaches.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi criteria decision making,Interval type-2 fuzzy sets,Literature review,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Multi criteria decision making (MCDM) is a discipline of operations research which has widely studied by researchers and practitioners. It deals with evaluating and ranking alternatives from the best to the worst under conflicting criteria with respect to decision maker(s) preferences. Since, many real-world systems include uncertainty and vagueness in information, MCDM uses fuzzy sets. In recent years, as an extension of the traditional fuzzy sets concept, type-2 fuzzy sets are preferred to have the capability of handling more uncertainty, and hence, to produce more accurate and robust results, MCDM approaches based on interval type-2 fuzzy sets (IT2FSs) have been published in various subjects. This paper reviews 82 different papers using various MCDM approaches based on IT2FSs which are classified into 35 categories. All papers with respect to single and hybrid approaches are discussed, pointing out their real applications or empirical results and limitations. Furthermore, the papers are statistically analyzed to show new trends within the context of IT2FSs. This systematic and comprehensive review study provides an insight for researchers on interval type-2 fuzzy MCDM in terms of showing current state and potential areas to be focused in the future.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
MCDM is a discipline of operations research which has been widely studied by researchers and practitioners [60,7,6]. It concerns with evaluating, assessing and selecting alternatives from the best to the worst under conflicting criteria with respect to decision maker(s) preferences. The main characteristics of a MCDM method include: (1) the alternatives to be evaluated, (2) the criteria against which the alternatives are evaluated, (3) scores that reflect the value of an alternative’s expected performance on the criteria, and (4) criteria weights that measure the relative importance of each criterion as compared with others [5]. It is common that linguistic variables are used to assess the ratings of various criteria and alternatives in real-world problems [16]. The concept of linguistic variables is useful in dealing with complex situations. Linguistic values are frequently represented by fuzzy sets [36] and it makes more sense than exact numbers [93]. Thereby, fuzzy multi criteria decision making (FMCDM) discipline is emerged as an area that incorporates fuzzy sets and MCDM problems. On the other hand, the superiority of fuzzy sets has been varying for different types of fuzzy models such as type-1, type-2 and higher types because they are designed to meet varying levels of uncertainty [38]. IT2FSs are more suitable to reflect uncertainties [20] for applying in fuzzy decision making problems [66,51].The fundamental of a type-2 fuzzy set was presented by Zadeh [93] as an extension of the concept of a type-1 fuzzy set [56,62]. An interval type-2 fuzzy set is a special version of a general type-2 fuzzy set. Since applying general type-2 fuzzy systems contains complex computational operations [66], it has not widely applied to real world applications [55]. IT2FSs are the most frequently used type-2 fuzzy sets [63] because of their easiness and reduced computational effort in comparison with general type-2 fuzzy sets. It is also emphasized that type-2 fuzzy sets handle more uncertainty [65], and hence, produces more accurate and robust results [38,37]. Therefore, it is widely used in various application areas [64,38,51]. Dereli et al. [38] presented a concise literature review of industrial applications of type-2 fuzzy sets and systems. Castillo and Melin [8] and Castillo and Melin [9] presented reviews about the design and optimization of interval type-2 fuzzy controllers, and optimization of type-2 fuzzy systems based on bio-inspired methods, respectively. Melin and Castillo [61] also presented applications of type-2 fuzzy logic in classification and pattern recognition. Unfortunately, no systematic and comprehensive review has been provided for MCDM approaches based on IT2FSs. However, there have been several MCDM approaches based on IT2FSs (Table 1). Therefore, in this paper, we review the literature related to the approaches to MCDM based on IT2FSs using academic databases of ScienceDirect, Springer, Taylor&Francis, Wiley, SagePub, Emerald, ProQuest, IEEE Xplore, and Hindawi. A total of 82 papers were reviewed ranged from 2007 to April 2015. Our contributions to the literature are as follows: (1) to determine the MCDM approaches that have been integrated with IT2FSs, (2) to reveal application areas (education, energy, environment, healthcare, human resource management (HRM), investment management, manufacturing, risk management, technology management, transportation and logistics) that have further used these MCDM approaches based on IT2FSs, (3) to show the countries which published papers related to these MCDM approaches based on IT2FSs, and (4) to determine how the trend of type-2 fuzzy MCDM will continue in the future.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief overview on the fundamentals of type-2 fuzzy sets. Section 3 and 4 present the single and hybrid approaches, respectively. Section 5 provides discussion of the review based statistical analysis results of the review. Finally, Section 6 presents conclusion, limitations, and recommendations for future studies.In this section, we briefly review some definitions of type-2 fuzzy sets and IT2FSs from Mendel et al. [66], Lee and Chen [59], Chen and Lee [20], Celik et al. [13,12], Kahraman et al. [55]:Definition 1A type-2 fuzzy setÃ̃in the universe of discourse X can be represented by a type-2 membership functionμÃ̃, shown as follows:Ã̃=((x,u),μÃ̃(x,u))∀x∈X,∀u∈JX⊆0,1,0⩽μÃ̃(x,u)⩽1whereJXdenotes an interval in [0,1]. Moreover, the type-2 fuzzy setÃ̃also can be represented as follows:Ã̃=∫x∈X∫u∈JXμÃ̃(x,u)/(x,u)whereJX⊆0,1and∬denotes union over all admissible x and u.LetÃ̃be a type-2 fuzzy set in the universe of discourse X represented by the type-2 membership functionμÃ̃. If allμÃ̃(x,u)=1, thenÃ̃is called as an interval type-2 fuzzy set. An interval type-2 fuzzy setÃ̃can be regarded as a special case of a type-2 fuzzy set, represented as follows:Ã̃=∫x∈X∫u∈JX1/(x,u)whereJX⊆[0,1].The upper membership function and the lower membership function of an interval type-2 fuzzy set are type-1 membership functions, respectively. The reference points and the heights of the upper and the lower membership functions of IT2FSs are used to characterize IT2FSs by Chen and Lee [20]. Fig. 1shows a trapezoidal interval type-2 fuzzy setÃ̃i=ÃiU,ÃiL=ai1U,ai2U,ai3U,ai4U;H1ÃiU,H2ÃiU,ai1L,ai2L,ai3L,ai4L;H1ÃiL,H2ÃiL, whereÃiUandÃiLare type-1 fuzzy sets,ai1U,ai2U,ai3U,ai4U,ai1L,ai2L,ai3Landai4Lare the reference points of the interval type-2 fuzzyÃ̃i;HjÃiUdenotes the membership value of the elementai(j+1)Uin the upper trapezoidal membership functionÃiU;1⩽j⩽2,HjÃiLdenotes the membership value of the elementai(j+1)Lin the lower trapezoidal membership functionÃiL;1⩽j⩽2,HjÃiL.H1ÃiU∈0,1,H2ÃiU∈0,1,H1ÃiL∈0,1,H2ÃiL∈0,1and1⩽i⩽n.The linguistic variables are defined and meant a variable as words and sentence in a natural or artificial language [93]. The importance weights of criteria and ranking of the alternatives in MCDM problem are calculated based on experts’ decision(s) that make a linguistic evaluation using predetermined linguistic variables. In current literature, the different linguistic variables are proposed for IT2FSs that are originated from type-1 fuzzy sets. The linguistic variables for AHP and DEMATEL are proposed to determine the importance weights of criteria. Table 2presents the interval type-2 fuzzy numbers associated with the linguistic terms for determining importance weights of criteria according to the pairwise comparisons.Abdullah and Najib [1], Kahraman et al. [55] and Celik et al. [14] used different scales for evaluating the importance weights of criteria in AHP based on IT2FSs. All different linguistic variables and corresponding IT2FSs are inspired from type-1 fuzzy sets. On the other hand, the linguistic variables for DEMATEL based on IT2FSs are also proposed by Abdullah and Zulkifli [3]. These linguistic variables are also originated from Abdullah and Najib [1] which are proposed for AHP based on IT2FSs.The linguistic variables are used for evaluating alternatives to overcome the complexity and difficulty of data collection process. Chen and Lee [20] proposed a seven point scale for IT2FSs. They proposed upper and lower trapezoidal fuzzy numbers and considered upper and lower membership functions for both of them. Chen [25,27,28,30], Chen et al. [36], and Wang and Chen [88] also proposed nine point scales for IT2FSs. It also contains lower and upper trapezoidal fuzzy numbers. The heights of the lower and upper trapezoidal fuzzy numbers were designated as 1.0 and 0.8, respectively.The proposed linguistics variables can be also used for determining importance weights of criteria and it is presented in Table 3. According to our review, these two linguistic variables are applied by all authors.The classification, we follow in this review study, depends on whether the paper uses a unique IT2FSs based MCDM method or two or more in combination. We specify the single approaches as subsections in the following.One of the first studies of IT2FAHP in MCDM is owed to Uçal Sarı et al. [87], who aimed at showing the potential applicability of type-2 fuzzy sets, using warehouse selection as an example. The study is a book chapter including an empirical example. Kahraman et al. [55] develop an interval type-2 fuzzy AHP method together with a new ranking method for type-2 fuzzy sets. They solve a supplier selection problem with type-1 and type-2 Buckley’s fuzzy AHP method. Both methods give the same ranking results. However, they conclude that type-2 fuzzy AHP enables to define the membership functions with a larger flexibility. Abdullah and Najib [1] propose linguistic variables and a ranking approach [20] for AHP based on IT2FSs. The proposed approach is compared with traditional AHP and fuzzy AHP. According to the results, the rankings of the three methods are coincided with each other, but the importance weights of the three methods are different. Celik et al. [14] identify and then evaluate the success factors which are critical for effective management of humanitarian relief logistics operations. They propose AHP based on IT2FSS for determining the importance weights of the critical success factors. They conclude that management and planning, and transportation and distribution criteria groups have more importance than the others. Also, strategic and operational planning sub-criterion has the highest weight which means that it reports more impact on the whole system. Oztaysi [74] focuses on enterprise information systems selection problem which contains various and conflicting criteria. A group decision making approach is proposed using AHP and IT2FSs on a real world ERP selection problem with six criteria and four alternatives. They conclude that, by using IT2FSs for handling FMCDM problems, may give more flexible decisions since IT2FSs are more suitable to represent uncertainties than type-1 fuzzy sets.Lee and Chen [59] and Chen and Lee [20] propose a new method with fuzzy TOPSIS to handle the fuzzy multiple attributes group decision-making problems based on IT2FSs. The proposed method provides a useful way to handle fuzzy multiple attributes group decision-making problems in a more flexible and more intelligent manner since it uses interval type-2 sets rather than traditional type-1 fuzzy sets to represent the evaluating values and the criteria weights. Saremi and Montazar 83] apply IT2FTOPSIS approach for selecting the best website. Ghaemi Nasab and Rostamy-Malkhalifeh [43] introduce an extension of fuzzy TOPSIS based on IT2FSs for handling fuzzy MCDM problems. They solve two numerical examples using the proposed TOPSIS method. Kahraman and Uçal Sarı [54] use interval type-2 fuzzy TOPSIS in environmental risk evaluation. They consider the footprint of uncertainty in the membership functions by using IT2FSs. A multi criteria selection among the treatment alternatives of hazardous waste management is made. A numerical example is also presented. Otheman et al. [73] select the best supplier by using interval type-2 fuzzy TOPSIS method. They indicate that the IT2FTOPSIS method offers a feasible solution to supplier selection problem. Temur et al. [85] suggest a multi criteria approach for the selection of the most appropriate reverse logistics facility location using a type-2 fuzzy TOPSIS methodology. Chen and Hong [19] propose a different ranking method which is proposed by Chen et al. [24] for TOPSIS based on IT2FSS. The proposed TOPSIS approach is compared with Chen and Lee’s [20] TOPSIS approach. They state that the proposed method can overcome the drawback of Chen and Lee’s method. Zamri and Abdullah [97] propose a new linguistic variable that considers positive and negative sides of the TOPSIS approach based on IT2FSs. The proposed approach is compared with Chen’s [16] TOPSIS approach and Chen and Lee [20]’s approach. The all rankings of the example for three different approaches are found as the same. Erdoğan and Kaya [42] apply IT2FTOPSIS approach for selecting the best private university in Istanbul. They aim to rank top four private universities of Istanbul. They choose three experts who teach in private universities and have an experience to score the criteria and alternatives. They prefer to solve the MCDM problem with IT2FSs in order to obtain results closer to reality. Otheman and Abdullah [72] use cosine similarity measure to calculate positive and negative ideal solutions of TOPSIS approach based on IT2FSs. Çebi and Otay [10] propose a comprehensive and systematic approach for multi-criteria and multi-stage facility location selection problem of a cement factory using interval type-2 fuzzy TOPSIS. The proposed method is compared with the other multi-criteria decision making approaches (Buckley’s fuzzy AHP integrated with fuzzy VIKOR, Fuzzy TOPSIS, and Zeng’s fuzzy AHP integrated with fuzzy VIKOR) for the multistage and multi-criteria facility location selection problem. Chen [33] develops a novel IT2FTOPSIS method for MCDM analysis that is based on interval type-2 trapezoidal fuzzy numbers. They conclude that the proposed method is easy to implement and produces effective and valid results for solving multiple criteria decision-making problems. Qin et al. [79,81] propose a new decision model combining IT2FSs and TOPSIS method and apply it to a metro station dynamic risk assessment in Beijing. The results can reflect the actual risk status of metro stations objectively and are consistent with the real situation.Chen [30] develops a signed distance based PROMETHEE approach using IT2FSs. The proposed method is compared with Chen’s [18] nine translations and ordinary fuzzy PROMETHEE method using trapezoidal fuzzy numbers. According to the results, the proposed method yields the same ranking results when coping with the rating data using Chen’s [18] trapezoidal fuzzy numbers, the mean trapezoidal fuzzy numbers, and the IT2TrFNs. Chen [32] develops a likelihood-based PROMETHEE method within the environment of IT2FSs. They also introduce the concepts of lower and upper likelihoods to quantify the likelihood of IT2FSs binary relationship. The proposed method is compared with PROTMETHEE based on IT2FSs [30] and a likelihood approach [20].Chen et al. [36] develop an extended QUALIFLEX method for handling MCDM problems in the context of IT2FSs. As a consequence of the proposed method, traditional QUALIFLEX method is extended to the IT2FSs environment, a signed distance-based approach is developed and an algorithmic procedure for the proposed method is proposed. Wang et al. [89] develop a likelihood based QUALIFLEX method with IT2FSs for multiple criteria decision analysis. They solve a medical decision-making problem concerning selection of treatment options. Gumus et al. [47] propose a QUALIFLEX approach, using a ranking method based on IT2FSs, to evaluate the passenger satisfaction level for rail transit lines in Istanbul through the survey obtained from Istanbul Public Transportation Co., the only rail transit service provider of the Istanbul.Hosseini and Tarokh [49] extend the DEMATEL method with IT2FSs to obtain the weights of criteria based on words. Hosseini and Tarokh [50] extend fuzzy DEMATEL method into type-2 fuzzy sets in order to obtain the weights of dependent criteria based on the words. The perceptual computing characteristics and fuzzy DEMATEL are combined in order to map the influence matrices defined by words into weights.Ghorabaee et al. [45] propose a new method for extending COPRAS method for group decision-making with interval type-2 fuzzy numbers, based on the centroid of fuzzy sets. The proposed method is compared with existing methods. The simplicity of the proposed method is the major advantage of it. The computational steps of the proposed method are less than those of other methods, while it gets the same results in most cases.Qin et al. [80] extend the traditional DEA model and establish a DEA model with type-2 fuzzy inputs and outputs. The proposed reduction method is used to reduce the type-2 fuzzy variables, and then is formulated as a DEA model via generalized credibility measure.Chen [31] proposes a signed-distance based ELECTRE approach within the environment of IT2FSs. It is also provided a median ranking at the last step of the algorithm. The proposed method is compared with ELECTRE, fuzzy ELECTRE [48] and TOPSIS [17].Zamri and Abdullah [94] implement IT2FSs and entropy weight for developing a new weight approach. Qin and Liu [78] propose a new method to handle multi criteria group decision making (MCGDM) problems based on combined ranking value and develop new interval type-2 fuzzy entropy with trigonometric sine function to measure the uncertainty of the IT2FSs. The proposed combined ranking value method is compared with ranking value method, possibility degree method and granular computing particle swarm optimization (PSO)-based method. It obtains the same ranking results with four methods.Chen [35] proposes a linear programming approach for multi attribute decision making based on IT2FSs. They apply multiple anchor point in LINMAP approach instead of single anchor point. They also use Minkowski distance to measure the separation of the evaluative ratings from the alternatives and approximate ideal solutions. The results are compared with Chen’s [25] signed distance based TOPSIS approach. Two different ranking orders are obtained for supplier selection problem. The proposed method is applied to practical case in order to validate the applicability related to difficulties in marketplace decision-making for selection of smartphone for older people.Yazici and Kahraman [92] develop an IT2FVIKOR method including a fuzzy ranking method for IT2FSs. They also present an empirical study to show the effectiveness and applicability of the proposed method. Ghorabaee [44] proposes a method based on IT2FVIKOR method for robot selection problem. They compare the results with IT2FSs based methods. The results of the proposed method are relatively consistent with other methods. Qin et al. 79,81] propose IT2FVIKOR method based on the prospect theory. They propose a new distance measure for IT2FSs following a proposed decision model integrating VIKOR method and prospect theory. They give a numerical for a high-tech risk evaluation to show the applicability of the proposed method and compare the model with TOPSIS method.Doctor et al. [39] develop a software based on IT2FSs approach to select and rank the best job applicant CVs in human resource systems. A scoring technique is presented for ranking of the applicant to determine how well they match the qualification of the application according to the expert decisions. Chen and Lee [21] propose a new method to handle fuzzy multiple attributes group decision-making problems based on the ranking values and the arithmetic operations of IT2FSs. Chen and Lee [22] also proposed a new method for handling fuzzy multiple criteria hierarchical group decision-making problems based on arithmetic operations and fuzzy preference relations of IT2FSs. They conclude that the proposed method is more efficient than Wu and Mendel’s [91] method. It can handle the situation where the evaluating values are represented by non-normal IT2FSs. Hu et al. [52] propose a method based on possibility degree as well as deviation degree to construct a key optimal model for using interval type-2 fuzzy numbers in MCDM problems where the weights are partially known. The proposed method is compared with Chen and Lee’s [21] possibility degree method and ranking value method. The proposed approach obtains the same ranking results as how it is better than the two methods. Chen [27] develops a new signed based linear assignment method to produce an optimal preference ranking of the alternatives in accordance with a set of criterion-wise rankings and a set of criterion importance within the context of interval type-2 trapezoidal fuzzy numbers. The proposed method does not require a complicated computation procedure and it is beneficial to decision analysis. Chen and Wang [23] propose a new method for FMCDM based on the α-cuts of IT2FSs considering the decision maker’s attitude towards risks. Qin and Liu [76] develop an approach based on TIT2FFWA operator to solve multiple attribute group decision-making (MAGDM). This new method is compared with the type-2 ordered weighted averaging (OWA) operator and type-2 FWA operator. According to the comparisons, the proposed aggregation operators are better than the two methods. Qin and Liu [77] propose the distance measure and inner product measure. The results show that the proposed method is effective and valid for handling MCDM problems with interval type-2 fuzzy information. The proposed method is compared with similarity measure method, possibility degree method, and ranking value method. Chen [34] develops a new likelihood-based decision-making method using the useful concepts of likelihood-based performance indices, likelihood-based comprehensive evaluation values, and signed distance-based evaluation values. The proposed method is validated via four applications. Comparisons show the effectiveness and the applicability of the proposed method. The mathematical computations associated with the proposed method are much easier and simpler than those of comparable methods. Gong et al. [46] introduce the concepts of interval possibility mean value and present a new method for calculating the possibility degree of two trapezoidal IT2FSs. The results show that the proposed method provides a useful way to deal with FMAGDM problems based on IT2FSs. Akay et al. [4] propose a new concept selection methodology that includes IT2-fuzzy information axiom (FIA) approach. IT2FIA is also improved by using ordered weighted geometric aggregation operator to include the decision maker’s attitude during the aggregation process.In this section, we collect two or more IT2FSs based MCDM methods. We present the main goal of each hybrid study, as well as their methodology, application area, limitations and contributions.Kiliç and Kaya [57] propose a type-2 fuzzy AHP and type-2 fuzzy TOPSIS based method for the investment project evaluation problem in development agencies operating in Turkey. It is concluded that the proposed model is effective in evaluation of alternatives in multi-criteria group decision making (MCGDM) problems in a broader perspective and flexible fashion. Kiliç and Kaya [58] propose a new city-ranking model for development agencies operating in Turkey using interval type-2 fuzzy AHP and interval type-2 fuzzy TOPSIS. Four provinces are categorized in terms of socioeconomic development using linguistic variables and crisp numbers by three agency specialists. After four different provinces are evaluated for twenty-six criteria, the provinces with the lower scores have been given priority in the grant allocation process. Erdoğan and Kaya [41] propose an integrated MCDM methodology based on IT2FSs for selection among energy alternatives of Turkey. They conclude that the proposed method aims to obtain a road map of energy policies for Turkey. Celik and Gumus [11] propose an assessment approach for evaluating of non-governmental relief organizations performance in Turkey.Abdullah and Otheman [2] apply entropy weight for obtaining the importance weight of the criteria. Then, the importance weight is used as an input for TOPSIS approach based on IT2FSs. The proposed approach’s solution is compared with Shahanagi and Yazdian’s [84] solution. The ranking of the result is different but they did not analyze the reason. Zamri and Abdullah [95] adopt the information interval type-2 entropy concept into the weighting process of IT2FTOPSIS for selection of the best flood control project. The development of the interval type-2 fuzzy method seems to be usable for the flood control project selection. Diversion scheme alternative yields the highest closeness coefficient. Zamri and Abdullah [96] introduce a new linguistic variable that considers positive and negative ideal solutions in IT2FSs concept in interval type-2 entropy weight. To validate the new method, a ranking of road accidents problem is tested due to the increasing number of fatalities on road accidents. The efficiency of the new method is proven with a straight forward computation on road accidents case study.Naim and Hagras [68] propose a hybrid MCGDM approach combining IT2FSs and intuitionistic fuzzy sets. They present results from the proposed system deployment for the assessment of ten candidates for postgraduate study. Naim et al. [70] combine IT2FS and intuitionistic fuzzy sets for MCDM. They apply various experiments for selecting a suitable lighting level for reading. According to the results, it is found that results are able to provide a measure of the uncertainties present among various decision makers in the proposed approach. Naim and Hagras [69] propose a MCGDM approach to extend the interval type-2 fuzzy values into intuitionistic values which help to evaluate the hesitation values. The proposed approach is compared with fuzzy TOPSIS. According to the results, fuzzy TOPSIS gives lower correlation values compared to proposed method.Chen [25] integrates the objective and subjective importance of decision criteria using IT2FSs. The signed distances and linear scale transformation are used to solve the problems and to modify the STEM method. Seven different criteria are used for determining landfill site in Kwei-Shan of Taiwan. Zhang and Zhang [103] define some operations on trapezoidal IT2FSs. A TOPSIS based MCDM approach is proposed according to the defined operation. A robot selection problem is presented to ensure the feasibility of the application. The results are not compared. Chen [28] proposes a signed-distance based positive and negative ideal solution based on IT2FSs. The importance weight of the criteria is determined with linear programming in the STEM approach. The proposed weight-assessment method can be applied to the subjective and objective weights. A patient-centered medicine in basilar artery occlusion problem is applied to show the feasibility and effectiveness of the proposed methods. Chen [29] presents an integrated nonlinear programming model based on the concept of signed distance-based closeness coefficients approach to estimate criteria weights. A comparative study is applied to validate the results of the proposed method with TOPSIS approach. Despite the rankings of the four treatments are same, the closeness coefficients are different. Wang and Chen [88] develop an interval type-2 fuzzy MCDM method by using a new closeness coefficient based approach in the context of IT2FSs. They introduce the concept of approximate positive and negative ideals to serve as points of reference. They compare the proposed closeness coefficient based approach with the approximate positive and negative ideals. In order to demonstrate the feasibility and applicability of the proposed approach, watershed sites selection problem is used. According to the obtained results, the proposed approach is a useful tool in evaluating potential sites for watershed planning.Öztayşi and Kahraman [75] propose a fuzzy multi criteria method based on interval type-2 fuzzy AHP in criteria weighting and hesitant fuzzy TOPSIS in ranking alternatives for the evaluation of renewable energy alternatives. Wind and solar energy is determined as the first and second renewable energy resource in Turkey. Cevik Onar et al. [15] develop a MCDM model which is based on interval type-2 fuzzy and hesitant fuzzy TOPSIS in order to select the best strategy for an investment. As a consequence of the case the joint venture becomes the best strategic decision for the company.Abdullah and Zulkifli [3] develop an integration of IT2 fuzzy DEMATEL and fuzzy AHP. The results show that the criterion of education is more critical than the other criteria since it is a cause and directly influence HRM. The case study results verify the feasibility of the proposed method where it suggests the criteria of education as the most influential criterion.Zamri and Abdullah [100] propose a new aggregated phase for TOPSIS using ELECTRE I based on IT2FSs. They also present a material supplier selection problem to illustrate the procedures and feasibility of the proposed approach.Celik et al. [12] propose a novel customer satisfaction evaluation approach which integrates statistical analysis, SERVQUAL, type-2 fuzzy sets and VIKOR for the rail transit network in Istanbul. The attributes which have the highest and the lowest customer satisfaction scores are determined for each rail transit lines according to the results obtained by the proposed approach. They also apply a sensitivity analysis to validate the results of customer satisfaction level to be steadier.Zamri et al. [101] develop a weighted average for TOPSIS approach using fractional programming within IT2FSs. The proposed approach is compared with Chen’s [16] TOPSIS approach and Chen and Lee’s [20] approaches. All ranking of the example for three different approaches are same. Celik et al. [13] aimed to evaluate and improve customer satisfaction in Istanbul public transportation firms. They presents a novel customer satisfaction evaluation model for urban transportation system of Istanbul, using survey study, statistical analysis and MCDM. The proposed MCDM integrates GRA and TOPSIS based on IT2FSs. The best public transportation firm is selected according to a passenger survey. Zamri and Abdullah [98] integrate TOPSIS and multi choice goal programming approach within the IT2FSs environment. Closeness coefficient of each supplier is used as the weight of the supplier in multi choice goal programming approach. Then, the best supplier and its optimum order quantity are determined by applying this approach. Sang and Liu [82] propose fractional nonlinear programming for obtaining fuzzy relative closeness of TOPSIS approach. Then, Karnik–Mendel algorithm is used for identifying the switch points of the NLP models. The ranking of the alternatives is found in same order when the proposed method is compared with Chen and Lee’s [20] example. According to the authors, the main difference from Chen and Lee [20] is that it keeps IT2FSs format for the evaluations and weights in the whole computing process, and realizes the actual sense of IT2FSs based TOPSIS solution. Zamri and Abdullah [99] develop a linear assignment method which is consistent with the simple additive weighting and linear programming for TOPSIS based on IT2FSs. The proposed method is compared with Chen’s [16] fuzzy TOPSIS method. The result of the proposed method coincides with Chen’s [16] fuzzy TOPSIS method, but the closeness coefficient is different.There are also some papers related to the IT2FSs which are not taken into consideration in classical MCDM concepts such as Wu and Mendel [91], Naim and Hagras [67], Chen [26],Wang et al. [90], Zhang and Zhang [102], Ngan [71], and Türk et al. [86]. Wu and Mendel [91] define cardinality, fuzziness, variance and skewness of IT2FSs. The definitions are found useful in IT2 fuzzy logic systems design using the principles of uncertainty, and in measuring the similarity between two IT2FSs. Naim and Hagras [67] propose a method focused on interval type-2 fuzzy logic MCGDM system with intuitionistic evaluation. The proposed method should be able to handle the uncertainties, subjectivity and hesitation of experts’ evaluation. Chen [26] develops a multiperson, multi-attribute model for patient-centered decision-making. A signed distance based method is proposed for collaborative decision making approach. Wang et al. [90] investigate the group decision making problems in which all the information is expressed as interval type-2 fuzzy decision matrices, and the information about criteria weights is partially known. The proposed method not only can determine the attribute weights from the collective interval type-2 fuzzy decision matrix with the incomplete weight information, but also can avoid losing or distorting the original decision information in the process of aggregation. Zhang and Zhang [102] introduce the concept of the type-2 fuzzy soft set by integrating the type-2 fuzzy set theory and the soft set theory. When compared with existing approaches to multiple attribute decision making problems in which the attribute values take the form of fuzzy sets, the proposed approaches have great flexibility, less computations, and wide applications. Ngan [71] extends linguistic variable for IT2FSs that allows uniform approach for developing methodologies for basic tasks such as taking the union and intersection of and performing arithmetic operations on type-2 linguistic numbers. Türk et al. [86] propose type-2 fuzzy sets based model in supplier selection to investigate the influence of the membership function shape on the results. It is concluded that the shape of membership functions influence the ranking of suppliers. Dymova et al. [40] develop an interval type-2 fuzzy extension of the TOPSIS method using alpha cuts. They present a numerical example for comparison with defuzzification of the IT2FSs ratings of alternatives.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
