@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A combination method for interval forecasting of agricultural commodity futures prices

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Proposing an interval forecasting method for agricultural commodity futures prices.Extending the “linear and nonlinear” modeling framework for ITS forecasting.VECM and MSVR are integrated (abbreviated as VECM–MSVR).The experimental analysis is based on one-step-ahead and multi-step-ahead forecasts.VECM–MSVR is a promising method for interval forecasting in future markets.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Interval-valued data,Agricultural commodity futures price forecasting,Vector error correction model (VECM),Multi-output support vector regression (MSVR),Econometric modeling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Accurate interval forecasting of agricultural commodity futures prices over future horizons is challenging and of great interests to governments and investors, by providing a range of values rather than a point estimate. Following the well-established “linear and nonlinear” modeling framework, this study extends it to forecast interval-valued agricultural commodity futures prices with vector error correction model (VECM) and multi-output support vector regression (MSVR) (abbreviated as VECM–MSVR), which is capable of capturing the linear and nonlinear patterns exhibited in agricultural commodity futures prices. Two agricultural commodity futures prices from Chinese futures market are used to justify the performance of the proposed VECM–MSVR method against selected competitors. The quantitative and comprehensive assessments are performed and the results indicate that the proposed VECM–MSVR method is a promising alternative for forecasting interval-valued agricultural commodity futures prices.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, agricultural commodity futures markets in China have witnessed a massive growth. With an increasing product variety and deepening liquidity pools, the agricultural commodity futures markets in China are playing an increasing important role in serving the global financial market and the national economy. In 2012, the three most active agricultural futures in the world by contract volume were happening in China—the cotton, sugar, and rubber contracts, which traded over 139 million, 128 million and 104 million, respectively. Out of the top 10 agricultural contracts by volume, 7 were Chinese. Accurately measuring and forecasting the dynamics of agricultural commodity futures prices is inevitably an important component not only in trade risk management but also in price speculation. Agricultural commodity futures price forecasting is considered as a challenging task due to the fact that the prices are highly volatile, complex and dynamic, and is thus of great interests to finance researchers, market practitioners, and policymakers.An extensive literature investigation reveals that it is not difficult to find that great research efforts have been expended to explore the underlying dynamic of futures prices and develop models suitable for forecasting futures prices, including stock index futures [1–5], oil futures [6–13], gold futures [14,15], and metal futures [16]. But there exists a much smaller body of research examining the predictability of agricultural commodity futures prices [17–19]. Furthermore, an important point to note from past studies [1–19] mentioned above is their preoccupation with point forecasting rather than interval one.Our focus in this study is on interval forecasting of agricultural commodity futures prices. An interval forecasting of futures prices has the advantage of taking into account the variability and/or uncertainty so as to reduce the amount of random variation relative to that found in classic single-valued futures prices time series (e.g., future closing price) [20]. Since the work of Moore [21] and Moore and Moore [22], interval analysis and forecasting has attracted particular attention in various fields, particularly in finance market [23–26] and energy market [27,28]. As Hu and He [23] pointed out, the interval forecasts of stock price are superior to the traditional point forecasts in terms of the overall lower mean error and higher average accuracy ratio. As shown in García-Ascanio and Maté [27], moreover, the interval-valued time series (ITS) forecasting method as a potential tool will lead to a reduction in risk when making power system planning and operational decisions. To date, a variety of ITS forecasting methods has been developed (see [25] for a recently survey), among which the traditional statistical techniques, including interval exponential smoothing methods [29], vector autoregressive (VAR) model [27], and vector error correction model (VECM) [30], have been widely used due to their statistical properties. However, traditional statistical techniques can provide good predictions only when ITS under study are linear and stationary. But ITS may unfortunately appear nonlinear and non-stationary due to the intrinsic complexity and volatility of ITS (e.g., interval-valued agricultural commodity futures prices). In order to overcome the limitations of the traditional statistical techniques and capture the nonlinear pattern exhibited in ITS considered, machine learning techniques have recently attracted much attentions, among which interval multi-layer perceptrons (iMLP) [28] and multi-output support vector regression (MSVR) [24] have shown excellent nonlinear modeling capability for ITS in real world. Although both traditional statistical techniques and machine learning techniques have achieved success in their own linear or nonlinear domains, it is difficult in practice to determine when an ITS is generated by either a linear or nonlinear process, and thus which particular technique is more suitable than another for a specific ITS forecasting task. Actually, ITS in real world rarely appears linear or nonlinear pattern and usually contains both patterns. Thus, a novel method, which can simultaneously handle linear and nonlinear patterns exhibited in ITS, is required for such tough forecasting tasks such as, in this present study, interval-valued agricultural commodity futures prices forecasting.Fortunately, these difficult forecasting tasks can be partially solved by using combined “linear and nonlinear” modeling framework. Given the real time series exhibiting both linear and nonlinear patterns, it is very difficult in practice to construct a single model which is best in all situations. In this regard, Zhang [31] proposed a hybrid autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) and artificial neural network (ANN) model for time series forecasting to take advantage of the unique strength of ARIMA and ANN in linear and nonlinear modeling, respectively. Generally speaking, there are three main steps involved in the combined “linear and nonlinear” modeling framework, i.e., linear modeling, nonlinear modeling, and summation. First of all, a linear modeling technique is used to model the linear part, then the residuals from the linear model will contain only the nonlinear relationship. Secondly, by modeling residuals obtained in the previous step using a nonlinear modeling technique, nonlinear relationships can be discovered. Finally, these prediction results from the linear and nonlinear modeling techniques in the previous steps are summed to generate an aggregated output, which can be seen as the final prediction results for the original time series. Since the work of Zhang [31], the combined “linear and nonlinear” modeling framework has been recently well-established in finance market [32,33], tourism management [34], and energy market [35]. However, the aforementioned studies [31–35] focus only on single-valued time series forecasting. Following the thought of Zhang [31], Maia et al. [36] proposed a hybrid method (namely ARIMA–ANN) that combines both ARIMA and ANN for interval-valued time series forecasting. However, the hybrid method in [36] was applied to forecast the lower and upper bound series of interval-valued time series respectively, without considering the possible interrelations (e.g., cointegration between the low and high of the agricultural commodity futures prices in this study) that are presented among themselves, which has been criticized in [25].Motivated by the thought of Zhang [31], and in particular, to remedy the mentioned above shortcomings in [36], this study proposes an improved combination method (namely VECM–MSVR) for ITS forecasting in agricultural commodity futures market by using VECM and MSVR to model and forecast the low and high prices series of interval-valued agricultural commodity futures prices simultaneously, taking into account the cointegration (the statistical evidences are given in Section 3.1). The MSVR, which is proposed to solve the problem of nonlinear regression estimation for multiple variables [37] and has been successfully used for ITS forecasting [24], is a generalization of the standard SVR. The reason for using MSVR in the proposed combination method is that MSVR can fit and forecast the interval bounds of interval-valued time series simultaneously due to its inherent multi-output structure. For comparison purposes, five counterparts, including VECM [30], single-output support vector regression (SSVR), MSVR [24], ARIMA–MSVR, and ARIMA–ANN developed by Maia et al. [36], are selected as benchmarks. The daily interval-valued futures prices of cotton and corn from Chinese futures market are used as the experimental data series for the purpose of validation. The experimental results are judged as follows. We examine whether the out-of-sample forecasts generated by the VECM–MSVR are more accurate than and preferable to those generated by the benchmark methods for an interval-valued agricultural commodity futures prices, employing statistical criteria such as the goodness of forecast measure and the accuracy competing forecasts test.Our contributions could be outlined as follows. First, as was mentioned above, although extensive mounts of methods [1–12,14–19] have been developed for futures prices modeling and forecasting, most of them rely only on single-valued futures price series. The interval forecasting of futures prices, particularly agricultural commodity futures prices, has not been widely explored. Therefore, this study attempts to originally investigate the possibility of forecasting the interval-valued agricultural commodity future prices series over short and long horizons using a novel combination method. Second, by introducing VECM and MSVR, the well-established “linear and nonlinear” time series modeling framework can be extended to deal with ITS forecasting, which can fully take the advantages of the unique strength of VECM and MSVR in linear and nonlinear modeling, respectively. Third, the most published literature on agricultural commodity futures prices forecasting focuses on international markets, and on the US market in particular [17–19]. There is limited research on the predictability of Chinese agricultural commodity futures market. So, we hope this study would fill this gap. The fourth contribution is straightforward to provide the empirical evidence on the interval-valued agricultural commodity futures prices forecasting with real-world data from Chinese futures market.The paper unfolds as follows. Section 2 illustrates the data representation of an interval-valued agricultural commodity futures price series and discusses the VECM, MSVR, and proposed VECM–MSVR method in details. Section 3 illustrates the research design on data processing and preliminary analysis, performance measurement criteria, methodological implementation, input selection, and experimental procedure. Following that, in Section 4, the experimental results are discussed. Finally, Section 5 summarizes and concludes this work.This section presents the overall formulation process of the proposed VECM–MSVR for interval-valued agricultural commodity futures price series forecasting. First, the data representation of interval-valued agricultural commodity futures price series is illustrated. Then, the VECM, MSVR, and the proposed VECM–MSVR for the obtained ITS are formulated in detail.An interval-valued variable,X,is a variable defined for all of the elementsiof a setE, whereXt={[XtL,XtU]T:XtL,XtU∈R,XtL⩽XtU},∀t∈E. The particular value ofXfor theithelement can be denoted by the interval’s lower and upper bounds,Xt=[XtL,XtU]T. Table 1shows the daily interval values of the cotton futures prices at Zhengzhou Commodity Exchange.An interval-valued time series (ITS) is a chronological sequence of interval-valued variables. The value of a variable at each instant in timet(t=1,…,n)is expressed as a two-dimensional vector[XtL,XtU]Twith the elements inRrepresenting the lower boundXtLand upper boundXtU,withXtL⩽XtU. Thus, an ITS isXi=[XtL,XtU]Tfort=1,…,n,wherendenotes the number of intervals of the time series (sample size). Fig. 1illustrates the futures market in which a daily interval-valued cotton futures prices arises. Fig. 1(a) illustrates a 1-min settlement (closing) prices of cotton futures prices from January 18, 2012 to February 9, 2012. Fig. 1(b) depicts the corresponding daily cotton futures prices intervals.The vector error correction model (VECM) proposed and extended by Johansen and Juselius [38] is a combination of the vector autoregressive model and cointegration restrictions. A VECM is a restricted vector autoregressive model that has cointegration restrictions built into specification [39]. Hence, the VECM includes an examination of the dynamic comovement among variables and the adjustment process toward long-term equilibrium [40]. This subsection gives a brief description of the development of a VECM for interval-valued agricultural commodity futures prices forecasting. The details of the formulation can be found in [38].Following [30,41], the lower and upper bounds series of agricultural commodity futures prices are assumed to be generated by a VECM. The VECM employed by [41] is represented as(1)ΔXt=μ+∑i=1pΓiΔXt-i+αRt-1+εtwhereXt≡[XtL,XtU]T,XtLandXtUare the daily low and high of commodity futures prices, respectively.Rt-1is the range variable given byXtU-XtL,pis the number of lags, the parameters areμ,Γi, andα, andεtis the residual term. Eq. (1) is a VECM that incorporates the cointegrating vector given by the range variable in modeling the joint behavior of the non-stationary high and low series of commodity futures prices. To justify Eq. (1), we verified three key points given as follows: First, the individual high and low series of commodity futures prices areI(1)non-stationary and the range variable is stationary; Second, for each contract, its highs and lows are cointegrated; Third, the range variable can be interpreted as a stationary error correction term in Eq. (1). These empirical results are presented in Section 3.1.In this subsection, we provide a brief outline of the development of an MSVR model for interval-valued agricultural commodity futures prices forecasting (an in-depth discussion on MSVR can be found in the studies of [37]).The MSVR, which is proposed to solve the problem of nonlinear regression estimation for multiple variables [37] and has been successfully used for ITS forecasting [24], is a generalization of the standard SVR. Given an interval-valued cotton futures prices series[Xt]=[XtL,XtU]Tfort=1,…,nas shown in Fig. 1(b), wherendenotes the number of intervals of the time series andXt∈R2represents thetthinterval. Interval-valued cotton futures prices series modeling and prediction is defined as finding the mapping between an input vectorx=[(XiL,XiU),(Xi-1L,Xi-1U),…,(Xi-d+1L,Xi-d+1U)]T∈R2dand an output vectory=[Xi+1L,Xi+1U]T∈R2from a given independent, identically distributed sample, i.e.,{(xi,yi)}i=dn. As such, we use an MSVR model with2dinputs (lagged intervals ati,i-1,…,i-d+1) and two outputs, with each output corresponding to the forecast of the bounds,Xi+1LandXi+1U.The MSVR solves the problem above by finding the regressorswjandbj(j=1,2)for every output that minimizes:(2)Lp(W,b)=12∑j=12‖wj‖2+C∑i=1nL(ui)whereui=‖ei‖=(eiTei),eiT=yiT-φ(xi)W-bTW=[w1,w2],b=[b1,b2]Tφ(·)is a nonlinear transformation of the feature space, which is usually a higher-dimensional space, andCis a hyper parameter that determines the trade-off between the regularization and error reduction terms.L(u)is a quadratic epsilon-insensitive cost function defined in Eq. (3), which is a differentiable form of the Vapnikεinsensitive loss function.(3)L(u)=0u<εu2-2uε+ε2u⩾εIn Eq. (3), whenεis nonzero, the function will take all outputs into account when constructing each individual regressor and will obtain more robust predications and will then yield a single support vector set for all dimensions. It should be noted that the proposed problem cannot be resolved in a straightforward manner; thus, an iterative reweighted least squares (IRWLS) procedure based on a quasi-Newton approach to obtain the desired solution was proposed by [42]. By introducing a first-order Taylor expansion of the cost functionL(u),the objective of Eq. (2) will be approximated by the following equation:(4)Lp′(W,b)=12∑j=12‖wj‖2+12∑i=1naiui2+CT,ai=0uik<ε2C(uik-ε)uikuik⩾εwhereCTis a constant term that does not depend onWandb, and the superscriptkdenotes thekthiteration.To optimize Eq. (4), an IRWLS procedure is constructed that linearly searches the next step solution along the descending direction based on the previous solution [42]. According to the Representer Theorem [43], the best solution for minimizing Eq. (4) in the feature space can be expressed aswj=∑iϕ(xi)βj=ΦTβj, so the target of the MSVR becomes finding the bestβandb.It has been documented in the literature that a combination of linear and non-linear time series models achieves better results than the individual forecasting of each model [31–35]. Following the thought of Zhang [31], as was mentioned in Section 1, this study proposes a combined VECM–MSVR method for ITS forecasting in futures market by using VECM and MSVR capture the linear and nonlinear patterns in interval-valued agricultural commodity futures prices, respectively.An interval-valued agricultural commodity futures prices series can be considered as comprising a linear autocorrelation structure and a non-linear component. This is(5)Xt+1=Lt+1+Nt+1whereXt+1=[Xt+1L,Xt+1U]T,Lt+1andNt+1are the linear and non-linear components of the combination model, respectively.The general process of the proposed VECM–MSVR is as follows:Step 1: The VECM is used to model the linear structureLt+1. The residuals of the VECM isStep 2: The residualset+1are modeled by an MSVR,Step 3: The prediction of the residualset+1via MSVR is denoted byeˆt+1,and thus the forecast provided by the VECM–MSVR method is given byTo verify effectiveness of the proposed VECM–MSVR method, the SSVR and ARIMA–ANN [36] are employed as univariate techniques, two individual ITS forecasting methods, i.e., VECM [30] and MSVR [24], and ARIMA–MSVR are selected as benchmarks herein. It should be noted that the ARIMA is used as univariate modeling technique in ARIMA–MSVR. More specifically, the ARIMA fits and forecasts the upper and lower bounds of interval-valued time series respectively.This section provides details about the research design. In Section 3.1, the details of the data process and preliminary analysis are given. Section 3.2 lists and briefly describes the goodness of forecast measure and the accuracy compared to competing forecasts test used. Section 3.3 presents the implementations of the VECM, SSVR, MSVR, VECM–MSVR, ARIMA–MSVR, and ARIMA–ANN. Section 3.4 briefly describes the input selection used. Section 3.5 depicts the experimental procedures with ITS in details.The data for our study consist of two agricultural commodity futures contracts traded in Chinese futures market: cotton from Zhengzhou Commodity Exchange1Datasets are available from the Zhengzhou Commodity Exchange website (http://www.czce.com.cn/).1and corn from Dalian Commodity Exchange.2Datasets are available from the Dalian Commodity Exchange website (http://www.dce.com.cn/).2Agricultural commodity futures contracts are traded until the 15th of the contract month (or the last business day before the 15th). For each contract, a long and unique price series is constructed using only the data of the nearest futures contract up to its maturity and links it with the following contract on the next day [44]. The sample data are daily interval-valued data of two contracts with different periods and sample sizes, as shown in Table 2. The intervals are obtained for a daily range of a selected agricultural commodity futures contract; the lowest and highest values for the day are calculated to define the movement in the market for that day. The statistical descriptions of the two contracts are shown in Table 3. It is clear that a big difference by examining the minimum and maximum of both contracts. The mean and standard deviation show that both contracts exhibit high fluctuation. Moreover, the skewness and kurtosis indicate the high differences against the normal distribution. Generally speaking, the interval-valued agricultural commodity futures prices of the selected contracts illustrate a high fluctuation pattern with irregularity.For each agricultural commodity futures contract, the first two-thirds of the observations are used as an estimation sample, while the remainder is reserved as the hold-out sample. Each of the examined methods is implemented (or trained) on the estimation sample, and forecasts are produced for the entire hold-out sample. The forecasts are then compared to the hold-out sample to evaluate the out-of-sample performance of each method. A fivefold cross validation is used in the training phase to avoidover-fitting. For the purpose of a description of the dataset, the interval-valued cotton futures price series is used as an example (see Fig. 2). The data are expressed on a log scale. The interval-valued cotton futures price series contains 959 observations from January 4, 2010 to December 31, 2013. The first 640 observations from January 4, 2010 to August 22, 2012 are used as the estimation sample, and the last 319 observations from August 23, 2012 to December 31, 2013 are reserved as the hold-out sample, following the common practice of sample splitting—two-thirds for training and one-third for testing.We employ one-step-ahead (h=1) and multi-step-ahead (h=3,5) forecasts because it is useful to examine the proposed method at higher horizons. For multi-step-ahead forecasting, the iterated strategy, which is often advocated in standard time series textbooks [45] and reviews [46], is implemented here. This strategy constructs a prediction model by means of minimizing the squares of the in-sample one-step-ahead residuals and then uses the predicted values as an input for the same model when forecasting the subsequent point, continuing in this manner until reaching the horizon [47].To construct the VECM, we first conduct the preliminary analysis using the example of the daily interval-valued cotton futures price series as shown in Fig. 2. Looking at Fig. 2, it is transparent that the lower (XtL) and upper (XtU) bounds series move in tandem; neither series look to be stationary. The prior condition for construction for the VECM is that the lower and upper bounds series should be integrated in the same order or contain a determine trend. As a preliminary analysis, the Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test is carried out to determine the integrated order of the series. The results at 5% levels of significance (not reported here for brevity but available on request) suggest that a unit root cannot be rejected at the levels. However, they are stationary after the first difference. Thus, the lower and upper bounds series are integrated to order one (i.e.,I(1)), and they are put forward to cointegration analysis and are used to build the VECM in the subsequent modeling procedures. Thus, the Johansen test is used to test for any cointegration between the variables with the VECM as specified in Eq. (1). The Bayesian criterion is used to select the lag parameterp. According to both maximum eigenvalue and trace statistics, the null hypothesis of no cointegration is rejected at 5% levels of significance (see Table 4). Further, there is no evidence that there exists more than one cointegrating vector. Thus, it is concluded that there is one cointegration relationship betweenXtLandXtU.That is, the lower and upper bounds series of the interval-valued cotton futures price series are considered to be CI(1,1). More importantly, Table 4 shows that when the coefficient ofXtUis scaled to 1, the estimated cointegrating vector is (1,−0.99762), which is very close to (1,−1). In other words, the stationary error correction term is closely proxied by the daily range variableXtR=XtU-XtL.This results concur with the findings of He et al. [48] and Xiong et al. [24] who detected the same conclusion when analyzing the daily lower and upper bounds series of the WTI (West Texas Intermediate) crude oil prices and three stock indices, respectively. The identical preliminary analysis mentioned above is conducted for the corn futures price series as well. These results suggest that the lower and upper bounds of agricultural commodity futures prices are integrated (not reported here for brevity but available on request).In this paper, the performances of examined methods are evaluated based on the interval U of Theil statistic (UI), which has been recently employed in [26,49] for ITS problems, and the mean absolute percentage error (MAPE), which is a well-known classical accuracy measure in forecasting community. The definitions of these measurement criteria are shown as follows:(9)UI=∑t=1n(Xt+1U-Xˆt+1U)2+∑t=1n(Xt+1L-Xˆt+1L)2∑t=1n(Xt+1U-XtU)2+∑t=1n(Xt+1L-XtL)2(10)MAPEU=100n∑t=1n|XtU-XˆtU|XtUMAPEL=100n∑t=1n|XtL-XˆtL|XtLwherendenotes the number of fitted intervals,[XtL,XtU]is thetthtrue interval,[XˆtL,XˆtU]is thetthfitted interval.MAPEUandMAPELare the MAPE for upper and lower bounds of the ITS, respectively.TheUIstatistic is suitable for comparing the performances of a reference model with a naïve model (which assumes a random walk model), where the most recent interval is considered as the prediction of a future interval of the series,[Xˆt+1L,Xˆt+1U]=[XtL,XtU]. This statistic is less than one if the predictor performs better than a random walk model. However, it is greater than one if the predictor performs worse than a random walk model. A value ofUIequal to 0 indicates perfect forecasting.In addition to the accuracy measure, the superior predictive ability (SPA) test developed by Hansen [50] is employed to test the statistical significance of two or more competing methods at a time. Detailed discussion of the SPA test can be found in [50], but a brief introduction about the formulation of SPA test is provided here. Considerl+1(l=3in this case) different methodsMkfork=0,1,…,l(these are VECM, MSVR, VECM–MSVR, and ARIMA–ANN in this case), which are discussed in Section 2.M0is the base method, and the null hypothesis is that none of the methodsk=1,…,loutperform the base method in terms of the prespecified loss function (that isUIin this case). For each methodMk,we generateNforecastsXˆk,tfort=1,2,…,N.For every forecast, we compute the loss functionLt,kdescribed as follows: LetLt,k≡L(Xt,Xˆk,t)denote the loss if one makes the predictionXˆk,twith thekthmethod when the realized futures prices areXt.The performance of the methodkrelative to the base method at timetcan be defined asfk,t=L0,t-Lk,tfork=1,2,…,l;t=1,2,…,N.The SPA test is used to compare the forecasting performance of a base method against itslcompetitors. The null hypothesis that none of methods is better than the base method (i.e., no predictive superiority over the base method itself) can be expressed as(11)H0:μmax≡maxk=1,…,lμk⩽0The associated test statistic proposed by Hansen [50] is given as(12)T≡maxk=1,…,lNf¯kωˆkkwhereωˆkkas a consistent estimate ofωkk2,f¯k=N-1∑t=1Nfk,t, andωkk2=limN→∞var(Nf¯k). A consistent estimator ofωkkand ap-value of test statisticTcan be obtained via a bootstrap procedure discussed in [51]. Here, we use 10,000 bootstraps to obtain a SPAp-value between any two competitive methods. The SPA test program implemented in the R software package ‘ttrTests’3R package ‘ttrTests’ are available at http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/ttrTests/.3is used in this study.As discussed in Section 2.4, three ITS forecasting methods (i.e., VECM [30], MSVR [24], and the proposed VECM–MSVR), two univariate technique (i.e., SSVR and ARIMA–ANN [36]), and ARIMA–MSVR are implemented in this study. Taking into account the amount of interval-valued series (that is 2), it is necessary to construct 2 models undertaking VECM, MSVR, and VECM–MSVR, respectively, one for each contract and 4 models undertaking SSVR and ARIMA–ANN, as both the SSVR and ARIMA–ANN methods are used to independently model and forecast the lower and upper bounds of a given interval-valued agricultural commodity futures price series. Concerning on the ARIMA–MSVR, it is necessary to construct 4 ARIMA models and 2 MSVR models, as the ARIMA is used as univariate technique and MSVR is adopted as ITS forecasting method in the ARIMA–MSVR method.The results of preliminary analysis presented in Section 3.1 suggest a cointegrating relationship betweenXtLandXtUwith a cointegrating vector well approximated by (1,−1), a VECM withXtR(XtR=XtU-XtL) substituting for the error correction term is the natural empirical construct to examine their long-run and short-run interactions. The VECM for daily interval-valued agricultural commodity futures price series is implemented using Eviews.LibSVM (version 2.86) is used for SSVR implementation. The MSVR model with two outputs is implemented using the Matlab program provided by Pérez-Cruz et al. [37]. The radial basis function (RBF) is selected as the kernel function for both SSVR and MSVR. To determine the hyper-parameters, namelyC,ε,γ,particle swarm optimization (PSO) [52] is used for both SSVR and MSVR. It should be noted that parameters selection for PSO is yet another challenging model selection task. In this study, the parameters of PSO are determined according to the recommendations in [53–56]. Table 5summarizes the final parameters of PSO. Table 6summarizes the final parameters (these are,C,ε,γ,) of SSVR, MSVR, and VECM–MSVR.The identical implementation procedures for individual VECM and MSVR modeling mentioned above are employed for the proposed VECM–MSVR method.The ARIMA–ANN method is implemented using Matlab and R software. Specifically, the automatic model selection algorithm proposed by Hyndman and Khandakar [57] and implemented in the R software package ‘forecast’4R package ‘forecast’ are available athttp://ftp.ctex.org/mirrors/CRAN/.4is used for ARIMA estimation in this study. For ANN implementation, the feed-forward neural network with one hidden layer containing 16 neurons and 1 output node. The input nodes are determined by the input selection method. The transfer function for hidden nodes is the logistic function and for the output node is the identical function. The Levenberg and Marquardt Algorithm, provided by the Matlab neural network toolbox, is adopted here.In this study, only historical lower and upper prices are used as inputs. The maximum embedding order, d, is set to 15 by the rule of thumb. More specifically, the initial input variables are[(XtL,XtU),…,(Xt-d+1L,Xt-d+1U)]∈R2d,d=15.After determining the maximum embedding order, the best subset of inputs is determined through the filter method. In the case of the filter method, the best subset of inputs is selected a priori based only on the dataset. The input subset is chosen by an evaluation criterion, which measures the relationship of each subset of input variables with the output [58]. Specifically, in terms of evaluation criteria, the partial mutual information [59] is used for single-output SVR, while the 2-fold cross-validation of a 1-NN approximator [24,60] is adopted for MSVR. With respect to the search algorithm, a forward–backward selection method that offers the flexibility to reconsider previously discarded input variables and to discard previously selected input variables is used. It should be noted that the initial input variables for the SSVR and individual MSVR are[(XtL,XtU),…,(Xt-d+1L,Xt-d+1U)]∈R2d,d=15, while the initial input variables for the MSVR in the VECM–MSVR method are[(etL,etU),…,(et-dL,et-dU)]∈R2d,d=15.Table 7summarizes the best subset of inputs (these are, final input variables) for SSVR, MSVR, and VECM–MSVR models.Fig. 3shows the procedure for performing experiments with the ITS. The daily interval-valued agricultural commodity futures price series are first split into the estimation sample and the holdout sample. Then, the input selection and model selection of six examined models for the estimation sample are determined by using the filter method (mentioned above) and a fivefold cross-validation technique. Then, the models are tested on the holdout samples. Afterward, accuracy measures are computed. The performance of the examined models is judged in terms of the accuracy measures for the holdout samples. In addition, the superior predictive ability statistic is used to test the statistical significance of different forecasting models.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Following the well-established “linear and nonlinear” modeling framework, this study proposes a novel VECM–MSVR method for ITS forecasting in futures market by using VECM and MSVR capture the linear and nonlinear patterns in interval-valued agricultural commodity futures prices with high volatility and irregularity, respectively. The results obtained show that the proposed VECM–MSVR method can statistically outperform five well-established competitors in term of the goodness of forecast measure and the accuracy competing forecasts test, indicating the proposed VECM–MSVR method is a promising alternative for ITS forecasting in futures markets.The limitations of this study lie in two aspects. First, although we investigate the multi-step-ahead forecasting ability of all methods using iterated strategy, there are many other prediction strategies, which may shed a different light on the multi-step-ahead modeling issue. Second, this study evaluates the examined methods only based on statistical criteria, which provides no information about the profitability of each method in futures markets. Profitability is of greater value to decision-makers than statistical criteria in futures markets. We will explore these issues in future research.