@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel Multiple Objective Symbiotic Organisms Search (MOSOS) for time–cost–labor utilization tradeoff problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This research presents a novel multiple optimization algorithm MOSOS.MOSOS is applied to solve time-cost-utilization work shift tradeoff problem.The model performance is demonstrated in the experimental results.Statistical test found MOSOS to provide better solutions compared to other methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Work shift,Scheduling,Multi-objective analysis,Symbiotic Organisms Search,Time-cost-resource tradeoff,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Multiple work shifts are commonly utilized in construction projects to meet project requirements. Nevertheless, evening and night shifts raise the risk of adverse events and thus must be used to the minimum extent feasible. Tradeoff optimization among project duration (time), project cost, and the utilization of evening and night work shifts while maintaining with all job logic and resource availability constraints is necessary to enhance overall construction project success. In this study, a novel approach called “Multiple Objective Symbiotic Organisms Search” (MOSOS) to solve multiple work shifts problem is introduced. The MOSOS algorithm is new meta-heuristic based multi-objective optimization techniques inspired by the symbiotic interaction strategies that organisms use to survive in the ecosystem. A numerical case study of construction projects were studied and the performance of MOSOS is evaluated in comparison with other widely used algorithms which includes non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm II (NSGA-II), the multiple objective particle swarm optimization (MOPSO), the multiple objective differential evolution (MODE), and the multiple objective artificial bee colony (MOABC). The numerical results demonstrate MOSOS approach is a powerful search and optimization technique in finding optimization of work shift schedules that is it can assist project managers in selecting appropriate plan for project.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Labor is a critical construction project resource for construction contractors to be successful on every construction project. Inefficient management of labor resources can result the contractors not able to meet the project deadline and budget requirement. When facing a tight schedule deadline, labor resources has a huge limitation on the number of hours a worker can work per day. Therefore, it requires the use of shift work to meet scheduled deadlines [1]. Using shift work can approximately double the total amount of work hours per day. It also has an advantage over using overtime hours because it prevents worker fatigue and has lower hourly labor costs [2,3]. Furthermore, work shift done during the evening and night is often more efficient due to the quieter, less congested environment around the construction site.In spite of these advantages, the multiple shift schedules possess several shortcomings including its negative impacts on construction cost, productivity, and safety [1,4]. The multiple shifts might lead in higher overall costs that are required for shift premiums, quality control, nighttime lighting, and safety measures. Additionally, disturbed sleep cycles and stress resulting in higher injury and accident risks, and nighttime construction adversely affects worker health due to circadian rhythm disruption [5–7]. Moreover, recent researches identified that the utilization of evening and night shifts causes higher rates of labor overturn and absenteeism that leads to project delays and cost overruns [2,4]. In order to minimize these negative impacts of utilizing multiple shifts while complying with labor availability constraints, project decision makers need to distribute and utilize the limited labor resources among multiple shifts in the most efficient and effective way to maximize project performance.Over past decades, a significant amount of research studies have developed optimization models to solve civil engineering problems ranging from structural engineering [8] to construction management [9]. In recent years, there have been notable efforts to solve resource utilization problems using multi-objective optimization models. The most commonly used multi-objective optimization model is the multiple objective genetic algorithm (GA) [10–13]. Other researchers have developed hybrid models of genetic and other algorithms such as particle swarm optimization (PSO) [14], differential evolution (DE) [15] and simulated annealing [16]. However, there are a few reported researches that focus on optimizing the utilization of multiple labor shifts in constructions. Jun and El-Rayes [1] firstly applied a multiple objective genetic algorithm to work shift problem. Therefore, further study is needed to build better optimization models to schedule construction project work shift.Symbiotic Organisms Search (SOS) is currently one of the most recent metaheuristic algorithms [17]. SOS was first used in a wide variety of highly nonlinear benchmark and engineering problems. The SOS algorithm is simply structured and easy to use, while demonstrating great robustness and fast convergence in solving single objective global optimization problem. Preliminary studies indicate that the new SOS algorithm is superior over the widely used GA, PSO, DE, and bees algorithm (BA) in solving a various continuous benchmark function and engineering problems [17]. Since the SOS algorithm is relatively new, the capability of the SOS algorithm in solving the time cost utilization labor tradeoff (TCUT) problem is very interesting to be further explored and investigated.This study presents the novel Multiple Objective Symbiotic Organisms Search (MOSOS) algorithm to facilitate a TCUT analysis. The important contribution of this research is that the proposed MOSOS algorithm is a new, multiple objective optimization (MOO) version of the basic SOS algorithm. MOSOS algorithm is developed to fit the TCUT problem because the ability to provide efficient solutions for complex problems simpler operations of SOS is very much attractive and encouraging. The proposed algorithm is designed to attain fast convergence without losing solution diversity on the Pareto front.The remaining of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the time-cost-utilization resource problem is mathematically formulated. In Section 3, literature related to the establishment of the new optimization model is briefly reviewed. In Section 4, the detailed descriptions of the proposed optimization model for the TCUT problem are presented in details. In Section 5, the performance of the newly developed model is demonstrated using two numerical experiments and result comparisons. Section 6 presents study conclusions.Using multiple work shifts in a construction project requires that the project planners determine the execution mode of project activities, seek to find the optimal scheduling sequence and assign workers to shifts while satisfying all project constraints. The work shift problem must minimize three contradicting objectives simultaneously including project duration, project cost, and total evening and night shift working hours [1].The first objective, minimization of total project duration, may be expressed as follows:MinimizeprojecttimeT=∑n=1lTnSn=Max∀n(ESn+Dn)(1)ESn=Maximumallpredecessorsmofn(ESm+Dm)whereTnSnis the duration of the activityn{n=1,2,…,l}on the critical path for a specific option of resources (Sn); l is the total number of critical activities on a specific critical path. ESnis the earliest start of activity n, Dnis the duration of activity n. In general, project duration is calculated based on precedence constraints and activity duration. The project information determines the precedence constraints and the selection alternatives determine activity duration.The second objective, minimization of total project cost, may be calculated as follows:(2)Minimizeprojectcost=∑i=1NCostiSiwhereCostiSiis the total cost which includes direct and indirect cost of activity i for a specific option of resources (Sn) and N is the total number of activities.The third and final objective, minimization of project labor utilization in evening and night shifts, may be calculated as follows.(3)MinimizeLHEN=LHE+LHN(1+W)ifSS=3(Threeshiftssystem(SS))(4)LHNE=LHEifSS=2(Twoshiftssystem)(5)LHE=∑n=1N(Dn*Rn,2)*HE(6)LHN=∑n=1N(Dn*Rn,3)*HNwhere LHEN is the total number of evening and night shift work hours, LHE is the total number of evening shift work hours and LHN is the total number of night shift work hours. Because risks faced in night shift work are typically higher than in other shifts, W is the defined weight that represents the relative importance of minimizing LHN. Rn, kis the daily labor demand of activity n on shift k. k represents the shift type (e.g., for the 3-shift system, k = 1 means day shift, k = 2 means evening shift, and k = 3 means night shift); HE is the daily evening shift work hours (7.5 h per day); and HN is the daily night shift work hours (7 h per day). In this study, day shift is the period of time for such work during the day (as 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. – 8 h). Evening shift is the work shift during the evening (as 4 p.m. to midnight). Night shift is the work shift during the night (as midnight to 8 a.m.).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A novel Multiple Objective Symbiotic Organisms Search optimization algorithm has been introduced for optimizing work shift schedules. MOSOS is a population based meta-heuristic algorithm which imitates the biological interactions between organisms in an ecosystem. Three phases of mutualism, commensalism, and parasitism inspire MOSOS to find the non-dominated solutions of given multiple objectives. The proposed algorithm run a construction project to demonstrate its efficacy in finding optimal schedules that simultaneously minimize project duration (time), cost, and the utilization of evening and night work shifts while satisfying with all precedence and labor availability constraints. A project was conducted to illustrate the impact of three shifts systems on project performance. Experimental results shows that the proposed MOSOS approach efficiently solves multi-objective TCUT problems and finds Pareto optimal solutions in one simulation run. Results obtained from the proposed approach have been compared with those obtained from widely used multi-objective evolutionary algorithms such as MOABC, MODE, MOPSO, and NSGA-II. MOSOS displayed better diversity characteristics, yielded better compromise solutions, and attained a higher degree of satisfaction. It is also observed that the proposed approach provides a competitive performance in terms of diversity characteristics, compromise solutions and degree of satisfactions.The Pareto front generated by MOSOS provides useful information that assists construction-project decision makers determine the optimal tradeoff among the three important project considerations of project duration, cost, and labor utilization.The proposed MOSOS is simple, robust and efficient. It does not impose any limitation on the number of objectives and can be extended to include more objectives. Further minor modifications of the proposed MOSOS algorithm hold interesting potential to resolve other multi-objective optimization problems in the field of construction management such as the tradeoffs among performance, cost, and reliability in engineering design work; time, cost and safety tradeoffs; and resource-constrained and resource-leveling in project scheduling activities.Detail flowchart of MOSOS for the TCUT problem.