@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Proximal three-way decisions: Theory and applications in social networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Proximal 3-way decision-making introduced.Delaunay triangulation meshes used.Computational geometry and near set theory foundation provided.Location-based social networks application included.Human socio-spatial behaviour analysis carried out.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Delaunay triangulation,Proximity,Three-way decisions,Nearness of sets,Social networks,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This article introduces proximal three-way decision-making. This form of 3-way decision-making stems from the proximity structures that result from endowing each nonempty set of social network triangulation nodes with several proximity relations. A triangulation is obtained by connecting every pair of nearest neighbour nodes with a straight edge. The proposed approach to 3-way decision-making results from the analysis of Delaunay graphs (spatial) as well as friendship network (social) of location-based social network nodes. The knowledge gained from proximal three-way decision-making is in the form of information granules that are near sets of nodes representing interaction between either casual users or friends in a social network. A practical illustration of proximal three-way decision-making is given in terms of a public domain large-scale social network dataset.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
This article introduces proximal three-way decision-making based on the spatial and friendship relationships between nodes in social networks. The proposed approach to three-way decision-making results from recent work on Voronoï tessellation [29], Delaunay triangulation [27] of subsets in the Euclidean plane and visibility in Delaunay meshes [30]. This work also carries forward recent work on proximity (expressions of nearness between sets), starting with F. Riesz (1908 [33]) and E. Čech (Brno seminar, May 1936 to November 1939 [38]) leading to advanced work on proximity by S.A. Naimpally (from 1969 to 2014, e.g., [23,21]) and others [18,19] as well as recent work on new forms of proximity [32,28,14]. Delaunay triangulations, introduced by B.N. Delone (Delaunay) [6], represent discrete triangular-shaped approximation of continuous space. This representation partitions the space into regions. The combination of Delaunay triangulation and proximity theory leads rather naturally to a formal foundation for proximal three-way decision-making introduced in this article. In this work, spatial properties are analysed based on the proximity or remoteness of triangle vertices and line segments (sides of triangles) in a Delaunay triangulation of network nodes. The analysis of these properties leads to three types of decisions (acceptance, deferment, rejection) based on proximal relations: strongly near, near and far respectively in analysing subgroups in a network.Recently, location-based online social networking applications have emerged, where users share their current location by checking-in on websites such as Foursquare, Facebook, Gowalla [35]. The access to geographic locations of users as well as friendship links amongst them makes it possible to gain insight into socio-spatial properties of such networks. In the sequel, it is noted that proximal three-way decision-making complements recent work on rough set-based three-way decision-making.Three-way decision-making based on rough sets is a natural outcome of considering the quality of the positive, negative and boundary regions in the approximation of a set [47, Section 5.2.1, p. 86]. These three regions induce rules for three-way decisions: acceptance, rejection, deferment. The framework for a Delaunay triangulation-based proximal three-way decision-making (PTWD) and rough set based three-way decision making (RTWD) models are rooted in granular computing. The notion of nearness not only differs from indiscernibility but is a more general concept and in consequence, all basic notions of rough sets can be obtained within the near set framework [43]. The relationship between RTWD and PTWD can be best described as follows: (i) both of these approaches are set-theoretic based models, (ii) RTWD partitions the universe of objects or observations into three disjoint regions and PTWD involves discrete approximation of continuous space which partitions the space into regions, (iii) RTWD consists of a set of objects endowed with an equivalence relation whereas PTWD consists of a set nodes endowed with a proximity (nearness) relation, (iv) the set of nodes X in PTWD is in the Euclidean spaceR2whereas the universe U in RTWD is typically in non-Euclidean space, and lastly, (v) depending on a specific application, in PTWD one can envision proximity relation strongly near leading to an accept decision, near leading to a deferment decision and far leading to a reject decision. Some applications of PTWD can be in the following areas: (i) improving content-delivery using socio-spatial ties. These include on-line multimedia streaming where users’ social links are used by providers who rely on content delivery networks, (ii) local activism and advocacy that rely on socio-spatial ties, (iii) advertising, and (iv) potential sites for speciality retailing with highly customised offerings. For example, strongly near proximal decision-making could play an important role in local activism and speciality retailing whereas both strongly near and near can be influential in advertising.The contribution of the article is a first attempt at creating a framework for proximal three-way decisions based on Delaunay triangulations in the study of socio-spatial properties of location-based social networks. This form of three-way decision-making is a quintessential application of proximity (near) set theory. It derives its strength from topological spaces endowed with several proximity relations, namely, δ(near),δ∧∧(strongly near) andδ(far). This is a metric-free form of three-way decision-making, since proximal three-way decision-making does not depend on a metric to derive graph properties.The Delaunay Proximity Graph (spatial) and Friendship Network (social) were both derived from the Gowalla data set from Stanford University.1http://snap.stanford.edu/data/.1Analysis of the Gowalla data is given in terms of properties derived spatial and friendship triangulation graphs. Some examples with increasing complexity of triangles were chosen for analysis. Experiments with the complete data set are also presented.This article has the following organisation. Section 2 includes a discussion of works related to three-way decision-making with rough sets, Delaunay triangulation and location-based social networks. The computational geometry and topology underlying social networks with Voronoï diagrams and Delaunay triangulation is given in Section 3. Properties of proximal three-way decisions are introduced in Section 4. These properties are illustrated using an online location-based social network data in Section 5. An analysis of PTWD is given in Section 6. Results from the full Gowalla Dataset is presented in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
