@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Chance-constrained DEA models with random fuzzy inputs and outputs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) problems with Random Fuzzy (Ra-Fu) variables.We propose three fuzzy DEA models with Poisson, uniform and normal distributions.We extend possibility–probability and necessity–probability DEA models with Ra-Fu variables.We propose a possibility–probability DEA model with fuzzy thresholds.We propose a necessity–probability DEA model with fuzzy thresholds.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data envelopment analysis,Random fuzzy variable,Possibility–probability,Necessity–probability,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) is a widely used mathematical programming technique for comparing the inputs and outputs of a set of homogenous Decision Making Units (DMUs) by evaluating their relative efficiency. The conventional DEA methods assume deterministic and precise values for the input and output observations. However, the observed values of the input and output data in real-world problems can potentially be both random and fuzzy in nature. We introduce Random Fuzzy (Ra-Fu) variables in DEA where randomness and vagueness coexist in the same problem. In this paper, we propose three DEA models for measuring the radial efficiency of DMUs when the input and output data are Ra-Fu variables with Poisson, uniform and normal distributions. We then extend the formulation of the possibility–probability and the necessity–probability DEA models with Ra-Fu parameters for a production possibility set where the Ra-Fu inputs and outputs have normal distributions with fuzzy means and variances. We finally propose the general possibility–probability and necessity–probability DEA models with fuzzy thresholds. A set of numerical examples and a case study are presented to demonstrate the efficacy of the procedures and algorithms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Efficiency and productivity measurement in organizations has received a great deal of attention in recent years. Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) by Charnes et al. [6] generalizes the Farrell [16] single-input/single-output technical efficiency measure to the multiple-input/multiple-output case in order to evaluate the relative efficiency of peer units with respect to multiple performance measures ([6,5,11,12]). The units under evaluation in DEA are called Decision Making Units (DMUs) and their performance measures are grouped into inputs and outputs. Using the optimization for each DMU, DEA yields an efficient frontier or tradeoff curve that represents the relations among the multiple performance measures. Unlike parametric methods which require an explicit production function, DEA is non-parametric and does not require an explicit functional form relating inputs and outputs. Charnes et al [6] introduced the following conventional radial input-oriented DEA model of a given DMU∘ for constant returns to scale (called CRS or CCR):(1)max∑r=1suryr∘s.t.∑i=1mvixi∘=1,∑r=1suryrj-∑i=1mvixij⩽0,j=1,…,n,ur,vi⩾0,r=1,…,s;i=1,…,m.where yrj(r=1,,2,…,s) and xij(i=1,,2,…,m) are the s outputs and m inputs for the jth DMU, j=1,,2,…,n. In addition, the urand viare the weights associated with the rth output and the ith input, respectively. The DMU∘ is [technically] efficient if the objective function of (1) equals unity, otherwise, is [technically] inefficient.The conventional DEA evaluation process is based on well-defined, precise and deterministic data for the production set. However, the input and output data in real-world problems are often fuzzy and random. Some researchers have proposed various methods for dealing with imprecise and ambiguous data in DEA. Cooper et al. [11,12] has studied this problem in the context of interval data. However, many real-life problems use linguistic data such as good, fair or poor that cannot be mapped to interval data. Fuzzy logic and fuzzy sets can represent ambiguous, uncertain or imprecise information by formalizing inaccuracy in the decision making process [8]. Fuzzy set algebra developed by Zadeh [54] is the formal body of theory that allows the treatment of imprecise estimates in uncertain environments.Various fuzzy methods have been proposed to solve DEA problems with Random Fuzzy (Ra-Fu) variables. In a recent study, Hatami-Marbini et al. [20] classified the fuzzy DEA methods in the literature into five general groups: (1) the tolerance approach (e.g. [50]), (2) the α-level based approach (e.g. [25,21,7,45]), (3) the fuzzy ranking approach (e.g. [18,35,22,53]), (4) the possibility approach (e.g. [19,36,26]), and (5) other developments (e.g. [24,43,52,57]).Each of the above mentioned approaches has both advantages and disadvantages in the way it treats uncertain data in DEA models. For example, the tolerance approach fuzzifies the inequality or equality signs but it does not treat fuzzy coefficients directly. However, the input and output data are often imprecise. The α-level based approach provides fuzzy efficiency metrics, but requires the ranking of the fuzzy efficiency sets. The fuzzy ranking approach produces fuzzy efficiencies for the DMUs. The possibility approach, finally, requires generally relatively complicated numerical computations compared to the other approaches.The fundamental advantage of DEA is that it does not require prior weights or explicit specification of functional relationships among the multiple outputs and inputs. However, when evaluating the efficiencies of DMUs, the conventional DEA methods do not allow stochastic variations in the data. Addressing this limitation, stochastic programming has been developed for decision problems where the input data are assumed to be random variables with known probability distributions [27,44,51]. Zadeh [56] introduced the so called possibility theory in the context of fuzzy set theory as a mathematical framework for modeling situations involving uncertainty. He introduced the notion of a “fuzzy variable,” which is associated with a possibility distribution, similar to a random variable, which is associated with a probability distribution. In a fuzzy linear programming model, each fuzzy coefficient can be characterized as a fuzzy variable and each constraint can be viewed as a fuzzy event. Lai and Hwang [33] have given a systematic classification of all possible problems and existing fuzzy mathematical programming approaches. They also made the distinction between fuzzy linear programming problems and possibilistic linear programming problems.In a random fuzzy environment, the crisp inputs and outputs of a conventional DEA model become random fuzzy (Ra-Fu) variables. Building a DEA model directly with Ra-Fu variables is not useful because the meanings of the objective and the constraints are not clear. This problem is apparent in both a stochastic environment and a fuzzy environment, whereby the Decision Makers (DMs) are faced with uncertainty from the random data and imprecision from the fuzzy data.The α-level approach is the most popular fuzzy DEA model [20]. In this approach the main idea is to convert the fuzzy DEA model into a pair of parametric programs in order to find the lower and upper bounds of the α-level of the membership functions of the efficiency scores. Using an α-cut method proposed by Sakawa [47], Lertworasirikul [36] proposed the possibility and necessity methods for solving a fuzzy DEA-CCR model. They introduced a possibility approach in which constraints were treated as fuzzy events and transformed fuzzy DEA models into possibility DEA models by using possibility measures of the fuzzy events (fuzzy constraints). It is known that possibility theory is based upon two dual fuzzy measures - possibility and necessity measures [15,28,56].Credibility theory, founded by Liu [37–39], is a branch of mathematics for studying the behavior of fuzzy phenomena. Fuzzy DEA models with credibility constraints are complex and difficult to solve because the proposed models contain the credibility of fuzzy events in the constraints and the expected value of a fuzzy variable in the objective.One way to manipulate uncertain data in DEA is via probability distributions. The ground-breaking work by Sengupta [48,49] showed how stochastic variables could be included in the non-parametric framework. The seminal work by Land et al. [34], Olesen and Petersen [42] and Cooper et al. [9] lead to breakthroughs in developing stochastic non-parametric efficiency models. In stochastic DEA, the frontier is no longer a deterministic envelope englobing the production set, but a chance-constrained envelopment based on an a priori probability of production space feasibility. Critics of this model argue that certain technical parameters are arbitrary and that the model lacks statistical properties, in spite of its goal to incorporate stochastic variables. Moreover, probability distributions in general require either a priori predictable regularity or a posteriori frequency determinations, which are difficult to construct [14]. Classical probability theory is a popular tool for dealing with randomness and credibility theory is an appropriate tool for treating fuzziness. However, in many complex real-world problems, the analyst may encounter a hybrid uncertain environment where impreciseness occurs jointly with stochastic influences. A random-fuzzy (Ra-Fu) variable is an effective concept for representing phenomena in which fuzziness and randomness appear simultaneously. Ra-Fu variables were first introduced by Kwakernaak [31,32], and then studied by a number of researchers in the literature [46,30,41,38,39,17]. The mean chance of a Ra-Fu event is an important concept in Ra-Fu optimization, just like the probability of a stochastic event in stochastic optimization and the credibility of a fuzzy event in fuzzy optimization. The main contribution of this paper is twofold:(1)To generalize and consolidate the disparate DEA models by simultaneously addressing Ra-Fu reference sets and imprecisely defined production sets. Naturally, this generality comes at the expense of notational and computational complexity.To systematically transform the quadratic programming formulations into implementable problems for actual problem solutions. To this end, we illustrate the feasibility and richness of the obtained solutions by means of a series of numerical examples and a real-world case study.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we present some preliminaries and definitions for Ra-Fu variables. In Section 3 we present the Ra-Fu CCR model with an expected value operator. In Section 4 we propose the chance-constrained Ra-Fu CCR model and in Section 5 we present the chance-constrained Ra-Fu CCR model with a fuzzy threshold level. In Section 6 we present the results of some numerical examples to demonstrate the efficacy of the procedures and algorithms. In Section 7 we present a case study to demonstrate the applicability of the proposed models. Section 8 presents our conclusion and discussion.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
