@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Utilizing user tag-based interests in recommender systems for social resource sharing websites

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Tag frequency, recency, and duration were combined to model the personalized preference.The social network was utilized to find similar users in the collaborative filtering.The incorporated system was applied to the social resource sharing systems.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Collaborative recommendation,Folksonomy,Social tagging,Tag,Social resource sharing,Personalization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Recently collaborative tagging, also known as “folksonomy” in Web 2.0, allows users to collaboratively create and manage tags to classify and categorize dynamic content for searching and sharing. A user’s interest in social resources usually changes with time in such a dynamic and information rich environment. Additionally, a social network is one innovative characteristic in social resource sharing websites. The information from a social network provides an inference of a certain user’s interests based on the interests of this user’s network neighbors.To handle the problem of personalized interests changing gradually with time, and to utilize the benefit of the social network, this study models a personalized user interest, incorporating frequency, recency, and duration of tag-based information, and performs collaborative recommendations using the user’s social network in social resource sharing websites. The proposed method includes finding neighbors from the “social friends” network by using collaborative filtering and recommending similar resource items to the users by using content-based filtering.This study examines the proposed system’s performance using an experimental dataset collected from a social bookmarking website. The experimental results show that the hybridization of user’s preferences with frequency, recency, and duration plays an important role, and provides better performances than traditional collaborative recommendation systems. The experimental results also reveal that the friend network information can successfully collaborate, thus improving the collaborative recommendation process.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The new Web 2.0 sites, which provide interactive information sharing and user-centered collaboration, have recently experienced rapid growth in the World-Wide Web. Examples of Web 2.0 website types include social networking, social bookmarking, Web-based communities, blogs, photograph sharing, video sharing, wikis, and knowledge management. Folksonomy is one characteristic of Web 2.0. Folksonomy is also known as collaborative tagging or social tagging, which allows users to collaboratively create and manage tags to classify and categorize contents or user collections. Now collaborative tagging in Web 2.0 is becoming widely used as an important tool to classify dynamic content for searching and sharing [16,38].Research has shown that social tagging can classify blogs [3], enhance information retrieval [22,18], and improve recommender systems [16]. Recommender systems are developed to deal with information overload and provide personalized recommendations, content, and services to users [1]. These software systems have been applied in many areas including e-commerce, news, advertisements, document management, and e-learning. Using tags reduces the limitations of the cold-start and sparsity problems in the collaborative filtering-based recommender systems [16,11].The tags collected by a user represent part of the user’s interests or preferences in the social bookmarking website. The frequency of a tag represents the strength of user’s preference in this category, defined by this tag. The frequency information of the tag has been used in recommender systems [16]. For recommender systems of the Internet, however, user interests changes with time; thus, learning a user’s interest categories in a dynamic environment like the Web is challenging [37,26].In an environment in which the user gradually changes interests, tag data close to the current temporal period are usually more important than data temporally far from the current period. That is, based on the tagging information, users are typically interested in items that they recently tagged. For example, a certain user was interested in a Personal Digital Assistant (PDA) six months ago. He is currently interested in the iPad, and the tag of an iPad is used frequently. It is more appropriate to recommend an iPad over a PDA to this user. In addition to the recency of a user’s preference, another aspect that represents a user’s interest in social resource sharing websites is the duration of a user’s interests. The duration a certain activated tag represents the continuity of the user’s preference on the category defined by this tag.How should one utilize and combine tag-based information to handle personalized preferences for recommender systems in social resource sharing websites? This motivates our research to analyze user preferences in frequency, recency, and duration as well as to introduce a hybrid of a collaborative model and a content-based model to improve recommendation quality based on tag-based information. Tag-based information can be extremely useful for user-adaptive applications such as recommender systems [5]. To our knowledge, there has not been any research on a tag-based recommender system that incorporates the frequency, recency, and duration for social resource sharing websites.Section 2 of this paper describes the related works on social tagging and recommender systems. Section 3 analyzes users’ tagging behaviors in the social resource sharing website. Section 4 introduces proposed procedures for how tag information is used to design a hybrid collaborative and content-based recommender system. Section 5 demonstrates the experimental results. Section 6 suggests conclusions and some possible areas of exploration for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
