@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Hybrid multiple objective artificial bee colony with differential evolution for the time–cost–quality tradeoff problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study presents a novel hybrid multiple optimization algorithm MOABCDE.Hybrid operation is utilized to balance exploration and exploitation capability.MOABCDE is applied to solve time cost quality tradeoff problem.The model performance is demonstrated in the experimental result.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi-objective analysis,Artificial bee colony,Differential evolution,Time–cost–quality tradeoff,Construction management,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Time, cost, and quality are three important but often conflicting factors that must be optimally balanced during the planning and management of construction projects. Tradeoff optimization among these three factors within the project scope is necessary to maximize overall project success. In this paper, the MOABCDE-TCQT, a new hybrid multiple objective evolutionary algorithm that is based on hybridization of artificial bee colony and differential evolution, is proposed to solve time–cost–quality tradeoff problems. The proposed algorithm integrates crossover operations from differential evolution (DE) with the original artificial bee colony (ABC) in order to balance the exploration and exploitation phases of the optimization process. A numerical construction project case study demonstrates the ability of MOABCDE-generated, non-dominated solutions to assist project managers to select an appropriate plan to optimize TCQT, which is an operation that is typically difficult and time-consuming. Comparisons between the MOABCDE and four currently used algorithms, including the non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm (NSGA-II), the multiple objective particle swarm optimization (MOPSO), the multiple objective differential evolution (MODE), and the multiple objective artificial bee colony (MOABC), verify the efficiency and effectiveness of the developed algorithm.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Planning a schedule that achieves both project deadline and project budget requirements is one of the most difficult tasks in construction management. Moreover, minimizing the time and the cost of construction projects is typically a key determinant of construction company success [1]. Researchers have established numerous models and applied many methods to optimize the time–cost tradeoff (TCQT) problem in the construction industry. Of these methods, evolutionary algorithms have proven relatively more efficient at avoiding local optimization [2–6]. The costs of resources and technologies used in a project are typically associated with work productivity and, thus, project duration. Conversely, higher resource and technology costs are typically associated with shorter project durations. However, shorter project durations and/or costs may decrease the quality of project work, resulting in earlier-than-projected aging/deterioration and higher-than-anticipated maintenance and rehabilitation costs. Therefore, determining the optimal combination of execution methods, construction technologies, and resource utilization plans that minimize time and costs while simultaneously maximizing quality, i.e., the TCQT problem, is crucial for construction planners [7].Quality is a crucial factor that correlates highly with time and cost factors [8]. Scholars have established various models and methods that attempt to optimize the time–cost–quality tradeoff. Babu and Suresh [9] proposed an initial methodology for studying the TCQT problem using three inter-related linear programming models. Khang and Myint [10] established the validity of this methodology in a trial application on a cement factory construction project. El-Rayes and Kandil [11] used multiple objective evolutionary algorithms in a multi-objective model that they used to search for an optimal resource utilization plan to minimize construction cost and time while maximizing quality. They applied a genetic algorithm (GA) to quantify and consider quality and used the example of a highway construction project to visualize the optimal tradeoffs among the three variables. Zhang and Xing [7] indicated that time, cost, and, especially, quality are difficult to describe precisely. Therefore, they proposed a Pareto-based multi-objective Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) for the fuzzy TCQT problem. More recently, hybridized evolutionary algorithms have been used successfully to solve the TCQT problem [12,13].The Artificial Bee Colony (ABC) algorithm is one of the most recently introduced evolutionary methods [14,15]. The ABC is a swarm intelligence-based optimization algorithm inspired by honeybee foraging behavior. With its few parameters, ABC is simple to implement and relatively efficient and robust in comparison to other algorithms. It has been applied successful to solve complex multi-model optimization problems [16]. The ABC seems particularly suited for multi-objective optimization problems mainly because of solution quality and the high speed of convergence that the algorithm presents for single-objective optimization [17]. The ABC algorithm distributes information on food location throughout the entire population of bees. This characteristic makes ABC good at exploration but poor at exploitation and thus inadequate for problems that must apply existing information to find a better solution. Additionally, ABC converges relatively slowly for certain complex issues [18]. Differential Evolution (DE) is currently one of the most popular evolutionary algorithms. DE may be used in a wide variety of highly nonlinear and complex optimization problems. This algorithm is simply structured and easy to use, while demonstrating great robustness and fast convergence in solving single-objective global optimization problems [19]. The ability of DE to provide efficient solutions for complex problems with relatively simple operations has encouraged many researchers to develop MODE-based techniques [20,21].Although meta-heuristic methods have been proven to have superior features than other traditional methods, they also suffer some limitations. For example, the convergence speed of the ABC algorithm is typically slower than the convergence speeds of representative population-based algorithms such as DE when handling unimodal problems because the ABC cannot utilize the information adequately to determine the most promising search direction [22]. The performance of the original DE algorithm is highly dependent on the mutation and crossover operator. In some cases, it may become easily trapped in the local minimum or converge too slowly [23]. In addition, numerous researchers have found that a skilled combination of two meta-heuristics may be beneficial and perform significantly better than single pure meta-heuristic algorithm in handling real-world and large-scale problems [24,25]. Therefore, hybridization with other algorithms offers the potential to further improve the performances of ABC and DE. The superior performance of hybridized ABC and DE over other algorithms in single and multiple-objective problems have been widely reported and verified [18,26–28]. Despite many reports of impressive hybridized ABC-DE performance in benchmark functions and practical applications, this algorithm has yet to be applied to solving the TCQT problem. Therefore, this paper applies the hybridized ABC-DE algorithm in a model that is designed to solve the TCQT problem.Based on the above, this study develops the novel, hybrid MOABCDE model to conduct TCQT analysis. This new algorithm follows the same scheme as ABC while incorporating DE operators, which are used to generate new candidate solutions by combining the parent individual and several other individuals of the same population according to a simple formulation. The hybridization balances the exploration, exploitation, and convergence capabilities of the optimization process. Additionally, this new algorithm offers a strategy to balance the tradeoff between local search and global search capabilities and enhances MOABC performance. The objective is to demonstrate that the proposed algorithm attains fast convergence without losing solution diversity on the Pareto front.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the TCQT problem is mathematically formulated. In Section 3, we review briefly the literature related to the establishment of the new optimization model. In Section 4, we present detailed descriptions of the proposed optimization model for the TCQT problem. Section 5 uses a numerical case study and result comparisons to demonstrate the performance of the newly developed model. Finally, some conclusions and suggested directions for future work are presented in Section 6.In the TCQT problem, a project is represented by the diagram G=(A), which is an activity-on-node network with N activities. These activities are numbered from 0 to N+1 in the project network, where activities 0 and N+1 are “dummy” activities denoting, respectively, the start and finish of the project. P is the set of all paths in the activity-on-node network, starting from activity (0) and ending at activity (N+1). Plis the set of activities contained in pathl∈P. Each activityi∈Ais associated with several execution methods. Each method has its time Ti, cost Ci, and quality Qi. The TCQT problem concentrates mainly on selecting an optimal combination of execution methods for all activities in order to arrive at an optimal compromise among time, cost, and quality for the project. The project time, cost, and quality are quantified as follows:The first objective, minimization of total project duration, may be expressed as follows:(1)MinimizeprojecttimeT=∑n=1lTnSn=Max∀n(ESn+dn)ESn=Maximumall predecessorsmofn(ESm+dm)whereTnSnis duration of the activity n{n=1,2,…,l} on the critical path for a specific option of resources (Sn); l is the total number of critical activities on a specific critical path. ESiis the earliest start of activity n, dnis the duration of activity n. In general, project duration is calculated based on precedence constraints and activity duration. The project information determines the precedence constraints and the selection alternatives determine activity duration.The total cost of a project includes direct costs, indirect costs and tardiness cost. The direct cost (DC) of the project is the sum of the direct costs of all its activities. Indirect costs (IC) are costs proportional to the duration of the project as a whole. In accordance with contract requirements, contractors are often subject to tardiness cost (TC) because of delays in project completion.The second objective, minimization of total project cost, may be calculated as follows:(2)Minimizeprojectcost=∑i=1NDCiSi+ICiSi+TCiSiwhereDCiSi,ICiSi,TCiSiis the direct, indirect and tardiness cost of activity i, respectively, for a specific option of execution methods (Sn) and N is the total number of activities.Since a project comprises various resources such as materials, machines, labor, the overall project quality is determined by each activity’s quality. On the basic of the previous researches [8,12] and the collected data, we define Quality Performance Index (QPI) as the achieved level of the quality goal under the contract in a given period.We define QPIias the quality of a single activity as follows:(3)QPIi=aiTi2+biTi+ciwhereQPIi∈[0,1], i=1,2,…,N, Tiis duration of activity i, with Ti>0, ai, bi, ciare the coefficients decided by the quadratic function (Fig. 1). Fig. 1 shows that SDi, BDi, LDiare the shortest duration, best duration, longest duration of activity i.The third and final objective, is the maximization of project’s overall quality.(4)Maximize project quality=∑i=1N(QPIi)/NThe scope of this study is limited to a deterministic environment in which decisions are made with deterministic input data from the case study. The assumptions of the case study are that all the objective functions are quantified data and the mean values of the resources are used.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
