@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A fuzzy logic model for forecasting exchange rates

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
First attempt at implementation of fuzzy logic in fundamental analysis.Comparison of the effectiveness of statistical and artificial intelligence models.High effectiveness of the forecast generated by the created model.Improved forecasting effectiveness of three currency pairs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Exchange rate,Fuzzy logic,Forecasting,Fundamental analysis,Financial crisis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This article is devoted to the issue of forecasting exchange rates. The objective of the conducted research is to develop a predictive model with the use of an innovative methodology – fuzzy logic theory – and to evaluate its effectiveness in times of prosperity (years 2005–2007) and during the financial crisis (years 2009–2011).The model is based on sets of rules written by the author in the form of IF-THEN, where expert knowledge is stored. This model is the result of ten years of the author’s research on this issue.Empirically, this paper employs three currency pairs as experimental datasets: JPY/USD, GBP/USD and CHF/USD. From the model verification, it is demonstrated that refined processes are effective in improving the forecasting of exchange rate movements. The author’s created model is characterised by high efficiency. These studies are among the world’s first attempts to combine fundamental analysis with fuzzy logic to predict exchange rates.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Exchange rates play an important role in international trade, investment determination, risk management in enterprises and the economic situation of a country by influencing its balance of payment. Many countries have implemented a freely floating exchange rate system that relies upon market mechanisms to adjust the value of their currencies. Currently, interventions of central banks in a currency market are rare and rarely successful when attempted. This ineffectiveness implies that market forces influence exchange rates. Exchange rates adjust over time, and a floating exchange rate system produces results which, in the long run, reflect the underlying economic fundamentals.The fluctuation of exchange rates might not be understood completely due to a lack of information about factors affecting them. Additionally, in the real world, there are times when input variables cannot always be determined in the precise sense. Therefore, forecasting exchange rates is often uncertain and vague in a number of ways. The lack of models capable of providing reliable predictions of future exchange rates is therefore puzzling. This paper takes a novel perspective on the problem and finds an alternative way of improving the forecasting process by overcoming the drawbacks contained in statistical models and artificial neural networks. This paper should offer a good methodology that could be used more easily by investors. In the paper, the author assumes that there is an effective exchange rate adjustment mechanism operating in market-based economic systems that employ floating exchange rates, and Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) and Interest Rate Parity (IRP) are part of this mechanism. However, the approach taken in this paper is different from previously reported research. It brings together two research approaches – the use of fuzzy logic (the artificial intelligence method) in combination with a fundamental analysis. Fundamental analysis consists of evaluating the economic and political factors behind currency fluctuations and involves four theories (they are characterised in detail in Section 2): Purchasing Power Parity, Interest Rate Parity, the Balance of Payments Model and the Asset Market Model. The PPP theory states that exchange rates are determined by the relative prices of similar sets of goods. The IRP theory states that the fluctuation of one currency against another currency is neutralised by a change in the interest rate differential. While the Balance of Payments Model is mainly focused on stable current account balances, the Asset Market Model is based on financial assets, stating that exchange rates demonstrate a strong correlation with asset markets.Fuzzy logic provides an appropriate tool for modelling this imprecise, uncertain and ambiguous phenomenon. Because the movement of exchange rates is affected by many factors (economic, political, psychological, etc.) that cannot be precisely and unambiguously defined, such an approach greatly enhances the predictive power of fundamental analysis and makes it an economically useful tool for exchange rate management. The purpose of this paper is to improve the forecasting effectiveness of exchange rates with the use of fundamental variables (relative inflation rates, relative interest rates, investments in fixed assets, country ratings, income levels, GDP growth, and trade balance) implemented in the fuzzy logic model.The paper has the following contribution and innovation to the literature:•implementation of fuzzy logic theory into fundamental analysis of the exchange rates,development of the fuzzy logic models for forecasting the exchange rates (based on economic factors),creation of an open application that can be easily updated and adopted for readers’ needs,comparative analysis of effectiveness between developed fuzzy logic models and models of other research approaches (ARCH model, GARCH model and artificial neural networks).Empirically, this paper employs three currency pairs as experimental datasets. From the model verification, it is shown that refined processes are effective in improving the forecasting of exchange rate movements.The paper is organised as follows. Section 2 presents an overview of the main ways of forecasting exchange rate models. Section 3 recalls the technical background of the fuzzy logic model. Section 4 presents the research assumptions. Section 5 proposes forecasting models for the JPY/USD, GBP/USD and CHF/USD. Section 6 presents the conclusions.The problem of predicting the movement of foreign exchange rates has attracted increasing attention. There are three main approaches to forecasting exchange rates in the literature:(1) The majority of research efforts are devoted to standard models, where volatility is a key parameter used with time-dependent conditional heteroskedasticity. These models belong to the well-known ARCH (autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity) and GARCH (generalised autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity) approaches initiated by Engle [15] and Bollerslev [4]. The ARCH/GARCH framework has proven to be successful in predicting volatility changes. Those models describe the time evolution of the average size of squared errors, that is, the evolution of the magnitude of uncertainty Engle et al. [16]. Despite the empirical success of ARCH/GARCH models, there is no real consensus on the economic reasons why uncertainty tends to cluster. Therefore, the models tend to perform better in some periods and worse in other periods. The example of such research is the study conducted by Brandt and Jones [7], which shows that there is substantial predictability in volatility at horizons of up to 1year, which is in contrast with earlier studies, such as those by West and Cho [46] and Christoffersen and Diebold [13], both of which conclude that volatility predictability is essentially a short-horizon phenomenon. Additionally, the application of ARCH models may be problematic according to Lamoreux and Lastrapes [28] because ARCH estimates are seriously affected by structural changes.(2) Less popular models are those that use a fundamental analysis. These models are based on the information of the supply and demand and of domestic currency compared with a foreign currency. The following factors are the most commonly listed factors in the literature (for example, [52,31]):(a)Relative inflation rates – changes in relative inflation rates can affect international trade, which influences the supply and demand of currencies and therefore affects exchange rates. A higher inflation rate in country A than in country B will cause the increase of the import of cheaper products from B to A (ceteris paribus1In reality the actual demand and supply of currency depends on several factors simultaneously. The point of holding all other factors constant is to logically present the mechanics how each individual factor influences the exchange rates. Each factor assessed one at a time allows to describe separate influence of each factor on exchange rates. Then, all factors can be tied together to the forecasting model.1). This will result in a higher demand for the currency of country B. At the same time, a higher relative inflation rate in country A will lead to the reduction of the supply of its currency because the export of products will decrease in such circumstances. The higher demand and smaller supply of country A’s currency will lead to the appreciation of country B’s currency. Such findings are consistent with the conclusions derived from previous studies, for example, those by Parsley and Wei [38] and Qiu et al. [35].Relative interest rates – changes in relative interest rates affect investment in securities, which influences the supply and demand of currencies. Higher relative interest rates in country A will lead to a higher supply of currency of country B in exchange for the currency of country A because investments in securities in country A will be more profitable for investors (ceteris paribus). On the other hand, the demand for currency B should decrease due to less profitable securities. The increase of the supply and the decrease of the demand of country B’s currency will cause its depreciation. Gruen and Wilkinson [19] find that the real interest rate differential is qualitatively more important than the balance of trade in forecasting the exchange rate. Similar conclusions can be found in recent studies conducted by Chen [10].Gross domestic product – a country characterised by a high growth of GDP should attract foreign investors that will seek to use the opportunities for profit in such an economy. A booming economy in country A would lead to a higher demand for its currency (ceteris paribus), thereby influencing its appreciation. Karfakis and Phipps [25] and Bergvall [3] report that GDP has a significant influence on exchange rates.Trade balance – because exports and imports are the elements of GDP, the assumption will be connected to the above assumption. Increasing the exports of country A means that the demand for its currency is increasing, causing its appreciation. Increasing the imports as an opposite to increasing exports will lead to the depreciation of the currency due to a higher supply of the currency of this country (ceteris paribus). For example, De Gregorio and Wolf [14] demonstrate that an improved balance of trade will lead to an appreciation of the exchange rate.Income level – higher GDP accompanies high income levels. However, high-income societies tend to increase their demand for imported goods. According to this assumption, the growth of the income level in the country will lead to the depreciation of its currency (ceteris paribus) due to higher imports. Miyakoshi [34] reveals that the variation in the exchange rate is attributable to the productivity and income level.Fundamental analysis has a few drawbacks in forecasting exchange rate movements. Firstly, besides describing the main economic variables affecting the supply and demand of the domestic currency and foreign currencies, there are many other psychological and political factors that may lead to speculative trading. Secondly, different factors can have different impacts on the exchange rate at different times. There is also empirical evidence that presents a low relationship between nominal exchange rate movements and fundamental variables suggested by the exchange rate determination models (for example, [17,18]). An additional drawback is that in most statistical methods, there are some assumptions about the variables used in the analysis, which cannot be applied to those datasets that do not follow the statistical distributions [12].(3) The models from the third approach are the least popular in literature. In recent years, some researchers have implemented artificial intelligence to forecast exchange rates. The most popular artificial intelligence models are artificial neural networks. As a nonparametric and data-driven model, the neural network model imposes few prior assumptions on the underlying process from which the data are generated [37]. Because of this property, the neural network model is less susceptible to the model misspecification problem than most parametric statistical models. This does not mean that these models are free from other defects in forecasting exchange rates. The most common complaint encountered in the literature is the inability to justify the decision made. Often, the ways in which artificial neural networks make predictions are described as a “black-box system” [6]. An analysis of the process of assigning individual variable weights is complex and difficult to interpret. Neural networks do not provide the course of reasoning leading to a certain assessment, only giving their outcomes without being able to trace further evidence leading to a final conclusion. This makes it difficult to correctly identify the causes of errors generated by an artificial neural network. Another drawback of the use of artificial neural networks in forecasting exchange rates is an arbitrary method of selecting the network architecture. Although there are general formulas that designate the number of hidden neurons, the literature postulates the use of an individual and arbitrary approach for each forecasted phenomenon separately.Traditional financial models use classical mathematics based on binary logic. Łukasiewicz [30] named it as the law of bivalence. According to McNeill and Freiberger [33], the law of bivalence forbids anything other than true and not true responses. In practice, this means that an element (company, phenomenon, etc.) either belongs to a certain set or it does not. There is no third possibility. However, many phenomena in finance are fuzzy, and they are treated as if they were crisp. Moreover, very often, the input variables and data of financial models cannot be determined in a precise sense. Therefore, fuzzy logic provides an appropriate tool for modelling imprecise models. The concept of fuzzy logic was introduced by Zadeh in 1965. Fuzzy set theory permits the gradual assessment of the membership of elements in relation to a set. The fuzzy set “A” in a non-empty space X (A⊆X) can be defined as [49]:(1)A={(x,μA(x))|x∈X}where μA: X→[0,1] is a function of each element of X that determines the extent to which it belongs to set A. This function is called a membership function of fuzzy set A.In fuzzy set theory, an element may partially belong to a certain set, and this membership may be expressed by a real number in the interval [0,1]. Larger values denote higher degrees of set membership. Thus, the membership function μA(x): U⇒[0,1] is defined as follows [44]:(2)∀x∈UμA(x)=f(x),x∈X0,x∉Xwhere: μA(x) is a function defining the membership of element x to set A, which is a subset of U; f(x) is a function receiving values from the interval [0,1]. The values of this function are called the degrees of membership.A membership function assigns the degree of membership of each element x∈X to a fuzzy set A, where we can distinguish three situations:•μA(x)=1 means full membership of element x to fuzzy set A,μA(x)=0 means that no element x belongs to fuzzy set A,0<μA(x)<1 means partial membership of an element x to fuzzy set A.A fuzzy logic model is constructed by a set of “IF-THEN” rules to describe the relationship among the input and output variables. An important distinguishing feature between fuzzy logic and the traditional expert system is that the rules in fuzzy logic are described through the use of linguistic variables instead of the numerical variables [51]. Furthermore, in the fuzzy logic model, there is a mechanism for describing the degree of membership of an element to the set and the use of several terms to classify the linguistic variables. For example, a fuzzy logic rule can be stated as follows:IF the inflation rate is high AND the interest rate is low.THEN the probability of currency depreciation is high.With the membership function, all economic phenomena that contain a certain part of the lack of precision can be better described and used in the economic model. For example, the following statements are imprecise:•The inflation rate is low.The GDP should increase next year.The imprecision of these statements is the inability to accurately determine the values of all variables occurring in them. When using bivalent logic, an economist is forced to make a decision based on imprecise or fuzzy information, i.e., whether the currency will “appreciate” or “depreciate”. In the case of the application of fuzzy sets, an analyst uses a smooth transition between the total membership [μA(x)=1] and total non-membership [μA(x)=0] of the analysed phenomenon. The difference between classical logic and fuzzy logic in the way of classifying phenomena is shown in Figs. 1 and 2.The example of the inflation rate problem in the bivalent model (Fig. 1) can now be represented as a transitional flow from a low inflation rate to medium inflation rate (Fig. 2). Using fuzzy logic, economists can show how the degree of membership rises between 2% and 6%. This way, it eliminates the paradox of the law of bivalence with only two possible values “1 - true” or “0 - false” (low or medium inflation rate).Membership functions can be in any form, arbitrarily determined by the analyst. In the literature, the most common functions take one of three forms: triangular, trapezoidal or Gaussian.In the case of the trapezoidal membership function (Fig. 3), these functions are defined by four points: a, b, c, and d[44]:(3)μ(x)=x-ab-afora<x<b1forb≤x≤cd-xd-cforc<x<d0forx≤aorx≥dA triangular membership function can be considered as a special case of the trapezoidal fuzzy number with b=c.One-third of the membership function often used is the Gaussian curve (Fig. 4). Gaussian functions have the characteristic shape of a bell with a centre “a” and width “σ” dependent parameter:(4)μ(x)=e-(x-a)2σ2The trapezoidal function can be used to estimate an optimal interval of the analysed variable (in above example, interest rates). When interest rates are lower than 2%, the situation is classified as “bad” (the value is too low). A situation in which the interest rates reach values greater than 8% is also rated as “bad” (the value is too high). Fig. 4 shows an example in which it is assumed that the optimum value for the interest rates is at point “a”, that is, in the centre of the Gaussian function, values from 2% to 8% belong to varying degrees of membership to a set that is “good”.The process to construct a fuzzy logic model generally consists of three major steps [26]: fuzzification, inference and defuzzification. Fuzzification arranges numbers by linguistic variables and defines the types of membership functions for the terms of variables. During the second step of constructing the model, the analyst defines the method of inference. There are two fundamental approaches for the inference procedure: the deductive interpretation and the assignment interpretation. The approach that is most commonly used in practice is the assignment interpretation, and the most common in this category is the Max–Min inference, known as Mandami/Assilian inference, which is based on a triangular minimum norm (TM t-norm; TM(x,y)=min(x,y)) and a triangular maximum conorm (SM t-conorm; SM(x,y)=max(x,y)), that is the dual notion to triangular norm [48,22]. The final step is representing the defuzzification procedure, which actually converts the fuzzy fact into a fix output value. Three methods of realising this procedure are: the MON (mean of maximum), the COG (centre of gravity) and the COA (centre of area).The practical applications of fuzzy logic belong more to business administration and engineering than to finance and economics. Fuzzy logic has recently found extensive applications in a wide variety of industrial systems and consumer products (for example, [1,47]). Fuzzy logic has also been used in the following areas of management:•optimisation of the production processes (for example: [36]),quality management (for example: [24]),logistics management (for example: [5]),inventory management (for example: [11]),planning production capacity (for example: [43]),the design of products (for example: [45]),valuation of the company (for example: [32]).In addition to the above examples, fuzzy logic is present in many other disciplines such as the risk assessment of debris flow [29], a policy-enhanced fuzzy model to reveal Simple Object Access Protocol-related attacks at the application layer [8], weather forecasts [21] or even in medicine [42].Three currency pairs were selected for forecasting based on the fuzzy logic model: JPY/USD, GBP/USD and CHF/USD. The data set consists of the average quarterly exchange rates for six years – three years before and three years after the global financial crisis started (years: 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, 2010, 2011). The year 2008 (the “crisis year”) was excluded from the analysis due to the intense influence of psychological and speculative factors on the volatility of the exchange rates. The objective of the conducted research is to evaluate the effectiveness of the forecasting model based on the innovative methodology of fuzzy logic in times of prosperity (years 2005–2007) and during the financial crisis (years 2009–2011). The type of economic data collected for four countries (Japan, Great Britain, Switzerland, and the USA) is presented in Fig. 5, which is divided into two parts: trade-related factors and investment variables. The division of factors into these two groups allows the author to model the level of influence separately for trade-related factors and for investment factors on the movement of exchange rates. For example, in the case of Switzerland, the investment factors as relative real interest rates may have a greater influence on the volatility of CHF/USD than trade-related variables.In all cases, the author forecasts the volatility of USD in percentages against the following currencies: CHF, GBP and JPY.The model is based on the sets of rules written by the author in the IF-THEN form, where expert knowledge is stored. That is why there is no in-sample data set in the existing research. This model is the result of ten years of the author’s experience on this issue.For each entry variable to the model, the author identified three fuzzy sets (which are subsets of a set of values of the entry variable), and their corresponding membership functions. The fuzzy sets and the thresholds for all membership functions are presented in Table 1. The output of the model is a variable representing the forecast of the movement of the exchange rates. This variable has a value from −15% to +15% (Fig. 6). Negative values represent the depreciation of USD against the analysed currency (CHF, JPY or GBP), and positive values mean the appreciation of USD against these currencies. There are five membership functions that define the output variable (Fig. 6):•“high_dep” – this function represents a high depreciation of USD,“dep” – this function defines an average or low depreciation of USD,“steady” – this function shows the stable situation in the market with no significant volatility of USD,“appr” – this function represents an average or low appreciation of USD,“high_appr” – this function presents the intensive appreciation of USD.The author has arbitrarily set fuzzy sets and the shape of membership functions for both entry variables and the output variable. In all cases, Gaussian and Sigmoidal membership functions were chosen. In Table 1, the author specified the type of membership function with its respective range of values for each variable. According to the literature, such functions are the most adequate in representing uncertainty in measurements (for example, [27,20]. Gaussian and Sigmoidal membership functions allow smooth transition between the full membership [μA(x)=1] and full non-membership [μA(x)=0] of the analysed variable. Trapezoidal membership function is good at representing variables that have the optimal range of values. For example the ratio of current liquidity of the enterprise is considered to be optimal in the range [1.2; 2.0], the incorrect value belongs to the range (0; 1.2)∪(2.0; ∞). When this ratio is less than 1.2, it is considered that the company will have too low current liquidity; on the other hand, when this value is greater than 2.0 it is said that the company has excess liquidity.In addition, the most common method for inference was chosen, that is, the Mandami/Assilian inference, and for the defuzzification procedure, the MON (mean of maximum) procedure was selected.In fuzzy logic model there are no weights assigned to individual variables (as it is for example in case of each neuron representing variables in artificial neural networks). There is a possibility of modifying the membership functions (the type of functions, the number of functions and its’ ranges) and the importance of each decision rule – “Degree of Support” (in current form – all the rules have equal importance). Author of this paper has tried to modify the importance of individual rules in the models but it caused the situation in which one or two rules always “won” over the rest of the rules and it generated worse results. That is why it is better to keep the equal importance of all rules as it models better the economic reality. Author has also tried to see different scenarios of ranges of membership functions in the used variables. Presented ranges of membership functions (Table 1) are optimal.The schematic of the developed fuzzy logic model is shown in Fig. 7. In this diagram, there are three rule blocks, seven entry variables and one output. The “Investment” rule block evaluates the country’s investment variables (relative real interest rate, the dynamics of investments in fixed assets, the growth of GDP, and the country rating) that can have a direct influence on the exchange rate (Table 2). The second rule block – “Trade” – takes into account a country’s international trade variables (the relative inflation rate, the growth rate of the income level, and the growth rate of the trade balance) that influence the volatility of the exchange rate (Table 3). The forecast of the exchange rate is based on the evaluation of these seven variables in the two rule blocks described. The third rule block – “Output” – generates the exchange rate. This rule block consists of two input variables, which are the scores generated by the previous rule blocks: “Investment” and “Trade” (Table 4).The scores of the first two rule blocks may take three different states:•“Decrease” – means that “trade” and/or “investment” variables influence the depreciation of USD against the analysed currency (JPY, GBP or CHF).“Steady” – indicates the relative stability of the exchange rate of USD against the analysed currency (JPY, GBP or CHF).“Increase” – means that “trade” and/or “investment” variables influence the appreciation of USD against the analysed currency (JPY, GBP or CHF).In Table 4, it is considered that the scores of “Trade” and the scores of “Investment” have equal influence on the movement of exchange rates. However, the fuzzy logic model allows the analysts’ modification of those rules. For example, in the case of the exchange rate of CHF/USD, a larger influence of “investment” variables can be set, and in the case of the currency pair of JPY/USD, the “trade” factors can have a bigger influence on the generated output.The complete set of rules defining a manner of fuzzy logic model inference is presented in Table 2 (Rule Block “Investment”), Table 3 (Rule Block “Trade”) and Table 4 (Rule Block “Output”).Below is an example of fuzzy sets defined with membership functions for three variables: the relative inflation rate (Fig. 8), the growth rate of GDP (Fig. 9) and the growth rate of the trade balance (Fig. 10).For the variable of the relative inflation rate, there are three membership functions defined: “low,” “medium” and “high.” All values less than −2.4 percentage points are strictly low – they belong to the fuzzy subset “low” with the degree of membership of 1 and to the subsets “medium” and “high” with the degree of membership equal to 0. All values greater than +2.4 percentage points belong to the fuzzy subset “high” with the degree of membership equal to 1. Values contained in range from −2.4 p.p. to +2.4 p.p. belong to both fuzzy subsets (“low” and “medium” or “medium” and “high”) with different values of membership functions. For example, for a value of this variable equal to −1.2 p.p., the value of the function of membership is 0.5 for the “low” set and for the “medium” set.With the defined subsets, the boundary between the values considered to have a positive or negative effect on the movement of exchange rates is fuzzificated – a certain variable value is “partially good” and “partially bad”. There is no such possibility in the case of classical logic, which is bivalent.The out-of-sample test results of the described fuzzy logic model are presented in Table 5. A comparison of the results received by Balaban [2], who estimated ARCH and GARCH models to predict the movement of DM (German Mark) against USD from 1974 to 1997, is also presented. The second comparison consists of the results of studies conducted by Panda and Narasimhan [37]. These authors used the artificial neural network model to forecast Indian Rupees against US dollars during 1994–2003. The third and fourth comparisons are performed with results generated by the combination of artificial neural networks with fuzzy logic, which were created by Pulido et al. [39] and Hernandez and Mendez [23]. In both comparisons, the researchers forecasted the exchange rates of USD and MX Peso. The last comparison is conducted with results achieved by Tsai and Wu [9], who estimated a fuzzy time series model for forecasting USD and NTD. In all cases, the authors developed predictions based on time series. In this manner, the presented studies are some of the first to use economic factors with a combination of fuzzy logic to generate the forecast of exchange rates. The author of this paper has not found any studies devoted to the combination of fuzzy logic with a fundamental analysis of the factors used in presented studies.The tests of the created fuzzy logic model carried out on three different currency pairs showed that the model performed best at forecasting the quarterly movement of GBP/USD. The mean absolute error (MAE) equals 0.3034%, while the mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) equals 14.30%. The second-best result was received by forecasting the quarterly volatility of CHF/USD. In this case, the MAE is 0.0037 percentage points higher, and the MAPE is 2.99 percentage points higher compared to the results of forecasting GBP/USD. The worst effectiveness was received for forecasting the quarterly movement of JPY/USD (MAPE equals to 29.02%). It can be a symptom that in case of Japan, the decision rules should be diversified by setting higher influence to one of the factors (for example: international trade variables). The real and forecasted quarterly fluctuations are presented in Figs. 11–13.There is a consistent variation of fluctuation between JPY/USD. Fig. 11 shows that forecasted fluctuation (red columns) is always higher than the real fluctuation (blue columns). It means that model always predicts stronger value of USD against JPY (higher appreciation/lower depreciation of USD against JPY than the real one). Similarly in Fig. 12, the consistency is shown again but in the reverse order – model always forecasts lower value of USD against CHF (lower appreciation/higher depreciation of USD against CHF than the real one). This phenomenon could be caused by Interest Rate Disparity. Interest Rate Parity theory is explained in Sections 1 and 2 of this paper. In such case, forecasted fluctuation would represent appropriate exchange rate than the real fluctuation that occurred. According to Madura [30, p. 223–234] such disparity can be caused by non-economic factors influencing the exchange rates of two countries.Nevertheless, comparing the mean absolute percentage error of the models found in the literature to the effectiveness of the fuzzy logic model created by author, it can be observed that the author’s model is characterised by the best forecasting properties. The ARCH and GARCH models generated 35.88% and 29.81% mean absolute percentage errors, while the author’s fuzzy logic model error was two times smaller (14.30%). Although the results achieved by the models combining ANN with FL are characterised by much better results (with errors from 18.09% to 30.28%) than the ARCH and GARCH models, the author’s FL models based on the fundamental approach generated smaller errors. These results may be a signal to continue research on improving the forecasting process, focusing more on economic factors and not necessarily creating time series models with new techniques.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper develops an original and novel approach to forecasting exchange rates based on fundamental factors. It is quite clear that the author’s fuzzy logic model only explains a portion of the exchange rate movements. However, in many applications, possessing even a small degree of explanatory power can be highly useful. The degree of predictive power demonstrated can have real economic benefits. For exporters and importers who make frequent foreign exchange transactions over the course of several years, limiting even a small defect can yield large benefits over long periods of time. For international portfolio investors, knowing which currency exposures to hedge also can provide significant benefits.It should be emphasised that the fuzzy logic model presented has high practical value. Because this model is an “open” application, a person interested in its use cannot only use it in its current form but can also easily modify it for his/her own needs.Received results of presented studies are promising that is why, the author of this paper is planning to verify possibilities of using these models in forecasting the volatility of other currency pairs.