@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
User identification for enhancing IP-TV recommendation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
In contrast with group recommendation which recommends items for groups of people, this approach provides recommendations for members.The user identification problem is studied as clustering periodical temporal habits and combination of similar activities in each account.Experimental results show that the proposed algorithm gives substantially better results than previous approaches.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
User identification,Shared account,IP-TV recommendation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Internet Protocol Television (IP-TV) recommendation systems are designed to provide programs for groups of people, such as a family or a dormitory. Previous methods mainly generate recommendations to a group of people via clustering the common interests of this group. However, these methods often ignore the diversity of a group’s interests, and recommendations to a group of people may not match the interests of any of the group members. In this paper, we propose an algorithm that first identifies users in accounts, then provides recommendations for each user. In the identification process, time slots in each account are determined by clustering the factorized time subspace, and similar activities among these slots are combined to represent members. Experimental results show that the proposed algorithm gives substantially better results than previous approaches.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, due to the rapid growth and increasing popularity of Internet Protocol Television (IP-TV) services, IP-TV services have been widely consumed in our daily life, and it has been a common phenomenon that families or roommates share programs after they get back home or dormitory from work. To help users (viewers) benefit from the abundant resources, such as channels, programs and videos, and easily find what they are actually interested in, recommender systems [1] are integrated into the services.However, the main challenge in developing a IP-TV recommendation system is user identification [2]. Intuitively, the recommendations provided to a shared account, comprising the ratings of two dissimilar users, may not match the interests of either of both users [3]. The use of a single account shared by multiple users poses more personalized requirements in providing programs to this account.Our goal is to improve the recommendation performance by alleviating the problem of user identification in IP-TV services. However, none of the individual user information [4] can be directly used for the identification, since the interaction between a user and a set-top-box (STB) is very weak. Typically, users do not have easy access to the keyboard, mouse or touch screen. Moreover, the services are indistinctly shared by the users in a shared account. The history logs recorded by STBs contain the following data fields: AccountId, ProgramId, StartTime, EndTime and Genre. In reality, a log recalls that an account starts and ends a program, and marks a program to a genre.The assumption is that users within a shared account not only have distinct temporal habits, such as after dinner or at weekends, but also have different preferences for television programs (or genres). There are two questions: (1) how to accurately detect temporal habits over accounts? (2) how to accurately obtain preferences based on the detected temporal habits for a user?To address these questions, we propose a novel algorithm that consists of a partition process and a consolidation process. In the partition process, the time is divided into several nonoverlapping time slots to present temporal habits of users. More specifically, we use the consumption logs to construct an account-item-time play count tensor. We decompose this tensor into the multiplication of a few (low-rank) latent matrices of accounts, items, time intervals, and a core tensor. And then, time slots are obtained via clustering the latent matrix of time intervals. In the consolidation process, we introduce virtual user to represent preferences of an account in a clustered time slot, and similar virtual users are combined to extract users.A simple overview of our proposed algorithm is drawn in Fig. 1.The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:1.We study the problem of user identification in IP-TV services as mining groups of time slots and preferences within accounts.We propose an algorithm to fulfill the identification task. In this algorithm, we try a tensor factorization based subspace clustering method to discover groups of time slots. And then similar preferences over these time slots are combined to present users.Finally, we demonstrate how this algorithm above can be applied to improve recommendation. Experimental results on a real IP-TV dataset show that our algorithm outperforms comparable methods.A preliminary result was reported previously [5]. This paper substantially extends this work.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief review of related work on IP-TV recommendation. Section 3 gives the problem definition and notations. Section 4 describes our proposed approach to carry out identification task. Section 5 shows the settings in our experiments. Section 6 presents the experimental results and analysis. Finally, Section 7 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we study the problem that multiple users share a common account in IP-TV services. To enhance recommendation performance for each user, we propose the algorithm TCC to decompose an account into several users. This algorithm consists of two processes: the partition process is designed for detecting time slots, and the consolidation process is used for combining similar preferences to extract real users.Experimental results on a commercial dataset show that about 2.5 users per account are identified in average, and the recommendation performance is significantly enhanced with respect to precision and recall. The advantage of the proposed TCC is that the temporal habits (i.e., time slots) can be automatically learned from the provided dataset. Moreover, the proposed VUI and TCC have been officially adopted by the provider SMG. The algorithm VUI has been applied as an option of recommendation strategy in the television system with excellent user satisfaction since 2013, and TCC is deploying.In the future, we plan on extending our work on the study of factorization methods for partition process, cross-validation techniques in terms of the number of clusters and ρ and try different recommendation algorithms.