@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A pre-evolutionary advisor list generation strategy for robust defensing reputation attacks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Our approach better estimate trustworthiness of sellers and reducing risk.Pre-evolution algorithm searching for optimal customized advisor lists.Evaluating by buyer's own experience and seller's recent reviewers.Superior in robustness, accuracy and stability under multifarious attacks.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Trust and reputation systems,Unfair rating attacks,Robust trust network,Evolutionary algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Trust and reputation systems are vital in large open distributed electronic commerce environments. Although existing various mechanisms have been adopted to guarantee trust between customers and sellers (or platforms), self-interested agents often impose various attacks to trust and reputation systems. As these attacks are usually deceptive, collusive, or strategic, it is difficult to keep trust and reputation systems robust to multifarious attacks. Many defense strategies employ a robust trust network (such as a trustable advisor list) for protecting buyers. However, in the evolution of a trust network, existing strategies consider only historical ratings of given buyers and advisors, while neglecting the timeliness of these ratings. Besides, only a single trust network is utilized to evaluate all sellers, leading to problems such as lack of pertinence and quite large deviation of evaluation. This paper proposes a novel pre-evolutionary advisor generation strategy, which first pre-evolves an optimal advisor list for each candidate seller before each trade and then evaluate each seller according to its corresponding list. After evaluating and selecting the seller, the buyer's own advisor list is evolved based on the pre-evolved optimal advisor list of chosen seller. Two sets of experiments have been designed to verify the general performance of this strategy, including accuracy, robustness, and stability. Results show that our strategy outperforms existing ones, especially when attackers use popular attack strategies such as Sybil, Sybil and Camouflage, and Sybil and Whitewashing. Besides, our strategy is more stable than compared ones, and its robustness will not change with the ratio of dishonest buyers.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Trust has attracted widely attention in the fields such as sociology, psychology, economics, and computer science. Although these disciplines have different definitions and research emphasizes, it is widely agreed that trust means the confidence that one or many entities behave as they expected [1]. According to the source of trust, it can be divided into direct trust and referral trust. The former kind of trust comes from one's own experience, while the latter is calculated according to recommenders’ reviews. If a given pair of trustor and trustee have interacted for many times, the trustor's trust about the trustee may rely much on its direct trust accumulated according to their interaction experience. Otherwise, the trustor may refer to the referral trust recommended by its advisors.Trust plays a vital role in open, large, distributed, and dynamic multi-agent systems where self-interested agents may be deceptive and strategic. For example, in multi-agent based e-marketplaces, dishonest selling agents often employ “ballot stuffing” reviewers providing unfairly high ratings to promote the seller's reputation [2], which may result in the quality of the delivered products not as good as the buyers’ expectations. In such cases, the buyers will be disappointed or even annoyed, and they will feel risky of subsequent transactions with that seller. Thus, the buyers will distrust these sellers or even distrust the electronic commerce platform after several times of unsatisfactory transactions. Therefore, reputation systems are designed for buyers to model the trustworthiness of sellers based on ratings shared by other buyers (called advisors in this paper) and make decisions on which sellers to transact with.However, unfair rating attacks (such as the collusive unfair ratings, Sybil, Camouflage, Whitewashing, and discrimination attacks) from dishonest advisors render reputation systems’ vulnerable to mislead buyers to transact with dishonest sellers [3, 4]. Dishonest advisors may also employ sophisticated attack strategies to avoid being detected or defended. For example, Luca and Zervas [5] show that appropriately 16% of Yelp restaurant reviews are fraudulent thought Yelp adopts an authentication algorithm to filter out suspicious reviews. Besides, scalping is prevalent on the Taobao platform, which has even led American Apparel and Footwear Association (AAFA) to submit its worry to the United States Trade Representative (USTR) and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) [6].As further explained in the next section of literature review, existing defending strategies either has limitations in defending some strategic attacks or neglect timeliness of advisor's ratings. To address such problems, we design a new robust algorithm for improving intelligent agents’ capabilities in defending various types of attacks, accurately estimating the trustworthiness of sellers and reducing the risk of purchase. An overview of our approach is highlighted as follows. Before making a decision in selecting which recommended seller as trading partner, the buyer agent should first pre-evolve an optimal advisor list for each recommended seller as well as the trustworthiness of all member of each list (see Algorithm 1). In this process, not only the ratings given by the buyer agent and its advisors are considered, those rated by the recommended seller's recent reviewers are also taken into consideration. Based on the optimal advisor list for each recommended seller, the buyer agent can then evaluate the trustworthiness of the corresponding sellers (see Algorithm 2). According to the evaluation results, the buyer agent will select one recommended seller as trading partner. Finally, the advisor list of the buyer is evolved based on the pre-evolved optimal advisor list of chosen seller (see Algorithm 3).In contrast to existing advisor list generation algorithm, the novel features of this algorithm are as follows. First, the evolution algorithm aims at pre-computing an optimal advisor list for each seller, in which includes the buyers that our buyer agent should consult in evaluating the trustworthiness of the seller. If h sellers are recommended by the search agent, we will get h optimal customized advisor lists. Therefore, the efficiency of this algorithm is O(hG), where h is the number of sellers that are considered in recommendation list, G is the generation that evolution process should be proceeded. This algorithm is inevitably h times that of the strategy of Jiang et al.[7], as their strategy only include one G-generation of evolution process. Secondly, in the computation of optimal advisor list, the involved advisors come from two sources: (i) the buyer's own witness list; (ii) the seller's recent reviewers. As different sellers have different recent reviewers, the resultant optimal advisor list for the recommended sellers are updated in a timely manner, as improved over the strategy of Jiang et al.[7]. Thirdly, the computation of optimal advisor list is only a pre-calculation process before selecting trading partner. In that process, the buyer agent's advisor list is not evolved, as opposed to the strategy of Jiang et al.[7], but is postponed after the seller is chosen, and therefore evolving the buyer's advisor list according to its recent trading experience.The rest of our paper is developed as follows. Section 2 reviews related literature. Section 3 gives a framework for electronic commerce platform with advisor mechanism. Section 4 illustrates the pre-evolutionary advisor lists generation strategy given in this paper, which is composed of three algorithms, i.e., the optimal advisor lists pre-evolution algorithm, the seller evaluation and chosen algorithm, and the buyer's advisor list evolution algorithm. Section 5 demonstrates the merits of our approach with the experimental settings and results. Section 6 concludes this paper with our future work directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we develop a new advisor list generation strategy, which is composed of several algorithms including pre-evolution of optimal advisor list for evaluating each seller, evaluation and selection of recommended sellers, and evolution of buyer's own advisor list. In contrast to existing advisor list generation strategy, our strategy has following novel characteristics.(1)	This paper's evolution aims at searching various optimal advisor lists for evaluating different sellers. The idea of Jiang et al.[7] about evolving buyer agent's advisor list aims at learning a trustable advisor list according to a buyer's own experience, therefore, the advisor list evolves after each purchase experience. In contrast, the evolution algorithm in this paper (i.e., Algorithm 1) is a pre-calculation process before bargaining, which aims at finding the optimal advisor listsTb1,Tb2,…,Tbhto given sellersS1,S2,…,Sh. An optimal advisor list is just generated for a given seller that is recommended according to the buyer's given purchase requirements. Therefore, the optimal advisor list varies with sellers and purchase requirements. It should be noted that, in this paper, the advisor listTB0does not change in the differential evolution process of calculating the optimal advisor lists. It is evolved based on the optimal advisor lists after the trading partner is selected, which makeTB0always timely evolve according to recent trading experience and recent trading partner's optimal advisor list.(2)	In pre-evolution process, the advisors are selected according to the buyer's own experience and the ratings of seller's recent reviewers. The selection source of trustable advisors (i.e., members in advisor list) in personalized strategy proposed by Zhang et al.[17] is all the reviewers in the market. The three advisors Ar1, Ar2, Ar3 used in MET strategy proposed by Jiang et al.[7] are selected from buyer B's witness list before the current purchase. In contrast, in this paper, these three advisors are randomly selected from all those in the last generation of witness list of buyer B (i.e.,WBg−1) and recent r buyers who rate this sellerSi(i.e.,bij(j=1,2,…,r)in Fig. 1). Our selection strategy thus improves the timeliness of buyers’ ratings.Two sets of experiments have been carried out to compare the performance of our strategy, existing ones and baseline ones. Experimental results show that the advisor list generation algorithm proposed in this paper outperforms existing related algorithms in defensing various attacks such as AlwaysUnfair, Camouflage, Sybil, Whitewashing, Sybil-Camouflage, and Sybil-Whitewashing, under robustness, MAE, and stability criteria. Especially, when defensing attacks that are widely recognized challenging such as Sybil, and Sybil&Whitewashing, the robustness of our PEALGA strategy is significantly higher than MET in all ratios of dishonest buyers. Moreover, PEALGA is the most stable one in comparing with 5 other strategies because its robustness almost keeps the same under all listed pure or combined attacks.The strategies compared in this paper are suitable for B2B electronic market, where user requirements are not changed frequently. In our future work, whether this strategy proposed in this paper is suitable for the C2C market in which the purchase requirement often change is a problem that needs to be explored. Besides, we are planning to apply our study into different real-life applications of tourism [19] and workforce management [20].