@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An enhanced trust propagation approach with expertise and homophily-based trust networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We combine a homophily-based trust network with an expertise-based trust network.Homophily and expertise-based trust values can be propagated simultaneously.The homophily-based trust is an important metric in trust propagation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Trust propagation,Homophily property,Subjectivity of trust,Trust transitivity,Sparsity issue of social networks,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The transitivity property of trust enables the propagation of a trust value through a chain of trusting users in social networks and then provides an expected trust value for another user. Logically, a user in social networks can assess a large number of other users, even if two users have not been directly connected previously. However, a large percentage of trust propagation efforts fail to find reliable trust paths from a source user to a target user because the web of trust in real-world online social networks is too sparse. The success (both quality and quantity) of a trust propagation algorithm strongly relies on the density of a web of trust. The more trust paths that are able to reach the given target user, the more reliable will be the trust estimates based on the trust path with the highest strength. In this paper, we propose an enriched trust propagation approach by combining a homophily-based trust network with an expertise-based trust network, which enhances the density of the trust network. We then evaluate the prediction accuracy and coverage of trust propagation based on various aggregation methods and highlight the most promising method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In social networks, users have incomplete knowledge of others, including those who have devious intentions [17]. Tracking trust is useful for predicting future behavior in a reliable manner and for deterring malicious users by encouraging good behavior and discouraging bad behavior. With the proliferation of Web-based social networks, users are allowed to directly express who they trust and how much they trust other users based on previous interactions. Given such information, trust transitivity enables us to propagate a trust value through a chain of trusting users and then provide an expected trust value for another user [4]. Logically, a user in social networks can assess a large number of users through trust propagation, even if two users were not directly connected previously.However, trust propagation is not always successful for any two random users of social networks. If a web of trust (i.e. a network consisting of trust connections) is not dense enough to be propagated, it is difficult to find reliable and trustworthy paths from a source user to a target user [7]. Practically speaking, a significant percentage of trust propagation efforts fail to find reliable trust paths from a source to a target user in online social networks. Thus, the success (both quality and quantity) of trust propagation is strongly affected by the density of a web of trust. The more trust paths that are able to reach the given target user, the more likely it is to determine reliable trust estimates by choosing the trust path with the highest strength.In recent years, considerable numbers of studies have been done on reliable trust propagation models in social networks. The main objective of these models is to discover reliable trust paths from a given source user to an unknown target user by mathematically combining recommendations from trusting users with minimum error, resulting in a trust prediction [8]. Few researchers have noted to the failure of trust propagation due to a sparse web of trust.In order to reduce the sparsity problem in a web of trust, we adopt the property of homophily in social interactions. Homophily refers to the tendency of people to have non-negative ties with similar other users in social networks. In online social networks, homophily is a fundamental characteristic. In a trust effective community, users trust some people more than others, thus they are more influenced by them and share similar tastes. In addition, in a homophily effective community, similar users might share mutual trust, so the similarity of trust might induce trust among other people. Then trust and similarity will be influenced by each other [11].A homophily property-based network is able to enlarge network connections over an entire network and help a user to find more trust paths and more trustworthy neighbors who know a target user. In the context of trust propagation, however, there are challenges to adopting homophily-based trust and combining it with a web of trust in which trust is directly issued by users. Compared to a homophily-based trust, this second web of trust, with connections directly given by users, is constructed by evaluating another user’s knowledge or expertise based on each user’s limited direct experiences. In this paper, we will call this web of trust an ‘expertise-based trust,’ as compared to a ‘homophily-based trust.’ We will discuss these definitions further in Section 2.First, we face the issue of adjusting the level of two types of trust scores. Expertise-based trust is assessed by evaluating and analyzing the actions that a user performs over the domain content. Moreover, since this trust judgment is a very subjective opinion given by each user, there exists a trust subjectivity issue in an expertise-based trust network [5]. On the contrary, homophily-based trust is determined by evaluating the similarity between two users’ opinions. It is difficult to compare an expertise-based trust score of 0.9 and a homophily-based trust score of 0.8 without eliminating the distinction between them. In other words, the evaluation metric of a homophily-based trust is different from an expertise-based trust, so these two kinds of trust scores cannot be compared and propagated simultaneously into a raw score.Second, aggregation is an important issue in simultaneously propagating two types of trust values. In current research, expertise-based trust is considered the most reliable source, since it is directly given by each user. However, no studies have evaluated the reliability of a homophily-based trust score as compared to an expertise-based trust score. Several aggregation methods are possible, including mean aggregation, max aggregation and priority aggregation. In summary, it is imperative to find an effective method to adjust and aggregate these two types of trust knowledge during trust propagation.In this paper, we propose an enriched trust propagation approach by combining a homophily-based trust network and an expertise-based trust network, which enhances the density of the trust network. We normalize and transform both trust values so they can be compared with each other through a long chain, as well as through a single user. We then evaluate the prediction accuracy and coverage of trust propagation based on various aggregation methods and highlight the most promising method. In our experiments with the FilmTrust dataset, we discover that homophily-based trust is a more important metric than expertise-based trust in terms of trust propagation. Our proposed combined trust propagation approach could significantly outperform current proposed models, which rely only on expertise-based trust networks, for prediction accuracy and coverage.This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly describes the definition of trust in various perspectives and presents the previous studies on trust propagation. Section 3 discusses our proposed method, while Section 4 explains the details of our experiment results. Finally, Section 5 summarizes our work and provides directions for future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
