@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An ontology-based adaptive personalized e-learning system, assisted by software agents on cloud storage

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
DL Query is used to extract information from content stored in the ontology.The Felder Silverman model is used to determine learning styles of learner's.JADE agents monitor learner's behavior to provide adaptive learning.Deployments on cloud enable scope for expanding the content stored on an ontology.The proposed system supports the vision of Semantic web education learning (SWEL).

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
E-learning,Ontology,Semantic web,Cloud storage,Software agents,Adaptive,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
E-learning and online education have made great strides in the recent past. It has moved from a knowledge transfer model to a highly intellect, swift and interactive proposition capable of advanced decision-making abilities. Two challenges have been observed during the exploration of recent developments in e-learning. Firstly, to incorporate e-learning systems effectively in the evolving semantic web environment and secondly, to realize adaptive personalization according to the learner's changing behavior. An ontology-driven system has proposed to implement the Felder-Silverman learning style model in addition to the learning contents, to validate its integration with the semantic web environment. Software agents are employed to monitor the learner's actual learning style and modify them accordingly. The learner's learning style and their modifications are made within the proposed e-learning system. Cloud storage is used as the primary back-end in order to maintain the ontology, databases and other required server resources. To verify the system, comparisons are made between the information presented and adaptive learning styles of the learner along with actions of agents according to learners' behavior. Finally, various conclusions are drawn by exploring the learner's behavior in an adaptive environment for the proposed e-learning system.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The emerging semantic web needs to develop an e-learning system which focuses on personalized and adaptive learning style of learners rather than just content delivery. Current E-learning system of read/write web (web 2.0) is facing some challenges to meet the requirements of semantic web (Web 3.0). Some issues of current e-learning system are to manage huge continuous growing e-learning content on the internet, searching an appropriate e-learning content as per the learner's requirement, represent knowledge in machine readable format with reasoning capability and also to allow reuse of e-learning material. All these issues are addressed by using ontologies for storing e-learning content and building an e-learning application for the semantic web. The ontology presents the course taxonomies in an unambiguous format which is its main resolution. Machine–readability and parsing capabilities of ontology makes it ideal for collaborative purposes. The knowledge base can be shared with other applications of similar intent. In our proposed e-learning system, the detail of personalization is stored appropriately in ontology, based on the Felder-Silverman model [1] and dynamic changes are notified by JADE agents. Ontology provides personalized e-learning content as the learner's requirements change dynamically and the agents capture these changes in learning style and store this information in the ontology. The agents collaborate to thus provide accountability for adaptive learning. To store ontologies we require an expanded and secure environment, thus the entire system is deployed on DigitalOcean's remote cloud host. Cloud can store incremental e-learning content and also provides security by preventing unauthorized access of e-learning content. By overcoming these issues we can develop an effective and enlightening ontology driven personalized and adaptive e-learning system.The rest of this paper is structured into 6 sections; initially we focus on introduction of paper in Section 1. In Section 2, foundation provides an overview of technologies used to propose our system, like, e-learning, ontologies, cloud computing for storing ontology and multi-agents architecture for interaction among agents. In Section 3, we explain the methodology details with the specification related to the actual technologies engaged on the basis of the foundation of the system. Methodology mentions the technologies used like Felder-Silverman learning model, ontology building tools and languages, DigitalOcean's cloud hosting and multi-agent architecture for development of proposed ontology driven adaptive & personalized e-learning system. Section 4 shows experimental results, which will affirm the content provided to the learner by the system, by imitating to the learner's learning style. It also mentions the agents’ actions and their impact on the adaptive nature of personalization realized by the system. Followed by Section 5, in which Learner's dimension, Instructor dimension, Course dimension, Technology dimension and the Design dimension are used to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed e-learning system. Finally, Section 6 draws conclusion and future research opportunities in the current e-learning scenario.E-learning has gradually emerged as one of the most frequently used technologies in the modern era. The importance of e-learning is highlighted through emphasizing learning techniques as well as patterns. Hisham et al. has briefly defined it as a learning platform that utilizes information and communication technologies as well as electronic media. They also implied a number of alternative terms for e-learning such as technology enhanced learning, computer-based training, online-education, and others [2]. This definition quite immensely generalizes the utility of e-learning, which is of high importance, as the scope and approach of constructing an e-learning system is heterogeneous. Focus on a particular design of a system may vary completely from another design and heterogeneity in it leads to segregation of research areas within e-learning. Various segregations require different approaches to actualize the desired system.A few studies have been reviewed in order to concisely comprehend the readiness of e-learning as a field. A study in 2004 conducted by the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) focused on the validation of e-learning readiness and was achieved internally via checking the consistency of objects assigned to the development of self-assessment. Data obtained from it, was later employed as a guide for better enhancements that seemed fit for the development of numerous instruments working towards the cause. Respondents included members from the USCG within the age range of 17 to 34. Despite the study focusing on online learning, the respondents didn't have to actively use any online courses. The assessment of results confirms the potential in terms of validation and consistency, and it also shows indication of a good prediction tool in determining e-learning performance [3].In 2005, Directors of Human Resource Department of, several companies in Turkey started an initiative to assess e-learning readiness in emerging countries. Top 100 companies in Turkey have been selected to become a part of a survey, by the Istanbul Chamber of Industry (ICI), from it's of 500 Major Industrial Enterprises of Turkey, published in 2001. While achieving a precise review of their e-learning readiness, they arrived at a conclusion to develop the companies’ HR structure before proceeding with the integration of the online courses [4].In 2006, a study focused to unravel the readiness among the teachers of an institute, rather than its students, was conducted by the academic staffs and deans of the International Islamic University Malaysia. The study underlined two factors, which played a crucial role in determining their readiness, e-learning training and confidence. However, it was suggested that their improvement hinged upon the infrastructure of the institute. The study also concurred that gender did not play a factor among its respondents [5].In 2008, a study was conducted to review the feasibility in the health department, which was done by the nurses in Flemish hospitals in Belgium. The analysis also highlighted the necessity of training along with determining the importance of strict protocols involving work hours. It also emphasized the importance of transparency between communication involving the developers and people in charge of hospital policies [6].In 2011, the focus of assessing e-learning readiness was to candidly determine its acceptance among students of different levels of proficiency in a subject. A group of undergraduate students studying English as a Foreign Language were selected from the King Khalid University in Saudi Arabia as respondents. The study showed a complete acceptance in e-learning integration in their environment [7].In 2013, a study was conducted to determine the readiness of Ph.D. scholars in the Christian University of Thailand. Students were selected from various years into their research and the aspects taken into account, while quantifying their acceptance were technology access, online audio/video, importance to success, internet discussion, online skill and relationship, and motivation. As a whole, the study uncovered a great extent of e-learning readiness, wherein, technology access proved to be the most promising aspect while motivation was theleast. The difference in demographics, according to their year in research or gender had no significance at the readiness level [8].In 2015, Satpute et al. reviewed several prototypes engaged for educational needs and compared their usability to find the advantages of using Augmented Reality (AR). Web 2.0 tools were also examined to understand the combined use of the two technologies. They concluded by assertingbetter results in educational achievements come through by combining technologies. AR enhances immersion and engagement, whereas web 2.0 supports social interaction and collaboration [9].The learner personalization details as well as the taxonomy of learning resources will be maintained in ontology. There have been many attempts to define an ontology, though all of them have described the same concept but from different perspectives. However, in 1998, Studer et al. made an attempt to define the term while keeping in consideration, all the contemporary perspectives and stated that – “An ontology is a formal, explicit specification of a shared conceptualization” [10], the definition which needs a thorough explanation to decipher a comprehensive understanding. The word formal implies that the knowledge or content represented by the ontology is stored in a format understood by computers, which makes parsing the content, trivial. In the paper, DL Query11DL Query, Protégé wiki - http://protegewiki.stanford.edu/wiki/DLQueryTab.is used as the query language to parse the data. The explicit specification means that no relationships or concepts depicted by the ontology can be assumed or is implicit. Every property and relationship must be listed in its entirety, with none left to be assumed, which could result in multiple inferences. Finally, shared conceptualization reflects knowledge and its constituent conception to have a definition entirely agreed upon. This entails that the content represented by the ontology is universally accepted and only has a single perspective and context to understand. In the system, domain ontology is used, as the personalization to be demonstrated is done sufficiently through a localized batch of concepts pertaining to a specific domain. Elaboration is needed for the development of domain ontology to provide personalized e-learning.•Having a formal representation of knowledge is helpful in interoperability within heterogeneous e-learning environments.Explicit specification goes towards the enhancement of exhaustive learning by not making assumptions on the implicit nature of the information or the learner's style.Shared conceptualization ensures that the knowledge being stored and used, has no ambiguity or over its definition.Elaboration is needed for the development of domain ontology to provide personalized e-learning. There have been few attempts at creating domain ontologies to meet the e-learning demands, even though its importance is substantial.There are multiple aspects to be considered while classifying ontologies. These aspects may be characterized according to their formality, granularity, computational capability and generality.•Top-level ontologies[11] also referred to as upper ontologies or foundational ontologies are domain-independent, high level ontologies. Examples include overly generalized, cross domain ontologies explaining general concepts such as Time, Space and others.Mid-level ontologies, also known as utility ontologies, behave as a channel between top-level ontologies and domain ontologies. Their purpose is similar to that of software libraries in object-oriented programs.Task ontologies are developed in order to store content relevant to a specific task, like, presenting fundamental concepts related to an overly general activity or task.Domain ontologies specify concepts, their properties and relationships pertaining to a specific domain of interest. Example ontologies showing principal concepts which relate to a generic domain. Therefore, the scope needs to be very distinctly specified.Application ontologies are created for the purpose of aiding specific applications. They generally are the combination of domain and task ontologies. For instance, it includes the most specialized ontologies which are application specific, focusing on a definitive task or domain.In this present work, various web ontology languages are explained as the research is focused on the semantic web. A few web ontology languages are OIL, DAML+OIL, SHOE, XOL and OWL. Interoperability is ensured in the web environment, as these languages are based on the web standards XML and RDF.•Extended Markup Language (XML) is a markup language which tries to segregate web content from web presentation. A major drawback is its lack of semantics, although it's widely used as the web standard to represent information [12].Resource Description Framework (RDF) is a W3C standard used to represent web resources. A statement in RDF is called a triple which consists of a subject, predicate and object. A triple can be imagined as a directed link between two nodes, which can be modeled as the subject and the object, whereas the predicate acts as a directed link which is from the subject to the object. The purpose of RDF is to allow exchange of machine-understandable information, mainly on the web [13].Ontology Interface Layer (OIL) was developed during the On-To-Knowledge project. It is established on frame-based languages, description logics and web standards. Its purpose is for both representing and exchanging ontologies [14].DAML+OILare the consequence of an effort to merge DARPA Agent Markup Language (DAML) and OIL. DAML+OIL show more efficiencythan OIL due to increase in features from description logics. However, due to the exclusion of several frame-based features, usability with frame-based tools became limited [15].An XML-based Ontology Exchange Language (XOL) is designed as a framework to exchange ontology definitions [16].Simple HTML Ontology Language (SHOE) extends and allows HTML pages to incorporate machine-readable semantic knowledge [17].Web Ontology Language (OWL) is a standard for representing ontologies on the semantic web. Web-Ontology (WebOnt) Working Group developed it in 2001. It soon became a W3C recommendation in 2004. OWL provides developers with a superior power to express semantics, and to allow automated reasoners to derive knowledge and to carry out logical inferences [18].Methodologies for the development of ontologies can be traced back to the time of development of the Cyc ontology, during which Cyc developers published their experiences [19]. Subsequently, experience in developing the Enterprise Ontology [20] and the TOVE (Toronto Virtual Enterprise) [21] ontology was also reported. After these proposals, a series of ontology development methodologies were presented, including KACTUS [22], METHONTOLOGY [23], Sensus [24], On-To-Knowledge [25] and CO4 [26].In this article, the focus is on the method proposed in the KACTUS project, in which, the ontology is built in a bottom-up manner from a knowledge base (KB) application. It was achieved through abstraction which selects a KB for a specific application, and when the need arises to create an ontology for a similar application, the first KB abstracted represents an ontology for both applications.•Ontology based Question and Answering: Ontology plays an important role in the development of knowledge based system which describes semantic relationships among entities. These relationships described with the help of ontology are able to reach accurate answers to a user's question. Question Answering systems; improve if the emphasis is on the semantic analysis of literal terms in a user's query rather than the syntax analysis. The Fuzzy Ontology plays a vital role in understanding such ambiguous user questions. Fuzzy Ontology can help in understanding Semantic relationships by applying Fuzzy logic (Fuzzy Type 1 and Fuzzy Type 2) to deal with vagueness [27]. Fuzzy type-1 can deal with Crisp membership, whereas Fuzzy type-2 deals with Fuzzy membership.Ontology based decision support system: Ontology can be used along with various methods to build intelligent discussion support system. Ontology-supported case-based reasoning (OS-CBR) method [28].Ontology based E-commerce services: Ontologies provide web services through various heterogeneous domains by using Agent technologies. In an environment Agent allows us to access, retrieve and process relevant content from various domain ontologies. Ontology integrates with the Multi - agent platform to improve e-commerce application for B2B and B2C. For example, in real world scenarios if user wants to retrieve information like flight booking, hotel reservation, banking transaction, etc. information from the heterogeneous domain ontology in single click is hard to obtain results, as we first need to integrate these domains. The main goal of this research is to develop a real time system with the help of ontologies to support systems like railways, flight ticket booking domain, hotel booking domain, banking transaction system, information retrieval system etc. by communicating among agents having domain ontology knowledge. Fuzzy ontology with multi-agent platform system (FOMAS) to give a proposal to automate the personalized example for flight ticket booking domain. Fuzzy type 2 is helpful for retrieval with multi-agent platform system (T2FOMAS). When we consider security aspect of such system called secure type fuzzy ontology multi agent system (ST2FOMAS) [29].Ontology based Recommender system: Wu et al. describe Fuzzy set technique can be used to express user preference for recommendation of items, e-books in business like e-service [30] and e-learning.In 2013, Sarmacakula et al. indicate overlapping point between e-learning and knowledge management to provide personalized course content. The merging of various dimensions like student personality using Myers-Briggs learning styles, course content is described in the form of IEEE Learning objects (LO), TECHNOLOGY USING FIAP device ontology and at knowledge level using taxonomy to provide personalized content 31–51].In the proposed architecture cloud storage is used as its primary back-end. The cloud is where the proposed system is deployed along with its complementing learner/user database, ontologies such as the user.owl and course.owl, and the relevant learning resource for the courses. The advantages of using cloud storage can be directly derived from many of its generic advantages.•The cost of backing up data on a cloud is incremental, therefore saving large costs of physical servers.Cloud storage is said to be invisible, implying that there isn't any prerequisite for a physical space to store the servers required for the proposed system.Security becomes unquestionable, as it is enforced via DSA public key encryption with the remote terminal.Many cloud services provide several APIs to work with by default, therefore increasing automation from the beginning.Cloud storage has extensive features in its online GUI to further ease backing up and downloading.Accessibility of cloud storage is by default extended to multiple platforms such as mobile phones and tablets along with real-time syncing.Salesforce.com marked the advent of cloud computing. The service utilized the internet to grant business applications in 1999. Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) is what this is called now. In 2002, Amazon Web Services (Amazon Mechanical Turk) was introduced, following which, in 2006, Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2) was launched as a commercial web service providing computing capacity. Amazon is credited with pioneering in pay-as-you-go services and the two services established a firm foothold in cloud computing. With the introduction of Web 2.0, and Google, others got into the business of providing browser-based enterprise applications. Cloud computing became apparent as the next step in evolution and took over computing models such as cluster, grid, utility, distribution and services computing [31].Although there's limited clarity on the emerging trends in cloud, the following two topics noticed: technological facets such as “elasticity”, “multitenant”, “resource pooling”, “computing”, and “virtualization” and Commercial faucets such as “self-service on demand”, “SaaS”, and “pay-per-use” [32].Cloud computing has received considerable attention at both firm and industry levels from 2007. The cloud computing environment modifies the role of the computing stakeholders and also demands, regulatory compliance with the infrastructure pertaining to the location of the service provider [33]. The cloud provides flexible IT resources and has completely changed the way they are provided. Cloud computing on-demand resources allow IT organizations to scale quickly as the need arises which is required by the ever increasing business needs.Aljenaa et al. propose an e-learning framework to store rapidly developing e-learning resource on cloud as due to its scalability, thus providing E-learning as a service (EaaS) [34].A multi-agent architecture is used in the proposed system and a few of its properties are listed below, which makes it advantages clear.•The primary advantage of its usage can be narrowed down to the main agenda of the system, which is personalization.The multiple agents used can be categorized as intelligent software agents which are autonomous, specialized in their roles and are persistent entities.Their multi-agent environment adds the adaptability factor to personalization by monitoring learner's activities to modify initial learning style assessment from the Felder-Silverman model [35].Agents differ from a normal program module in their resistance towards the environment.Software agents maintain their own code, but are dormant in execution until triggered by the environment.Their power lies in the fact that they can be modified without affecting its environment which includes collaborating agents.The relevance of personalization became clear through the need for more specific materials according to learners' preferences which in turn improved learners' performance. Novel methodologies as well as proposed framework were introduced to achieve personalization, with encouraging results indicating enhanced learner performance [36].Deploying intelligent tutor in online education emerged in the 90s of the last century. Sherman Alpert and his colleagues conducted a research in 1999 on the shift of using independent Intelligent Tutoring System (ITS) compared to those operating on the World Wide Web, showing both, architecture and features of the system, support students' problem solving activities [37].Another research conducted by Marcia Mitchell proposed a framework for an intelligent tutoring system that support Distance Learning (DL), which is high level software based tutoring that has the ability to encompass a wide variety of current DL technologies in a single session [38].In 2012 a new trend commenced, which focused on deploying agents in learning, applications based on mobile games. Two studies were conducted autonomously, one in English [39] and another in Japanese Kanji. The results confirmed acceptance towards the use of the frameworks proposed, which were analogous to the multimedia world [40].Dung et al. propose an architecture in 2011 which is to represent domain ontology for e-learning course content and agents interact on it to provide personalized e-learning content to learners [41]. Subsequently, in 2013 Bokhari et al. propose an architecture for interactive multi-agent based learning system for distance education [42].In 2015, a study applied Multi-Agent Systems (MSA) in several research projects and software agent based projects. With the aid of MAS methodology, a tool was developed, known as the Agent tool, to understand the role of MAS in the design of distributed software systems [43].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
