@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
ClustOfVar and the segmentation of cruise passengers from mixed data: Some managerial implications

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The ClustOfVar algorithm is applied to segment cruise tourists.The technique is suitable for mixed qualitative and quantitative variables.Clusters of cruise visitors to Uruguay are detected and analysed.Economic impact is linked to positive perception of local people.Port of call and age are main discriminators of groups.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
ClustOfVar,Cruise tourism,Mixed data,Market segmentation,Uruguay,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Market segmentation comprises a variety of measurement methodologies that are used to support management, marketing and promotional policies in tourism destinations. This study applies ClustOfVar, a relatively recent algorithm for cluster analysis from mixed variables. The technique finds groups of variables by using a homogeneity criterion based on the sum of correlation ratios for qualitative variables, and squared correlations for quantitative variables. Then principal components from each cluster of variables are extracted in order to segment cruise passengers. CART analysis is finally used for the sake of finding the variables that drove the formation of the clusters. All the analysis is based on an official survey of tourists who disembarked in Uruguayan ports. The analysis identified five clusters, both for variables and cruise passengers. Findings highlight the importance of the enjoyment of the contact with local people for the economic impact, as well as the important role of age and gender related variables. Managerial implications are also discussed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With a remarkable growth in the last decades, cruise industry has become one of the most dynamic and growing segments of the travel and tourism industry [28]. This increase has occurred since 1990 with an average annual passenger growth rate of 7.4% [20]. The cruise industry has responded to the worldwide ports growth with a rapid increase in the world’s cruise fleet, the creation of appealing itineraries that reflect the interests of today’s travellers and the ability of cruise ships to visit new and exotic locations [17]. Recent numbers reported by the FCCA [20], an organization that represents member lines operating more than 100 vessels in Floridian, Caribbean and Latin American waters, announced that 17 million passengers chose to cruise in 2012. Thus, the industry will be well on the way to maturity [36,43].In this context, South American markets, together with the Mediterranean areas (with an annual growth rate of about 10%) are also increasing their shares. They belonged to the top world destinations in 2012 [17]. The country of Uruguay is in line with this trend. It is a small country located in southern South America, bordering the South Atlantic Ocean, between Argentina and Brazil. With two main ports Montevideo and Punta del Este, the country has experienced a significant increase in the number of vessels, as well in the number of disembarking cruise passengers. According to the data of the Ministry of Tourism and Sports of Uruguay [34], during the 2011–2012 season 225 cruise ships arrived to the country in the two ports of Montevideo (53%) and Punta del Este (47%). This corresponds to an increase of 32% with respect to the previous season, and it is also the most outstanding outcome for both ports since 2004 [8]. From this context, a deeper understanding of the main characteristics of the cruisers disembarking in the two ports could be an important feature in order to improve the positive impact generated by this kind of activities.The main focus of this paper is to find and analyse homogeneous groups of cruise passengers who disembarked in Uruguayan ports. This would allow to identify market segments, and suggest managerial recommendations to destination managers and port authorities. Indeed, market segmentation techniques comprise a set of tools that are appropriate not only to segment markets and identify target markets, but also for assisting a business analyst to understand the relationship between destination and tourists [3].Segmentation tools have been widely used in both industry and academic research for the sake of gaining more insights into a wide range of markets [40,19,21]. Their number has sensibly grown [31,18], with each method presenting a peculiar view of the data [30]. Hence, scholars have improved them in order to make them less prone to error and misinterpretation [19]. The wide set of techniques ranges from elementary percentiles and quartiles [35] to more complex techniques such as factor analysis, principle components and cluster analysis [3]. Nowadays, segmentation techniques and methodologies have evolved in order to overcome a series of limitations [3]. For instance, artificial neural networks (ANN) have been proven as better method in yielding market segmentation [26,33]. In many market segmentation researches, ANN based clustering has been dominated by Self-Organizing Feature Map-SOFMs or SOMs [26]. These neural networks have apparently primary advantages over cluster analysis [3,6,24]. On the other hand, other techniques have been developed in order to ‘refine’ classic ones [7]. However, for what concerns the studies of cruise passengers, only few papers have applied these techniques for detecting and analysing characteristics, behaviors and onshore experience of cruise passengers while visiting a port of call (see [2,9,12,10,42]).This paper adopts a three-step multivariate market segmentation analysis, where clustering techniques are adopted for both variables and units. The first step consists in the dimensionality reduction of the original set of variables. This is a classic problem in statistical analyses [32]. The reduction of the number of variables in a few latent dimensions has the twofold purpose of imploding highly linearly dependent variables that might carry too similar information, and at the same time of finding and interpreting common latent dimensions to such variables. Techniques such as Principal Component Analysis (PCA) or Multivariate Correspondence Analysis (MCA), respectively for quantitative and qualitative variables, are usually applied in order to detect latent traits. However these techniques are not able to handle mixed datasets. In addition, they are built on the hypothesis that all variables share a common ‘aspect’, i.e. come from a common ‘semantic’ group, and they ‘only’ need to be imploded via a technique that would extract latent variables. The latter components are found in such a way that they are independent each other. Therefore they do exclude the possible presence of links within the set of latent dimensions. This paper faces these methodological issues through ClustOfVar [16], a recent algorithm for clustering datasets where mixed variables are present. The methodology is based on PCAmix, a generalization of PCA and MCA.After finding groups of variables, the second step is to segment the cruisers via classic clustering algorithm. Specifically, Ward’s [44] method and the comparison of different stopping rules were adopted to determine groups of units. Finally, the third step consists in using CART analysis [5], for the sake of estimating those variables that significantly affect the partition in clusters of the original set.The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 resumes the adopted methodology. Section 3 presents the datasets. Section 4 shows the results and discusses them. Section 5 concludes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Despite the remarkable growth of the cruise industry and its great changes, studies on cruise passenger’s behavior while at port are not common in the academic research. In this sense, the present paper contributed both to the cruise industry literature, and to provide some insights to destination stakeholders, who can use the results as an input to design suitable managerial strategies and to offer a pleasant and satisfactory visitation during the time ship passengers are onshore.In this work we adopted a three-step multivariate market segmentation analysis. Given the classic problem in reducing dimensionality we used ClustOfVar, a relatively recent algorithm for the statistical software R that is able to handle qualitative-quantitative datasets. There are few studies designed to handle mixed datasets in the tourism field and, particularly to best of our knowledge, in the cruise tourism analysis. Key findings reported the importance of the cruiser onshore expenditure in general terms, thus suggesting that cruise tourists find good shopping opportunities while at Uruguayan ports. In addition, economic impact in all the items appears to have something in common with the enjoyment of personal characteristics of local people. Thus, it would be desirable to create a good atmosphere for cruisers while at port, through positive experience derived from the interaction with locals. With this regard, the synergic cooperation with local partners may lead also to effects that go beyond the single cruise trip, such as the increasing loyalty of customers [38], and the development of local firms [27].As to managerial implications from other findings, suggestions regard the launch of targeted market strategies and campaigns focusing on attracting passengers from nationalities different from the Argentinean one. As results indicate, being resident in Argentina is in the same group and positively correlated with loyalty indicators. Promotion of cruise tourism can be a good strategy in order to increase the volume of the segment of travellers who have never visited the country.In addition, variables such age and port of disembarking, and to a lesser extent gender and economic impact, have shown to be the main drivers for cluster formation. This is a further strong suggestion towards the organization of specific on-site activities for differently aged cruisers. Moreover, the specific features of each place of disembarking should be highlighted while promoting the activities at the port of call, and at the same time be an important part of the experience of the tourist. Once more, all this reinforces the idea of creating or strengthening the relationships with local partners. For what concerns the economic impact, at Punta del Este there has been a reduced number of tourists exhibiting very high levels of spending, mainly women. But after isolating for these, no further discriminating thresholds of expenditure or economic impact were functional to identify segments of tourists. This might suggest that the profitability of disembarking tourists could be quite widespread within the great majority of them.The used dataset comes from an official survey from the Uruguayan Ministry of Tourism (MINTURD), which reports a large sample of cruisers. Of course, this is a strong point. However the main limitation of this study is given by the used dataset itself. Important variables such as income, and behaviors-related ones while at the port are absent. In addition, the presence of psychographic variables is limited. For future researches, it would be of great importance to include these key variables. This would allow a better understanding of attitudes and behaviors that are crucial for market operators and promoters of activities related to cruise ship visit. Future research directions can consist in applying the technique to other surveys of cruisers visiting other places and in different times, in order to better define the tourists’ profile of this growing segment in the tourism industry. More in general, the combination of information from clusters of variables and of units can support market segmentation and analysis in a wide variety of business contexts.