@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The synergistic combination of particle swarm optimization and fuzzy sets to design granular classifier

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper proposes a granular classifier to discover hyperboxes in three phases.The first phase of the proposed model uses the set calculus to build the hyperboxes.The second phase develops the geometry of hyperboxes using PSO algorithm.The PSO is used to optimize the classification rate and expanding the hyperboxes.The third phase identifies the noise points to improve the geometry of classifier.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hyperbox geometry of classifiers,Granular classifier,Membership functions,Particle swarm optimization,DBSCAN clustering algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Granulation extracts a bundle of similar patterns by decomposing universe. Hyperboxes are granular classifiers to confront the uncertainties in granular computing. This paper proposes a granular classifier to discover hyperboxes in three phases. The first phase of the proposed model uses the set calculus to build the hyperboxes; where, the means of the DBSCAN clustering algorithm constructs the structure. The second phase develops the geometry of hyperboxes to improve the classification rate. It uses the Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) algorithm to optimize the seed_points and expand the hyperboxes. Finally, the third phase identifies the noise points; where, the patterns in the second phase did not belong to any hyperboxes. We have used the capability of membership function of a fuzzy set to improve the geometry of classifier. The performance of a proposed model is carried out in terms of coverage, misclassification error and accuracy. Experimental results reveal that the proposed model can adaptively choose an appropriate granularity.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Granulation is a well-known computational model used as a significant step in the human cognition process. It is a process that decomposes a universe into parts [8]. Granules are a bundle of similar patterns or objects, which are extracted and collected from datasets based on the characteristic similarity in the granulation process. Characteristic similarity in information granules is defined in terms of indistinguishably, proximity or functionality, where operations and computation are applied on the information granules. For instance, the leveled granular system is created based on the information similarities by the tolerance relation of distance function [1,7]. The information granules are employed to develop and solve the uncertainty, incompleteness or vagueness of the information problem in granular computing [11,28]. Information granules are constructed based on the homogeneity of the patterns in order to establish geometry of the feature space and the decision boundaries. The significant goal of granulation is to find the high homogeneity of the patterns to discover the granules for classification [3,22,24,28]. Development and computation of the information granules are usually the basic issues in granular computing [16]. Granular computing can generate a unified framework from the different problems and technologies by interacting with other granules and gathering essential granular information to prepare suitable outcomes [12,15]. One of the significant capabilities of hyperboxes in classification is that each of them plays a role of classifier for each class under interest. Consequently, unlike the traditional classifiers, the group of classifiers for each class under interest is existed for classification. In addition, the field of cluster analysis suffers from extensive studies to discover certain category of granular classifiers referred as hyperboxes [36]. Therefore, we proposed a model to discover the hyperboxes and noise points for effective classifiers in the geometry of the information granules.Fig. 1shows the schematic view of decomposing the universe into parts with hyperboxes and its refinement from sets of points to fuzzy sets in granular computing. The hyperboxes are built through the homogeneity of the patterns in the granulation process as presented in Fig. 1(a). Twelve hyperboxes build with the granular classifier through the border of classes in Fig. 1(a). Each hyperbox represents only a single class. If pattern x ∈Rnbelongs to one of the hyperboxesH1,H2, …,Hcin each class under interest (“class one”, “class two” or “class three”), it assigns and classifies it to that class. Fig. 1(b) considers the patterns that do not belong to any hyperbox namely noise points. Fig. 1 presents the refinement of the hyperboxes through the fuzzy sets in terms of the membership grades to confront the regions of the universe.In this paper, we have proposed a granular classifier to discover hyperboxes. The model is constructed in three phases. In the first phase, we use DBSCAN clustering algorithm [4] to build the seeds of the hyperboxes defined as the centers of clusters in each pattern class. Then, we have applied an interval analysis to capture the key part of the classifier’s structure whereby the high homogeneity of the patterns is constructed based on the sets of the areas within the feature space. The classifiers are used to establish the geometry of the feature space and the decision boundaries are interpreted as classification processes that will be analyzed according to the evaluation criteria base on coverage, misclassification and accuracy [7,13]. In the second phase, we use the Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) algorithm to optimize the seed_points of each class of patterns in order to improve the hyperboxes in covering more patterns related to classes. PSO expands the size of hyperboxes by expanding away from the center; showing that optimized_seed_points can cover more points. In the third phase, there are some points remained as noise after optimizing the seed_ points and creating hyperboxes. The noise points do not belong to any clusters and located outside the optimized hyperboxes. We used the membership function in fuzzy sets to allocate the noise points. The fuzzy sets are applied to the regions of the universe where the probability of classification error is high, and the classification result is expressed by membership grades.The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 explains the related works. Section 3 describes the proposed model to discover the hyperboxes and noise points in the geometry of the information granules. In Section 4, we benchmarked the proposed model with different datasets from the UCI machine learning repository [19], and we evaluate them based on the coverage, misclassification and accuracy measurements. Finally, we conclude the research findings in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
