@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Estimating translation probabilities for social tag suggestion

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a new perspective to tag suggestion and treat it as a translation process.We propose two methods to estimate the translation probabilities.Our methods can solve the problem of vocabulary gap.Our methods are effective and robust compared with other methods.Our methods are relatively simple and efficient, which makes them practical.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Natural language processing,Tag suggestion,Translation model,Word alignment model,Pointwise mutual information,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The task of social tag suggestion is to recommend tags automatically for a user when he or she wants to annotate an online resource. In this study, we focus on how to make use of the text description of a resource to suggest tags. It is intuitive to select significant words from the text description of a source as the suggested tags. However, since users can arbitrarily annotate any tags to a resource, tag suggestion suffers from the vocabulary gap issue — the appropriate tags of a resource may be statistically insignificant or even do not appear in the corresponding description. In order to solve the vocabulary gap issue, in this paper we present a new perspective on social tag suggestion. By considering both a description and tags as summaries of a given resource composed in two languages, tag suggestion can be regarded as a translation from description to tags. We propose two methods to estimate the translation probabilities between words in descriptions and tags. Based on the translation probabilities between words and tags estimated for a large collection of description-tags pairs, we can suggest tags according to the words in a resource description. Experiments on real-world datasets indicate that our methods outperform other methods in precision, recall and F-measure. Moreover, our methods are relatively simple and efficient, which makes them practical for Web applications.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In Web 2.0, Web users often use tags to collect and share online resources such as Web pages, photos, videos, movies and books. As an example, we consider a social tagging system for books. Table 1presents a book entry annotated with several tags by multiple users.1The original record was obtained from the book review website Douban (www.douban.com) in Chinese. Here we translate it into English for comprehension.1On the top of Table 1 we list the title and a short introduction of the book “The Count of Monte Cristo”. The bottom of Table 1 shows the annotated tags, each of which is followed by a number in brackets, which is the total number of users who used the tag to annotate the book. As the tags of online resources are annotated collaboratively by multiple users, we also refer to these tags as social tags. For a resource, we refer to the additional information, such as the title and the introduction of a book, as description, and the user-annotated social tags as annotation.The task of social tag suggestion is to automatically recommend tags for a user when he or she wants to annotate a resource. Social tag suggestion, as a crucial component for social tagging systems, can help users annotate resources. Moreover, social tag suggestion is usually considered as an equivalent problem to modeling social tagging behaviors, which is playing an increasingly important role in social computing and information retrieval.Most online resources have descriptions, usually containing abundant information about resources (Liu, Chen, & Sun, 2011). For example, on a book review website, each book entry contains a title, the author(s) and an introduction of the book. Thus, a number of researchers (Liu et al., 2011; Katakis, Tsoumakas, & Vlahavas, 2008; Mishne, 2006; Xu, Fu, Mao, & Su, 2006) propose to automatically suggest tags based on resource descriptions, which is collectively known as the content-based approach (Xu et al., 2006). In this study, we focus on how to make use of the text description of a resource to suggest tags. Note that besides descriptions, online resources may also have multimedia data (e.g., images, videos and audio files) and a survey of multimedia tagging can be found in Wang, Ni, Hua, and Chua (2012).One may think to suggest tags by selecting important words from descriptions. This approach is far from sufficient because descriptions and annotations use diverse vocabularies, which is typically referred to as the vocabulary gap problem (Liu et al., 2011). The vocabulary gap is usually reflected in two primary issues:1.A portion of tags in the annotation do appear in the corresponding description, but they may not be statistically significant.A portion of tags may even not appear in the description.Taking the book entry in Table 1 as example, the tag “classic” had been annotated by 1062 users but it did not appear in the description; another appropriate tag “famous book” also did not appear in the description.Many approaches have been proposed to reduce the vocabulary gap and find the semantic correspondence between descriptions and annotations. Several researchers regard social tag suggestion as a classification problem by considering each tag as a category label (Fujimura, Fujimura, & Okuda, 2008; Heymann, Ramage, & Garcia-Molina, 2008; Katakis et al., 2008; Lee & Chun, 2007; Mishne, 2006; Ohkura, Kiyota, & Nakagawa, 2006). Various classifiers such as Naive Bayes, kNN and SVM have been explored and words are used as features. Some researchers propose to use the topic information between words and tags to suggest tags (Iwata, Yamada, & Ueda, 2009; Si, Liu, & Sun, 2010).In this paper, we propose a new perspective on social tag suggestion to solve the vocabulary gap problem. By regarding both the description and the annotation as parallel summaries of a resource, we want to build a translation model to estimate the translation probabilities between the words in descriptions and tags in annotations. The translation probabilities are able to capture the semantic relation between words and tags. After obtaining the translation probabilities, the tagging behavior associated with a resource can then be regarded as a word translation process:1.A user reads the resource description and understands its substance according to the important words in the description.Triggered by the important words in the description, the user translate these words into corresponding tags and annotate the resource with these tags.In Fig. 1, we provide a simple example to demonstrate the basic idea of using word translation for tag suggestion. In this figure, some words in the first sentence of book description are translated to tags in the annotation. The translation is denoted with various arrows from words or phrases in the description to tags in the annotation. For example, the phrase Count of Monte Cristo in the description is translated to two tags, including Dumas and Count of Monte Cristo, and the word fictions is translated to novel.In this paper, we propose two methods to estimate translation probabilities between words in descriptions and tags in annotations. One method is the word alignment model (WAM) in statistical machine translation (SMT) and the other method is mutual information (MI) (Lin, 1998). It is straightforward to use WAM since it is the basic model in SMT to estimate the translation probabilities. For training, WAM requires a collection of parallel documents, where each document pair should have the comparable length. In this paper we propose a sampling method to prepare length-balanced description–annotation pairs for WAM. Moreover, we propose the second method, MI, to estimate the translation probabilities. Mutual information is a popular measure that can utilize co-occurrence information to measure semantic similarities between two words (Lin, 1998).Our model can solve the vocabulary gap problem because the translation probabilities estimated by WAM and MI are able to capture the semantic relation between words and tags. Thus we can suggest tags that are not statistically significant or even not appear in the descriptions based on the translation probabilities. We hypothesize that our approach is better than the methods mentioned above and conduct experiments to investigate the performance of our model in the task of tag suggestion. Experiments on real-world datasets indicate that our method outperforms other methods in precision, recall and F-measure. Moreover, our method is relatively simple and efficient, as proven with the computational complexity, which makes it practical for Web applications.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 we briefly introduce some of the most commonly used methods for tag suggestion. Sections 3 and 4 introduce the details of our approach. Section 5 presents the experimental evaluation of our approach compared to other existing techniques. Finally Section 6 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we present a new perspective on social tag suggestion and propose two methods to estimate translation probabilities between words in descriptions and tags. One method is the word alignment model in statistical machine translation and the other method is mutual information. Based on the translation probabilities between words and tags, we propose the word translation method. The experiments revealed that our method is effective and efficient for social tag suggestion compared with other baseline methods.There are several open issues for further investigation:1.Our model focuses on suggesting social tags according to the resource descriptions. We will take advantages of more social information such as user information to improve the performance of social tag suggestion.Other metadata of resources (author, title, images and videos) can be also taken into account to improve the performance of social tag suggestion.Our model is a supervised model which requires a large collection of annotated resources. We will explore to use large-scale unlabeled text corpora to estimate the translation probabilities between words, which could be used to enhance the estimation of translation probabilities between words in descriptions and tags in annotations.In this paper we suggest each tag in isolation, without considering the correlations between tags. We will investigate the hieratical structure and the semantic relatedness between tags to regularize the granularity of tags.