@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Computer-aided diagnosis of diabetic subjects by heart rate variability signals using discrete wavelet transform method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Automated identification of normal and diabetic subjects using HRV signals.Features are extracted using DWT method.Ranked features are subjected to various classifiers.Proposed method classifies diabetes and normal subjects with 92.02% accuracy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Diabetes,HRV,Classifier,DWT,Feature extraction,Feature ranking,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Diabetes Mellitus (DM), a chronic lifelong condition, is characterized by increased blood sugar levels. As there is no cure for DM, the major focus lies on controlling the disease. Therefore, DM diagnosis and treatment is of great importance. The most common complications of DM include retinopathy, neuropathy, nephropathy and cardiomyopathy. Diabetes causes cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy that affects the Heart Rate Variability (HRV). Hence, in the absence of other causes, the HRV analysis can be used to diagnose diabetes. The present work aims at developing an automated system for classification of normal and diabetes classes by using the heart rate (HR) information extracted from the Electrocardiogram (ECG) signals. The spectral analysis of HRV recognizes patients with autonomic diabetic neuropathy, and gives an earlier diagnosis of impairment of the Autonomic Nervous System (ANS). Significant correlations with the impaired ANS are observed of the HRV spectral indices obtained by using the Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) method. Herein, in order to diagnose and detect DM automatically, we have performed DWT decomposition up to 5 levels, and extracted the energy, sample entropy, approximation entropy, kurtosis and skewness features at various detailed coefficient levels of the DWT. We have extracted relative wavelet energy and entropy features up to the 5th level of DWT coefficients extracted from HR signals. These features are ranked by using various ranking methods, namely, Bhattacharyya space algorithm, t-test, Wilcoxon test, Receiver Operating Curve (ROC) and entropy.The ranked features are then fed into different classifiers, that include Decision Tree (DT), K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN), Naïve Bayes (NBC) and Support Vector Machine (SVM). Our results have shown maximum diagnostic differentiation performance by using a minimum number of features. With our system, we have obtained an average accuracy of 92.02%, sensitivity of 92.59% and specificity of 91.46%, by using DT classifier with ten-fold cross validation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
According to the International Diabetes Federation (IDF), it is estimated that in 2013 a total of 381million people were diagnosed with diabetes across the globe, out of which 23million people are from Southeast Asian countries [26]. Due to lack of finance or access to healthcare, most of the populations around the world are unaware that they may be suffering from diabetes [26]. Statistics shows that around 1.9million people are diagnosed with diabetes in USA every year and 79million have pre-diabetic conditions [7]. By 2030, the number of diabetes subjects is estimated to get almost double (2.8% in 2000 and 4.4% in 2030), as its incidence is increasing rapidly every year Sarah et al. [47]. Diabetes and its complications have shown a notable impact on individuals, families, and health systems and countries’ economy. The USA alone spends around $245billion annually on the diagnosed diabetes patients. It is predicted that by 2050, 1 in 3 Americans adults may have diabetes if the current tendency is continued [7,10].Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a condition that is defined by hyperglycemia state (blood glucose level), which in turn leads to microvascular, and macrovascular damage [60]. Even though, finding a cure for this DM condition is difficult, emphasis is laid on early diagnosis of DM. In this regard, it is well known that a person with diabetes exhibits autonomic neuropathy (AN), damage to the nervous system or cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy (CAN), a well-known complication of DM that affects the central and peripheral vascular systems and causes abnormalities in the heart rate signal [1]. Thus, diabetes can also be diagnosed by studying the heart rate variability.Concerning heart rate variability, the heart rate (HR), a non-stationary/nonlinear signal, is obtained by calculating the time elapsed between two ventricular contractions or the time between two consecutive R-waves (R–R interval) on the ECG signals [27]. The HR Variability (HRV) is one of the reliable methods for qualifying physiological dysfunction in terms of the condition of sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system [6,25]. The analysis of HRV enables us to evaluate overall cardiac health in terms of the heart rate regulation, based on the status of the autonomic nervous system responsible for regulating cardiac activity [37].Spectral analysis of the short-term HRV enables quantitative evaluation of the neurologic oscillations, and delivers values for neural regulation of heart rate [9,51,34]. The spectral analysis of HRV (spectral parameters like the power spectrum of HRV signal) recognizes patients with autonomic diabetic neuropathy, and gives an earlier diagnosis of impairment of the autonomic nervous system (ANS) [15,21]. Significant correlations are observed between impaired ANS and the HRV indices obtained by spectral analyses using nonparametric and parametric methods namely, fast Fourier Transform (FFT) and autoregressive (AR) method respectively [12]. Time–frequency domain analysis of HRV makes it easier to quantify the ANS activity in DM subjects [48]. Even though the autonomic functions are better assessed by using frequency domain features, the accuracy of spectral power is limited by the low level of the signal to noise ratio [6].Nonlinear dynamic techniques are used in HRV signal analysis to circumvent the limitations of time and frequency domain analysis [4]. Nonlinear methods are needed for the analysis of nonlinear signals and systems [35]. The non-linear methods have been applied in HRV analysis [50,30] to predict diabetes [14,5,20] and cardiovascular disease (CVD) [23]. Nonlinear techniques can be coupled to frequency analysis techniques. Among all of these techniques, the DWT has the advantage of providing multiple resolutions. This method provides discrimination between two different signals with the same spectrum magnitude, thus distinguishing the subtle changes in the signals [17,2,56].In normal and diabetic subjects, the HRV signal has been used to study and measure the activity and symptoms of the cardiac parasympathetic nervous system [41]. Their study reported that diabetic subjects’ exhibit diminished cardiac parasympathetic activity before the appearance of autonomic neuropathy symptoms. Several studies conducted (Table 3) have reported that diabetic patients are characterized by reduced HRV, with less information about HRV across the spectrum of blood glucose levels. In 2000, Singh et al. [52] studied the correlation between hyperglycemia (increased blood glucose level) and reduced HRV. They reported reduced HRV variables in DM subjects and in subjects with impaired blood (plasma) glucose levels by using time domain features.Awdah et al. [11] studied diabetic subjects with and without autonomic neuropathy by using the time domain analysis of HRV. Their results showed significant decrease in all the time domain measures for diabetic subjects with and without diabetic neuropathy compared to the control class. In 2005, Flynn et al. [22] used detrended fluctuation analysis (DFA) to study the HRV changes over a short time ECG recordings of 20min. Their study reported reduced values of HRV for diabetic subjects. Chemla et al. [16] used autoregressive (AR) methods to study the HRV spectral components in diabetic patients. They found that diabetic subjects exhibit decreased spectral values, and that FFT method is more suitable for evaluation of short-term HRV spectral components in diabetic subjects.Analysis in the time and frequency domain of RR interval has been carried out by Ahmad Seyd et al. [8], to quantify the autonomic nervous system (ANS) in DM patients. Significant differences in high frequency (HF) power, very low frequency (VLF) and low frequency (LF) power were noted between DM patients and normal classes in the frequency domain analysis of extracted data (NN interval – normal to normal interval). This study also observed significant difference in time domain analysis of root mean square of successive NN interval differences (RMSSD) and the standard deviation of NN interval (SDNN) between the DM and control groups.Multiscale entropy (MSE) analysis method has also been used to diagnose the autonomic dysregulation in DM patients by Trunkvalterova et al. [58]. Their study performed the analysis of heart rate (HR) signal, systolic and diastolic blood pressure (SBP and DBP) signals in both normal and diabetic subjects, to evaluate the SampEn and linear measures. They reported that in young patients with DM, the changes in cardiovascular control were detected by the MSE analysis of SBP and DBP oscillations and HR signals. The relationship between HRV and duration of type 2 diabetes based on sex-differences was studied by Nolan et al. [38]. By this study result, an inverse relationship was reported between the Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes duration and HRV measures among male subjects only. The inverse association of HRV with increasing age of diabetes diagnosis, as well as increasing severity of coronary heart disease risk and obesity was observed in female subjects.Then in 2012, Faust et al. [20] used time and frequency domain and nonlinear methods to study the HRV signals of both diabetic and normal subjects; they have proposed unique ranges for various features of the two classes. The HRV parameter in diabetic and non-diabetic patients with renal transplantation has been investigated in time and frequency domain by Kirvela et al. [31]; their result highlighted that in end-stage diabetic neuropathy patients the autonomic neuropathy is the main reason to cause severe impairment of HRV and partly by the co-existing heart disease.Recently, a novel Diabetic Integrated Index (DII) has been developed by Acharya et al. [3], by using nonlinear parameters extracted from the HRV signal. This DII is a number which can distinguish and classify the two classes in terms of just one number. They also reported that the AdaBoost classifier yielded a high classification accuracy of 86% for the two classes (normal and diabetic). In this research group, Swapna et al. [54] used Higher Order Spectral features to classify diabetic patients from normal subjects; their method reported the highest accuracy, sensitivity and specificity of 90.5%, 85.7% and 95.2% respectively, by using Gaussian mixture model classifier. The magnitude plots of the HOS bispectrum obtained from HRV signals have been subjected to principal component analysis for feature reduction [28]. These principal components with SVM classifier reported an accuracy of 79.93%. However, Acharya et al. [5] reported 90% of accuracy, 92.5% of sensitivity and 88.7% of specificity with AdaBoost classifier coupled with four nonlinear features. Pachori et al. [42] (In press), proposed a new nonlinear method based on Empirical Mode Decomposition (EMD) to discriminate between normal and diabetic RR-interval signals. In their proposed method, EMD decomposes the RR-interval signal into IMFs from which five features (Fourier–Bessel series expansion, amplitude modulation bandwidth, frequency modulation bandwidths, analytic signal representation and second order difference Plot) are extracted. The study results show that the features extracted exhibits are statistically significant difference between normal and diabetic classes.In our present work, in order to automatically diagnose and detect DM, we have performed DWT decomposition up to 5 levels and have extracted the energy, sample entropy, approximation entropy, kurtosis and skewness features at various detailed coefficient levels of the DWT. Fig. 1shows an overview of our proposed methodology for diabetic HR signal classification. In the off-line system, normal and diabetes RR signal data are analyzed by DWT, performed up to 5 level of decomposition. Energy, sample entropy, approximate entropy, kurtosis and skewness features are extracted from each levels of the detailed coefficients of the DWT. Then, these features are ranked by using Bhattacharyya space algorithm, t-test, Wilcoxon test, Receiver Operating Curve (ROC), and entropy method. The ranked features are fed to DT, KNN, NBC and SVM classifiers to obtain the highest classification performance using minimum number of features. In the on-line system, up to five levels decomposition are performed by using DWT method and the features (energy, ApEn, SampEn, kurtosis, and skewness) are extracted. These features are ranked and fed to the selected classifiers for automated classification as normal and DM.The flow of the paper is as follows. Section 2 delineates (i) the data acquisition process and pre-processing, (ii) feature extraction method and feature ranking methods, and (iii) classification. The results of this novel diagnostic system are presented in Section 3. The discussion of the results is carried out in Section 4, and conclusion is provided in Section 5.The electrocardiogram signals (ECG) were acquired from 30 subjects (15 subjects with DM and 15 healthy subjects) in a relaxed supine position for 60min. The ECG recordings were performed by using BIOPAC™ (Aero Camino Goleta, CA, USA) equipment, and the AcqKnowledge software inbuilt within equipment to convert the recordings into heart rate time series. Fig. 2shows the RR signals of normal and DM patients. We have kept the ECG sampling rate to 500Hz. A total of 81 datasets from 15 diabetic subjects (10 male and 5 female) and 82 datasets from 15 normal subjects (8 male and 7 female) were used in this study, with each dataset having 1000 samples. All the subjects were instructed about the aim of the study and signed an informed consent before being examined. The study received the approval by the Kasturba Medical Hospital, in Manipal, India. Band reject filter with a center frequency of 50Hz was used to remove the power-line interference noise. RR points were detected using Pan and Tomkins algorithm [40].Feature extraction step is the crucial process in biomedical signal analysis and interpretation. We have performed DWT on the HR signals up to five levels, and extracted features of Energy (E), Approximate Entropy (ApEn), Sample Entropy (SampEn), Kurtosis (Kur) and Skewness (Skw) from these different levels of DWT coefficients. The DWT method and the features extracted are described briefly in the following section.The DWT transforms the signal from time domain to wavelet domain and delivers different coefficient values. In the DWT, the given heart rate signals are passed through high pass and low pass filter. Once filtering is done, half of the samples are eliminated as it is sub-sampled by 2. This is the first level of decomposition. Then the low pass filter coefficients are subjected to low pass and high pass filter again and this procedure is repeated for different levels of decomposition. At each level, the number of samples and frequency band are halved [55]. This converts a signal into low pass (approximate) coefficients and high pass (detailed) coefficients. In this work, we have used db8 mother wavelet function [17]. We performed DWT on HR signals up to five levels, and then extracted features of energy, ApEn, SampEn, kurtosis, and skewness.In this work, A5 is the fifth level of the approximate coefficients and D1–D5 correspond to first to fifth level detailed coefficients. Fig. 3shows the DWT performed on RR interval signals of normal and DM patients.It is the square of the DWT coefficient of the heart rate signal.It is a method used to quantify the amount of regularity and unpredictability of signal variations [43]. This regularity statistic has potential application in ECG and heart rate data analysis/time series [44]. A signal varying rhythmically has small ApEn and vice versa. Herein, we have used the ApEn formula proposed by Pincus et al. [45].It is a modification of approximate entropy used for the assessment of complexity and regularity of physiological time-series [57]. Unlike ApEn, SampEn is independent of data length and performs consistently well. A signal with more repeating patterns will have small SampEn and vice versa.These two values are used to assess the probability distributions of the signal series [46]. Kurtosis indicates whether the data is peak or flat relative to the normal distribution. Skewness measures the asymmetry of the tails of distribution. The kurtosis (Kur) and skewness (Skw) are defined as(1)Kur=E[{X-μ}4]σ4(2)Skw=E[{X-μ}3]σ3where X is the probability distribution of the signal, μ is the mean value of the data set, and σ represents the standard deviation of the data set.Ranking methods are one of the fastest methods in feature selection problem. Feature ranking is used to select a subset of features, which will reduce the classifiers complication without making any difference in its performance. In our work, the different feature ranking methods namely, Bhattacharyya space algorithm, t-test, Wilcoxon test, Receiver Operating Curve (ROC), and entropy are used to rank the significant features. These feature ranking methods are briefly explained below.In this method, the features are ranked according to their ability in discriminating the training data. Bhattacharyya ranking method yields a single evaluation route, to thereby reduce the number of classifications by adding every feature [29].The student t-test method is used to determine whether the mean of two sets are different or not [13]. The test gives the p-value and t-values for the features extracted for the two groups of data. Statistically, a low p-value is preferred (p<0.05), and higher the t-value better the ranking. Hence in this work, the low p-value features are selected and the t-values are used to rank them.It assess the difference between the two related samples. This is a paired test that is suitable for comparing two different measurement sets made on the same data [61].In this method, the sensitivity and specificity of a diagnostic test is evaluated to obtain the ROC curve at different threshold values, and it is plotted as sensitivity versus 1-specificity. A test that perfectly discriminates between the two groups would yield a curve; then, by determining the area under curve, the soundness of a test can be assessed. In practice, the area varies between 0.5 and 1; if the area is closer to 1, the test is considered better; the test is considered worst if the area is closer to 0.5 [39].This method is based on the fact that entropy is lower for orderly layout and higher for disorderly layout. In this method, the features are ranked in descending order of relevance, by finding the descending order of the entropies after removing each feature one at a time [18].In our work, we have used ten-fold cross validation method to evaluate the classifiers [2]. Our main objective is to obtain the best classification accuracy, by using the minimum number of ranked features and identify the best classifier. In this method, the whole set of ranked features are first divided into 10 equal parts, with the first 9 parts (147 data files) being used for training the classifier, followed by using the trained classifier on the one remaining part (16 data files) to evaluate its performance. This whole process is repeated 10 times by taking different parts for training and testing dataset. The classifier performance is measured by using the average value of the ten folds. The different classifiers used in our study are explained below.This classifier uses the significant features from the training data to construct a tree [33]. The two classes are defined by using the rules extracted from the constructed tree. Then the class of the test data is determined using these rules. The main advantage of this classifier is its ability to break down a complex decision-making process into a collection of simpler decisions, thereby providing a solution which is often easier to interpret. There may be difficulties involved in designing an optimal DT classifier. The performance of a DT classifier strongly depends on how well the tree is designed.It is a simple classifier that determines the k-nearest neighbors by using the minimum distance from the testing and training data [32]. The most common among the k-nearest neighbors are assigned with a class. This classifier has poor run-time performance when the training set is large. In this work, we have used k=3.It is a probabilistic classifier which works on the principle of Bayes theorem, and on the assumption that the features are independent random variables [24]. The main advantage of this classifier is that it requires a small amount of training data to estimate the parameters (means and variances of the variables) required for classification. The most important downside of this classifier is that it has strong feature independence assumptions.It is one of the most widely used classifiers, which constructs a separating hyper-plane in a feature space which separates the training data into two classes [19]. Kernel functions are used, if the data used are nonlinearly separable, to map the original input data to a higher dimensional feature space where the features might become linearly separable. This work concerns polynomial kernel functions of order 1, 2 and 3 and radial basis function (RBF) kernels. We have used Least Square SVM (LS-SVM) in this work [53]. The biggest advantage of SVM is to overcome the curse of dimensionality in traditional machine learning and local minima. When dealing with small sample size problem, the generalization ability of this classifier is the best. The biggest limitation of the SVM lies in the choice of the kernel, and the most serious one from a practical point of view is the high algorithmic complexity and extensive memory requirements.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
