@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Cross-domain polarity classification using a knowledge-enhanced meta-classifier

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a new generic meta-learning-based approach to polarity categorization.Study impact of word sense disambiguation and vocabulary expansion-based features.State-of-the-art results on single and cross-domain polarity categorization.Our approach does not perform any domain adaptation, therefore it is generic.Our approach obtains the most stable results across the different tested domains.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sentiment analysis,Cross-domain polarity classification,Meta-learning,Word sense disambiguation,Semantic network,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Current approaches to single and cross-domain polarity classification usually use bag of words, n-grams or lexical resource-based classifiers. In this paper, we propose the use of meta-learning to combine and enrich those approaches by adding also other knowledge-based features. In addition to the aforementioned classical approaches, our system uses the BabelNet multilingual semantic network to generate features derived from word sense disambiguation and vocabulary expansion. Experimental results show state-of-the-art performance on single and cross-domain polarity classification. Contrary to other approaches, ours is generic. These results were obtained without any domain adaptation technique. Moreover, the use of meta-learning allows our approach to obtain the most stable results across domains. Finally, our empirical analysis provides interesting insights on the use of semantic network-based features.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Text classification (also known as text categorization) is the task of assigning a category or categories to a text document from a set of predefined categories. Although at first this topic was approached from a knowledge engineering perspective (manually defining a set of rules encoding expert knowledge), in the 90s machine learning became the main approach, and so it stands today. A good survey on machine learning approaches to text classification can be found in Sebastiani [51].The nature of the predefined categories in text classification can be very heterogeneous. The most common task is that of topic-based classification, attempting to classify documents according to their subject matter (e.g. Sports vs. Politics vs. Economics). More recently, in the context of the Web 2.0 and social media, it emerged the task of deciding whether a subjective text (typically, a textual review of some product or a cultural or political issue) is positive or negative, depending on the overall sentiment detected. This particular task is known as polarity classification or sentiment classification [54,42]. Although it can be defined in terms of text classification (being positive and negative the predefined categories) and tackled with similar approaches, polarity classification has been proved to be a more difficult task [42]: while topics are often identifiable by keywords alone, sentiment can be expressed in a more subtle manner, and even more when for instance irony is employed [48]. Therefore, solutions based only on bag-of-words representations of documents may not be enough.In this work we are interested in single and cross-domain polarity classification. Since we are applying machine learning techniques, we start with a training set of documents to build some classifiers. In this context, single-domain classification is the aforementioned common text classification; it refers to training and testing classifiers on the same domain (e.g. movie reviews). Meanwhile, cross-domain classification refers to testing on a different domain (target domain) from that or those used in training (source domains), e.g. training on movie reviews and testing on books reviews. Because manually labeled documents are needed for training, the latter allows to work with domains where no labeled documents are available. The problem of cross-domain text classification was first tackled by Dai et al. [13], and the first results on cross-domain polarity classification were reported by Blitzer et al. [7].In order to combine different approaches from the research literature and recent knowledge-based approaches, and also to measure the contributions of each one, we propose the use of a meta-learning scheme called Stacked Generalization [56]. The set of base classifiers to be combined using that scheme include solutions used in the past as a TF-IDF bag-of-words classifier, a TF-IDF word n-gram classifier, and a lexical resource for opinion mining-based classifier; but also two new proposals, a word sense disambiguation-based classifier and a vocabulary expansion-based classifier. The latter two classifiers are trained on the basis of knowledge graphs, a subset of a semantic network, i.e., BabelNet [38], focused on the concepts belonging to the text being classified.The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we describe the related work on single and cross-domain polarity classification. In Section 3 we introduce our new knowledge-enhanced meta-classifier. In Section 4 we evaluate our approach in the tasks of single and cross-domain polarity classification, and compare it with other state-of-the-art approaches. In that section we evaluate also the performance of our different base classifiers. Finally, in Section 5 we draw the conclusions and mention directions for future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this work we introduced a knowledge-enhanced meta-classifier for single and cross-domain polarity classification. The main contributions of this work are: (i) KE-Meta, a new generic approach that combines different types of classifiers to categorize documents according to their polarity; and (ii) the study of the impact of WSD and vocabulary expansion-based features as document representation.In single and cross-domain polarity classification, KE-Meta has proven to perform at par or better than state-of-the-art when classifying Amazon product reviews. Thanks to the combination of different classifiers, our approach obtained the most stable results across domains, and was able to excel in domains such as books and DVDs, which often combine a review and a summary of the product together. In contrast to the state-of-the-art, our meta-classifier does not perform any domain adaptation, which renders our approach generic. Moreover, the study of the information gain of our base classifiers concluded that WSD and vocabulary expansion-based features provide additional information not included in other BOW or n-gram-based classifiers.Future work will investigate how it affects the inclusion of new base classifiers in KE-Meta. The use of other state-of-the-art approaches combined with our approach should provide better results. In addition, we will improve the current base classifiers, specially the vocabulary expansion-based one, to perform better both at single and cross-domain level. We will study also the performance of our classifier in other popular datasets like the well-known movie review dataset. Moreover, we will evaluate our polarity classification approach in other languages.27As we stated in Section 3.1, our approach is multilingual. This is due to the use of BabelNet, which performs WSD, vocabulary expansion, and mapping of SentiWordNet with the disambiguated words.27Finally, we will investigate how to apply multilingual semantic networks and knowledge graphs in other NLP tasks, from both, monolingual and multilingual perspectives.