@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Pornographic images recognition based on spatial pyramid partition and multi-instance ensemble learning

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Spatial pyramid partition based multi-instance modeling method is proposed.Fuzzy histograms fusion based metadata extraction method is proposed.Extreme learning machine and classifier ensemble based MIL algorithm is proposed.The ELMCE-MIL is robust and comparable to other state-of-the-art MIL algorithms.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi-instance learning,Pornographic images recognition,Extreme learning machine,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
For tackling the problem of pornographic image recognition, a novel multi-instance learning (MIL) algorithm is proposed by using extreme learning machine (ELM) and classifiers ensemble. Firstly, a spatial pyramid partition-based (SPP) multi-instance modeling technique has been deployed to transform the pornographic images recognition problem into a typical MIL problem. The method has deployed a bag corresponding to an image and an instance corresponding to each partitioned sub-block described by low-level visual features (i.e. color, texture and shape). Secondly, a collection of visual word (VW) has been generated by using hierarchical k-mean clustering method, and then based on the fuzzy membership function between instance and VW, a fuzzy histogram fusion-based metadata calculation method has been proposed to convert each bag to a single sample, which allows the MIL problem to be solved directly by a standard single instance learning (SIL) machine. Finally, by using ELM, a group of base classifiers with different number of hidden nodes have been constructed, and their weights bas been dynamically determined by using performance weighting rule. Therefore, the strategy of classifiers ensemble is used to improve the overall adaptability of proposed ELMCE-MIL algorithm. Experimental results have shown that the method is robust, and its performance is superior to other similar algorithms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the rapid development of computer and communication technologies, the Internet has become one of the primary resources to access variable information and knowledge. However, the ocean of information from the Internet not only contains useful knowledge that people need, but also rapidly increasing objectionable messages, such as violence, pornography, and rumors. Because image contains much more semantic information than texts does, the pornographic images have the most straightforward impact to the teenager’s physical and mental health. Thus, purifying the network environment and keeping teenagers away from pornographic web pages becomes a serious challenge to their family and our society. Therefore, an automated, effective and accurate pornographic images recognition method, which can prevent teenagers from browsing online pornographic images, becomes very important and necessary [1,2].Blacklist and keyword-based approaches are two kinds of common pornographic image recognition methods [3–6]. The blacklist-based methods block all the accesses to the websites in a list of URLs where pornographic contents have been reported. However, since the highly dynamic feature of the model network system, the methods cannot filter all the URLs containing pornographic contents effectively. On the other hand, keyword-based methods attempt to filter images by analyzing the sensitive texts from webpages. But many words belonging to the pornographer’s lexicon can be also appeared in webpages for other purpose (i.e. the educational sites about breast cancer). In addition, some pornographic websites embedding their text into images which make the keyword-based analysis impossible to be applied. Therefore, in recent years, content-based pornographic image recognition technology becomes a hot research topic for pornographic images recognition, which has better adaptability when identifying pornographic content from webpages.In recent years, many content-based pornographic image recognition methods have been proposed and they can be roughly categorized into three groups [7–9], which are model-based, feature-based and region-based methods. (1) Model-based method was first proposed by Fleck and Forsyth in 1996 [10,11]. The authors firstly detect the skin color pixels in an image using color and texture information and then find all connected columned skin regions that are candidates for trunks and limbs. These skin columns are used to combine constrained subjects derived from a geometrical model of the human body. If the combination can form a reasonable shape of a human body, the image is then treated as pornographic. This method is quite straightforward and easy to apply. However, as human bodies are non-rigid objects and have a wide variety of postures, it is very difficult to build a comprehensive body grouper effectively. Thus, the recognition accuracy is usually not very high [7,8]. (2) Feature-based methods emphasize the extraction of image features [7,8]. For example, Wang et al. [12] uses wavelet transformation to represent images, and then color histogram and normalized central moments are used to form semantic-matching vectors to classify those images. However, it generates high missing and false detection since local details of the image are ignored. (3) Rule-based methods [9] decide pornographic image according to some predefined rules such as the ratio of the skin areas against the image area, the number of connected skin regions, the ratio of the largest skin area to all skin regions etc. As rule-based methods are relatively simple, the recognition results are unsatisfactory. Recently, a bag-of-feature approach based on SIFT has been proposed [13] to classify images into nude and non-nude while the reported average recognition rate is no more than 70%. Yan et al. [14] also proposed a new approach of extracting salient region from pornographic image regions, which remarkably improves the detection rate.Above mentioned content-based pornographic image recognition methods can be regarded as binary classification problems that the image should be classified into either pornographic or non-pornographic. Because of the users often distinguish the pornographic images by their “semantic features” rather than “visual features”, in order to bridge the “semantic gap”, the machine learning method, such as support vector machine (SVM) or neural network, can be employed to train the “visual feature” vectors for generating the classification model. But the first challenging task of such methods is to collect a large number of training samples for the learning. Unfortunately, manually collecting (and possibly further annotating, aligning, cropping, etc.) during the supervised learning processes is an expensive endeavor, which is both time consuming and error-prone [15].To solve this problem, in this paper, the pornographic image recognition problem has been transformed into a multi-instance learning (MIL) problem by regarding each image as a bag and their low-level visual features of divided sub-blocks as instances [16]. An image can be labeled as a positive bag if it is a pornographic image (otherwise it should be labeled as a negative bag). One advantage of using the MIL is its coarse labeling processes, rather than fine labeling at region level, so it can significantly improve the efficiency when applying supervised learning.There are three major contributions in this paper:•A SPP-based multi-instance modeling method has been proposed. We applied SPP method to divide each image into a sequence of increasingly finer sub-blocks, and then based on the color, texture and shape features extracting from all the sub-blocks, an image are modeled as three different multi-instance bags. Compared with other method, the SPP method is not only simple and efficient, but also more adaptable and robust.A brand new ELM and classifier ensemble based MIL algorithm has been proposed. Firstly, ELM is used to train a group of base classifiers, which the ELM with different number of hidden nodes has been deployed. Secondly, the performance weighting rule is used to determine the weights of the base classifiers dynamically. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first inductive ELM method for the MIL problem with superb efficiency and performance.For demonstrating the promising performance of our method, an extensive comparison work was carried out for evaluating our method with many state-of-the-art MIL approaches in a real-world setting when solving pornographic image recognition problem.The remaining paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, a brief review of recent development of MIL is introduced. Section 3 provides the details of our proposed MIL method, including the multi-instance modeling, metadata extraction, extreme learning machine and classifier ensemble. The experimental results are presented in Section 4 and the Section 5 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we have proposed a new MIL algorithm for pornographic images recognition, named as ELMCE-MIL, which is based on ELM and classifiers ensemble. We have applied SPP method to transform images into three different multi-instance bags based on the extracted low-level visual features (i.e. color moment, LBP texture and HOG shape features). This MIL problem can then be solved by using ELMCE-MIL, which is not only shown its good metadata representation based on fuzzy histogram of VW, but also utilizes the power of ensemble paradigms to achieve strong generalization ability. We also evaluated the performance of ELMCE-MIL on the real condition data set, comparative experimental results show that this algorithm is feasible, and the performance is competitive to other state-of-the-art MIL algorithms.