@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Construction of a technology adoption decision-making model and its extension to understanding herd behavior

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Construct a technology adoption model called the G-WB model.Explore the effect of different parameters on the convergence speed.Demonstrate that our model is an optimal version of the WB model.Extended our model by relaxing certain assumptions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Herd behavior,Information cascade,Observational learning,Sequential decision making,Technology adoption,Waiting strategy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Decision makers often face challenges during the adoption of technology. Indeed, technology adoption usually occurs sequentially, so observational learning can help the decision makers to reach reasonable decisions. In reality, the decision makers may prefer to adopt a waiting strategy when the situation is equivocal. In this study, we construct a technology adoption model called the G-WB model, where we consider a generalized waiting situation based on the Walden–Browne (WB) model. In our model, herd behavior is a difficult issue, but an information cascade occurs after herding appears. We explore the effect of different parameters on the convergence speed and extend our G-WB model. We also demonstrate that observational learning is a useful strategy during sequential decision making and our model is an optimal version of the WB model, which facilitates a better understanding of herding.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Information technology and information system (IT/IS) are now indispensable components of our everyday lives, which are important for improving economic development, the efficiency of work, and the quality of life. However, whether IT plays critical roles depends on people actually adopting technology. Bikhchandani et al. [19], Walden and Browne [11], and Banerjee and Fudenberg [3] studied technology adoption from the perspective of social learning. In the real world, decisions are often made in order in many uncertain situations, which is known as sequential decision-making. Considering the cost of information acquisition, every decision maker may possess a small amount of information. Since the information asymmetry that is at least some relevant information is known to some but not all parties, every decision maker may possess different information. In order to make reasonable decision, decision makers usually acquire from others in the local environment, i.e., social learning.Observational learning is a typical component of social learning. Although observational learning behavior is common, simple, and easily understood, the different approaches to abstract observational learning from real situations may lead to different conclusions. Thus, observational learning models may be based on observing the immediate predecessor, random samples, or aggregation actions.In this study, we mainly consider the role of aggregation actions in observational learning. Many previous studies have addressed this issue. For example, Banerjee [2] found that observing aggregation actions can lead to herd behaviors, i.e. people will be doing what others are doing, which may result in inefficient outcomes. Bikhchandani et al. [19] claimed that human behavior is based on localized conformity (e.g., Americans act like Americans and Germans act like Germans) and the fragility of mass behavior (e.g., the attitude toward cohabiting unmarried couples has changed over time). These characteristics can also be explained by information cascades, which occur when it is optimal for an individual, having observed the actions of those ahead of him/her, to follow the behavior of the preceding individual without regard to his own information. However, Walden and Browne claimed that the concept of fragility is to some degree an artifact of the model employed by Bikhchandani et al. [19] and that other types of fragility may exist. Furthermore, Gale [7] stated that cascades may be fragile or robust depending on many factors, such as whether the signal is continuous or discrete, whether the action space is discrete or continuous, and whether the decision-making queue is endogenous or otherwise. Smith and Sorensen [16] emphasized the difference between information cascades and herd behaviors. In information cascades, the decision makers ignore their private information and copy their predecessors when making decisions. In herd behaviors, the subjects usually make the same decision as others but he/she might not ignore his/her private decisions. Thus, herd behavior is not necessarily the result of an information cascade [5].Many studies have addressed the learning of aggregation actions, but there are different opinions regarding whether herd behaviors will occur, why herd behaviors might emerge, and the robustness of herd behaviors. The different assumptions regarding observational learning behavior have yielded different results. Bikhchandani et al. [19] proposed a discrete signal binary behavior model, where each decision maker has a binary signal, eitherHorL, and a binary decision is made about whether to adopt new technology. Walden and Browne [11] developed an observational learning model based on that described by Bikhchandani et al. [19], where they changed discrete signals into continuous signals. Doong and Ho [23] referred to this as the Walden–Browne (WB) model and they discussed it from a dynamic Bayesian network perspective. In the present study, we also consider the WB model. In all previous models, the decision makers are rational and they make once in a lifetime decisions about whether discrete signals or continuous signals are employed. However, the WB model ignores the possibility that a decision maker may prefer to adopt a waiting strategy if their private signal cannot provide sufficient information and the situation is equivocal, before making a reasonable decision after the situation becomes clearer.Faced with new options, decision makers often stick with the status quo alternative, that is, waiting, doing nothing or maintaining one’s current or previous decision [21]. For example, the development and popularization of the Internet has led to the appearance of social networking platforms such as Twitter and Renren. Initially, when the situation was not clear, many people chose to wait rather than join these networks immediately. And, after waiting for a period of time, the decision makers were likely to choose the social platform selected by most of their friends and herd behaviors may occur.Therefore, in this study, we construct a generalized WB model (G-WB model), where we consider a more general situation for technology adoption and incorporate a waiting strategy. In the G-WB model, as well as selecting a specific technology that is considered to be desirable, the decision makers can wait if they are in a dilemma. We also test the G-WB model with an increased number of decisions to determine whether herd behaviors emerge, as well as addressing the controversial question of the relationship between herding and information cascades. We then investigate the effects of different parameters in our model on the convergence speed. Moreover, we show that the G-WB model is an optimal version of the WB model in terms of both accuracy and robustness. Finally, we extend the model in three respects: (a) decision makers have different preferences; (b) incomplete information is available when the decision makers observe actions in a group; and (c) the decision makers have limited rationality, where we analyze the effects of these changes on convergence.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In the next section, we present background material about IT adoption and social learning. Next, we describe the proposed G-WB model in Section 3. In Section 4, we analyze the G-WB model, before extending this model in Section 5. Finally, we give our conclusions in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Decision makers often face challenges related to technology adoption, but each decision maker possesses little information. The decision makers often adopt technology sequentially and they usually observe the actions of previous decision makers to update their beliefs in order to make reasonable decisions. However, the decision makers may choose to wait when the situation is equivocal. In this study, by combining observational learning and waiting, we have constructed the G-WB model based on the WB model and analyzed its performance in detail. At first, we have reviewed previous studies of technology adoption and social learning. After defining several assumptions and constructing the G-WB model, we have performed simulations to investigate the performance of the G-WB model and reached the following conclusions: (1) Herding is a difficult issue, but an information cascade occurs once when herding emerges; (2) In the G-WB model, various parameters influence the convergence speed; (3) The G-WB model performs better than the WB model in terms of both accuracy and robustness.We have also extended the model in three respects: (1) The different preferences of decision makers; (2) Incomplete information; (3) The decision makers with limited rationality, where we have analyzed their effects on convergence.Perhaps this study is most closely related to the research of Walden and Browne [10]. They construct the WB model and the results suggest that following the behavior of other similarly-situated decision makers can be a very useful strategy in adoption situations in which there is a great deal of uncertainty. However, the biggest different between the study of Walden and Browne [10] and ours is that we have considered a more generalized situation for constructing G-WB model, which allows the decision makers to wait if they are in a dilemma, and demonstrated that G-WB model is better than the WB model in terms of both accuracy and robustness. Second, we have clarified the relationship between herd behaviors and information cascades. Third we have extended our model by relaxing certain assumptions and analyzed the different influences on convergence.Technology revolution is the result of one new technology’s widely adoption and the wash out of others. Take fierce format war for example. In order to meet the demand of high-capacity data storage and the high definition entertainment, two new formats were designed to supersede the standard DVD format. One is HD DVD (short for High Definition Digital Video Disc) supported principally by Toshiba, the other is Blu-ray Disc (BD) supported by Sony. The first BD-Rom players (Samsung BD-P1000) were shipped in mid-June 2006, the first mass-market Blu-ray Disc rewritable drive for the PC was the BWU-100A, released by Sony on July 18, 2006 and on November 11, 2006, SCE (Sony Computer Entertainment Inc) released the PlayStation3 which was the first console with Blu-ray Disc player. Meanwhile, Toshiba released the HD DVD players in Japan and the Home game consoles Xbox 360 with external HD DVD player were published by Microsoft. Facing with two new technologies, there are three choices for consumers. Some of people adopted BD and a small group of people adopted the HD DVD, however the most people chose to wait. After a period of stalemate, BD hold 90% of the next generation disc market in Japan, and more than 66% of that in America. In Europe, the sales of BD kept head of the sales of HD DVD in the ratio of 3 to 1. In February 2008, Toshiba abandoned the HD DVD format, announcing it would no longer develop nor manufacture HD DVD. The HD DVD Promotion Group was dissolved on March 28, 2008. Nowadays, the Blu-ray Disc has been wildly used and developed well.The format war is just one example of new technology adopting process. The best explain of the stalemate are observational learning and the waiting choice. When facing two or more than two new technologies, a large group of people in practice have little private information would choose to wait. After a period of observational learning, the large group of decision makers who chose to wait at first start to make the reasonable decisions they believed in. Since the observational learning is a useful strategy, the better technology is rapidly adopted and the others would be vanished. Thus, herd behaviors occur. According to the relationship between herd behaviors and information cascades, we claim that there must be initiated information cascades.Because it’s difficult for us to get the detailed data of the two technologies (BD and HD DVD), such as parameters ofμA,μBandσ, so we turn to analyze the format war descriptively. Once we obtain the terminal data of two technologies, we could estimate the parameters mentioned in G-WB model, investigate the convergence of the two technologies and test the accuracy of the G-WB model. Thus, we can examine whether the G-WB model is well used in practice empirically.This paper has verified the efficiency of observational learning in technology adoption. However, we don’t know the performance of expert advising in our paper structure, since the expert advising is one of important factors in technology adoption. So we look forward to what would happen considering the expert advising and make a comparison between expert advising and observational learning in future research. What’s more, waiting has no cost in our paper, whereas the decision makers may pay to wait [22]. Therefore, how to make G-WB model more perfect is also our further research.