@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Building the meaning of preference from logical paired structures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose paired structures to represent the meaning/use of preference.Preference models are logically and semantically characterized by paired structures.The semantics of reciprocal preferences reduces to strict preference.The P–A is the only preference model distinguishing between need and desire.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Knowledge representation,Meaning of concepts,Neutrality,Paired structures,Preference,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Making decisions by learning preferences requires to consider semantical aspects dealing with the meaning and use of the preference concept. Examining recent developments on bipolarity, where concepts are measured/verified regarding a pair of opposite poles, we focus on the dialectic process by which the meaning of concepts emerges. Our proposal is based on the neutrality in between the opposite poles, such that a basic type of structure is used to characterize in logical terms the concepts and the knowledge that they generate. In this paper we model the meaning of concepts by paired structures, and apply these structures for learning and building the different meanings of preference for decision making.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Concepts allow understanding the multiple stimuli and perceptions coming from reality, organizing and giving sense to all the relevant information surrounding us. In this sense, the meaning/use of concepts can be verified by data, based on a valuation structure specifically designed for such verification process.In psychology (see e.g. [9,29,37]), the meaning of concepts is generally developed on a semantic theory which became a corner-stone in economic and decision models (see e.g. [27,51]) dealing with subjective measurements of attitudes and perceptions. This semantic theory (initially stated in [37]), considers the polarity of concepts and the neutrality that holds in between, such that any concept is understood in relation to its positive and negative poles. The relation among opposite poles, examined under the term bipolarity[14,15], basically entails either a reciprocity or non-reciprocity among poles, where the former is commonly associated to a bipolar univariate model, and the latter to a unipolar bivariate one (see e.g. [26]).In a general sense, bipolarity refers to the meaning of concepts and the nature of positive and negative knowledge. Hence, it is deeply related with that which we consider to be valid or even relevant knowledge. Take for example the intuitionistic philosophical–mathematical position (referring to a position defended in the last 19th and early 20th century by H. Poicaré and L.E.J. Brouwer), where the truth/provability of P can only be associated to the explicit mathematical construction of P. In consequence, the proof of the impossibility of P cannot be taken as the proof of its negative affirmation not-P[5], unless a certain reciprocity between P and not-P is assumed (this led to a philosophical discussion on the validity of the principle of the excluded middle, where it holds either P or not-P, and of some mathematical demonstrations that make use of it, like e.g. the existence of non-denumerable sets).Now consider the meaning of gains and losses and how these concepts can be used in natural language. Consider a situation where we have the amount of 100c, and make a bet where we lose 20c and end up with 80c. Then it can be said that “we have losses of 20c”. Now assume that we make a bet planning to win 100c more, but fail to win, although we manage to keep the initial 100c we started with. Then, if we understand that everything that is not gains automatically becomes losses, it could be said that“we have losses of 100c”, even though we keep the same 100c that we started with. But if we distinguish between gains, not-gains, losses and not-losses, then, for the second case, it can be said (with proper sense) that “we have not gained 100c” and that “we have no losses”.As it has been recently stated in decision theory and mathematical literature (see e.g. [14,26]), the bipolar univariate model makes use of a one-dimensional scale whose end-points are opposite references. These references are taken to be reciprocal, such that the known value of one of them entails (by complementation) the value of the other. Then, in the univariate model the measurement of the meaning of a concept can be negative, neutral (neither negative nor positive) or positive. In consequence, its meaning cannot be positive and negative at the same time. On the other hand, the unipolar bivariate model allows a more general measurement, based on two unipolar scales respectively measuring positive and negative aspects, such that the concept can have a positive, negative, neither positive nor negative, or both positive and negative meanings at the same time.At the current state of things, bipolarity has been examined following a typology where bipolarity types I, II and III are proposed [14,15]. The first two respectively refer to the above mentioned univariate and bivariate models, while the third one stands as a proposal on its own (it still remains to be further explored, as suggested in [35,39]). At first instance, type III bipolarity seems to refer to a bivariate model with more than one pair of opposite references, possibly describing the different and non-reciprocal sources of information by the multiple dimensions building up the meaning of concepts. As it seems, this third type is the most general setting for modeling complex concepts, due to the fact that the meaning of concepts emerges from the multiple positive and aversive stimuli composing perceptions and emotions [4,8,45]. Then, the different neutral states holding in between the opposite poles play a determinant role for understanding the respective concepts, configuring a pertinent valuation structure for explaining the available data.From a general perspective, building the valuation structure for measuring the meaning of concepts entails that negative information/evidence exists independently from the positive one (i.e., from the intuitionistic point of view, the construction of a proof on the impossibility of P does not imply having a proof for the affirmation of not-P). Hence, as a consequence of such independence, an unavoidable step in order to understand concepts and reality is to modelize the neutral states that arise in between such opposites, not necessarily assuming a reciprocal relation between the positive and the negative information/evidence.For example, the meaning of a reference concept C can be examined by its decomposition into the pairs Q and V, but also into pairs A and Z (and notice that any pole/concept, such as Q and V, is at the same time susceptible of being further decomposed, e.g. intoQ+,Q-andV+,V-, respectively). Here, let C=“preference”, such that C can be understood regarding its decomposition into the opposite poles/concepts of Q=“desire” and V=“non-desire”, but also regarding the poles/concepts of A=“desire”, and Z=“rejection”, or even W=“want” and N=“need” (this example will be developed along the paper, extending the initial proposal of [21]). Notice that under the univariate model (bipolarity type I), the verification of C can only occur with respect to a given pair such as Q and V, where it can never hold that C is both Q and V. Then, if the ambivalence between Q and V should be represented, where C can be both Q and V, an independent non-reciprocal measurement of both Q and V would be required, and the same happens for A and Z, and for any other pair of meaningful opposites (a term firstly introduced in [37]), where such complexity builds on as much as it is required.Hence, given a pair of opposite references and their associated poles representing antagonistic[40] perceptions of reality, the meaning of concepts is represented based on the same cognitive-emotional process of the brain and its treatment of pleasant and aversive stimuli. In fact, it has been observed by neurologists that such stimuli are processed separately in different physical areas of the brain (see e.g. [36,52]), as two independent perceptions, even combining both types of stimuli through distinct neural networks causing reactions and emotions leading to specific behaviors [2,10,30,53]. In this sense, different pleasant and unpleasant affective components of the same sensory stimulus may provide the inputs of human decision making [25]. In decision theory, some well-known examples referring to bipolar knowledge are Prospect Theory [28,51], the Choquet integral with respect to bi-capacities [27], and Partial Comparability Theory [42,48–50].In this paper we examine paired structures[32] for the representation of bipolar knowledge and its role for subjective decision making. Paired structures allow representing and measuring the meaning of concepts, without imposing linearity among their associated opposite poles as it occurs in the (univariate/type-I) bipolar model [14,26,37]. Therefore, by means of paired structures, the verification/measurement of the meaning of a concept can be properly computed, where the semantics of the valuation structure is well specified regarding the relation among opposites together with their characteristic neutrality. We stress the point that neutrality in our sense should not be confused with the neutral element of bipolar valuation scales [14,26,37], as the neutral category we refer to characterizes the semantic relation between poles.In order to specify the semantic structure of bipolar models and learn the meaning of concepts, we present in Section 2 the basic and necessary notions regarding the proposal of paired structures. Then in Section 3 we model preferences with paired structures, examining in Section 4 extended preference structures and their characterization of conflicting situations. Then we recapitulate by exploring a numerical example in Section 5 for making sense of data and learning preferences for decision making. Finally we give some final comments for future research.Bipolar scales (in the traditional sense of [14,26,37]) have been used to measure the meaning of concepts. Here we examine both the representation and the measurement of the meaning of concepts under the building process of paired structures. From this standpoint, a representation process refers to the meaning/use of stimuli correlating with perceptions and concepts, while a measurement process refers to the meaning/use of concepts for making observations and verifying their occurrence.Based on this representation of meaning, opposite paired concepts (Q,V) emerge[6] from an initial ignorance category Ω, which is taken here as the point of departure of any learning process [33]. This is the basic structure supporting the paired structures, allowing making sense of data according to the different neutral situations emerging jointly with the opposite poles and their particular semantic relation (see Fig. 1).Then, observations can be collected and measured with proper sense, being valued according to the previous specification of the semantical structure and the meaning of the concept giving sense to them (the observations or the objects of interest). This enables the model to have a proper valuation scale to fulfill its purposes, where a specific metric can be considered for capturing the distance between poles and their respective values.From a general perspective, different types of opposition may hold among paired concepts. The main argument here consists in characterizing the relation among paired concepts according to their semantic relation. In this way, three different types of neutrality can be identified regarding paired concepts or opposite poles, namely indeterminacy, ambivalence and conflict. The first type refers to the situation where both poles are insufficient for covering the whole evaluation space, being there a space in between where no valuation can be given to the object. The second type refers to overlapping concepts (see e.g. [7]), such that the object is associated to both poles simultaneously. In this sense, under both types of neutrality a new middle category/concept is required, but the reasons for doing so are different. If it is because of indeterminacy, then the object cannot be properly explained given the pair of poles. If it is because of ambivalence, the object may then be explained by both poles. Anyway, in both situations the neutral concept emerges because of the specific semantic relation among poles. Besides those two types of neutralities, there is a third one, where poles hold a conflictive relation. This is typical of multi-criteria decision modeling (see e.g. [42]) and the representation of complex concepts [24].Therefore, taking these basic types of neutrality, it is stated that neutral concepts can only emerge when dealing with paired concepts, defined here as two logically independent poles. Take for example the case of a predicate Q=“more desired than”, where its complement is given byV=n(Q)≡not-Q. However, V, the complement of Q, is not logically independent from Q, since it does not define a different concept from Q (nor does it offer any additional information on Q, see also [33]). Complementation constitutes a very specific semantic relation that refers to the verification or lack of verification of a single concept, since the verification of Q corresponds to the reciprocal verification of V. E.g., measuring preference by Q=“desire” and V=“non-desire” (as in utility theory [1,13]), preference is represented by means of a single concept of desire, with two complementary references Q and V (where only one single notion is being measured). Hence, if Q holds, then V does not hold, such that there is no space for any other concept, since both Q and V represent in a precise and complementary form the references covering the whole evaluation space.On the other hand, consider a given pair of non complementary poles(Q,V), such that their semantic relation can be modeled by some duality operator δ, such thatQ=δ(V)andV=δ(Q)(see e.g. [40,46,47]). Firstly, it can be that both poles are related through an antonym[46] or sub-additive duality operatorδA, such thatQ=δA(V). Here,δAis sub-additive with respect to the complement operator defined by a strong negation n, such that for anyQ,δA(Q)⊂n(Q). Then, both poles are logically independent in the sense that each pole is contained in the complement of the other, so either pole cannot be obtained from the other by means of a logical operation. Rather, both poles are semantically dependent, as they are paired through a semantic operation or duality. A pair of opposite concepts related in this way are referred to as paired concepts, giving rise to neutral categories within the paired structure they define [32]. Particularly, under the sub-additive nature ofδA, there is a space in between poles and objects may fail to verify either pole, being there indeterminacy.Secondly, it can be that both poles are related through an over-additive duality operatorδD, such thatV=δD(Q). Here,δDis over-additive in the sense that for anyQ,n(Q)⊂δD(Q). Then, both poles are also logically independent, leaving no space in between because of overlap or redundancy among them. Again, both poles are opposite due to a semantic argument suggesting a new neutral category within the paired structure. Given the over-additive nature ofδD, objects might verify both poles due to the redundancy between them, being there ambivalence.These two types of neutrality, namely indeterminacy and ambivalence, in fact emerging from the opposition of two dual poles, model a simple meaning for concepts, i.e., they refer to concepts based on a simple, 1-dimensional attribute/criterion or characteristic. Nonetheless, poles may refer to a multi-dimensional decomposition of the complex meaning of concepts. Regarding this type of complex dual concepts, conflict emerges from the verification of a pair of poles resulting from the aggregation of several simpler concepts. Therefore, conflict exists whenever positive and negative arguments (e.g. evidence acting in favor and against) on both poles are simultaneously given under different and independent criteria.In this way, complex concepts admit a particular kind of conflictive meaning, building on the neutrality associated to simpler paired concepts. Thus, poles are entities associated to dual concepts harvesting families of independent arguments, such that different kinds of conflict are expected to exist in higher multi-dimensional problems. Besides, different types of neutrality may simultaneously appear in the same paired structure, as a consequence of the particular semantic relationship between poles (notice that general duality operators are not constrained to be strictly sub-additive or over-additive). This will become clear in the following sections, where different kinds of conflict emerge from preference modeling and a multi-dimensional decision framework.In this Section we examine different logical models of preference based on paired structures, offering a general framework for the evaluation of decision alternatives according to a pair of semantic opposite poles and their associated neutrality. The (bi) polar and neutral components of such paired structures define an evaluation space for exploring the subjective decision process, characterizing preference according to its type of semantics. Such evaluation space is also relevant for addressing the pertinence of different models to represent the decision problem and build reliable decision support.From a cognitive perspective, preference structures allow absorbing and organizing the available information, with the purpose of building some informed judgment on a decision problem and act upon it. Hence, the description and solution of the decision problem depends on the semantics assigned to the preference predicate, i.e., on its subjacent valuation structure and the different components that form the conceptual figure of preference (just as paired structures model the figure of knowledge according to the meaning of simple and complex concepts). Here we explore a framework based on paired structures, where the meaning of the preference predicate can be characterized according to its decomposition into binary relations representing either pole of preference, or some situation of (decision) neutrality.Exploring the genealogy of preference models in decision theory, preference structures allow decomposing the meaning of the preference predicate into different binary relations, ordering a set of alternatives according to their relative situations of dominance and/or indifference. For example, in classical preference models (mainly the first axiomatic models of economic utility theory [44,54]), preference is characterized as the property of being “more desired than”, which is represented by the strict preference relation P; but preference can also refer to the property of being “at least as desired as” [41], which is represented by a weak preference relation R, considered as a large relation in the sense that it can be decomposed into strict preference (P) and indifference I, the latter referring to the property of being “as desired as”.Different semantics can be assigned to the preference predicate depending on the general purpose of the model, obtaining a different order on the set of alternatives. From this standpoint, understanding preference refers to the structural decomposition of its meaning and the way in which those components relate between themselves, just as the meaning of an expression forces us to consider, besides the words alone, the expression as a whole. Then, regarding the classical structure〈P,I〉, the meaning of R is captured between the two semantic categories of P andP-1, according to which the alternatives are valued and organized. In this sense, taking a set of alternatives X, for any pair of alternativesx,y∈X,P=P(x,y)and its inverseP-1=P(y,x)can be understood as two opposite poles under a paired structure, being limit categories of an evaluation space for measuring the meaning of preference.Focusing on the classical structure, I holds only if neither P norP-1hold, being I a middle category defined by exclusion, thus expressing neutrality due to indeterminacy. Here, P andP-1are respectively associated with positive and negative evidence for affirming that one alternative is better than the other one, representing a pair of opposite reference poles of preference, denoted in general by (Q,V). Then, if it holds that,(1)Q=P,and(2)V=P-1,then the classical structure understands indifference as a situation of indeterminacy, such thatQ∩V=∅andQ∪V⊆U, where U is the universe of discourse, typically taken in preference theory [16,41] asU=X2.Notice here that the nature of indifference obeys to the semantic relation among poles/paired concepts. In this sense, poles can also be associated to overlapping concepts. This is represented through the assignation of R andR-1to the respective opposite poles, such that,(3)Q=R,and(4)V=R-1,where it holds thatI=Q∩V≠∅andQ∪V=U.Then, the overlap among poles occurs in a compatible/redundant manner, due to the semantic nature of the weak preference predicate and its decomposition into paired overlapping concepts. Thus, it is a semantic argument which allows distinguishing between indifference as a situation of indeterminacy, defined by exclusion among poles (1) and (2), or as a situation of ambivalence, defined by the overlap among poles (3) and (4). As shown in Fig. 2, the valuation scale associated to the classical preference structure corresponds with a univariate type-I bipolar scale (in the sense of [14,26,37]), but owes its semantics to the paired structure being considered in each case from its initial ignorance state Ω and the respective paired concepts.Consider now the case of logically dependent poles Q and V, such that(5)Q=n(V),where we have a single concept Q and its complementationV=n(Q). In this case, it holds thatQ=P, such thatV=P-1=n(P). Then, there is no place for any neutrality, given thatQ∩V=∅but at the same timeQ∪V=U. Notice that if we make the assignation ofQ=RandV=R-1=n(R)(i.e., defining R as a reciprocal relation [12,55]), it would hold thatR=P∪I, but thenn(R)=P-1, from where it follows thatR=n(n(R))=(P-1)-1=Pdue to the involutive character of n. As a result, there is no place for indifference as a neutral category if the poles of preference are complementary, being there a binary unipolar model where either P orP-1holds, as in traditional utility models where something is either desired/useful or not [44,54].On the other hand, in the case of standard preference structures [41], indifference is not the only neutral situation in between poles. This is because the classical restriction(6)R∪R-1=Uis not assumed to hold anymore in this standard context.Then, for any pair of alternativesx,y∈X, if neither R norR-1hold, then x and y are said to be incomparable. In this way, the situation of incomparability exists as a second neutral category besides the one of indifference, such that(7)J=n(R)∩n(R-1).Notice that the relation of incomparability (7) agrees with a situation where any type of comparability is negated, such that no evidence can be found for affirming R. In this sense, incomparability refers to a situation where no perception of desire can be found. In terms of our semantic paired structures, incomparability represents a category of neutrality due to indeterminacy, where alternatives fail to verify either pole or their neutral overlapping concept. Thus, incomparability is defined by exclusion under the standard model (as argued in [34]), such that(8)J=n(R∪R-1)=n(P∪P-1∪I).As it is shown in Fig. 3, the situations of strict preference (P andP-1) stand opposite to each other, while neutrality is now understood according to two different concepts, namely incomparability due to indeterminacy and indifference due to ambivalence. The valuation scale that is associated to this paired structure consists in a bivariate scale [26], in the sense that both states I and J are included in the evaluation space.Now, under a more general framework, more than one attribute/criterion may exist for evaluating the set of alternatives. Under such multi-criteria setting, incomparability emerges not as the absence of evidence, but as a situation revealing the impossibility for affirming preference on the alternatives. Such impossibility refers to conflicting or contradictory evidence, when the meaning of preference is decomposed into several dimensions/criteria.In consequence, regarding a complex meaning for preference, incomparability consists in a type of neutrality that emerges from the existence of at least two criteria, such that their verification implies conflict (see e.g. [42]). The paired structure for analyzing this scenario builds a more complex meaning from the paired concepts R andR-1. Next we analyze this scenario by examining the semantics of extended preference structures, where dual concepts in fact harvest families of independent arguments giving rise to different kinds of conflict.Partial Comparability Theory (PCT) [42,48] has been introduced in the multiple criteria framework together with the principle of concordance/discordance[48,50], building an extended preference structure by gathering evidence in favor and against alternatives. Here we have a set of criteria, where each criterion harvests positive and negative arguments/evidence in favor and against the alternatives. Hence, the joint consideration of opposing arguments gives rise to different kinds of conflict.Under this approach of the 4-PCT model [48,49], the meaning of R is represented in a different way from the one of the previously examined classical and standard structures. In this way, for every pairx,y∈X, the existence of positive and negative evidence for affirmingR(x,y)is verified according to a (positive) preference predicateQ(x,y)=“x is at least as desired as y” and its inverseQ(y,x), as in the previous standard and classical models, but now it also takes into account an opposite (negative) preference predicateV(x,y)=“x is at least as non-desired as y” (and its inverseV(y,x)) [38,49]. Based on Belnap’s logic and the use of bilattices (see e.g. [3,23]),Q(x,y)andV(x,y)are associated to one of the four statesRt(x,y),Rf(x,y),Ru(x,y)andRk(x,y)(see Fig. 4), where alternatives are valued on a bilattice resembling a bivariate scale in the sense of [26,29]. Hence, R has associated a pair of concepts Q and V, such that Q is logically independent from V (i.e., either one cannot be obtained from the other), as in(9)V=δ(Q).The representation of〈Q,V〉according to (9) allows evaluating conflicting or contradictory evidence based on the separate measurement of V and its conjunctive aggregation with Q. Here, due to the fact thatV≠Q-1, the aggregation of dual/antagonistic components should follow a different procedure than the one of dual/inverse ones. Hence, in order to acknowledge the dual-antagonistic aggregation procedure, and distinguish it from the dual-inverse one, take the conjunction operator∩δfor the dual/antagonistic procedure, aggregating dual-antagonistic relations such asQ∩δV, and leave the conjunction operator∩for aggregating dual-inverse relations, such asQ∩Q-1.Then, for everyx,y∈X,Rtholds if alternatives verify the positive pole Q and not the negative pole V, such that,(10)Rt(x,y)=Q(x,y)∩δn(V(x,y));Rfholds ifn(Q)and V are verified, such that(11)Rf(x,y)=n(Q(x,y))∩δV(x,y);Ruholds ifn(Q)andn(V)are verified, such that(12)Ru(x,y)=n(Q(x,y))∩δn(V(x,y));andRkholds if Q and V are verified, such that(13)Rk(x,y)=Q(x,y)∩δV(x,y).Therefore, the 4-PCT model represents the complete meaning of R according to the four-valued extension of〈Q,V〉={Rt,Rf,Ru,Rk}and its inverse〈Q-1,V-1〉={R-t,R-f,R-u,R-k}, whereR-t(x,y)=Rt(y,x),R-f(x,y)=Rf(y,x),R-u(x,y)=Ru(y,x)andR-k(x,y)=Rk(y,x), such that the PCT preference structure(14)RPCT=〈i,q,h,p,r,s,l,j,w,v〉,is defined for everyx,y∈Xby [49],•Indifference:i(x,y)=Rt(x,y)∩R-t(x,y).Weak indifference:q(x,y)=Rk(x,y)∩R-k(x,y).Semi-indifference:h(x,y)=Rt(x,y)∩R-k(x,y).Strict preference:p(x,y)=Rt(x,y)∩R-f(x,y).Weak preference:r(x,y)=Rk(x,y)∩R-f(x,y).Semi-preference:s(x,y)=Rt(x,y)∩R-u(x,y).Semi-weak-preference:l(x,y)=Rk(x,y)∩R-u(x,y).Incomparability:j(x,y)=Rf(x,y)∩R-f(x,y).Weak incomparability:w(x,y)=Ru(x,y)∩R-u(x,y).Semi-incomparability:v(x,y)=Ru(x,y)∩R-f(x,y).The PCT preference structureRPCTidentifies ten basic relations (characterizing sixteen different decision situations), extending the standard framework of(P,I,J). In this sense, preference P, indifference I and incomparability J are now respectively understood regarding the states (p,r,s,l), (i,q,h), and (j,w,v). The complete figure of knowledge resulting from the complex meaning of preference according to the 4-PCT model is shown in Fig. 5.Next, we explore the P–A model [19,20], where a different order of aggregation is developed on〈Q,Q-1〉and〈V,V-1〉, obtaining a different meaning of preference.On the contary to the 4-PCT model, where Q and V are aggregated first and then decomposed into the PCT preference structure, complex paired concepts can also be aggregated once their respective decomposition into simple concepts has been undertaken. In this sense, preference can be understood regarding a pair of concepts/poles Q=“desire” and V=“rejection”, such that each pole is independently decomposed into their respective standard structures. Then, a more complex meaning can be obtained by aggregating both opposite structures. This can be examined as in the Preference-Aversion (P–A) model [19,20], where negative and positive arguments are independently weighed regarding the properties of being “at least as desired” and “at least as rejected”.In this way, the decomposition ofR=〈Q,V〉is firstly understood with respect to the paired (inverse) concepts of desireQ=RandQ-1=R-1, obtaining relations(P,I,J)as in the standard structure, and in an analogous manner, to the paired (inverse) concepts of rejection V andV-1, obtaining the relations of strict aversion Z, aversion indifference G, and aversion incomparability H[18,19]. As shown in Fig. 6, the independent representation of each pole/concept and its separate decomposition into standard structures〈P,I,J〉and〈Z,G,H〉, allows the P–A model to measure the complex meaning of R, such that(15)RP–A=〈Q,V〉=(〈P,I,J〉,〈Z,G,H〉).Then, the aggregation of these two separate structures under a dual-antagonistic process results in the P–A preference structure(16)RP–A=〈P,I,J〉∩δ〈Z,G,H〉,such thatRP–A=〈PZ,PA,PG,PH,IZ,IG,IH,JZ,JG,JH〉, where•Conflict-ambivalence:PZ=P∩δZ.Strong preference:PA=P∩δZ-1.Semi-strong preference:PH=P∩δH.Pseudo preference:PG=P∩δG.Pseudo aversion:IZ=I∩δZ.Strong indifference:IG=I∩δG.Positive indifference:IH=I∩δH.Negative indifference:JG=J∩δG.Semi-strong aversion:JZ=J∩δZ.Strong incomparability:JH=J∩δH.Based onRP–A(see Fig. 7), the meaning of R is represented regarding PA and nine neutral conflicting relations of indifference(IG,IH,IZ), preference(PZ,PH,PG)and incomparability(JG,JZ,JH).Therefore, what sets the PCT and P–A preference structures apart (besides the differences in the linguistic definition of Q and V) is the order of aggregation among paired concepts. That is, based on the decomposition of R into Q and V, and following the semantic argument under the representation of paired structures (9), the procedure for building the P–A structure can also be understood as given by the expression,(17)RP–A=(Q∩Q-1)∩δ(V∩V-1).On the other hand, the procedure for building the PCT structure can similarly be understood as given by the expression,(18)RPCT=(Q∩δV)∩(Q-1∩δV-1).The PCT and P–A structures differ in their semantics due to their characteristic aggregation procedures for constructing the meaning of preference. In fact, both structures are equivalent if, and only if, the semantic symmetric conditionV=Q-1holds.Theorem 1The PCT and P–A preference structures are equivalent if and only if the semantic symmetric conditionV=Q-1holds.Taking the sixteen different situations of both preference structures, the following assignation holds true if and only ifV=Q-1holds, where∩δ=∩:(1)The P–A situation of ambivalencePZ=(Q∩n(Q-1))∩δ(V∩n(V-1)), and the PCT situation of indifferencei=(Q∩δn(V))∩(Q-1∩δn(V-1)). Only if the semantic symmetric condition holds, thenPZ=(Q∩n(Q-1))∩(Q-1∩n(Q))=ialso holds.The P–A situation of pseudo aversionIZ=(Q∩Q-1)∩δ(V∩n(V-1)), and the PCT situation of semi-indifferenceh-1=(Q-1∩δn(V-1))∩(Q∩δV). Only if the semantic symmetric condition holds, thenIZ=(Q∩Q-1)∩(Q-1∩n(Q))=(Q-1∩n(Q))∩(Q∩Q-1)=h-1also holds.The P–A situation of semi-strong aversionJZ=(n(Q)∩n(Q-1))∩δ(V∩n(V-1)), and the PCT situation of semi-preferences-1=(Q-1∩δn(V-1))∩(n(Q)∩δn(V)). Only if the semantic symmetric condition holds, thenJZ=(n(Q)∩n(Q-1))∩(Q-1∩n(Q))=(Q-1∩n(Q))∩(n(Q)∩n(Q-1))=s-1also holds.The same can be affirmed for relations PA andp;PGandh;PHands;PA-1andp-1;PZ-1andj;PG-1andr-1;PH-1andv-1;IZ-1andr;IGandq;IHandl;JZ-1andv;JGandl-1; and JH and w. □Under the semantic equivalence given by Theorem 1, it follows that both the PCT and P–A structures collapse into the standard representation of R, where all other situations remain as unresolved conflict on the verification of a specific situation of〈P,I,J〉, such as,(19)PZ=i=(Q∩n(Q-1))∩(Q-1∩n(Q))=P∩P-1,(20)IZ=h-1=(Q∩Q-1)∩(Q-1∩n(Q))=I∩P-1,(21)JZ=s-1=(n(Q)∩n(Q-1))∩(Q-1∩n(Q))=J∩P-1,or(22)IH=l=(Q∩Q-1)∩(n(Q-1)∩n(Q))=I∩J.Corollary 2The PCT and P–A preference structures collapse into the standard structure〈P,I,J〉under the semantic symmetric conditionV=Q-1.As a result, it holds that(23)IG=q=I,(24)PA=p=P,and(25)JH=w=J.Even more, if it holds the semantic reciprocal condition(26)V=Q-1=n(Q),then the meaning of R collapses intoR=〈P〉.Theorem 3The semantics of R reduces to〈P〉if the semantic reciprocal conditionV=Q-1=n(Q)holds.Under the semantic symmetric condition, we know that the meaning of R refers to the standard structure〈P,I,J〉. Then, if the reciprocal condition holds, it also holds that indifference and incomparability collapse under the same relation, such thatI=Q∩Q-1=n(Q-1)∩n(Q)=J. But ifR=〈P,I〉, it then holds thatV=R-1=n(R)=P-1, from where it follows thatR=n(n(R))=(P-1)-1=P. □In consequence, if the semantic reciprocal condition holds, then the meaning of R reduces to that of P, being there no space for a neutral category in between poles of preference.Let us now turn our attention to another kind of preference structure, namely the need-preference structure, and how paired structures allow examining its particular semantics.Reviewing the classical preference models (see e.g. [1,13]), the meaning of preference has been used referring to the general satisfaction of both desires/wants and needs without distinguishing between both. In this sense, the classical and standard approaches do not allow distinguishing between that which is preferred because it is wanted, not rejected or even needed. It has been argued (see [19,22]) that solving decision problems for the individual requires considering both wants and needs. Here we examine the meaning of preference such that its component of need can be appropriately represented for its respective measurement.In order to distinguish between wants and needs, the preference relation R should be decomposed into the concepts ofW=“want” andN=“need”. Notice that need N, refers to that which cannot be rejected because of its basic character, like e.g. people needing basic nutrients for their vital subsistence. Then, the concept of need refers to a basic want which is constrained by that which is not needed. In this sense, the paired concepts holding a conflicting relation under (9) are those of W andn(N), such thatn(W)⊆δ(W)=n(N).Referring to the need-preference structure [19], the meaning of preference can be understood according to the conflict emerging between wants and needs, where(27)N⊆W.In this way, W and N are respectively defined with respect to the opposite poles of preference Q=“want/desire” and V=“rejection”, such that (see again [19,20])(28)W=Qand(29)N=Q∩δn(V).It can be shown that the representation ofR=〈W,N〉can be successfully developed under the P–A model and its characteristic dual-antagonistic aggregation procedure (17), such that N does not result in strict preference as in the classical, standard or PCT models.Theorem 4Given the classical, standard, PCT and P–A preference structures, the need(29)component of R can be distinguished from strict preference only under the dual-antagonistic aggregation procedure of the P–A structure.Following the classical and standard preference structures (3) and (4), it holds thatN=Q∩n(V)=R∩n(R-1)=P, being N indistinguishable from strict preference P. On the other hand, regarding the PCT structure, it holds thatN=Q∩δn(V)=Rt, which is re-affirmed by the inverse verification ofR-f=n(Q-1)∩δV-1, such thatN=Rt∩R-f=p, being N indistinguishable from strict preference p. On the contrary, under the P–A structure, it holds thatN=Q∩δn(V)=〈P,I〉∩δ〈Z-1,H〉, whereN=〈PA,PH,IZ-1,IH〉. Thus, N refers to any of the four relationsPA,PH,IZ-1,IH. □Based on the need component of preference, it is possible to learn a priority order by assigning an overall value of necessity to every alternative. In order to illustrate the learning procedure, and recapitulate the different meanings for preference as it has been examined in the last two sections, a general example is explored next.Consider a decision problem consisting in finding a decent place to live, where the alternatives arex1=“buying”,x2=“renting” or making part of ax3=“cooperative”. Then, the matrix M holds different data regarding the housing options, where alternatives are measured with respect to three (equally weighted) criteria ofc1=“risk perception”,c2=“price level” andc3=“general comfort”, such that the elementm(i,j)=[mijL,mijU]in M stands for the interval score of alternativexiregarding criterioncj, wherei={1,2,3}andj={1,2,3}. Then, data have to be somehow handled to assess the individual’s decision and solve the problem in a satisfactory way.(30)M=[0.54,0.92][0.89,0.95][0.82,0.99][0.30,0.41][0.74,0.96][0.56,0.73][0.62,0.99][0.76,0.85][0.73,0.99].The elements of M are normalized interval scores for the alternatives, consisting in lower and upper bounded estimations on the alternatives’ degree of verification of the given criteria. Notice here that criteriac1andc2are perceived in a negative way, such that the greater the score, the lower the suitability of alternatives. Hence, alternatives are chosen by maximizing their suitability regardingn(c1),n(c2)andc3, where the scores of alternativesxion criterian(cj)are taken under the transformation given byn(mij)=[n(mijU),n(mijL)].Firstly, taking the classical structure, preference is understood regarding the paired concepts ofQ=PandV=P-1. Then, alternatives are evaluated according to both poles by a given valuation function. In this way, by defining P for every pair of alternativesxi,xk∈Xand criteriacj∈C, such that(31)Pcj(xi,xk)⇔mi,jL>mk,jU,otherwiseIcj(xi,xk),we obtain e.g. thatPc1(x2,x1),Pc1(x2,x3)andIc1(x1,x3)hold. In this case, I is the situation that emerges as indeterminacy between the two opposite and non-overlapping poles of P andP-1.Secondly, taking the standard structure, preference is decomposed into the paired concepts ofQ=RandV=R-1. Hence, by defining R for everyxi,xk∈Xandcj∈C, such that(32)Rcj(xi,xk)⇔mi,jU>mk,jL,we obtain e.g. thatRc1(x2,x1),Rc1(x2,x3),Rc1(x1,x3)andRc1(x3,x1)hold, such thatPc1(x2,x1),Pc1(x2,x3)andIc1(x1,x3)hold in consequence. In this case, the same results as with the classical structure are obtained, but I is this time a situation that emerges as ambivalence between the two opposite and overlapping poles of R andR-1.Therefore, notice that under the paired concepts ofP,P-1, either P orP-1holds, and I is obtained by exclusion when neither pole can be verified. On the other hand, under the paired concepts ofR,R-1, both R andR-1may hold, such that I is obtained from the overlap between poles. In this sense, under the standard structure and regarding a single criterion, the category of incomparability J holds (by exclusion, if no comparisons are available) every time that there is missing information in the data matrix M (a common assumption in literature, see e.g. [31]). Then, if there is no evidence for either pole, J would hold given that it is not possible to assign any other category to the respective pair of alternatives. But considering several criteria simultaneously, where it holds e.g. thatPc1(x2,x1)andPc3(x1,x2), then the impossibility for assigning either pole follows a different semantic argument, being there conflict amongx1andx2. This is a situation that is faithfully represented by extended preference structures. Let us study next its application to this example.Regarding the interval data of M, one would be tempted to assign positive and negative poles Q and V such thatQ=RandV=R-1, but then the model would collapse into the standard one (as previously noted [20]). The key issue here is that positive and negative information are independent arguments that should be considered separately for their proper representation. A pertinent representation determines the means to measure the evidence for making sense of data. Thus, each criterion can be considered as a source of information containing both positive and negative aspects, where e.g., too much risk can be rejected but a small risk can be desired; everyone wants a low price, but at the same time a low price entails lower quality and a higher price may offer better services; or too much comfort may be perceived as boring but desirable at the same time.In this sense, the verification of poles Q and V requires an adequate process for obtaining the respective measurements on the alternatives. Here, by definingQ=R+andV=R-for everyxi,xk∈Xandcj∈C, such that(33)R+(xi,xk)⇔∀j,mi,jU>mk,jU,and(34)R-(xi,xk)⇔∀j,mi,jL<mk,jU,we obtain thatR-(x1,x3)holds, being impossible to affirmR+orR-on any other pairxi,xk∈X. Then, following the PCT preference structure, the decision situation amongx1andx3is described by the semi-incomparability relation (v). On the other hand, the P–A structure describes this situation as semi-strong aversion (JZ), stating thatx1is more rejected thanx3. For all other pairs of alternatives, the PCT assigns the weak incomparability relation (w), while the P–A assigns the strong incomparability relation (JH).Now that the decision problem is understood and described according to the conflict that emerges from alternatives and the complex meaning of preference, it is possible to organize the alternatives by learning a priority or preference-necessity order over them. This can be done e.g. by a standard scoring function f valuing the overall need of alternatives, defined for everyxi∈Xas,(35)f(xi)=∑k≠iN(xi,xk).Here, for every criterioncj∈C, the need componentNcjis computed, where it holds thatNc1(x2,x1),Nc1(x2,x3),Nc2(x3,x1),Nc3(x1,x2), andNc3(x3,x2). Hence, according to criterionc1,x2is needed over the other alternatives; regarding criterionc2,x3is needed over one alternative; and under criterionc3, bothx1andx3are needed over one alternative. As a result,f(x1)=1,f(x2)=2andf(x3)=2, obtaining a ranking wherex2andx3are equivalent and more needed thanx1.A logical characterization of preference structures has been given by means of paired structures, representing preference semantics for measuring/verifying the suitability of alternatives and learning priorities for decision making. Hence, the learning process builds up decisions from an initial state of ignorance, understanding data according to the desirable and needed attributes, where need entails both the positive and the negative aspects of information. Besides, it has been shown that relying only on logical terms, the semantics of concepts can be represented, arriving at different figures of knowledge for making sense of (preference) data.As a final note, the results obtained here for the different preference structures also hold under a continuous fuzzy setting. The classical set theoretic notation followed in this paper allows a straightforward and simple approach, having in mind that the negation n and conjunction∩and∩δoperators can also be taken as fuzzy operators (as in fact occurs in [18–20,38]), dealing with fuzzy preference relations.For further research, the general frame of paired structures can be used to examine different multi-criteria decision support methods (see e.g. [16], but also [11,17,43]), comparing their aggregation and exploitation procedures according to a specific (semantic) representation of preference. Besides, the application of paired structures for preference learning and knowledge extraction should be explored in more detail, taking advantage of its robust methodology for building meaning based on logical and semantic foundations.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
