@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Specification of a performance indicator using the evidential-reasoning approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
There are three main problems in DEA concluding overestimation, discrimination, and the handling the peculiar DMUs.The evidential-reasoning approach is used to construct a performance indicator.The constructed performance indicator is employed to combine the information from classic and inverted DEA.The proposed approach can overcome the three mentioned problems.Numerical simulation and empirical studies are conducted to present the findings.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data envelopment analysis,Efficient frontier,Anti-efficient frontier,The evidential-reasoning approach,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
There are three primary encountered problems in classic data envelopment analysis (DEA), which they decrease the effectiveness and reliability of decision making based on the obtained information from the classic DEA. These three problems include the following issues: (1) DEA efficiency scores overestimate efficiency and they are biased; (2) In certain cases, the standard DEA models are not as useful as expected in the sense of discriminating the decision making units (DMUs); (3) Specification of the evaluated DMUs as efficient by using DEA are peculiar rather than superiority. Tackling these mentioned problems is the motivation for creating this current study. To overcome these three problems in DEA together and enhance the effectiveness and reliability of the decision-making process, this paper uses the evidential-reasoning (ER) approach to construct a performance indicator for combining the efficiency and anti-efficiency obtained by DEA and inverted DEA models, which they are used to identify the efficient and anti-efficient frontiers, respectively. Numerical simulation tests indicate that our new performance indicator is more suitable for the cases where there are relatively few DMUs to be evaluated with respect to the number of input and output indicators. Furthermore, empirical studies demonstrate that this indicator has considerably more discrimination power than that of the standard DEA models, and also it reduces overestimation and addresses peculiar DMUs, properly.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Data envelopment analysis (DEA), which first introduced by Charnes et al. [13], has been widely used in productivity or performance evaluation and also the efficiency analysis of many businesses and non-profit organizations. The core idea of the classic DEA is first to identify the production frontier and then, the decision making units (DMUs) on the frontier will be regarded as efficient. Those DMUs that are not on the frontier will be compared with their peers or projections on the frontier to measure their relative efficiencies. All of the DMUs on the frontier are considered to represent the best practices and they have the same level of performance.However, DEA efficiency scores usually overestimate the efficiency and they are biased [9]. Smith [38] argued that the classic DEA always overestimates the true efficiencies, and the main reason for the overestimation is that many inefficient units have been incorrectly classified as efficient by the classic DEA. The extent of the overestimation is dependent on the sample size and the complexity of the production process (as indicated by the number of inputs and outputs). This problem is denoted as overestimation in this paper.Second, as we know, one of the main advantages of DEA is to allow the DMUs to have full flexibility to select their most favorable weights for their assessments to achieve the maximum efficiency scores. This full flexibility of selecting weights is important for identifying inefficient DMUs. However, this full flexibility may reduce the discrimination capacity of DEA in the sense that there are often many DMUs on the frontier, which they cannot be ranked further in the classic DEA models. Entani et al. [21] noted that the number of evaluating DMUs as efficient will increase combinationally as the dimensions of inputs and outputs increase. When there are many input and output variables and only a few DMUs, decision makers may find that most DMUs are efficient. Adler et al. [1] argued: “Often decision-makers are interested in a complete ranking, beyond the dichotomized classification, to refine the evaluation of the units.” This problem is denoted as discrimination in this context.Third, Entani et al. [21] argued that some of the evaluated DMUs as efficient by using DEA are peculiar rather than superiority. In their example with crisp data, they showed that peculiar DMUs, which are the intersection of efficient and anti-efficient frontiers, should not be evaluated as efficient, because the widths of their efficiency intervals are very large, and other superior DMUs (identified as efficient in their example) can dominate them. This problem is denoted as dealing with peculiar DMUs. These three main encountered problems in the classic DEA models, which are based on the distances to efficient frontiers, will decrease the reliability of decision making.There are already numerous published studies related to these three problems. However, most of these studies cannot solve the three problems together in a single framework. See Section 2 for details. This paper aims to provide a new idea to overcome some extent these three problems together including overestimation, discrimination and the handling of peculiar DMUs to rank DMUs using the evidential-reasoning approach (ER approach) (see, e.g., [47,48]) to combine the efficient and anti-efficient scores. The main contribution of this paper is to consider the efficient and anti-efficient scores as two pieces of evidence and then use the ER approach based on the evidence theory to combine two pieces of evidence for each DMU to: (1) Lower the overestimation; (2) Increase the discrimination power; (3) Deal with peculiar DMUs properly within a single framework.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes the related literatures for addressing the above three problems. We discuss about the efficient and anti-efficient frontiers in DEA models in Section 3. In Section 4, we first give a basic mathematical recall regarding the ER approach, and then we transform the efficiency scores or anti-efficiency scores to two pieces of evidence for combining the obtained information from both the best and worst viewpoints. Then, in this section, we conduct a numerical simulation process to test the performance of the proposed approach in this paper. In Section 5, we first provide an empirical example to illustrate the features of the ER approach, and then we perform a case study to examine the performance of the generated results from the ER approach. Finally, some conclusions are presented in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
