@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Development and validation of a software tool for complex aircraft powertrains

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A software for the designing and the backward analysis of aircraft powertrains.Map based modeling of powertrains components (in particular propeller and engine).Validation of the software with available data for a UAV.Power requirement and fuel consumption of the original powertrain (Wankel engine).Development of a high efficiency powertrain for the UAV (two-stroke Diesel engine).

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Backward simulation,Advanced aircraft powertrain,Diesel engine,Wankel engine,Flight conditions,UAV,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A simulation software for the assessment of performance, costs and environmental impact of conventional and advanced configuration aircraft has been developed and validated. The software is named PLA.N.E.S. (PLAtform for New Environment-friendly Solutions), and includes a sizing routine and a mission simulator. The simulation is performed with the so-called backward paradigm, i.e. the flight conditions along the mission (altitude and speed versus time) are assumed to be known. Accordingly, the instantaneous power request of the aircraft to meet that flight mission and the corresponding instantaneous fuel consumption are calculated. In the case of advanced powertrains, it is also possible to choose different energy management strategies for the optimal control of the energy flows among engine, secondary equipment and storage systems during the mission. The components currently modeled in PLA.N.E.S. include energy converters (piston and Wankel engines, turboprop, fuel cell, etc.), energy storage systems (batteries, super-capacitors), auxiliaries and secondary power systems. The tool is designed to be integrated with a multi-objective optimization environment. In the present investigation PLA.N.E.S. has been applied to a Medium Altitude Medium Endurance (MAME) Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) as a case study to compare an experimentally validated Wankel-based powertrain with a proposed turbocharged diesel piston-prop system.auxiliary power Unitbrake mean effective pressurebrake specific fuel consumptionenvironmental cabin systemelectricity storage systemhybrid electric vehicleinternal combustion enginelower heating valuemore electric aircraftstate of chargetrue airspeedtakeoff available distanceengine bleed airmass flow rate of fuelaccelerationaspect ratiowing spannominal capacity of the batterydrag coefficientparasite drag coefficientlift coefficientpropeller power coefficientpropeller thrust coefficientdrag forceacceleration distancetransition distancepropeller diameterrotation distancetakeoff distanceOswald's efficiency factorgravity accelerationlift off heightpropeller advance ratiolift induced drag coefficientlift forcemass of the aircraftempty massfuel masspayloadnominal powertrain massnumber of enginespropeller speed (instantaneous)atmospheric pressuremechanical power requested by accessorieselectric power required by electric accessoriesengine power shaftpropulsion powerpropeller power shaftradius of turnwing areatimethrustrolling timetrue air speedopen circuit voltagestall speedweight of the aircraftaltitudetime step of the backward simulatorfraction of thrust generated by the propellercompression ratioclimb angleengine efficiencygenerator efficiencypropeller efficiencygear efficiencywheel friction coefficientair densitycorrected densitytakeoff/sea level/parasiteaveragebrakingcruiseclimbingenginenominalsea leveltakeoff

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In conventional aircraft configurations, the main part of fuel energy is converted into propulsive power (primary power) by the engine. The remaining part (secondary power) is converted into mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic and electrical form to be used for on-board systems like landing gear, braking and flight control systems, air conditioning, pressurization, de-icing, avionics, etc. In order to reduce complexity and improve efficiency and environmental impact [1], the trend of aircraft manufacturers is towards the electrification of the powertrain with More Electric Aircraft (MEA), Hybrid Electric Aircraft (HEA), More Electric Engines (MEE) and so on [2,3].More electric aircraft (MEAs) improve engine performance through optimization of off-design behavior, elimination of bleed air, electric supercharging, etc. They also reduce equipment weight (by replacing hydraulics with electric systems) and improve secondary power and systems utilization.In MEAs, batteries can be used to provide the transient power needed for electric loads and emergency power. In HEAs, they can be also used to give additional mechanical power (through an electric motor) and for capturing braking energy by regeneration [4].HEAs allows the optimization of the operating point of the engine that can also be downsized. In fact, engines are usually designed to meet the high requirements of thrust at takeoff but for the most part of the mission (cruise) they work at part load. Fuel cell based powertrains have been also presented in literature [5–8] without a complete analysis of the performance in the whole flight.These advanced powertrains have been developed to improve fuel consumption and reduce environmental impact but have some disadvantage: higher complexity, volume and mass, and reliability problems. In HEAs, MEAs and HEAs, the power management of multi-source operation is a key issue.Some works in literature analyze, compare and optimize a particular configuration or a specific component [9,10]. Others concentrate on the simulation of electric systems or on the actuators but not on the energy conversion system [11–17].The interest in advanced powertrains call for the development of a general platform for modeling and optimization of aircraft systems similar to the software used in the automotive field (Advisor [18], AVL Cruise [19,20], etc.) to maximize performance and minimize the environmental impact of Hybrid Electric Vehicles (HEVs). These simulation tools use a unified model approach [21] for each component of the powertrain and adopt the so-called backward paradigm (i.e. they assume the driving conditions to be known and calculate the instantaneous power request of the vehicle to meet that driving conditions). This approach is similar to the “inverse simulation” used for aircraft systems [22].The goal of the research activity is the development and implementation of a similar tool to evaluate the benefits (in terms of engine specific fuel consumption, aircraft/engine mass, CO2 emissions, etc.) and the disadvantages (cost, weight, volume, etc.) of adopting advanced powertrain for aircraft.In the next paragraphs the simulation approach [23] for the design and optimization of complex aircraft powertrain will be explained. Then, the structure of the code and the models available in PLA.N.E.S for each component of the powertrain will be briefly described. More emphasis will be given to the models of propeller and engine used for the test case. The main novelty of the proposed software with respect to literature is the multidisciplinary approach since it takes into account flight mechanics, aerodynamics, thermodynamics and control aspects for the analysis of complex aircraft systems with a unified simulation approach. Also it is possible to model with the desired level of detail any component of the powertrain and evaluate the effect of the performance of the whole aircraft. In this investigation, the focus is on the model of the propeller and of the positive displacement engine. From this point of view it is also innovative with respect to the state of the art, the detailed analysis of the effect of altitude and load on the fuel consumption of Wankel engine and piston engines for aircraft applications.A preliminary version of the software was applied to a turbo-prop regional aircraft in [24] to quantify the effect of eliminating air bleed and to a diesel-based UAV to analyze the potential of turbo-compounding [25].In the present investigation the software has been validated through comparison with available data related to an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV). The initial powertrain based on a fixed-pitch propeller and a Wankel engine has been also compared with a more efficient powertrain as an example of application of the simulation software.An advanced aircraft can contain the following components:-A fuel converter (gas turbine system, piston engine or fuel cell);An auxiliary power unit (APU);An environmental control system (ECS);Electric loads;Hydraulic and pneumatic auxiliaries;One or more energy storage systems (ESS) like batteries or super-capacitors;Gearboxes;Electric motors/generators that can assist the engine in producing the required thrust.The main energy and mass flows among such components in an aircraft equipped with a gas turbine engine are shown in Fig. 1.Three different power paths: mechanical (black arrows), electric (blue arrows) and bleed air (green arrows) can be noticed. A supervisory controller is required to determine how to operate each power path in order to satisfy the corresponding power demand in the most convenient way while meeting aircraft requirement and components specifications.Given the mechanical power demand (Pp,p), the fuel consumption of a conventional aircraft can be calculated with three possible approaches [23]: average operating point, quasi-static and dynamic. The first two use a backward paradigm while the dynamic approach uses a forward paradigm.The average operating point approach is usually applied to aircraft simulation. The fuel consumption is calculated at a specific operating point (specifically takeoff or cruise) using the following equation:(1)m˙f=ηpηTηePp,pLHVWhere LHV is the Lower Heating Value of the fuel, ηp,ηT,ηeare the efficiency of propeller, transmission and engine, respectively. These efficiencies can be assumed or obtained from manufacturer's data.This approach gives good estimations of the fuel consumption of simple powertrains [26] but it is not well suited in the case of complex propulsion systems like HEAs because the effect of energy management strategies cannot be taken into account in these computations. Also the variation of aircraft mass along the mission needs to be assumed, in particular at cruise, descent and landing.In the proposed quasi-static simulations, the input variables are speed, acceleration and altitude during the flight. With this information, the thrust that has to be produced can be calculated based on the aircraft mass, geometry and aerodynamic characteristics. The aircraft is assumed to fly at constant speed, acceleration and altitude for a short time period h. The fuel consumption during the time intervaltϵ[(i−1)h,ih]is calculated using an equation similar to (1) where i is the current iteration step. The average operating point method and the quasi-static method differ in that the flight in the quasi-static approach is divided into many intervals for each of which the average operating point method is applied. With this method it is possible to design supervisory control systems that optimize the power flows in the propulsion system. Moreover, the aircraft weight is updated at each time step without any need of arbitrarily assuming its variation.The main drawback of the quasi-static method is its backward (or inverse) formulation: the flight profile has to be known priori. This is quite infeasible in the automotive case but not in aviation where the missions are well known in advance.The dynamic approach is based on a mathematical description of the system. The model of the powertrain is formulated using sets of ordinary differential equations where the instantaneous speed and acceleration are the results of the balance between propulsive, aerodynamic and gravitational forces acting on the aircraft. This formulation can be used to describe dynamic effects in powertrain that can affect the fuel consumption (engine temperature dynamics, etc) and evaluate comfort, driveability and pollutant emissions. The drawback is the high computational burden of the method. Since the majority of flight conditions are at constant speed, modeling the transient behavior of the aircraft is not a primary concern.PLA.N.E.S. has been developed in order to have an in-house design and simulation tool for advanced configurations. The software consists of a series of blocks for input, sizing, mission generation, simulation, post processing and optimization that will be discussed in the next paragraphs.Theinput block supplies the specification of the aircraft as reported in Table 1. In particular, the geometry of the wing and the masses of the aircraft are required together with drag, lift and wheel friction coefficients. Moreover, it is possible to assign the power required for electric and mechanical auxiliaries (as described later) and the requirements in terms of bleed air for the different phases of the flight.A library of aircraft is available in PLA.N.E.S.The block calculates the induced drag factor K as:(2)K=1πAReWhere AR is the aspect ratio b2/S and e is the Oswald's wing efficiency factor.Both the parasite drag CD0and the induced drag factor K can be corrected at takeoff (cD, 0t.o., Kt.o.) and landing according to literature data or user's experience.This block also calculates the empty mass/takeoff mass ratio and the takeoff mass/wing area ratio that can be used in the sizing procedure.This block allows the users to choose the configuration to be analyzed from the following already implemented in PLA.N.E.S.•Conventional;More-electric;Parallel hybrid;Series hybrid;Parallel turbo-compound;Series turbo-compound;All electric;Fuel cell all electric;Fuel cell hybrid electric.The flow chart of each configuration is reported in Fig. 2. Other configurations can be included in the software.The block also defines the specification and the size of each component of the powertrain. In the proposed platform, each component is modeled as a black box that receives input (flows of energy and mass) from the previous component and sends the output variables to the next one after a balance of mass and energy.For each component, the corresponding mass and volume are calculated for the sizing step. Note that the volume does not affect the fuel consumption but it is a constrain in the development of complex configurations like hybrid electrics systems.The mass of the new powertrain is used to upgrade the takeoff mass of the aircraft. If the new mass is more than 10% higher than the initial one, also the empty mass and the wing area of the aircraft are upgraded because it is assumed that the structure of the aircraft will need to be redesigned to allow for the increased weight of the powertrain.To this, the empty-to-takeoff mass ratio and the wing load are kept constant to the reference values for the aircraft. Note that this correction is mandatory for hybrid electric configuration due to the high specific mass of batteries.In the next paragraphs the model used for the main component will be shortly described.The propeller model receives as input the thrust to be delivered, the aircraft speed and the flight altitude and calculates the propeller efficiency according to the three possible options:(a)Constant efficiency;Constant pitch;Constant speed.In the case of “constant efficiency”, arbitrary values can be assigned during takeoff, climb, cruise, descent and landing to the propeller efficiency.In the case (b) the propeller rotates at a speed npthat depends on the required power Pshaftand the altitude z as follows [27]:(3)np=np,nomPshaftPp,nomρ(z)ρ03Where np, nom and Pp, nomare the nominal speed and power of the propeller, respectively, ρ(z) is the air density at altitude z and ρ0 is the air density at sea level.The efficiency is then calculated with the blade element theory according to the propeller specification (diameters, pitch, chord, etc.) [27].The performance of a propeller can also be defined through a map defined by three dimensionless parameters [27]:(4)Cp=Pshaftρnp3Dp5(powercoefficient)(5)CT=αTρnp2Dp4(thrustcoefficient)(6)J=VnpDp(advanceratio)Where Dpis the propeller diameter, npis its revolutionary speed, and ρ is the air density.Choosing “constant speed propeller”, the simulation software load a performance map (Fig. 3) that is used to evaluated the efficiency according to the working point (CTand J) of the propeller.The engine is modeled through the use performance maps whose content and usage depends on the kind of energy converter.The model for positive displacement engines (either piston or Wankel) receives as inputs:•the mechanical power requested for propulsion and auxiliaries;the flight altitude;the propeller speed;and estimates the corresponding brake specific fuel consumption and engine throttle position (or air fuel ratio, depending on the engine type) by interpolation of pre-loaded engine performance maps.For a piston engine, the following performance maps are required:-Brake Specific fuel consumption (BSFC) as a function of torque (or power), speed and altitude;Maximum torque (or power) as a function of altitude and corresponding engine speed;Minimum BSFC as a function of altitude and corresponding engine speed.The engine model gives also the flow rate and the thermodynamic properties of the exhaust gases to be used in the energy recovery system if available.A scaling procedure is also implemented for piston engines, based on the Willans line method [27]. To vary the size of the Internal Combustion Engine (ICE), the torque and the losses are scaled linearly with two scaling factors: displacement and stroke. This means that the reference engine and the scaled engine are assumed to have the same efficiency map in terms of Brake Mean Effective Pressure (BMEP) and piston mean speed but a different torque-speed map. The proposed scaling method is widely used in literature for the design of hybrid electric powertrains [21] and is valid for scaled sizes close to the baseline size and for ICEs with fixed number of cylinders as in this case. Recently Sorrentino et al. [28] validated the model by scaling a gasoline engine from 38.5 to 25 kW and a diesel engine from 102.6 to 67.2 kW. The mass of the scaled engine can be calculated with linear correlations as proposed in literature [29].Fig. 4shows the performance maps of a 128 kW two-stroke turbocharged diesel engine and the scaled map for a 80 kW engine Fig. 4d). In particular, the map contains the maximum power at different flight levels and engine speed (Fig. 4a), the efficiency maps at sea level (Fig. 4b) and at different heights (3000 m in Fig. 4c). Note that the maximum power is constant between 0 and 3000 m because of the usage of a turbocharge system with a Waste gate that is kept partially open at altitudes lower than 3000 m to keep constant the manifold pressure [27]. More details on the numerical simulation of the diesel engine used to obtain the maps can be found in [25].The turbine based model receives as an input the thrust requested for propulsion, the mechanical power for auxiliaries, the bleed air flow, the altitude and the Mach number of the aircraft and calculates the corresponding brake specific fuel consumption.For the turboprop engine, the performance maps include:-Brake Specific Fuel Consumption (BSFC) as a function of thrust, Mach and altitude;Maximum thrust as a function of altitude;Minimum BSFC as a function of altitude.Different maps are stored with different levels of bleed air (for example 0, 5 and 10%). The actual bleed air flow is an input of the simulation code because it depends on the request of the ECS and/or pneumatic actuators. The actual bleed air flow is used to interpolate in the pre-stored turboprop maps and obtain the BSFC of the engine.The maps also include the fraction of thrust given by the propeller (α) being (1-α)T the trust generated by the nozzle.A model for fuel cells is also implemented in PLA.N.E.S. but it is not described here because it will not be used in the present investigation.A library of fuels used for aviation has been implemented that includes density, constant pressure specific heat and lower heating value of each fuel. The mass of fuel to be stored in the tank is one of the input of PLA.N.E.S.The PLA.N.E.S software is designed to simulate also secondary energy storage systems, electric machines, fuel cells, gearboxes and thermal energy recovering systems. The models are not reported here because these components are not used in the present investigation.When using secondary Energy Storage Systems (ESS), four operating mode can be considered [21]:Charge sustaining: The state of the charge of the energy storage system is allowed to increase and decrease along the driving profile but at the end of the cycle it will return to the initial state.Charge depleting: The state of the charge of the energy storage decreases continuously during the mission.Charge depleting /charge sustaining: The state of the charge decreases until a threshold value of SOC is reached to maximize the use of electricity from off-board charging; then a charge sustaining strategy is used.Blended mode: the use of the engine is optimized so that the SOC decreases during the driving trip and reaches the minimum value only at the very end of the trip. The blended mode requires a priori knowledge of the driving pattern or sophisticated control algorithms [30]. This is a problem in traditional automotive applications but not in the new application proposed here because the mission profile of an aircraft is much more regular than the actual driving profile of an automobile and may be known a priori.The sizing block calculates the power/thrust required for takeoff, climbing and cruise, taking into account the specification of the craft.Takeoff is the phase of flight in which an aircraft goes through a transition from moving along the ground (taxiing) to flying in the air, starting on a runway. The aircraft starts accelerating rapidly until the necessary speed for takeoff is achieved. The takeoff includes three phases: acceleration, rotation and transition. Each phase requires a specific length named dA, dRand dH, respectively. The takeoff is assumed to end when the altitude over the runway is greater than h=35 ft (10.7 m) [27,31].Two possible approaches can be used in PLA.N.E.S for the takeoff. The first one is to calculate takeoff acceleration from available distance dtotwith the following procedure.The aircraft speed during the three phases of takeoff is assigned by the user or assumed to be equal to 1.2Vst since the takeoff climb speed Vtois typically 20% greater than the stall speed, Vst:(7)Vst=2W0/Sρ0cL,t.oWhere cL,t.o.is the lift coefficient during takeoff, ρ0 is the air density at sea level, S is the wing area and W0is the takeoff weight of the aircraft.The average speed during takeoff is assumed to be:Vavg=1.2Vst/2The climb angle during lift-off is calculated as:(8)cos(γ)=R−hRWhere:(9)R=(1.2Vst)20.15gThe transition distance is:(10)dH=RsinγThe rotation distance can be calculated as:(11)dR=1.2VsttRThe acceleration distance is given by:(12)dA=dtot−dR−dHFinally, the aircraft acceleration during takeoff (assumed to be equal in the three phases) is:(13)at.o.=(1.2Vst)22dAThis approach is used when keeping the takeoff distance within the bounds of existing runway lengths is a prime consideration in selecting the size (maximum thrust) of the engines. The same problem occurs on landing but is addressed by using flaps. A low flap deflection can be used on takeoff to reduce the takeoff distance.The second approach fixes the acceleration (i.e. the available power) and calculates the required takeoff distance dtotaccordingly.With both approaches, the thrust required for takeoff is then calculated as:(14)Tt.o.=12cDt.o.ρ0SVavg2+W0gat.o.+μW0WherecDt.o.=cD,0t.o.+Kt.o.cLt.o2is the drag coefficient at takeoff.The corresponding power is:(15)Pp,pt.o.=Tt.o.VavgA quasi-stationary climbing is assumed in the sizing phase. The user has to input the rate of climb dz/dt, and the initial values of speed and altitude so that the climb angle can be calculated as:(16)sinγclimb=Vclimbdz/dtSince the climb angle is assumed to be constant, the lift is equal to the weight of the aircraft during climb so that:(17)cLclimb=Wclimb12ρclimbVclimb2(18)cDclimb=cD,0.+K·cLclimb2The equilibrium of forces along the drag direction gives:(19)Tclimb=12cDclimbSρclimbVclimb2+WclimbsinγclimbThe power required for the climb phase is:(20)Pp,pclimb=TclimbVclimbA similar procedure is used for cruise. In the following equations, the subscript c refers to the cruise conditions (speed and altitude), which are inputs to the sizing procedure.(21)cLc=Wc12ρcVc2(22)cDc=cD,0.+K.cLc2(23)Tc=12cDcρcSVc2The power required for the cruise phase is:(24)Pp,pc=TcVcThe power required for takeoff, climb and cruise is then compared with the power that the powertrain is able to produce in the same flight phases. If the powertrain is found to be able to fulfill all the requirements, the backward simulation is activated.The sizing block also allows the calculation of minimum take-of distance (maximum acceleration), maximum climb rate at a certain altitude and speed, service ceiling and endurance. In the case of electric and hybrid electric configurations the sizing block also calculates the endurance in electric flight with the approach proposed in literature [32,33].Once the powertrain has been correctly sized to meet the power request at takeoff, climb and cruise, the user is allowed to simulate the chosen powertrain over a complete mission. The time step used for the simulation is 1 s for takeoff and landing and 60 s for the other parts of the mission. A sensitivity analysis was performed to find a compromise between accuracy and acceptable computational time. The results for the proposed case study are shown in Fig. 5with continuous lines. The fuel consumption error is the percentage variation with respect to the results with a time step of 1 s. The computational time has been measured on a i7-4770 CPU working at 3.4 GHz. However, the computational cost of the software depends on the level of details of the models of each component and on the supervisory energy management.The results of the validation are quite different in the case of hybrid configurations (see dotted lines in Fig. 5.) and depend on the supervisory control strategy.Each mission requires time histories of altitude and speed (that are used to calculate the instantaneous values of climb angle, acceleration and Mach number). This information can be either uploaded from a recorded database (see Fig. 6) or generated in the simulation code with a simple procedure illustrated in the validation section.The equilibrium of the forces acting on the airplane in any phase of flight can be written in the lift (L) and drag (D) directions as:(25)L=Wcosγ−WgVdγdt=12cLρV2Where W is the instantaneous weight and mass of the aircraft and cLis the lift coefficient.(26)T=D+Wsinγ+mdVdt+μW=12cLρV2+Wsinγ+mdVdt+μWNote that the rolling force μW is zero in flight while the gravitational force Wsin γ is zero at land.The drag coefficient at takeoff and landing is assumed equal to the value calculated in the sizing section. When in flight, the drag coefficient is:(27)cD=cD0+KcL2And the lift coefficient is calculated from (25).Then, thrust requested at that time step is calculated by using Eq. (26).The instantaneous values of thrust and speed are used to enter the propeller model and to calculate its efficiency ηP. The mechanical power Paxto be produced by the powertrain for propulsion only is:(28)Pax=αT·VηPNeWhere Neis the number of engines of the aircraft and α is the fraction of thrust generated by the propeller (the remaining being generated by the nozzle).According to the selected configuration and the corresponding supervisory controller, the power required for auxiliaries (power consumers) must be also taken into account [33,35]. In the present version of the PLA.N.E.S. software, auxiliaries are described through three variables:-Mechanical powerPaux,mto be extracted from the engine axis (by means of the mechanical gearboxes) to feed central hydraulic pumps, local pumps for engine equipment, central hydraulic pump, actuation systems and other mechanically driven subsystems;Electric powerPaux,eto power the avionics, cabin and aircraft lighting, galleys, and other commercial loads;Bleedairflow ratema,Eto be extracted from the compressor stage of the engine to account for pneumatic power required by the environmental control system and wing anti-icing systems.The supervisory controller behaves differently according to the selected configuration.In the conventional case the air flow rate for the pneumatic power can be obtained as bleeding air from the engine compressor or from a compressor. The electric power is obtained from a generator driven by the engine. Accordingly, the overall mechanical power to be generated from the engine is:(29)Pm=1Ne(αT·VηP+Paux,mηT+Paux,eηG)Where ηGand ηTare the efficiencies of the generator and the gear-box respectively.To simulate a MEA configuration [24], the air flow rate required by pneumatic systems ma,Ecan be assumed to be produced by an engine driven compressor.The request of power and bleeding air changes during the aircraft mission. Thus, PLA.N.E.S. is designed to consider different values of Paccand ma,Efor each phase of the flight.In the case of complex configurations, like hybrid and turbo-compound, a supervisory controller is required to manage the request of propulsive and auxiliaries power.According to the selected configurations, the power requests translate in a specific fuel mass flow ratem˙ffor each time step.The weight of the aircraft W is calculated at any time step by integrating the following:(30)W(t)=W0−Ne∫t0tgm˙fdtFor each energy converter it is possible to display the time history of power and efficiency versus time and for each energy storage system, the current and SOC curves.To sum up, this block calculates displays the following time step-based quantities:-Required thrust and power;Required power for auxiliaries;Power delivered by each component;Working efficiency of each component;Thermal power to be dispersed;Recovered thermal power;Fuel mass rate and corresponding aircraft mass;Battery current and corresponding state of charge;It is also possible to display the working points on the maps of each component at each time step.Moreover, it is possible to calculate overall quantities like overall fuel consumption, emission of CO2 per km, total electricity used on board, etc.The optimization block allows the multi-objective optimization of the aircraft including the possibility to change the aircraft configuration (structural optimization), the size and the specification of each component (parametric optimization) and the management strategies of the management block (control system optimization). The possibility to optimize the mission profile can be also taken into account. The optimization block has been obtained by linking the model with an external general optimization platform named ModeFrontier [36]. The method has been successfully applied by Donateo et al. [37] to perform a structural-parametric- control system optimization of a hybrid electric vehicle.The validation of the PLA.N.E.S software has been performed by comparison with available experimental data for a MAME (medium altitude – medium endurance) UAV. The available data include: aircraft masses, required and available power at sea level, takeoff ground run, altitude and speed profile, electricity and fuel consumption over a standard mission. Because of a confidentiality agreement, experimental and numerical data will be normalized and displayed as dimensionless quantities. The normalization is performed, for each variable, by dividing both numerical and available data by the same quantity. Therefore, the comparison showed here is not only qualitative but also quantitative.The UAV has an aspect ratio (b2/S) equal to 12 and a wing load W0/S = 815.4 N/m2.The mass distribution at takeoff is shown in Fig. 7.The mission of the UAV includes seven phases: takeoff, first climb, second climb, outbound to the target location, loitering at station, inbound /descent and landing. The percentage of mission time spent in each phase (except for takeoff and landing that are negligible) is plotted in Fig. 8. For the 73% of the overall time, the UAV is loitering at station for its surveillance task.The available data of altitude and TAS at the seven phases of flight were used to obtain the mission profile as reported in Fig. 9.Fig. 10 shows the electricity used for secondary power along the mission in arbitrary units. Note that the main electricity consumption is during loitering when the UAV is performing its surveillance task.The UAV is equipped with a conventional propulsion system based on a Wankel engine and a directly driven constant pitch propeller.This Wankel engine didn't require a specific modeling at sea level because the performance maps were provided by the engine manufacturer . The data of Fig. 14 show the engine BMEP curve, the BMEP along the propeller line and the corresponding BSFC at sea level as found in the datasheet of the engine manufacturer. At each time step, PLA.N.E.S calculates the required power with Eq. (29) and propeller speed with Eq. (3) and enters the performance map to obtain, by interpolation, the actual fuel consumption. Note that in this case the propeller speed is equal to the engine speed.The propeller of the MAME UAV has been modeled with the blade element theory [27]. The efficiency of the propeller obtained with the model has been multiplied by the nominal power of the Wankel engine to match the curve of available power at sea level as a function of the true air speed (see Fig. 11). Note that the effect of TAS on the propeller performances is not completely captured with this model but the accuracy is sufficient for the aims of this investigation.The parasite drag coefficient, the Oswald's wing efficiency factor and the maximum lift coefficient were assumed equal to 0.025, 0.95 and 2.5 respectively in order to match the available data at sea level (see Fig. 12). The wheel friction at the wheel is assumed to be 0.025,cD,0t.o.=1.1cD,Kt.o.=0.9K. The takeoff ground run calculated with this values is reported in Fig. 13as a function of takeoff mass and compared with available data.The maximum climb rate calculated by PLA.N.E.S is about 20% higher than the typical climb rate included in the available data.The backward model was used to simulate the Wankel-based configuration over the mission of Fig. 9 with the required electricity according to the profile of Fig. 10.As already explained, performance maps were provided by the engine manufacturer for the Wankel engine at sea level. The challenge was to predict the fuel consumption in flight because neither experimental nor numerical data are available in literature .To this, performance maps at different altitudes were derived with the following reasoning.Since the Wankel is a naturally aspirated/positive displacement engine, the maximum BMEP decreases in flight while the fuel consumption is almost constant [38] at full load.As known in literature, [27], a “corrected density” σ can be used to decrease BMEP according to the atmospheric pressure and temperature at flight level z(31)σ(z)=p(z)ps.l.Ts.l.T(z)For example, increasing the altitude from 2400 to 4200 m the correct density (and so the engine power) is reduced by 80%. This is perfectly in accordance with the experimental results of Sarveswaran et al. [37] that measured the performance of a Wankel engine in a climatic test facility.At part load fuel consumption is expected to increase when in flight because a large quantity of air-fuel mixture has to be introduced in the engine to obtain the same power than at sea level (s.l.). To account for this effect, the BSFC at sea level has been divided by the correct density σ(z) to obtain the fuel consumption at altitude z.The results of the simulation in terms of instantaneous and cumulative fuel consumption are shown in Fig. 15and compared to the available data of average fuel consumption at takeoff, first climb, second climb, outbound, loiter, inbound and descent.The models considered in the present investigation underestimate the fuel consumption at takeoff (probably because of the inaccuracies in the propeller model) but seem quite accurate in the other phases of the flight. The final fuel consumption predicted with the proposed correction is only 2% lower than the available data. However, a detailed model for the Wankel engine is currently under development to quantify the effect of altitude on the performances and fuel consumption of Wankel engines.More details about the backward simulation of the UAV powertrain can be found in Fig. 16. In particular, Fig. 16(a) shows the forces acting on the plane at any time step and the resulting thrust. Inertial and rolling forces are of course important only at takeoff and landing. The gravitational force (weight) acts against the flight direction at climbing while helps reducing the required thrust during descent. Fig. 16(b) reports the power required for the propulsion (black continuous line) obtained by multiplication of thrust and true air speed. The black dotted line shows the power at the propeller axis (propulsion power divided by the propeller efficiency). The magenta continuous line is the power delivered by the engine. It is higher than the propeller axis power because of the electric auxiliaries. For comparison, the available engine speed at the maximum speed (6800 rpm) is also reported to show the effect of atmospheric pressure and temperature on the engine performance.Note that the engine works at full load (engine power = available power) at takeoff and at the end of the first climbing segment. In the other phases the engine is quite oversized with respect to the required power. This can be also noticed by the engine speed time history in Fig. 16(c). The propeller efficiency ranges from 0.45 at takeoff to 0.8 at descent with an average value of 0.75 during the loiter phase (see Fig. 16d). The efficiency of the engine is quite low at loiter because of the part load behavior. As a result, the overall efficiency of the powertrain at loiter is only 10%. It is well known that efficiency of Wankel engine is quite poor because of the geometry of the combustion chamber that produces large heat losses and leakage issues [37].To improve the efficiency [39] (and thus reduce also the environmental impact) of the aircraft, a new powertrain is proposed in the following section.The proposed powertrain consists of:-An hypothetical constant speed propeller with the same nominal speed and diameter of the initial powertrain and the performance map of Fig. 3. This choice is motivated by the expected increased efficiency but also by the goal of showing the potential of the software;A two stroke diesel engine with the same nominal power of the Wankel engine but running at a lower speed (2770 rpm). The performance maps of the engine were obtained with the scaling procedure explained before and the reference maps of Fig. 4;The maps of the 128 kW 2-stroke diesel engine were obtained with a 1-D simulation code that was run on 275 combinations of air-fuel ratio, engine speed and aircraft altitude. The details of the diesel engine modeling can be found in [25].The results of the simulation with the new powertrain are shown in Fig. 17. Compared with the original powertrain, the required power at the propeller axis (see Fig. 17a) is reduced thanks to the highest efficiency of the propeller that ranges from 0.68 at takeoff to 0.85 at loiter (see Fig. 17c).As for the engine, the available power is less affected by the altitude thanks to the use of a turbocharging system and the average efficiency at loiter is 0.25 (see Fig. 17d). As already discussed, the maximum power of the proposed Diesel engine is constant between 0 and 3000 m because of the usage of a turbocharge system with a Waste gate that is kept partially open at altitudes lower than 3000 m to keep constant the manifold pressure [27,25].The overall efficiency of the new powertrain is about twice the value of the original powertrain at loitering. Over the whole mission, the new powertrain allows a reduction of fuel consumption by 43% (Fig. 17b vs Fig. 15a) and a corresponding increase in payload by 50% . However, the increase in payload is expected to be lower because of the higher powertrain mass. In fact, a propeller governor and a gear box are needed in the new powertrain. Moreover, the power/weight ratio of the diesel engine is lower than the Wankel engine, so the engine mass of the new powertrain will be higher if the nominal power is the same for the two engines.The new powertrain is expected to be less compact and silent [37] than the original one because it uses a reciprocating engine instead of a rotary machine.To compare the emissions of carbon dioxide from the two powertrains, it is necessary to take into account the different emission factors of gasoline and diesel fuel.The complete combustion of 1 liter of gasoline produces 2.4 kg of CO2. Assuming a density of 700 kg/m3, 1 kg of gasoline produces about 3.42 kg of CO2.The complete combustion of 1 kg of diesel (density of 830 kg/m3) produces 3.18 kg of CO2 .Taking into account these values, the emissions of CO2 from the new powertrain are –47% lower than the emissions of the Wankel-based system .If the lower well-to-tank emission factor of diesel fuel compared with gasoline [40] would be considered, the improvement guaranteed by the new powertrain. would been even stronger.As for the pollutant emissions, a direct comparison is difficult [41] but the strong reduction of fuel consumption obtained with the new powertrain should reduce the environmental impact of the diesel powertrain with respect to the original one.A platform for the analysis and the optimization of energy flows in advanced aircraft powertrain has been developed and presented in this investigation. The sizing procedure and the backward simulation approach have been described together with the models used for each component.The main novelty of the proposed software with respect to literature is the multidisciplinary approach since it takes into account flight mechanics, aerodynamics and control aspects for the analysis of complex aircraft systems with a unified simulation approach.The software PLA.N.E.S. has been validated through comparison with available data of a UAV equipped with a constant pitch propeller and a Wankel engine. The effect of altitude and load on the fuel consumption of Wankel engine and piston engines has been quantitatively addressed. The Wankel engine at sea level was not modeled because the performance maps were provided by the engine manufacturer. PLA.N.E.S calculates the required power and speed at any time step and enters the performance map to obtain, by interpolation, the actual fuel consumption. The challenge was to predict the fuel consumption in flight because neither experimental nor numerical data are available in literature. In the present investigation the fuel consumption in flight was adjusted with a correction factor used for the engine power and a surprising very good agreement was found. The fuel consumption over the whole mission was predicted with an accuracy of 2%. However, a detailed model the Wankel engine in flight is currently under development.A hypothesis of powertrain upgrade with a constant-speed propeller and a two stroke diesel engine has been also presented to show an example of application of the software . The diesel engine was modeled with AVL-Boost (a 1D simulation code) and the results were used to obtain the performance maps of the engine at sea level and in flight.The new powertrain should reduce fuel consumption by 43% and improve CO2 emissions by 47%.Note that in a conventional powertrain like that considered here, the fuel consumption could have been calculated with a similar accuracy by using an average operating point method i.e. by considering the required power and the component efficiencies at each phase of flight. For the overall mission, the fuel usage could have been calculated by multiplying the fuel consumption by the length of the mission phase. These approach would have been required the aircraft mass at any flight phase to be estimated a priori and verified a posteriori.In the case of advanced powertrain, the proposed approach is much more useful because it allows the implementation of energy management strategies and the calculation of the instantaneous state of the charge of the secondary storage systems. In fact, future investigation will deal with the development of a parallel hybrid electric powertrain for the same UAV presented here.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
