@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Adaptive system for dam behavior modeling based on linear regression and genetic algorithms

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We proposed an adaptive system for a dam behavior modeling.The system performs real-time generation of the optimized regression model.Optimized model is adapted to currently available measurements.The system is based on a linear regression and genetic algorithm.Case study showed advantage of this system comparing to traditional regression models.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Dam,Modeling,Linear regression,Genetic algorithms,Adaptive system,Monitoring,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Most of the existing methods for dam behavior modeling require a persistent set of input parameters. In real-world applications, failures of the measuring equipment can lead to a situation in which a selected model becomes unusable because of the volatility of the independent variables set. This paper presents an adaptive system for dam behavior modeling that is based on a multiple linear regression (MLR) model and is optimized for given conditions using genetic algorithms (GA). Throughout an evolutionary process, the system performs real-time adjustment of regressors in the MLR model according to currently active sensors. The performance of the proposed system has been evaluated in a case study of modeling the Bocac dam (at the Vrbas River located in the Republic of Srpska), whereby an MLR model of the dam displacements has been optimized for periods when the sensors were malfunctioning. Results of the analysis have shown that, under real-world circumstances, the proposed methodology outperforms traditional regression approaches.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Dams have strong interactions with environmental, hydraulic and geomechanical factors, such as air and water temperature, water level, pore pressure, and rock deformability, each of which influences the structural behavior of the dam [1]. To describe and predict the structural behavior of dams, over the past decades, a number of deterministic, statistical and hybrid mathematical models have been developed.For a long time, statistical models have been applied to dam safety monitoring to find out the contribution of external loads to dam displacements [2]. A number of statistical models based on multiple linear regression (MLR) and their advanced forms such as hierarchical regression, stepwise multiple regression, robust regression, ridge regression, and partial least squares regression have been shown to be more or less successful in dam modeling [3]. The advantages of the statistical models are the simplicity of formulation, the speed of execution and the availability of any type of correlation between independent and responses variables. In contrast, deterministic models require solving differential equations, for which closed form solutions could be difficult or impossible to obtain [4]. Therefore, many models that are based on numerical methods, such as the finite element method, have been developed as well [5]. Recently, numerical and statistical methods have been enriched with various heuristics from the artificial intelligence (AI) domain, creating hybrid models that combine their advantages. Some of these artificial intelligence techniques and heuristic algorithms are artificial neural networks (ANN) [6], genetic algorithms (GA) [7], support vector machines (SVM) [8], adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference systems (ANFIS) [9,10], Monte Carlo simulations [11], the modified complex method [12] and the artificial immune algorithm (AIA) [13].Recently, Rankovic et al. [9] presented a study in which the objective was to develop an adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) to predict the radial displacements of Bocac arch dam. ANFIS models have been proposed as an alternative approach for an evaporation estimation of the Yuvacik Dam [10]. In his paper, Mata [6] presented a comparison between MLR and ANN models for the characterization of dam behavior under environmental loads for the Alto Rabagao arch dam. In their study, Wang et al. [14] investigated several Artificial Intelligence techniques for modeling monthly river flow discharge time series, which included an ANN approach, an ANFIS technique, GP models and support vector machines (SVM), and compared their performance with traditional time series modeling techniques, such as autoregressive moving-average (ARMA) models. To improve prediction, support vector regression (SVR) upgraded with GAs is often combined with existing ANN and ARMA techniques [8]. Hybrid algorithms and their applications in prediction and optimization are also presented in a number of papers. Gholizadeh and Seyedpoor [15] used a hybrid methodology with a combination of metaheuristics (GA and Particle Swarm Optimization-PSO) and neural networks to propose an efficient soft computing approach to achieve optimal shape design of arch dams that were subjected to natural frequency constraints. There are several recent studies that describe applications of AIA techniques, which imitate the function of the natural immune system. For example, Xi et al. [16] proposed an immune statistical model to resolve the data analysis problems of dam horizontal crest upstream–downstream displacements.The above-mentioned methods play a crucial role in modeling structural dam behavior. However, all of the methods require a persistent set of input parameters, i.e., all of the measurements must be available during the entire examined period. In real-world applications, failures of the measuring equipment can lead to a situation in which the selected model becomes unusable because of volatility of the independent variables. In this paper, the concept of an adaptive system for dam behavior modeling (ASDBM) that is resistant to the variations in the set of measured variables is presented. This system is based on a multiple linear regression model of a dam, the form of which is optimized for the given conditions using genetic algorithms.The adaptive system for the generation of optimized models of dam behavior is a hybrid solution that is based on linear regression models and genetic algorithms. The theoretical background of the applied methods is given in the following sections.An MLR is a method that is used to model a linear relationship between a dependent variable (a predictant) and one or more independent variables (predictors). The general form of an MLR can be written as follows:(1)yi=β0+β1·x1i+β2·x2i+⋯+βj·xji+⋯+εi,i=1,2,…,nwhere yiis a response variable, xjithe predictors (j=1,2,…,k), k the number of significant predictors, the index i shows the sample number, and εiis the independent and normally distributed random variables that have a mean of zero and a variance σ2. In the majority of the applications of linear regression models, the functional forms of the predictors (basis functions) are not clear in advance and are dependent on the nature of the modeled phenomenon [17]. Coefficients β0,…,βkare unknown parameters of the model, which are estimated for a given set of data using the least squares method, which minimizes the sum of the squared error (SSE):(2)SSE=∑i=1nεi2=∑i=1n(yi-b0-∑j=1kbj·xji)2by taking the derivatives of SSE with respect to the b’s and setting them equal to zero. In Eq. (2), the b’s are the estimated values of the model parameters.Genetic algorithms are search techniques that are inspired by the theory of natural selection, in which strong species have a greater opportunity to survive and pass their genes onto future generations via reproduction [18]. GAs are probabilistic algorithms that maintain a population of individuals, P(t)=x1(t),…,xn(t), for the iteration (generation) t, where each individual represents a potential solution to the problem. Each solution xi(t) is evaluated to quantify its fitness. Subsequently, a new population (iteration t+1) is formed by selecting better individuals from those of generation t. In GA terminology, a solution vector x∈X is called an individual or chromosome and corresponds to a unique solution x in the solution space. The chromosomes are made of discrete units called genes. Each gene controls one or more features of the chromosome. In this paper, genes are assumed to be binary digits, according to the original implementation of GAs by Holland.GA uses two operators to generate new solutions from the existing solutions: crossover and mutation. In crossover, two chromosomes, called parents, are combined together to form new chromosomes, called offspring. By iteratively applying the crossover operator, genes of good chromosomes are expected to appear more frequently in the population, which eventually leads to convergence to an overall optimal solution. The mutation operator introduces random changes into the characteristics of chromosomes, for the purpose of reintroducing genetic diversity back into the population and assisting the search to escape from local optima.Reproduction involves selecting a set of chromosomes that will survive into the next generation. There are different selection procedures in GAs depending on how the individual fitnesses are used. Proportional selection, ranking, and tournament selection are the most popular selection procedures. The procedure of a generic GA [19] is given in Fig. 1.After the random generation and evaluation of initial solutions, the population is subjected to the iterative process of mating (crossover), mutation, evaluation and selection for the next iteration (generation). The iterative process is terminated when there is a satisfactory quality of the solutions or when a maximum number of iterations is reached.Among the main problems in real-time applications of predictive models are irregular operations of the measuring equipment, which lead to an impermanent set of available measured variables. The goal of the developed ASDBM system is to achieve an automatic real-time generation of the optimized predictive regression model that is robust to possible changes in the set of input parameters.The ASDBM is a hybrid system that is based on multiple linear regression and genetic algorithms. The core of the system is a module for dam behavior prediction using MLR. As mentioned above, regression models are not tolerant of changes in the set of input variables. Therefore, a module for adaptive generation of the optimized regression model according to currently available measurements has been developed. According to genetic algorithm theory, the determination of the optimal number and form of the regressors in an MLR model is considered to be an optimization problem in which each MLR model represents an individual in the population. The fitness of every single individual is determined by the accuracy and complexity of the model that represents that individual.Fig. 2shows a schematic view of the developed system. The structural dam behavior (1) can be considered to be a black box that transforms the vector of input variables X into the vector of output variables Y. This system is approximately described by the mathematical model (13) based on MLR, which produces a prediction of the structural dam behaviorY^given the known input variables. Feedback (15) performs a comparison (14) between the measurements and model results, and provides possible preventive actions in the case of a significant deviation.To create the learning and testing data sets (8) for the MLR model, all of the significant measurements (e.g., H – headwater, P – amount of precipitations, TA– air temperature, TS– structure temperature) as well as the output variables are stored in the database (3). Depending on the number and type of active sensors (2), the regressor generator (4) creates a container of basis functions (5) that are applicable with the currently available measurements. For example, if the precipitation sensor is inactive, then the container will not include basis functions (potential regressors) that have the precipitation amount as a parameter.Using previously created basis functions, the GA module (5) generates the initial population of regression models (6). Every single individual (MLR model) is formed as a random choice of regressors from the set of available basis functions. The fitness of every single individual in the initial population is determined through the evaluation process (7a) using two criteria: the accuracy and complexity of the model represented by that individual. The accuracy is a degree of closeness of the model results to the measurements for the same historical inputs (8). Considering the fact that an individual represents only the number and type of the regressors, it is necessary to calculate coefficients of regressors, to assess the accuracy of the MLR model (see Section 2.1). Once the coefficients are calculated, the accuracy of the model can be determined using standard statistical parameters, such as the root mean square error or the determination coefficient. The complexity criterion represents an evaluation of the model in terms of the computer time that is required to calculate the results and is determined by the number and type of regressors.New individuals are obtained from existing individuals through the processes of crossover (9) and mutation (10), and their fitnesses are evaluated, as described earlier (7b). Individuals that will pass to the next generation are chosen in the selection process (11) according to their fitness. A search for a better combination of regressors is continued until the termination criteria is reached, such as a satisfactory model accuracy, the number of generations or the searching duration (12). Once a termination criterion is satisfied, the optimized regression model (13) that is compatible with the currently available sensors is obtained. This model can be further used for dam behavior prediction, analysis, and comparison with measurements and possible actions.The aim of the proposed system is the determination of an MLR model that is optimized for currently available measurements. Having in mind that the regressors in MLR can appear in various functional forms, the goal is to find the best-fitted model based on the data at hand. This task is not simply to find the parameters of the MLR model but is also to clarify the best functions of the predictors. The mathematical programming model and optimization algorithm that find an optimal MLR model are described in the following sections.In the structural modeling of concrete dams using MLR, regressors can be roughly divided into several groups: the effects of hydrostatic pressure, the effects of temperature and the effects of time (aging, which is considered to be irreversible) [6]. The effects of hydrostatic pressure variation are usually represented by polynomials, power, exponential or logarithmic functions, depending on the water level. The displacements of the monitoring point located at the dam, which are affected by temperature variations, can be modeled in several ways: using the air or water temperature or using the temperature of characteristic points inside the structure. To represent the time effect, usually the number of days since the beginning of the analysis is considered.Accordingly, let us assume that independent variables (H,P,TA,TS,t,…) can appear in various functional forms (states):H,H2,H3,…,P,P2,P,…,TA,TA2,TA3,TA4,TA5,e-TA,e-TA2,TA,ln(TA),…,TS,TS2,TS3,TS4,TS5,e-TS,TS,ln(TS),…, t,e−t, ln(t), where H is the headwater, P the precipitation amount, TAand TSdenote the air and structure temperature, and t is the number of days since the beginning of the analysis.In general, the MLR model of the considered response variable can be written in the form:(3)y=∑j=1m∑k=1sCjk·βjk·fjk(xj)where m is the total number of predictors, s the number of states for each predictor, fjkthe kth basis form of the jth predictor, βjkthe coefficient of fjk(which should be estimated from the model) and xjis the value of the jth predictor from the vector of independent variables X. Parameter Cjkis a binary variable that is equal to one if its corresponding jth predictor in state k is used in the MLR; otherwise, it is equal to zero.IfMdenotes the set of all MLR models that can be created from the available set of basis functions fjk, then each model ζ fromMcan be written as:(4)y(ζ)=∑j=1m∑k=1sCjk(ζ)·bjk(ζ)·fjk(ζ)(xj),ζ=1,Nwhere N is the total number of models. If the accuracy of model ζ is measured by an adjusted coefficient of multiple determinationRadj2(ζ), then a mathematical programming model to find the best combination of linear regressors can be written in the following form:MaximizeRadj2(ζ),ζ=1,NSubjected to(5)fjk∈{χ,π,θ,τ}(6)χ:{H,H2,H3,...}(7)π:{P,P2,P,...}(8)θ:{TA,TA2,TA3,TA4,TA5,e-TA,e-TA2,TA,ln(TA),...,TS,TS2,TS3,TS4,TS5,e-TS,TS,ln(TS),...}(9)τ:{t,e-t,ln(t),…}where χ is the subset of hydrostatic effects (Eq. (6)), π the set of precipitation effects (Eq. (7)), θ the set of temperature effects (Eq. (8)) and τ is the subset of aging effects (Eq. (9)). Eq. (5) represents set of functions that can be used as regressors in the model, where the number and the type of the basis functions are defined according to theoretical and empirical knowledge. Estimatorsbjk(ζ)of coefficientsβjk(ζ)are obtained based on measured values using the least square method (Section 2.1). The adjusted coefficient of multiple determinationRadj2(ζ)[20] is widely used in the context of statistical models to describe how well a regression hyper-surface fits a set of data and is expressed as(10)Radj2(ζ)=1-n-1n-(d+1)·(1-R2)where n is the number of observations and d is the number of regressors in the model. The term R2 denotes coefficient of multiple determination which is calculated as follows:(11)R2=∑i=1n(yˆi-y¯)2∑i=1n(yi-y¯)2whereyˆiand yidenote predicted and measured values of the response variable, whiley¯is a mean of yi. The value ofRadj2(ζ)is adjusted for the number ofexplanatoryterms in a model and increases only if the new term improves the model more than would be expected by chance.Because the objective function of the problem contains both binary and non-linear variables (Eqs. (4)–(9)), it can be classified as a highly complex non-linear optimization problem and cannot be solved by classical methods. In addition, an enumerative search in the solution space is not applicable because of an exponential increase in the computational time, with a growth in the number of independent variables and states. To overcome this problem, the genetic algorithm described in the following subsection can be used.We define the response variable as a linear regression model and assume that the states of the independent variables are regressors. Each gene in the chromosome includes a corresponding regressor in the model or excludes it. Therefore, all of the chromosomes have a form of the mentioned binary variableCjk(ζ)and can exist in one of two possible states: zero (excluded) or one (included) (see Fig. 3).An example of the genetic structure of the individuals in a population pool is shown in Fig. 4. The first group of genes includes or excludes the influence of some hydrostatic pressure regressors (χ genes). The second group comprises genes that are related to precipitations (π genes). These genes are followed by genes that involve temperature effects (θ genes) and genes that describe irreversible time processes (τ genes). The MLR model represented by the chromosome in Fig. 4 is given in the following equation:(12)yζ=β0+β1·H+β2·H3+β3·P2+β4·TA+β5·ln(TS)+β6·t

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, the concept of an adaptive system for dam behavior modeling (ASDBM) that is resistant to the variations in the set of measured variables is presented. Using genetic algorithms, the system optimizes the multiple linear regression model of a dam according to currently active sensors. The MLR model is optimized based on two criteria: the accuracy and the complexity. For measuring the model accuracy, the adjusted coefficient of multiple determination is used, while the total number of regressors is used as a measure of the model complexity. According to the proposed approach, several software modules have been developed.The performance of the ASDBM system was tested using the Bocac dam case study, in which the radial displacements of a point inside the dam structure as a function of the headwater, precipitation, temperature and time have been modeled. Every time that any sensor became active or inactive, the ASDBM system adjusted the MLR model according to the currently available set of input data. In the time periods in which one or more sensors were inactive, the proposed system showed a significantly better prediction than the original MLR model (which assumes that all of the sensors are always active). In addition, the system has shown the capability of rejecting variables that have no influence on the modeled dam. This capability makes the proposed system useful for monitoring activities and makes it a robust and powerful predictive management tool. The robustness with respect to instrumental error in the monitored data can be improved if the “least square method” component (Fig. 2, label 7) is simply replaced by more robust linear regression method such as robust regression or resistant regression, that are less sensitive to outliers and heteroscedasticity [21].The main limitation of this approach lies in the fact that it does not directly consider the mechanical properties and any possible damage. Additional analysis in the form of non-destructive tests (static and dynamical), computational mechanical modeling and inverse analysis will also be required. Further research should be directed toward the improvement of the complexity criterion using the statistical significance of individual regressors. Another direction for further investigation should be the development of a novel evolutionary heuristic that would force the genetic modification of individuals according to the statistical significance of their regressors.