@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Flexible testing platform for employment of RFID-enabled multi-agent system on flexible assembly line

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The objective of this study is to examine the potential enhancement of flexible assembly line performance through the use of a radio-frequency-identification-enabled multi-agent scheduling and control system (RFID-enabled MASCS).A novel simulation test platform is developed for the examination of an RFID-enabled MASCS in a flexible assembly line, and several system performance measures are considered in the simulation test platform.The developed simulation test platform is based on a hybrid agent (HA) and uses an existing RFID-enabled MASCS architecture.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
RFID technology,Flexible assembly line (FAL),Multi-agent system (MAS),Production scheduling and control,Simulation test platform,Intelligent Manufacturing system,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The success of a flexible assembly line (FAL) depends on efficacious scheduling and control architecture. However, the scheduling and control architectures currently employed in FALs lack the flexibility and reconfiguration capacity to manage disturbances when they occur. Consequently, the system performance rapidly degrades when the system operation is interrupted. The objective of this study is to examine the potential enhancement of FAL performance through the use of a radio-frequency-identification-enabled multi-agent scheduling and control system (RFID-enabled MASCS). A simulation test platform is developed for the examination of an RFID-enabled MASCS in a FAL, and several system performance measures are considered in the simulation test platform. The results indicate that the RFID-enabled MASCS can increase the uptime productivity and production rate of a FAL. A real case-study test is performed, and a 22% decrease in lead time along with significant improvements in other system performance indicators are observed, especially when a series of disturbances occur within the examined assembly machine.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the current era of agile manufacturing, lean manufacturing, intelligent manufacturing worldwide competitiveness and changing client prerequisites underscore the importance of effective planning, scheduling, and control systems [1]. However, as competition becomes increasingly fierce and the need for differentiated and singular product introductions increase, the style of production remains an area in which limited options exist. Producers must change their production systems to adapt to the changes occurring in manufacturing. Effective use of these new systems and machines requires effective scheduling and control systems because the control systems used have a direct influence on the productivity of manufacturing systems [2]. Effective scheduling and control architecture increase the flexibility and reconfiguration possibilities of manufacturing systems [3].A Flexible Assembly Line (FAL) is a unidirectional flow system consisting of a sequence of assembly stations and storage or loading/unloading (L/U) station, coordinated by an automated material handling system. Each station contains assembly robots with limited workspace available for component feeders and gripper magazines. In FAL, various types of products are assembled concurrently. Where, the base part of a product is loaded on a pallet and enters the assembly line at the L/U station. Then, the pallet is carried by a conveyor or an automated guided vehicle through a sequence of assembly stations; modules are assembled and combined with the base part. The product may bypass some stations. When all the required components are assembled and combined with the base part, the product is conveyed back to the L/U station, and the completed product leaves the system [4].The possible consequences of the occurrence of disturbances in a flexible assembly line (FAL) are the degradation of system productivity and the loss of business opportunities, which are crucial for competitiveness [5]. Traditional FAL are not designed to possess responsiveness and re-configuration capability, as they are built upon centralized and hierarchical control structures. These structures exhibit good production optimization but weak response to change, because of their rigidity [6]. Usually, in these paradigms, system shutdown is required when a failure occurs [7]. Therefore, the current challenge is to develop innovative manufacturing scheduling and control systems that respond quickly to changes and production fluctuations, without stopping, re-programming, or re-starting of the process [4,8].In addition to efficiency and productivity, major concerns related to FALs are their lack of flexibility, insufficient agility to address a variety of manufacturing needs, and low-volume production. Furthermore, these systems do not have the ability to be reconfigured in real-time in response to unanticipated events. Adaptability to change and the ability to react in a dynamic fashion to disturbances are highly desirable in competitive manufacturing environments [9,10].The problems related to scheduling and control in FALs are characterized as follows:•Lack of distribution: an FAL is controlled by a central architecture that is located on a host computer; thus, all decisions are made by this control unit.Lack of reactivity: FALs are typically unable to manage a set of simultaneous events that must be addressed (e.g., equipment breakdowns, supply problems, environmental impacts).Lack of autonomous control systems for individual stations.No gathering of real-time data for use in real-time reconfiguration and no part-selection flexibility.Weak response to change as a result of control structure rigidity.To address the above FAL problems, we developed a simulation test platform for the employment of a radio-frequency-identification-enabled multi-agent scheduling and control system (RFID-enabled MASCS). The developed simulation test platform is based on a hybrid agent (HA) and uses an existing RFID-enabled MASCS architecture, which has been developed by the authors in previous studies [10–13]. The HA realizes simultaneous communication between the soft agents, along with communication with other hardware and low-level external software. Communication between the agents and simulation test platform is realized via the extensible markup language (XML). Color Petri Nets (CPN) Tools 4.0 is used as the shop-floor modeling software, as this tool has the ability to communicate with other software via XML. The basic feature of the simulation test platform developed in this study is that it supports the investigation of any control architecture when applied to a discrete manufacturing system. The objective of this research is to investigate whether the performance of an FAL can be improved through the implementation of RFID-enabled MASCS.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. An overview of related literature is presented in the next section, which is followed by a section describing the RFID-enabled MASCS for FAL. The simulation test platform is described in the fourth section, which is followed by the details and results of a related case study. Finally, the conclusions drawn from the results of the study are given.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
