@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Performance-based optimum seismic design of steel structures by a modified firefly algorithm and a new neural network

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An efficient methodology is proposed for performance-based structural optimum design.Optimization task is achieved by a modified firefly algorithm.A new neural network model is proposed to predict the results of pushover analysis.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Structural optimization,Firefly algorithm,Neural network,Performance-based design,Wavelet,Earthquake,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Structural optimization for performance-based seismic design (PBSD) in earthquake engineering aims at finding optimum design variables corresponding to a minimum objective function with constraints on performance requirements. In this study, an efficient methodology, consisting of two computational strategies, is presented for performance-based optimum seismic design (PBOSD) of steel moment frames. In the first strategy, a modified firefly algorithm (MFA) is proposed to efficiently find PBOSD at the performance levels. Because that for computing the structural responses at the performance levels a nonlinear static pushover analysis must be conducted, the overall computational time of optimization process is extremely large. In the second strategy, to reduce the computational burden, a new neural network model termed as wavelet cascade-forward back-propagation (WCFBP) is proposed to effectively predict the results of nonlinear pushover analysis during the optimization process. To illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed methodology, 3, 6 and 12 storey planar steel moment resisting frames are optimized for various performance levels. The results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed soft computing-based methodology for PBOSD of steel structures spending low computational cost.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Traditionally, the seismic design of structures has been strength-based. The occurrence of the recent severe earthquakes in the United States and Japan revealed that although the structures were designed according to the current seismic design codes, the amount of damage they sustained was very high. In the sequel, this made the engineering community to question the effectiveness of the seismic design codes. The need to have higher-performance designs with the ability to limit losses due to property damage resulted in developing performance-based seismic design (PBSD) methodology.Concepts of PBSD have been introduced over the last years by various guidelines [1–3] for the assessment and rehabilitation of existing structures and the analysis and design of new ones. The main objective is to increase the safety against natural hazards and in the case of earthquakes to make them having a predictable and reliable performance. In other words, the structures should be able to resist earthquakes in a quantifiable manner and to preset levels of desired possible damage [4].Immediate Occupancy (IO), Life Safety (LS) and Collapse Prevention (CP) are considered as the performance levels in the PBSD codes. The IO level implies very light damage with minor local yielding and negligible residual drifts. In the Life Safety (LS) level, the structure tolerates severe damage, but it remains safe for the occupants to evacuate the building. The CP level is associated with extensive inelastic distortion of structural members and an increase in load or deflection results in collapse of the structure. Depending on the degree of importance of a structure, it may be desirable to have different levels of performances for different levels of earthquake hazards.The PBSD methods directly address inelastic deformations to identify the levels of damage during severe seismic events. A nonlinear analysis tool is required to evaluate earthquake demands at the various performance levels. Pushover analysis is widely adopted as the effective tool for such nonlinear analysis because of its simplicity compared with dynamic nonlinear procedures. The purpose of the nonlinear static pushover analysis is to assess structural performance in terms of strength and deformation capacity globally as well as at the element level. The outcome of pushover analysis is the inelastic capacity curve of the structure.A highly-efficient design framework can be offered by structural optimization taking advantage of the benefits offered by nonlinear, static or dynamic analysis methods [5]. In order to replace the traditional “trial and error” process with an automatic advanced procedure for PBSD of structures, optimization algorithms can be effectively used. In this case, more elaborate nonlinear analysis procedures, such as pushover analysis, can be incorporated in a structural optimization strategy to evaluate the structural performance at the various performance levels. Many of gradient-based optimization methods have computational difficulties for solving complex problems. In contrast with these optimization algorithms, meta-heuristics can be efficiently employed to tackle such optimization problems. In the last years, extensive researches have been done in the field of performance-based optimum seismic design (PBOSD) of structures. However, meta-heuristics have been employed in a few numbers of these researches. A number of papers published in this area are addressed below.Liu et al. [6] proposed a Genetic Algorithm (GA) based multiobjective structural optimization procedure for steel frames considering weight, maximum interstorey drift for two performance levels, and design complexity criteria objective functions. Fragiadakis and Lagaros [5] presented a methodology based on Evolution Strategies (ES) for the performance-based optimum design of steel structures subjected to seismic loading considering inelastic behavior and life-cycle cost to take into account during the design phase the impact of future earthquakes. Kaveh et al. [7] compared the computational performance of ant colony optimization (ACO) and Genetic Algorithm (GA) meta-heuristics for performance-based optimal seismic design of frame structures. They utilized a nonlinear analysis to arrive at the structural response at various seismic performance levels, employing a simple computer-based method for pushover analysis which accounts for first-order elastic and second-order geometric stiffness properties. In an interesting paper, Fragiadakis et al. [4] presented the application of the performance-based seismic design concept using alternative formulations using a particle swarm optimization (PSO) meta-heuristic algorithm. In the presented formulations, which are consistent with the PBSD concept, the seismic design problem has been treated in a deterministic or a probabilistic manner, with one or more objectives that represent the initial cost or the cost of future earthquake losses that may occur during the lifetime of a structural system. Gholizadeh et al. [8] compared the computational performance of GA, PSO, ACO and harmony search (HS) meta-heuristics for PBOSD of steel structures. Their study demonstrated the superiority of the PSO to the other meta-heuristic algorithms.One of the objectives of the present study is to achieve PBOSD of steel moment-resisting structures using a new and efficient meta-heuristic optimization algorithm. One of the recent additions to meta-heuristics is the firefly algorithm (FA) [9]. The FA is an optimization technique inspired by social behavior of fireflies and the phenomenon of bioluminescent communication. The superiority of FA to PSO and GA was demonstrated in the literature [10,11]. In the present study, a modified firefly algorithm (MFA) is proposed to tackle the PBOSD problem. In the proposed MFA, the FA is employed in the framework of the sequential unconstrained minimization technique (SUMT) [12] using the exterior penalty function method (EPFM) for handling the design constraints. In fact, MFA handles multiple optimization processes in which the initial population of each process is selected from the close neighborhood of the best design found in the previous optimization process. This procedure is repeated until a stopping criterion is satisfied.Although the proposed MFA is an efficient algorithm for implementation of PBOSD process of steel moment-resisting frames taking into consideration the structural response at a number of limit-states, from serviceability to collapse, structural optimization requires extensive use of nonlinear finite element (NFE) analyses. Computational demands result in a prohibitively high computing time for obtaining results from NFE models, especially in an optimization setting. Unreasonably high computing time prevents designers from comprehensively exploring the design space and in this case the optimization algorithm converges to local optima [13]. Due to the fact that the computational burden of OPBSD is usually high, the other aim of the present paper is to utilize neural networks to substantially reduce the computational costs. Therefore, neural networks can be employed to predict the nonlinear responses of the structures during the optimization process. The accuracy of the predicted response plays an important role in the feasibility of the optimal design. If the predicted responses are not accurate, the optimization algorithm converges to local optima or even to infeasible designs. In order to attain better and reliable results, a new neural network model is proposed in this study by combining wavelet theory [14] and cascade-forward back-propagation (CFBP) [15] neural network and it is called wavelet cascade-forward back-propagation (WCFBP). To design the proposed WCFBP neural network model, the transfer function of hidden layer neurons of CFBP network is substituted with a dilated and translated wavelet function. The training and testing results of WCFBP are compared with those of the CFBP, feed-forward back-propagation (FFBP) [15] and wavelet feed-forward back-propagation (WFFBP) neural network models indicating the superiority of WCFBP to the CFBP, FFBP and WFFBP. Hence, during the optimization process only the WCFBP model is used to predict the results of nonlinear analyses.To assess the efficiency of the proposed methodology, 3, 6 and 12 storey planar steel moment frames are optimized for various performance levels by FA and MFA meta-heuristics incorporating WCFBP neural network. The results reveal that, however, the optimal solutions found by the mentioned meta-heuristics using pushover analysis are better than those of obtained by using WCFBP neural network, but the overall time of neural network-based processes is about 0.1 that of the pushover analysis-based one. Therefore, the proposed methodology can be effectively and reliably utilized for performing PBOSD process of steel moment frames.According to current design codes the strength of the structure is evaluated at one limit-state and the serviceability is usually checked in order to ensure that the structure will not deflect excessively. PBSD methodology differs from seismic design procedures for the design of new buildings specified in the current building design codes. PBSD is a design procedure in which the seismic demands of a structure are determined at predefined performance levels by introducing design checks at a higher level to ensure reliable and predictable seismic performance over its life.The definition of the performance objectives is the fundamental part in PBSD. A performance objective is defined as a given level of performance for a specific hazard level. To define a performance objective, at first the level of structural performance should be selected and then the corresponding seismic hazard level should be determined. In the present paper, IO, LS and CP performance levels are considered according to FEMA-273 [16]. Each objective corresponds to a given probability of being exceed during 50years. A usual assumption [5] is that the IO, LS and CP performance levels correspond respectively to a 50%, 10% and 2% probability of exceedance in 50year period. In this study, also the mentioned hazard levels are considered.Another part of PBSD is structural analysis for evaluation of structural capacity. The structural capacity is associated to the maximum inter-storey drift values. In this study the nonlinear static pushover analysis, is used to quantify seismic induced nonlinear response of structures. Among various methods of static pushover analyses, the displacement coefficient method [2] procedure is adopted in this paper to evaluate the seismic demands on building frameworks under equivalent static earthquake loading. In this method the structure is pushed with a specific distribution of the lateral loads until the target displacement is reached. The target displacement can be obtained from the FEMA-356 [2] as:(1)δt=C0C1C2C3SaTe24π2gwhere C0 relates the spectral displacement to the likely building roof displacement; C1 relates the expected maximum inelastic displacements to the displacements calculated for linear elastic response; C2 represents the effect of the hysteresis shape on the maximum displacement response and C3 accounts for P–Δ effects. The Teis the effective fundamental period of the building in the direction under consideration; Sais the response spectrum acceleration corresponding to the Te.In this study, the pushover analyses were performed using the OPENSEES [17] platform.In order to ensure that the obtained designs possess desirable performance, according to the employed design code, several constraints should be considered during the design process. These constraints can be checked in two steps as follows:The structure is checked for gravity loads. To perform serviceability checks, the following load combinations (QGSC) are taken into account:(2)QGSC=QDQD+QL1.4QD1.2QD+1.6QLwhere QDand QLare dead and live loads, respectively.In this work, the checks of LRFD-AISC [18] code must be satisfied as follows for the non-seismic load combinations for all structural elements.(3)forPuϕcPn<0.2;gσ,l(X)=Pu2ϕcPn+MuxϕbMnx+MuyϕbMny-1⩽0,l=1,…,ne(4)forPuϕcPn⩾0.2;gσ,l(X)=PuϕcPn+89MuxϕbMnx+MuyϕbMny-1⩽0,l=1,…,newhere Puis the required strength (tension or compression); Pnis the nominal axial strength (tension or compression);ϕcis the resistance factor (ϕc=0.9for tension,ϕc=0.85for comparison); Muxand Muyare the required flexural strengths in the x and y directions; respectively; Mnxand Mnyare the nominal flexural strengths in the x and y directions; andϕbis the flexural resistance reduction factor (ϕb=0.9); X is the vector of design variables.As the completion of the first step is prerequisite for the second one, if the checks of the first step are not satisfied then the candidate design is rejected, else a nonlinear pushover analysis based on the displacement coefficient method is performed in order to estimate the capacity of the structure in different performance levels. The structural capacity is associated to the maximum inter-storey drift values. The constraints of the second step can be described as follows:The applied PBSD concept is a displacement-based design procedure where the design criteria and the capacity demand levels are expressed in terms of displacements rather than forces [19]. To perform ultimate limit-state checks, the lateral drifts should be determined at various performance levels by nonlinear static pushover analysis. In nonlinear static pushover analysis, the lateral load distribution in the height of the frame is defined as follows [16]:(5)Ps=VbGsHsk∑m=1nsGmHmkwhere Ps=lateral load applied at storey s; Vb=base shear; Hs, Hm=height from the base of the building to stories s and m, respectively; Gs, Gm=seismic weight for storey levels s and m, respectively; k=constant number determined by period and in this paper k is chosen to be 2; ns is the number of stories.The following component gravity forces,QGPBD,is considered for combination with seismic loads according to [16].(6)QGPBD=1.1(QD+QL)In order to implement pushover analysis to evaluate the seismic demands of the structures, the target displacement should be determined. To achieve this task, Sashould be calculated for the three performance levels. In this case three acceleration design spectra, which represent three different earthquake levels corresponding to 50%, 10%, and 2% probability of exceeding in a 50-year period, are taken as the basis for calculating the seismic loading for the three performance levels IO, LS, and CP, respectively. Without loss of generality, the calculation of spectral accelerationSaifor each design spectrum i can be expressed as:(7)Sai=FaSsi(0.4+3T/T0)if0<T⩽0.2T0iFaSsiif0.2T0i<T⩽T0iFvS1i/TifT>T0i,i=IO,LS,CP(8)T0i=FvS1iFaSsiwhere T is the elastic fundamental period of the structure, which is computed here from structural modal analysis;SsiandS1iare the short-period and the first sec.-period response acceleration parameters, respectively. Faand Fvare the site coefficient determined respectively from FEMA-273 [16], based on the site class and the values of the response acceleration parametersSsiandS1i, according to Table 1[7].The lateral drift constraints at various performance levels can be expressed as follows:(9)gθ,kIO(X)=θkIOθallIO-1⩽0,k=1,2,…,ns(10)gθ,kLS(X)=θkLSθallLS-1⩽0,k=1,2,…,ns(11)gθ,kCP(X)=θkCPθallCP-1⩽0,k=1,2,…,nswhereθkIO,θkLSandθkCPare the kth storey drifts of a steel moment-resisting frame associated with IO, LS and CP performance levels, respectively;θallIO,θallLSandθallCPare their allowable values which in this study are chosen to be 0.7%, 2.5% and 5.0%, respectively [16].In a sizing structural optimization problem, the aim is usually to minimize the weight of the structure under some behavioral constraints. For a steel frame structure consisting of ne members that are collected in ng design groups, if the variables associated with each design group are selected from a given profile list of steel sections, a discrete optimization problem can be formulated as follows:(12)Find:X={x1x2…xi…xng}T(13)To minimize:w(X)=∑i=1ngρiAi∑j=1nmLj(14)Subject to:gk(X)⩽0,k=1,2,…,ncwhere xiis an integer value expressing the sequence numbers of steel sections assigned to ith group; w represents the weight of the frame, ρiand Aiare weight of unit volume and cross-sectional area of the ith group section, respectively; nm is the number of elements collected in the ith group; Ljis the length of the jth element in the ith group; gk(X) is the kth behavioral constraint and nc is the number of constraints.In the present study, design variables are selected from W-shaped sections found in the AISC design manual.In this study, the constraints of PBOSD problem is handled using the concept of exterior penalty functions method (EPFM) [12]. Penalty functions method transforms the basic PBOSD problem into alternative formulations such that numerical solutions are sought by solving a sequence of unconstrained minimization problems. In this case, the pseudo unconstrained objective function is expressed as follows:(15)Φ(X,rp)=w(X)1+rp∑k=1nsmax0,gθ,iIO2+max0,gθ,iLS2+max0,gθ,iCP2where Φ and rpare the pseudo objective function and positive penalty parameter, respectively.By choosing the minor values for the penalty parameter, the effect of constraints in pseudo objective function is decreased and the optimization algorithm converges to an infeasible solution. In other side, by choosing the high value for penalty parameter, the effect of constraints in pseudo objective function is increased and the found solution is merely a local optimum. If the unconstrained minimization of the pseudo objective function is repeated for a sequence of values of the penalty parameter in ascending order the solution may be brought to converge to that of the original problem. These methods are known as sequential unconstrained minimization technique (SUMT) [12].In this paper, to tackle the PBOSD problem a new meta-heuristic algorithm is proposed and its basics are explained in the next section.Meta-heuristic optimization algorithms reveal their promising abilities for comprehensively exploring the design space in comparison with gradient-based methods [20]. The meta-heuristics due to their high potential for simple computer implementation are now emerged as one of the most practical approaches for solving many complex problems. In the present work, a modified version of FA is proposed to solve the PBOSD problem.The FA is a new meta-heuristic optimization algorithm inspired by the flashing behavior of fireflies. The FA is a population-based algorithm, which may share many similarities with PSO. Fireflies communicate, search for pray and find mates using bioluminescence with varied flashing patterns [11]. In order to develop the firefly algorithm, natural flashing characteristics of fireflies have been idealized using the following three rules [9]:a.All of the fireflies are unisex; therefore, one firefly will be attracted to other fireflies regardless of their sex.Attractiveness of each firefly is proportional to its brightness, thus for any two flashing fireflies, the less bright firefly will move towards the brighter one. The attractiveness is proportional to the brightness and they both decrease as their distance increases. If there is no brighter one than a particular firefly, it will move randomly.The brightness of a firefly is determined according to the nature of the objective function.The attractiveness of a firefly is determined by its brightness or light intensity which is obtained from the objective function of the optimization problem. However, the attractiveness β, which is related to the judgment of the beholder, varies with the distance between two fireflies. The attractiveness β can be defined by [21]:(16)β=β0e-γ·d2where d is the distance of two fireflies, β0 is the attractiveness at d=0, and γ is the light absorption coefficient. The fixed value β0=1 is employed in the present study in line with [11].The distance between two fireflies i and j at Xiand Xjrespectively, is determined as follows:(17)dij=‖Xi-Xj‖=∑(xi,k-xj,k)2where xi,kis the kth parameter of the spatial coordinate xiof the ith firefly.In the FA, the movement of a firefly i towards a more attractive (brighter) firefly j is determined by the following equation:(18)Xit+1=Xit+β0e-γ·dij2Xjt-Xit+λmax-λmax-λmintmax·t(r-0.5)where the second term is related to the attraction; λmax and λmin are the maximum and minimum values of the randomization parameter; tmax and t are the numbers of maximum iterations and present iteration, respectively; r is a random number generator uniformly distributed in [0,1].As demonstrated in [9], the computational performance of the FA is better in comparison with other meta-heuristic algorithms such as PSO and GA, but it is not yet able to achieve a satisfactory trade-off between two contradictory requirements of the search process known as exploration and exploitation and this results in premature convergence to local optima. In the present study, to balance the exploration and exploitation abilities of the algorithm a modified FA (MFA) algorithm is proposed. It is demonstrated in the past researches [22] that the probability of finding a desirable optimum increases with additional searches around the local optima. In the present study, this idea is effectively employed in the framework of MFA. The proposed MFA is a multi-stage implementation of FA based on SUMT. In this case, a preliminary optimization process is implemented using FA by choosing a small value for rpand the best solution found is saved as X∗. The initial population of the next optimization process is selected from neighboring region of the X∗. If the best solution of the current optimization process is better than that of the previous optimization process, it is considered as the X∗, otherwise the saved X∗ remains unchanged. To select the initial population for performing a new optimization process, X∗ is directly imported to the new population and the remaining fireflies are selected from the neighborhood of X∗ in the design space using the following equation:(19)X=N(X∗,ξ·X∗)whereN(X∗,ξ·X∗)represents a matrix of normally distributed random numbers with the mean of X∗ and the standard deviation ofξ·X∗.When the new population is initialized based on X∗, another optimization process is implemented by FA using an increased rp. In this process, the value of rpis increased as follows [22]:(20)rpk+1=10rpk,k=1,2,…,noutwhererpkrepresents the value of the penalty parameter in kth optimization process; nout is the maximum number of optimization processes in the framework of SUMT.This procedure is repeated until the algorithm converges. The convergence in the inner and outer loops is achieved when the limit number of generations in each loop is reached (ninfor inner loop and noutfor outer loop). Fig. 1depicts the pseudo code of the proposed MFA.The algorithmic parameters γ, λmax, λmin, and ξ must be determined before using FA and MFA. In this work, a sensitivity analysis is implemented for each presented numerical example to find the best combination of the parameters.In the present study, neural network technique is utilized to predict the nonlinear responses of the structures at various performance levels. In the next section the basic concepts of the employed neural networks are briefly explained.Neural networks are more appropriate techniques for simplification of complex and time consuming problems due to their ability in processing and mapping external data and information based on past experiences. The principal advantage of a properly trained neural network is that it requires a trivial computational burden to produce an approximate solution. Such approximations appear to be valuable in situations where the actual response computations are intensive in terms of computing time and a quick estimation is required [23]. In the present study, feed-forward back-propagation (FFBP) and cascade-forward back-propagation (CFBP) neural networks are focused and a new neural network model is proposed to effectively predict the nonlinear responses of the structures during the PBOSD process. In the next section, the fundamentals of FFBP and CFBP neural networks are briefly described and then the proposed neural network model is presented.Standard BP [24] is a gradient descent optimization algorithm, which adjusts the weights in the steepest descent direction according to the following equation:(21)Wk+1BP=WkBP-ηkGkwhereWkBP, Gkand ηkare the weight matrix, current gradient matrix and the learning rate, respectively.Levenberg–Marquardt (LM) [25] algorithm was designed to approach second-order training speed without having to compute the Hessian matrix. In the LM algorithm the weights updating is achieved as follows:(22)Wk+1BP=WkBP-[JTJ+μI]-1JTEwhere J is the Jacobian matrix that contains first derivatives of the network errors with respect to the weights (for more details one can refer to [24]), and E is a vector of network errors. Also, μ is a correction factor. The value of μ is decreased after each successful step and is increased when a tentative step would increase the performance function.Hyperbolic tangent sigmoid (HTS) function [24] is usually taken as the transfer function of hidden layer neurons of FFBP and CFBP networks. The HTS function is given as follows:(23)fHTS(z)=ez-e-zez+e-zOutput layer of both FFBP and CFBP networks consist of neurons with linear transfer function. The typical architecture of a two layer FFBP network is shown in Fig. 2a. The CFBP network is similar to FFBP network, but includes a weight connection from the input to output layer. The typical architecture of a two layer CFBP network is also shown in Fig. 2b.Connection between input layer and output layer in CFBP network makes it more efficient than FFBP network in the some cases [26]. Furthermore, the additional connections might improve the speed at which the network learns the desired relationship [25]. These points imply the efficiency of the CFBP to the FFBP network.One of the problems that occur during BP networks training is “overfitting”. In this case, the error on the training set is small, but by presenting new data to the networks the error is large. One of the techniques used to prevent “overfitting” is regularization [15] in which the performance function of the networks is modified by adding a term that consists of the mean of the sum of squares of the networks’ weights as follows:(24)msereg=κ1m∑i=1mEi2+(1-κ)n∑j=1nwWjBP2where κ, m and nw are the performance ratio, size of Eiand number of networks’ weights, respectively.Among the neural network techniques, the wavelet neural network is an attractive modeling tool. Wavelet neural networks combine the advantages of wavelets and neural networks, and provide an efficient constructive method for the implementation of networks. Therefore, wavelet neural networks can be considered as an alternative to traditional neural networks [27].A functionf∈L2(R)is called a wavelet [28] if it has zero average on(-∞,+∞). This wavelet must have at least a minimum oscillation and a fast decay to zero in both the positive and negative directions of its amplitude. These three properties are the Grossmann–Morlet admissibility conditions of a function that is required for the wavelet transform. The wavelet transform is an operation which transforms a function by integrating it with modified versions of some kernel functions. The kernel function is called the mother wavelet and the modified version is its daughter wavelet. Sets of wavelets are employed for approximation of a signal and the goal is to find a set of daughter wavelets constructed by dilated and translated original wavelets or mother wavelets that best represent the signal. The daughter wavelets are generated from a single mother wavelet f(z) by dilation and translation as follows:(25)fa,b(z)=1afz-bawhere a>0 is the dilation factor and b is the translation factor [29].A number of wavelet FFBP (WFFBP) networks have been proposed by researchers [30–31] for structural engineering applications. In the present paper, a new wavelet CFBP (WCFBP) neural network is proposed for prediction of nonlinear responses of structures.In this paper to construct WFFBP and WCFBP neural networks, hidden layer HTS function of FFBP and CFBP networks are substituted with dilated and translated wavelets. Three main types of wavelet functions, i.e. radial basis (RB) [15], PolyWog1 (PW1) [32] and Mexican Hat (MH) [32], are examined. The daughter wavelets of RB, PW1 and MH are defined by Eqs. (26)–(28), respectively.(26)fa,bRB(z)=1ae-z-ba2(27)fa,bPW1(z)=1a·ez-bae-0.5z-ba2(28)fa,bMH(z)=1a·1-z-ba2e-0.5z-ba2wherefa,bRB,fa,bPW1andfa,bMHare translated and dilated RB, PW1 and MH functions, respectively.The graphs of RB, PW1 and MH with various values of a and b=0.0 are shown in Fig. 3.There are different approaches to train wavelet networks. In one approach, both the position and dilation of the wavelets are optimized besides the network weights. In another approach, the position and dilation of the wavelets taken to be fixed and only the weights of network are optimized [32]. In the present paper, the second approach is implemented for training the WFFBP and WCFBP neural networks. In this approach, for the various values of a and b the neural network model is trained and its generalization ability (i.e. prediction accuracy) is investigated. The values associated with the best generalization are taken as optimal combination.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
An efficient methodology is presented to implement PBOSD for steel frame structures by hybridizing meta-heuristic optimization algorithms and neural networks. A new MFA meta-heuristic is proposed for achieving optimization task. In order to ensure that the obtained optimum designs possess desirable performance, two sets of constraints are considered during the optimization process. In the serviceability checks, a linear static analysis is performed and all structural elements are checked for gravity non-seismic load combinations according to AISC-LRFD code. In the ultimate limit-state checks a nonlinear pushover analysis is performed to check the maximum inter-storey drift values for seismic load combination according to FEMA code. The numerical results reveal that the proposed MFA is an efficient meta-heuristic however, the overall computational time of optimization process due to performing many nonlinear pushover analyses is extremely large. To mitigate the computational rigor a novel neural network model is proposed to effectively predict the results of nonlinear pushover analysis during the optimization process. The best setting of internal parameters of FA and MFA are determined by performing sensitivity analyses incorporating the trained WCFBP NN model. In order to illustrate the effectiveness of the hybrid soft computing-based methodology, three low-rise, mid-rise and high-rise planner steel moment-resisting frame structures are optimized for various performance levels. The numerical results demonstrate that the proposed MFA is better than the FA in terms of convergence rate and optimum weight. The weight of optimum structures found by MFA using pushover analysis is slightly lighter compared with those of found using the WCFBP NN model. However the computational time of WCFBP-based optimization process for low-, mid- and high-rise frames are respectively about 11%, 9% and 4% those times required by the pushover-based optimization processes. Finally, it can be concluded that the presented methodology can be effectively and reliably used for performance-based optimum seismic design of steel structures at low computational effort.