@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Generation of hierarchical multi-resolution medial axis for CAD models

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An efficient approach to generating hierarchical multi-resolution MA of a CAD model is proposed.The affected region and the re-voxelization region are proposed to reuse voxels when the MA level is upgraded.An adaptive double queue distance dilation based algorithm is proposed to refine MA automatically.The MA quality metric is proposed to evaluate the MA.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hierarchical computation,Medial axis,Multi-resolution,CAD model,Distance dilation,MA quality,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Medial axis (MA) is used as an effective description for objects in many engineering fields. A difficulty for the current methods for the generation of MA of CAD models is the balance between the efficiency and the quality. In this study, an approach to iteratively generating hierarchical multi-resolution MA is proposed. In each iteration, only a small part of MA that affects MA quality is refined, by which the time cost and the space cost are reduced greatly. First, the model is voxelized and its initial MA is generated by distance dilation method. Meanwhile, the MA quality is computed and evaluated. Second, if the MA quality does not satisfy the requirement, upgrade the MA level and re-compute the local MA in the affected region until the MA quality does. Finally, by combining the local MA in the affected region with the reused MA in other regions, hierarchical multi-resolution MA is obtained. Several examples are given to demonstrate the outperformance of the proposed method in terms of time and space.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Medial axis (MA) is first proposed by Blum [1] as an effective description for objects. The MA of an object is the set of all points having more than one closest point on the object's boundary [2]. It has been widely used in many engineering fields, such as finite element analysis, shape analysis, robot route planning, solid modeling, and mesh generation [3–5]. For a complicated CAD model, as the computational complexity is too high, it is difficult to compute its accurate MA. Therefore, researchers usually use approximation methods to obtain the MA of a CAD model. For example, the surface-based method [6] computes approximate MA represented by points. The MA usually consists of some MA segments, each of which is generated by one or two boundary faces. Here, an MA segment here may refer to a curve edge/face/point based on the context. Moreover, the connection between MA segments can be obtained directly during the generation process by checking common MA voxels of different MA segments. However, the resultant MA of the surface-based method is difficult to be transformed to MA segments.Another work is thinning method based on distance transformation [7]. During the thinning process of a CAD model, the input model is usually first discretized into some voxels under a certain resolution, and then the MA represented by voxels is computed. However, it is not easy to satisfy both the requirement of the MA quality and the computational efficiency at the same time in the computation of the MA of a CAD model. If the model resolution is low, the MA quality will be low since the details of the MA cannot be properly represented by large voxels although the computational efficiency is high. On the contrary, the time cost and space cost will be intolerable although the MA quality is high if the model resolution is high. How to balance the quality and the efficiency is a difficult problem during the MA generation. To control the resolution, Gao et al. [8] proposed a method of multi-resolution MA generation. In their method, the concept “dilation unit” is used to combine the small boundary faces with large boundary faces to ignore their impact on the MA. Their method can efficiently suppress noises and thus improve the MA robustness. However, since the voxel resolution is still constant in this method, the MA segments generated by non-noise small boundary faces that have to be concerned still cannot be well computed efficiently.Based on above analysis, a method is proposed to compute the hierarchical MA of a CAD model with the help of multi-resolution voxels. The main idea is that based on the initial MA, local MA is refined iteratively to improve the MA quality until the requirement is satisfied. In the hierarchical MA, high-resolution voxels are used for the small boundary faces and MA segments generated by them to embody the details while normal-resolution voxels are for other boundary faces and MA segments generated by them. Therefore, high-quality MA can be generated at both low time cost and low space cost. The novelty of this study will be reflected in the following aspects. (1) A method to evaluate the MA quality is proposed based on boundary faces and MA segments. (2) In each model level, to refine the model based on the voxelized model efficiently, a method is proposed to determine the details of the model, called the re-voxelization region and conduct multi-resolution voxelization in the re-voxelization region by high-level voxels. (3) The affected region is proposed only in which the local MA needs to be refined to improve the MA quality. By combining the new local MA to the reused MA, the hierarchical MA is obtained. (4) The adaptive distance dilation is proposed to refine MA voxels by using boundary voxels in re-voxelization region. Based on the adaptive distance dilation, an adaptive double queues distance dilation based algorithm is proposed, which can be used to compute voxel distances for generating MA voxels.As the re-voxelization region and the affected region are both much smaller than the entire model, not only the high-quality MA can be achieved, but also low time complexity and space complexity is ensured.This paper is organized as follows. Related work is introduced in Section 2 while the basic concept and method overview are introduced in Section 3. In Sections 4, 5 and 6, the multi-resolution voxelization, computation of multi-resolution voxel distances and multi-resolution MA generation method are detailed, respectively. The complexity, robustness and accuracy are analyzed in Section 7. Some examples are illustrated in Section 8 while conclusions are given in Section 9.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, a method is proposed to generate the hierarchical multi-resolution MA for CAD models. The contributions of this paper are(1)The hierarchical MA and multi-resolution voxels are proposed to compute MA with different qualities. In hierarchical MA, the MA robustness and MA sensitivity are both considered. For each MA level, voxels of different resolutions are used.A reasonable method is proposed to evaluate the MA quality. By evaluating the impacts of all boundary faces on the normal MA segments, MA quality is computed. If the MA quality does not satisfy the requirement, the MA level can be automatically upgraded to obtain the MA with better quality iteratively.The re-voxelization region is proposed to refine the model locally when MA level upgrades. The affected region is proposed to simplify the computation of its voxel distances and MA generation. Therefore, the information outside the affected region can be reused to improve the efficiency greatly. Meanwhile, the re-voxelization region is proposed to simply the voxelization by reusing the region outside the affected region.The adaptive distance dilation is proposed which can refine the basic voxels in distance dilation automatically. By using adaptive distance dilation, the adaptive DQDD-based algorithm is proposed to compute the affected region and multi-resolution voxel distances. The refined MA by multi-resolution MA voxels with higher MA quality is generated.However, this method has some shortcomings. First, the efficiency should be improved when there are many detailed parts in a model. Second, this method should be extended to mesh models.