@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Bat inspired algorithm for discrete size optimization of steel frames

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Bat-inspired (BI) search is a recently developed optimization technique.BI makes use of echolocation behavior of bats in seeking a design space.A novel algorithm is developed with BI for steel frame optimization.Capabilities and potentials of BI are investigated in structural optimization.Efficiency of the BI algorithm is verified through numerical examples.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Structural optimization,Discrete optimization,Metaheuristic search techniques,Bat inspired search,Steel frames,Minimum weight design,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Bat inspired (BI) algorithm is a recently developed metaheuristic optimization technique inspired by echolocation behavior of bats. In this study, the BI algorithm is examined in the context of discrete size optimization of steel frames designed for minimum weight. In the optimum design problem frame members are selected from available set of steel sections for producing practically acceptable designs subject to strength and displacement provisions of American Institute of Steel Construction-Allowable Stress Design (AISC-ASD) specification. The performance of the technique is quantified using three real-size large steel frames under actual load and design considerations. The results obtained provide a sufficient evidence for successful performance of the BI algorithm in comparison to other metaheuristics employed in structural optimization.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A steel frame refers to a type of structure where vertical steel columns and horizontal beams generally selected from I-shaped steel sections are arranged in the form of a rectangular grid to support lateral and vertical loads acting on a building. The lateral stability of such systems is provided by flexural stiffness of beams and columns if beams are rigidly connected to columns at joints. Alternatively, moment-free connections can be used, in which case the framework must be stiffened with a full-bracing system that behaves like a vertical truss throughout the height of the building to transmit lateral forces to the ground. Different types of floor slabs can be adopted in such systems in composite or non-composite forms. A composite floor consists of a high-strength profiled steel deck with concrete topping cast and is more preferable for multi-story buildings due to high speed of construction.Both safety and economy have to be considered while designing a steel frame. The common practice followed by a practicing engineer is to observe structural safety always, while an economical design is pursued meanwhile using intuition, experience and a trial-and-error based procedure. However, despite the best effort of the designer, the optimum design, which leads to minimum weight or cost of the structure, can be reached at almost no times. Further, sometimes a design produced this way may lead to very uneconomical solutions especially when the design is governed by displacement constraints. Hence, it is essential that the design process of steel frames be implemented in conjunction of computer-aided numerical algorithms that are automated to achieve optimum design of such structures.In the past optimum design of structures was overwhelmingly carried out using optimality criteria (OC) and mathematical programming (MP) based methods [1]. Despite strong mathematical backgrounds and remarkable speed of convergence to the optimum, these methods have found scarce applications in discrete size optimization problems of steel frames. In the aforementioned problems, a set of steel sections selected from available section tables are initially collected in a design pool. Each steel section is assigned a sequence number that varies between one to the total number of sections in the list. The selection of steel sections for member groups is carried out using these numbers. This selection should be performed in such a way that a steel frame has the minimum weight or cost while behavior and performance of the structure is within the limitations described according to serviceability and strength requirements of a chosen code of design practice. The need for selecting member sizes from a list of ready sections as well as gradient-based nature of OC and MP algorithms hampers a direct application of these methods to such problems encountered in real life. Fortunately, in the last two decades a number of computational methods, commonly referred to as metaheuristics in the literature, have been developed as powerful tools that can effectively deal with discrete structural optimization problems at the expense of increased computational cost [2–10]. These novel and innovative approaches are derivative-free methods and make use of ideas inspired from the nature. There are a large number of metaheuristic techniques available in the literature nowadays. The state-of-the-art review of metaheuristics in structural design optimization is outlined in several excellent review papers, such as Lamberti and Pappalettere [11], Saka [12], and Saka and Dogan [13].One recent addition to metaheuristic algorithms is the bat-inspired (BI) search. The idea behind this technique is to imitate echolocation behavior of bats. In simple words, echolocation is used to refer to the way bats use to navigate their surroundings. Bats get to find their directions and detect prey and different types of objects around them even in complete darkness. They achieve this by emitting calls out to the environment and listening to the echoes that bounce back from them. The echolocation behavior of bats was turned into a numerical algorithm by Yang [14] for solving optimization problems. A verification of this algorithm was conducted using several standard test functions of unconstrained optimization in Yang [14,15]. Besides, the technique was successfully applied to some benchmark constrained engineering optimization problems in Yang and Gandomi [16] and Gandomi et al. [17].In Hasançebi et al. [18] a thorough reformulation of the BI algorithm was proposed for sizing optimization of steel trusses. In this study, the BI algorithm was scrutinized in the context of discrete sizing optimization of steel frames. It should be underlined that the latter is seemingly a more challenging optimization problem. The reason is that truss members carry only one type of force (i.e. axial force), and a discrete optimization process can be carried out for these systems using a well-ordered section list generated by sorting steel sections according to their cross-sectional areas. On the other hand, beams and columns in a steel framework are axial–flexural members. The governing behavior of a frame member is determined by relative magnitudes of axial force and bending moment carried by the member at a time. When steel sections are sorted according to a chosen sectional property, i.e. cross-sectional area or moment or inertia, there is no guarantee that the next section in the list is stronger for some frame members. This introduces a great deal of disorder in the list, and makes the search process more complicated for an algorithm. Hence, aside from presenting a new application of the BI algorithm, this study intends to investigate efficiency of this technique in more complicated problems of structural optimization. In the study strength and displacement provisions of steel frames are imposed according to the provisions of AISC-ASD specification [19]. The numerical performance of the BI algorithm is tested and verified using three real-size design examples. The numerical results evince that the BI algorithm performs very efficiently for this class of problems and produces improved results as compared to other techniques of metaheuristics.For a steel structure consisting of Nmmembers that are collected in Nddesign groups (variables), the optimum design problem according to AISC-ASD [19] code yields the following discrete programming problem, if the design groups are selected from steel sections in a given profile list.The objective is to find a vector of integer values I (Eq. (1)) representing the sequence numbers of steel sections assigned to Ndmember groups(1)IT=[I1,I2,…,INd]to minimize the weight (W) of the frame(2)W=∑i=1NdρiAi∑j=1NtLjwhere Aiand ρiare the length and unit weight of the steel section adopted for member group i, respectively, Ntis the total number of members in group i, and Ljis the length of the member j which belongs to group i.The members subjected to a combination of axial compression and flexural stress must be sized to meet the following stress constraints:(3)iffaFa>0.15;faFa+Cmxfbx1-faFex′Fbx+Cmyfby1-faFey′Fby-1.0⩽0(4)fa0.60Fy+fbxFbx+fbyFby-1.0⩽0(5)iffaFa⩽0.15;faFa+fbxFbx+fbyFby-1.0⩽0If the flexural member is under tension, then the following formula is used instead:(6)fa0.60Fy+fbxFbx+fbyFby-1.0⩽0In Eqs. (3)–(6), Fyis the material yield stress, and fa=(P/A) represents the computed axial stress, where A is the cross-sectional area of the member. The computed flexural stresses due to bending of the member about its major (x) and minor (y) principal axes are denoted by fbxand fby, respectively.Fex′andFey′denote the Euler stresses about principal axes of the member that are divided by a safety factor of 23/12. Fastands for the allowable axial stress under axial compression force alone, and is calculated depending on elastic or inelastic bucking failure mode of the member using Formulas 1.5-1 and 1.5-2 given in AISC-ASD [19]. The allowable bending compressive stresses about major and minor axes are designated by Fbxand Fby, which are computed using the Formulas 1.5-6a or 1.5-6b and 1.5-7 given in AISC-ASD [19]. It is important to note that while calculating allowable bending stresses, a newer formulation (Eq. (7)) of moment gradient coefficient cbgiven in ANSI/AISC 360-05 [20] is employed in the study to account for the effect of moment gradient on lateral torsional buckling resistance of the elements,(7)cb=12.5Mmax2.5Mmax+3MA+4MB+3MCRm⩽3.0where Mmax, MA, MBand MCare the absolute values of maximum, quarter-point, midpoint, and three-quarter point moments along the unbraced length of the member, respectively, and Rmis a coefficient which is equal to 1.0 for doubly symmetric sections. Cmxand Cmyare the reduction factors, introduced to counterbalance overestimation of the second-order moments by the amplification factor1-fa/Fe′. For unbraced frame members, they are taken as 0.85. For braced frame members without transverse loading between their ends, they are calculated from Cm=0.6−0.4(M1/M2), where M1/M2 is the ratio of smaller end moment to the larger end moment. For braced frame members having transverse loading between their ends, they are determined from the formulaCm=1+ψ(fa/Fe′)based on a rational approximate analysis outlined in AISC-ASD [19] Commentary-H1, where ψ is a parameter that considers maximum deflection and maximum moment in the member.For the computation of allowable compression and Euler stresses, the effective length factors (K) are required. For beam and bracing members, K is taken equal to unity. For column members, alignment charts furnished in AISC-ASD [19] can be utilized. In this study, however, the effective length factors of columns in braced and unbraced steel frames are calculated from the following approximate formulas developed by Dumonteil [21], which are accurate to within about −1.0% and +2.0% of the exact results [22]:For unbraced members:(8)K=1.6GAGB+4(GA+GB)+7.5GA+GB+7.5For braced members:(9)K=3GAGB+1.4(GA+GB)+0.643GAGB+2.0(GA+GB)+1.28where GAand GBrefer to stiffness ratio or relative stiffness of a column at its two ends.It is also required that the computed shear stresses (fv) in members are smaller than the allowable shear stresses (Fv), as formulated in Eq. (10).(10)fν⩽Fν=0.40CνFyIn Eq. (10), Cvis referred to as web shear coefficient. It is taken equal to Cv=1.0 for rolled W-shaped members withh/tw⩽2.24E/Fy, where h is the clear distance between flanges, E is the elasticity modulus and twis the thickness of web. For all other symmetric shapes, Cvis calculated from Formulas G2-3, G2-4 and G2-5 in ANSI/AISC 360-05 [20].Apart from stress constraints, slenderness limitations are also imposed on all members such that maximum slenderness ratio(λ=KL/r)is limited to 300 and 200 for tension and compression members, respectively. The displacement constraints are imposed such that the maximum lateral displacements are restricted to be less than H/400, and upper limit of story drift is set to be h/400, where H is the total height of the frame building and h is the height of a story.Finally, we consider geometric constraints between beams and columns framing into each other at a common joint for practicality of an optimum solution generated. For the two beams B1 and B2 and the column shown in Fig. 1, one can write the following geometric constraints:(11)bfbbfc-1.0⩽0(12)bfb′(dc-2tf)-1.0⩽0where bfb,bfb′and bfcare the flange width of the beam B1, the beam B2 and the column, respectively, dcis the depth of the column, and tfis the flange width of the column. Eq. (11) simply ensures that the flange width of the beam B1 remains smaller than that of the column. On the other hand, Eq. (12) enables that flange width of the beam B2 remains smaller than clear distance between the flanges of the column (dc−2tf).The role of nature as an inspiration resource for developing modern optimization techniques is undeniable. The bat inspired algorithm is derived from echolocation behavior of bats. Echolocation is an advanced hearing based navigation system used by bats and some other animals to detect objects in their surroundings by emitting a sound to the environment. In general echolocation calls are characterized by three features; namely pulse frequency, pulse emission rate and loudness (intensity). When flying, bats emit echolocation calls with varying frequencies between 25kHz and 150kHz depending on the proximity of a target [14]. Although low frequency sounds travel further than high-frequency sounds, the latter give bats more detailed and distinctive information about the surrounding objects. On the other hand, the pulse rate corresponds to the number of pulses emitted per second and it can also be adjusted by bats according to the distance to the target object. It is known that bats increase the rate of pulse to 200 pulses per second when approaching the target. Finally, bats decrease the intensity (loudness) of pulse from 120dB (loudest) to 50dB (quietest) as they come closer to their prey. Yang [14] simulated this echolocation behavior of bats in a numerical optimization procedure called bat-inspired (BI) algorithm. The BI algorithm implemented in the present study to solve minimum weight design problems of steel frames is outlined in the following.Step 1. Initializing bat population (positions and velocities): A population of μ micro-bats (candidate solutions) is randomly generated first, where μ refers to the population size. Each micro-bat Bihas two sets of components; a position (design) vector xiand a velocity vector vi, Eq. (13). The position vector retains values (positions) of the design variables, while the velocity vector is used to vary these positions during the search. The iteration counter t is set to zero initially.(13)Bi=(xi,vi)Step 2. Echolocation parameters and their initializations: The next step is to initialize an echolocation parameter set for the micro-bats in the population. Each micro-bat incorporates a set of echolocation parameters Ωi=(fi,ri,li), which consists of a frequency fi, a pulse rate riand a loudness parameter li. All the three echolocation parameters are non-negative dynamic real quantities defined in the following ranges:(14)fmin⩽fi⩽fmax,rmin⩽ri⩽rmax,lmin⩽li⩽lmax,where fmin and fmax are the specified lower and upper bounds for the frequency parameter fi, respectively; rmin and rmax are the specified lower and upper bounds for the pulse rate parameter ri, respectively; and lmin and lmax are the specified lower and upper bounds for the loudness parameter li, respectively. In the present study, fmin, fmax, lmax and rmin are set to the following constants:(15)fmin=0.0,fmax=1.0,lmax=1.0,andrmin=0.5where lmin and rmax are calculated using the following equations.(16)lmin=1Nsec(17)rmax=1-1Nd⩽1.0In Eqs. (14)–(17), Nsec is the number of steel sections in the list used to size the design variables, and Ndis the number of discrete design variables (member groups). The echolocation parameters are initialized such that the initial frequencyfi0is set to a value randomly chosen between fmin and fmax. Besides, the initial loudnessli0is set to its maximum value lmax=1.0, whereas the initial pulse rateri0is set to its minimum value rmin=0.5 for every micro-bat in the population.Step 3. Evaluating micro-bats in the initial population: The initial population is evaluated, where all micro-bats are analyzed with the set of steel sections selected for the design variables, and the force and deformation responses are obtained under the loads. The objective function values of the feasible micro-bats that satisfy all problem constraints are directly calculated from Eq. (2). However, infeasible micro-bats that violate some of the problem constraints are penalized using an external penalty function approach, and their objective function values are computed using Eq. (18).(18)ϕ=W1+p∑kckIn Eq. (18), ϕ is the constrained objective function value, ckis the kth problem constraint and p is the penalty coefficient used to tune the intensity of penalization as a whole. This parameter is set to an appropriate static value, such as p=1.Step 4. Storing the current population: The current population, which consists of the best micro-bats (solutions) located so far in the search process from the beginning, is stored and iteration counter t is increased by one.Step5. Generating candidate micro-bats: μ number of new micro-bats are generated as candidate solutions for the design population. This is implemented using a procedure that employs two probabilistic generation schemes referred to as random flying and local search. Random flying provides a more explorative search, allowing a micro-bat to fly to a new and possibly remote position in the search space. On the other hand, a more exploitative search is intended in a local search scheme, where a micro-bat selected from the current population is perturbed in the close vicinity of its current solution to browse neighboring points. The new micro-bat is generated by applying either one of these two schemes, which is determined probabilistically using the following pseudo code.Procedure – generating new micro-bats:i:= 1repeatif (ui⩾ri) then– Select ith micro-bat Bifrom the current population– Fly Bito a new position randomlyelse– Select any micro-bat Bkfrom the current population, k∊[1,μ]– Perform local search around Bki:= i+1until(i>μ)In the pseudo code shown above, a uniform random number uiis sampled between 0 and 1 for each micro-bat Biin the current population, and it is compared with the pulse rate riof the micro-bat. If ui⩾ri, the new micro-bat is generated by flying Birandomly to a new position in the design space. Otherwise, a micro-bat (Bk,k∊[1,μ]) is selected from the current population at random and a local search is performed around this solution to generate the new micro-bat. Probabilistically speaking, the odds of generating the new micro-bat using random flying and local search in this procedure are 1−raveand rave, respectively, where raverepresents the average pulse rate of the micro-bats in the current population. It should be noted that the initial value of pulse rateri0is set to 0.5 in the employed algorithm, and it increases towards a value around rmax=1−1/Ndin the course of the search process. It follows that in the beginning of the search the new candidate solutions are originated using the two generation schemes under equal probability. However, as the search goes on, the role of local search is augmented while that of random flying is diminished. This way an exploitative search is progressively dominated in time to benefit more from the previously visited good solutions than exploring new design regions of the search space.Random flying: A new candidate solution is generated from a micro-bat Bithrough random flying by adjusting its frequencyfi0first and updating its velocity and position next. Unlike real bats which exhibit random motion patterns, a micro-bat follows certain rules for the velocity and position updates, which are formulated in Eqs. (19)–(21).(19)fit=fmin+(fmax-fmin)ui(20)vit=round[vit-1+(xit-1-x∗)fit](21)xit=xit-1+vitIn Eq. (19), fmin and fmax are the lower and upper bounds imposed for the frequency range of micro-bats, respectively and ui∈[0,1] is a random number sampled anew for each micro-bat according to a uniform distribution. In Eqs. (20) and (21),vitandvit-1are the velocity vectors of the ith micro-bat at time steps (iterations) t and t−1, respectively; likewisexitandxit-1are the position vectors of the micro-bat at iterations t and t−1, respectively and x∗ is the current global best solution representing the best-so-far solution found during the optimization process.Local search: A local search is performed on a randomly selected micro-bat Bkfrom the current population using the following equations(22)εk,j=N(0,σ)·Nsec(23)xk,jt=xk,jt-1+round(εk,j·lavet-1):ifuk,j⩾rkxk,jt-1:ifuk,j<rkwhere ɛk,jis an arbitrary number generated anew for each design variable j of the micro-bat Bk; N(0,σ) is a normally distributed random with mean 0 and standard deviation σ;Nsec is the number of sections in the discrete set used for sizing the design variables;lavet-1is the average loudness of all micro-bats at time step t−1;xk,jtandxk,jt-1are the values of jth design variable in the micro-bat Bkat time steps t and t−1, respectively; and rkis the pulse rate of the micro-bat Bk.Step 6. Evaluating candidate micro-bats: Once generated, the candidate micro-bats are analyzed with the set of steel sections selected for the design variables, and the force and deformation responses are obtained under the loads. The objective function values of the feasible and infeasible candidate micro-bats are calculated from Eqs. (2) and (18), respectively.Step 7. Echolocation parameters update: After evaluating candidate micro-bats, the echolocation parameters are updated for improving candidates. The rationale behind this is to automatically adopt a more useful set of values for the echolocation parameters, similar to real bats which adjust those parameters based on the distance to a target object. A micro-bat is allowed to update its echolocation parameters every time when it produces a solution that surpasses its individual best. The individual best refers to the best solution attained by the micro-bat itself during its iteration history. When this happens, a uniform random number uiis first sampled in the range [0,1] and if it is smaller than the loudness liof the micro-bat, then its echolocation parameters riand liare updated using the following equations(24)li′=α·li(25)rit+1=1-(1-ri0)γ(t+1)⩽rmaxwhere liandli′are the previous and updated values of the loudness for micro-bat Bi, respectively, t is the iteration number,ri0andrit+1are the pulse rates at iterations zero and t+1 for micro-bat Bi, respectively, rmax is the maximum value of the pulse rate, and finally α and γ are the adaptation parameters for loudness and pulse rate, respectively.Step 8. Selection: Selection is then carried out between current and candidate micro-bats to form members of the next population which will parent and guide generation of the subsequent micro-bats. Here, the employed selection methodology is borrowed from the well-known variant of evolution strategies technique referred to as (μ+μ)-ES [23]. In this selection methodology current and candidate micro-bats are set into competition together and the best μ solutions from a total of μ+μ=2μ current and candidate solutions are selected deterministically in reference to their objective function values. It should be noted that this selection methodology comes up with a promise of guaranteed survival for the micro-bats; that is to say the selected micro-bats at any iteration represent the best solutions located by the algorithm from the start.Step 9. Termination: The steps 4 through 8 are carried out in the same way until a termination criterion is met, which can be imposed a maximum number of iterations or no improvement of the best feasible design over a certain number of iterations.In this section performance of the BI algorithm in discrete sizing optimization of steel frames is investigated numerically using a test suit consisting of three design examples; namely a 132-member unbraced steel frame, a 209-member industrial building, and finally a 1860-member high-rise braced steel frame. During numerical implementations, the control parameters of the BI algorithm are chosen as follows: population size μ=50, minimum frequency fmin=0.0, maximum frequency fmax=1.0, initial (maximum) loudnessli0=lmax=1.0, initial (minimum) pulse rateri0=rmin=0.5, and penalty coefficient p=1. For an objective comparison between different methods, the maximum number of iterations is limited to 50,000 in each example in line with the previously reported solutions of these problems in the literature. In all the examples, the material properties of steel is taken as follows: modulus of elasticity (E)=29,000ksi (203,893.6MPa) and yield stress (Fy)=36ksi (253.1MPa).The first design example shown in Fig. 2is a 132-member unbraced steel frame consisting of 70 joints and 132 members that are grouped into 30 independent size variables (Fig. 2b) to satisfy practical fabrication requirements. The columns are to be selected from a section list consisting of 297 W-shaped steel sections, whereas a discrete set of 171 sections is used to size the beams. Both gravity and lateral loads are considered in designing the frame. Gravity loads yielding uniformly distributed loads on outer and inner beams of the roof and floors are given in Table 1. As for the lateral forces, earthquake loads (E) are considered. These loads are computed as to equivalent lateral force procedure outlined in ASCE 7-05 [24], resulting in the values given in Table 1 that are applied at the center of gravity of each story as joint loads. Gravity (G) and earthquake (E) loads are combined under two loading conditions for the frame: (i) 1.0G+1.0E (in x-direction), and (ii) 1.0G+1.0E (in y-direction). The combined stress, stability and geometric constraints are imposed as explained in Section 2. The joint displacements in x and y directions are restricted to 1.53 in (3.59cm), which is obtained as height of frame/400. Furthermore, story drift constraints are applied to each story of the frame, which is equal to height of each story/400.This problem has been formerly studied in the literature [25,26] using simulated annealing (SA), big bang-big crunch (BB-BC), tabu search (TS), harmony search (TS) techniques as well as two enhanced versions of BB-BC referred to as exponential big ban-big crunch (EBB-BC) and modified Big Bang-Big Crunch (MBB-BC) algorithms. A total of eight independent runs are performed with the BI algorithm using different values of the parameter set for loudness adaptation parameter α∊[0.90,0.99], pulse rate adaptation parameter γ∊[0.95,0.99] and standard deviation σ∊[1.0,3.0]. The best run of the algorithm has been obtained when α=0.95, γ=0.99 and σ=2.0 are selected resulting in a minimum design weight of 57,519.97kg (126,809.83lb) for the frame. On the other hand, the mean and standard deviation of the eight independent runs come out to be 58,955.66kg (129,972.80lb) and 1582kg (3488lb), indicating a reliable performance of the BI algorithm. A comparison of the optimum designs obtained for the frame using different metaheuristics is carried out in Table 2in terms of section designation adopted for each member group and corresponding design weights. It is seen from this table that the solution produced by the BI algorithm is significantly lower than the formerly best solution of this problem attained using EBB-BC technique with a final design weight of 60,804.31kg (134,050.55lb). The solutions produced by other metaheuristics mostly fall within a band of 63,000–65,000kg; namely 62,993.55kg (138,874.67lb) by SA, 63,056.72kg (139,016.28lb) by MBB-BC, 64,733.69kg (142,710.96) by TS, and 64,926.17kg (143,135.29) by HS. On the other hand, an unacceptably poor design weight of 87,468.21kg (192,834.39lb) has been located using the BB-BC algorithm, indicating that this algorithm gets stuck in a local optimum before a convergence to favorable design regions is achieved.The variations of average pulse rate and loudness parameters during the optimum search process with the BI algorithm are presented in Fig. 3(a and b), respectively. This figure evinces success of the BI algorithm displaying how a satisfactory tradeoff is established by the algorithm between explorative and exploitative search features. It should be clear that explorative and exploitative search features are managed by the algorithm using random flying and local search, respectively. In the beginning of the optimization process the roles of explorative and exploitative search are balanced in an identical weight by setting pulse rate parameter to 0.5. As the iterations go on, the role of exploitative search becomes more prominent in proportion to increase in pulse rate parameter, while the loudness is decreased in the meantime to gradually narrow the size of the area investigated during local search.The second design example is an industrial building consisting of 100 joints and 209 members. Shown in Fig. 4are the plan, side and 3D views of this structure. The main system of the structure consists of five identical frameworks lying 6.1m (20ft) apart from each other in the x–z plane. Each framework consists of two side frames and a gable roof truss in between them, as depicted in Fig. 4(b). The lateral stability against wind loads in the x–z plane is provided through columns fixed at the base along with the rigid connections of the side frames. Hence, all the beams and columns in the side frames are designed as moment-resisting axial–flexural members. The gable roof truss, on the other hand, is designed to transmit only axial forces through pin-jointed connections, and hence the web and chord members in the gable roof are all designed as axial members. For longitudinal stability (along y-axis) of the structure, bracing is provided in the end bays in the walls and the roof.Three different types of loads are considered for design of the industrial building; namely dead, crane and wind loads. A design dead load of 1.2kN/m2 is assumed to be acting on both floors of the side frames, resulting in uniformly distributed loads of 14.63kN/m (1004.55lb/ft) and 7.32kN/m (502.27lb/ft) on the interior and exterior beams of the side frames. The dead weights of the gable roofs are neglected due to relatively light weight of these components. The crane load is modeled as two pairs of moving live loads acting on both sides of the crane runway beams, as shown in Fig. 4(d). Each pair consists of a concentrated load of 280kN (62.9kip) and a couple moment of 75kNm (5532kipft). In the study the crane load is represented in two distinct load cases referred to as CL1 and CL2 by choosing two different positions for the crane on its runway. In CL1, the crane is positioned at points A and A′ as shown in Fig. 4(d) to create maximum effect on the second framework. In CL2, however, it is positioned in the middle of the runway beam between the second and third frameworks (shown as B and B′ in Fig. 4(d)) to maximize response in the beams directed along y-axis.Only the wind in the x-direction is considered for design purpose, and the corresponding wind forces are calculated based on a basic wind speed of V=46.94m/s (105mph) in line with the prescriptions described in ASCE 7-05 [24]. Two load cases referred to as WL1 and WL2 are generated depending on the sign of internal wind pressure exerted on external faces of the building, as shown in Fig. 5. In both cases, it is assumed that wind causes a positive compression pressure on the windward face, while it causes a negative suction effect on the leeward face as well as on side walls of the building. In WL1 the suction effect is considered for the entire roof surface, whereas in WL2 one part of the roof is subjected to compression pressure. From amongst the five load cases (DL, CL1, CL2, WL1 and WL2), a total of six load combinations are generated for strength design of each structural member in accordance with AISC-ASD [19] specification, as follows: (i) 1.0DL+1.0CL1, (ii) 1.0DL+1.0CL1+1.0WL1, (iii) 1.0DL+1.0CL1+1.0WL2, (iv) 1.0DL+1.0CL2, (v) 1.0DL+1.0CL2+1.0WL1, (vi) 1.0DL+1.0CL2+1.0WL2.Considering symmetry of the structure as well as fabrication requirements of structural members, 209 members are collected in 14 member groups, Fig. 4(d). Section lists consisting of 297 and 171 W-shaped steel sections are used to size the columns and beams, respectively, whereas side wall and roof bracings are selected from a section list consisting of 407 equal-leg back-to-back double angle sections. Combined stress, stability and geometric constraints are imposed according to the provisions of AISC-ASD [19]. In addition, displacements of all the joints in x and y directions are limited to 3.43cm (1.25in.), and the upper limit of inter-story drifts is set to 1.52cm (0.6in.).A number of metaheuristics have been employed to solve this problem in the literature [26,27], including classical harmony search (HS), adaptive harmony search (AHS), big bang-big crunch (BB-BC), exponential big bang-big crunch (EBB-BC), and modified big bang-big crunch (MBB-BC). A total of eight independent runs are performed with the BI algorithm using different values of the echolocation parameter set. The mean and standard deviation of the eight independent runs come out to be 43,849.46kg (96,669.89lb) and 1,016kg (2,241lb), indicating a reliable performance of the BI algorithm. Again the best run of the algorithm has been obtained when α=0.95, γ=0.99 and σ=2.0 are selected resulting in a minimum design weight of 42,924.07kg (94,631.38lb) for the frame. In Table 3, a comparison of optimum designs obtained for the industrial building using different metaheuristics is carried out in terms of section designation adopted for each member group and the corresponding design weights. It can be seen from Table 3 that the optimum design found by the BI algorithm is overall the best solution for this test problem and coincides with that found by the EBB-BC algorithm. Other acceptable yet slightly higher solutions to the problem are 44,053.45kg (97,121.3lb) by AHS, 46,685.83kg (102,924.73lb) by HS and 46,195.10kg (101,842.77lb) by MBB-BC. On the other hand, an unacceptably poor design weight of 73,375.37kg (161,764.99lb) has been obtained when the BB-BC algorithm is employed, indicating that this algorithm gets stuck in a local optimum before a convergence to favorable design regions is achieved. The convergence history showing variation of the best feasible design generated so far throughout the optimization process with each metaheuristic technique is plotted in Fig. 6. The variations of pulse rate and loudness parameters during the optimum search process with the BI algorithm are presented in Fig. 7(a and b), respectively.The last design example shown in Fig. 8is a 36-story high-rise braced steel frame composed of 814 joints and 1860 members. An economical and effective stiffening of the frame against lateral forces is achieved through exterior diagonal bracing members located on the perimeter of the building, which also participate in transmitting the gravity forces. The 1860 frame members are collected in 72 different member groups considering the symmetry of the structure and practical fabrication requirements. That is, the columns in a story are collected in three member groups as corner columns, inner columns and outer columns, whereas beams are divided into two groups as inner beams and outer beams. The corner columns are grouped together as having the same section over three adjacent stories, as are inner columns, outer columns, inner beams and outer beams. Bracing members on each facade are designed as three-story deep members, and two bracing groups are specified in every six stories. The member grouping details are depicted in Fig. 8(b). The wide-flange (W) profile list consisting of 297 ready sections is used to size column members, while beams and diagonals are adopted from section lists consisting of 171 and 147 wide-flange sections, respectively.The frame is subjected to two loading conditions of combined gravity and wind forces. These forces are computed as per ASCE 7-05 [24] based on the following design values: a design dead load of 2.88kN/m2 (60.13lb/ft2), a design live load of 2.39kN/m2 (50lb/ft2), a ground snow load of 1.20kN/m2 (25lb/ft2) and a basic wind speed of 55.21m/s (123.5mph). Lateral (wind) loads acting at each floor level on windward and leeward faces of the frame are tabulated in Table 4and the gravity loading on the beams of roof and floors is given in Table 5. In the first loading condition, gravity loads are applied together with wind loads acting along x-axis (1.0GL+1.0WL−x), whereas in the second one they are applied with wind loads acting along y-axis (1.0GL+1.0WL−y). The combined stress, stability and geometric constraints are imposed according to the provisions of AISC-ASD [19]. The joint displacements in x and y directions are restricted to 32.0cm (12.6in.), which is obtained as height of frame/400. Furthermore, story drift constraints are applied to each story of the frame, which is equal to height of each story/400.A total of eight independent runs are performed with the BI algorithm using different values of the echolocation parameter set. The mean and standard deviation of the eight independent runs come out to be 2,283,796.31kg (5,034,824.32lb) and 76,139kg (167,856lb), indicating a reliable performance of the BI algorithm for a test problem of this scale. The best run of the algorithm has been obtained when α=0.99, γ=0.99 and σ=3.0 are selected resulting in a minimum design weight of 2,187,494.88kg (4,822,600.76lb) for the building. A comparison of this design with other formerly reported solutions of the problem using harmony search (HS) and adaptive harmony search (AHS) methods [27] is carried out in Table 6. It is observed from this table that an acceptable yet slightly higher solution has been produced to this structure by the AHS method, whereas the HS method exhibits a poor convergence characteristic getting stuck in a local optimum very far from favorable regions of the design space. The convergence history showing variation of the best feasible design generated so far throughout the optimization process with each metaheuristic technique is plotted in Fig. 9. The variations of pulse rate and loudness parameters during the optimum search process with the BI algorithm are presented in Fig. 10(a and b), respectively.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The objective in this study is to investigate efficiency of the BI algorithm in discrete sizing optimization problems of steel frames. The optimum design algorithm presented in the study selects steel sections from available section tables such that design constraints described according to provisions of AISC-ASD are satisfied and the structure has the minimum weight. This addresses a challenging category in discrete structural optimization because a great deal of disorder existing in discrete section lists makes the search process very difficult for optimization algorithms.In the study, the success of the BI algorithm has been quantified using numerical examples, where the optimum design weights obtained for the three real-size steel frames using the BI algorithm are compared to the previously reported solutions of these problems using different metaheuristics in the literature. The numerical results obtained indicate robustness and efficiency of the BI algorithm for this class of problems. The variations of average pulse rate and average loudness parameters in these design examples are plotted in Figs. 3, 7 and 10, which depicts how the algorithm can combine explorative and exploitative search features in a finest way when searching the design space.Optimal ranges of the echolocation parameters are investigated based on independent runs performed using different value sets of these parameters. It has been found that the suitable values for loudness adaptation parameter α lie in a range [0.95–0.99]. The larger this parameter, more slowly does the loudness decrease. Accordingly, by virtue of Eq. (23) local search is performed over wide regions even at late iterations. This may slow down convergence of the algorithm for relatively small and regular design spaces, yet it is very beneficial for large and irregular design spaces for which escaping from local optima is not easy. Hence, it is recommended that this parameter be set to 0.95 for small scale problems, yet it can be increased up to 0.99 for problems having a large and irregular fitness landscape. The results have also indicated that the optimal value for pulse rate adaptation parameter γ is 0.99 when the algorithm is executed over a maximum iteration number of 1000. This parameter can be set to a smaller value if lesser iterations are performed. But in no case it should be smaller than 0.95. Finally, we note that standard deviation parameter σ can be set to 2.0 for small to medium scale problems, and for larger scale problems it should be set to 3.0. This parameter has an impact similar to loudness adaptation parameter described above.