@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Robust multi-objective maintenance planning of deteriorating bridges against uncertainty in performance model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a new robust multi-objective maintenance planning method of deteriorating bridges against model uncertainties.Simulated system uncertainties are incorporated into the GA-based multi-objective optimization framework.The preference-based objective-space reduction method is utilized to enhance searching efficiency.Numerical example of a typical prestressed concrete girder bridge is provided.Proposed method produces well-balanced maintenance strategy both in terms of bridge performance and maintenance cost.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Maintenance planning,Robust multi-objective optimization,Deteriorating bridges,Uncertainty,Performance model,Genetic algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study proposes a new robust multi-objective maintenance planning approach of the deteriorating bridges against uncertainty in performance degradation model. The main focus is to guarantee the performance requirements of the bridge by the scheduled maintenance interventions even in the presence of uncertainty in time-dependent performance degradation model. The uncertainties are modeled as the perturbation of the system parameters. These are simulated by a sampling method, and incorporated into the GA-based multi-objective optimization framework which produces a set of optimal preventive maintenance scenarios. In order to focus the searching on the most preferable region, the performance models of the bridge components are all integrated into single overall performance measure by using the preference-based objective-space reduction method. Numerical example of a typical prestressed concrete girder bridge is provided to demonstrate the new robust maintenance scheduling approach. For comparison purpose, non-robust multi-objective maintenance planning without considering uncertainty of the bridge performance is also provided. It is verified that the proposed approach can produce successfully-performing maintenance scenarios under the perturbation of bridge condition grades while maintaining well-balanced maintenance strategy both in terms of bridge performance and maintenance cost.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
An important notion of preventive maintenance strategy is that it can eventually reduce the life cycle cost of structure with more frequent but low-cost pre-emptive maintenance actions rather than relatively rare but high-cost post-damage maintenance actions [1]. The latter is often called as reactive maintenance approach in which appropriate remedy actions are applied expensively after damage or degradation are observed. For bridge structures, it can be said that the preventive maintenance approach could be more effective than the reactive maintenance approach. The benefits of the pre-planned preventive maintenance stand out in that it can significantly save the resources needed for the processes of investigation, diagnosis and decision making which are typical in reactive maintenance. The success of preventive strategy, however, depends on the quality of maintenance planning that decides the time and the way of maintenance actions. For example, it is obvious that a plan of yearly reinforcement of bridge girder would be neither effective nor economical. Such frequent maintenance actions would provide more than enough capacity with overmuch cost. Thus, optimization technique plays a key role in solving the preventive maintenance planning problem.The existing optimization methodologies for maintenance planning can be found in the literature [2–9], which focus on minimizing the maintenance cost as well as the performance degradation. Some early researches successfully formulate the problem as a single-objective optimization problem [3,4,6], which typically minimizes the maintenance cost with the performance constraint or vice versa. In recent years, more attention has been paid to the multi-objective optimization technique [2,5,7–9] where the structural performance is considered as a separate objective rather than a constraint. The logic behind is that the structural performance and the maintenance cost should be regarded equally important and thus optimized at the same time. In this regard, the nature of the cost-performance trade-off relationship causes the variety of possible maintenance plans, and the multi-objective optimization approach aims at exploring as various maintenance plans as possible, so-called Pareto-optimal solutions. From the Pareto-optimal solutions, as a result, a decision making process enables us to choose a well-balanced planning strategy in terms of the mutually conflicting performance and cost measures, as demonstrated by Lee et al. [9].Successful maintenance planning optimization is greatly influenced by the quality of performance degradation model or how reliable the degradation model is to represent the present structural conditions. However, there inherently exist large uncertainties in the degradation models. Accordingly, the previous studies [2,8,10,11] demonstrated the significant effects of the uncertainties in deterioration and maintenance process on optimal maintenance planning. Probabilistic approaches were also used to take into account the uncertainties in deterioration process of bridge components. In these studies, parameters of the performance deterioration model were treated as random variables whose probability distributions were assumed. The resultant objective functions, i.e. performance indices and maintenance cost, were computed in terms of the sample mean and percentile values. Large dispersions in the computed performance indices and maintenance cost due to the parameter uncertainties were observed. Hence, it was verified that the uncertainties in estimate on the structural conditions need to be appropriately considered in the maintenance planning optimization.In the previous study [9], we presented a multi-objective maintenance planning method for the bridges integrated with a design-preference-based decision making. Design preference was used in a decision making process to select single well-balanced maintenance scenario. Although the proposed approach successfully provided a well-balanced maintenance plan between performances and life-cycle cost, it was unable to solve the maintenance planning problem with uncertainties inherent in the system, which will be referred to as a non-robust approach from now. For this reason, subsequent research has been made and the approach is further extended to deal with the system uncertainties in the optimal maintenance planning problem. As a result, we propose a new robust maintenance planning technique that integrates a sampling technique into the existing framework in order to simulate the perturbation of the uncertain parameters. Since our existing multi-objective optimization approach is based on the genetic algorithm (GA), the sampling technique is well suited for the GA-based approach.On the other hand, the previous non-robust approach adopted a sequential process of multi-objective optimization and preference-based decision making. However, it is well known [12,13] that simultaneous optimization of many objectives, e.g., four or more, is a challenging task because a large number of searching points are required to cover the huge objective space fully and the use of insufficient solutions leads to poor quality of the Pareto set approximation. In order to overcome the difficulty, this study introduces the preference-based dimension reduction method [15–19] into the multi-objective optimization framework so that we can reduce the high-dimensional objective space and focus the searching on the most preferable region.In what follows, a preference-based multi-objective formulation is described for the maintenance planning problem of bridge structures, and a robust multi-objective optimization technique against the uncertainties in the performance degradation model is explained thereafter. Next, illustrative example of a three-span continuous prestressed concrete I-girder bridge is presented to demonstrate the application of the proposed method, followed by concluding remarks.For maintenance planning, the deteriorating bridge structures are characterized by the time-dependent performance profile models. Several models have been used to describe the deteriorating processes of the bridges. For illustration purpose, we adopt the performance degradation models developed for bridge structures in Korea by MOCT and KISTEC [20] since the model is expected to best fit to representing the bridge condition in Korea. For more details, see [9]. Note that the proposed approach is not limited to this degradation model only; it can be generally applicable to different types of performance profile models. One common point is that the condition grade functions are decreasing with the elapse of the time.The bridge condition status can be categorized into five grades from “A” to “E”. The condition grade A corresponds to a range between 5 and 4, the grade B to a “3–4” range, and so on. The descriptive definition and the corresponding feasible maintenance actions are summarized in [9]. The maintenance action produces a time-shifting effect of the original condition grade curve because the post-maintenance condition of the bridge component is supposed to be degraded again from the newly updated point of the condition grade function in the same deteriorating rate. Fig. 1shows an example of the time-varying condition grade curves under the maintenance interventions. The corresponding condition grade functions that are updated by the maintenance interventions are mathematically expressed as follows:(1)Sj(x;t)=Sj(t)0⩽t<T1Sj(t-τ1)T1⩽t<T2⋮⋮Sj(t-τN)TN⩽t⩽TSin which t is the elapsed time (in year); and Sj(t) corresponds to each condition grade function of the bridge element, and the subscript j=1 represents the model for deck element, j=2 for girder, and j=3 for pier. Ti(i=1,2,…,N) is the ith applied time among a total of N maintenance; τiis the time-shifting effect of the ith action; Tsis the service life of the bridge; and x is a design vector to represent the maintenance actions. It includes the applied time Tiof the maintenance actions and the index mifor the type of the corresponding maintenance actions, e.g., mi=0 for no maintenance action, mi=1 for repair, mi=2 for reinforcement and/or mi=3 for rebuild.Cumulative life-cycle maintenance cost [2,9,21] is defined as the sum of the total expenses caused by all the maintenance interventions during the designated service life such that(2)CM(x)=∑j=13∑i=1NCTij(x)(1+ν)TiwhereCTij(x)is the cost associated with ith maintenance action applied at time tifor jth component; ν is a discount rate; and CM(x) is the present value of the cumulative life-cycle maintenance cost by all maintenance interventions. Table 1provides the maintenance cost per unit area according to the maintenance type and location [20,22]. Here, epoxy-injection and steel plate bonding are applied to each structural element as the repair and reinforcement actions. The costCTij(x)is then calculated by multiplying the unit costs by the areas and lengths of the corresponding structural components.As described before, the maintenance planning of the deteriorating bridges is formulated as a multi-objective optimization problem in terms of maintenance cost and bridge performance. The bridge performance can be represented by the foregoing three condition grade functions. However, using the three functions as separate objective functions can significantly increase numerical difficulty in searching the Pareto solutions. In addition to this computational difficulty, the high dimensionality in multi-objective optimization formulation involves additional difficulty in making a decision from the Pareto solution set. In general, the decision making task becomes harder the more objectives are involved. In order to overcome these difficulties, a preference-based objective-space-reduction method has been introduced in this study [12–19]. More specifically, it incorporates the three condition grade functions of the different bridge components into one ‘preference function’, a single measure of representing the overall performance of the bridge structure. The concept of ‘preference function’ has been borrowed from the physical programming [23] that allows the designer to easily establish quantitative description of the qualitative preference in a flexible and physically meaningful manner.Fig. 2graphically illustrates the concept of the preference function and its mapping relationship between three condition grade functions. Each condition grade curve in Fig. 2a is divided into four ranges in the vertical axis; ‘desirable’, ‘acceptable’, ‘undesirable’ and ‘unacceptable’. Note that these values respectively coincide with the condition grades and the corresponding feasible maintenance actions [9]. According to these definitions, the preference functions can be constructed as shown in Fig. 2b where the horizontal axis corresponds to the condition grade of the vertical axis in Fig. 2a. Note that the smaller value of the condition grade functions represents more degraded performance of the corresponding bridge component. Thus, the minimum value of the decreasing condition grade over the entire lifetime should be maximized to keep the bridge as safe and serviceable as possible. For this reason, the preference function in Fig. 2b converts the maximization problem of Eq. (1) into the minimization problem. As for this type of preference function, it can be derived as [24](3)fPj(λj)=cj1λjα2nnforλj⩾cj1cjk-1(λj-cjk)+cjkαn(cjk-1-λj)λj(cjk-1-cjk)α4-knnforcjk⩽λj⩽cjk-1(k=2,3)cj3λjnforλj⩽cj3wherefPjis the preference function of bridge element j (j=deck, girder, pier); n and α are the coefficients determining the shape of the preference function;cj1,cj2andcj3are the bounds on the degrees of desirability, respectively; andλjis the minimum value of the condition grade function of element j during the life span (TS) of the bridge in Eq. (1) such thatλj=min0⩽t⩽TS{Sj(x;t)}.Now, the three objective functions in Eq. (1) are normalized in terms of design preference and thus can be aggregated into single performance measure, as follows:(4)Fp(λ(x))=∑j=13fpj(λj(x))where λ is a vector of λj’s. In the end, the optimal maintenance planning problem of the deteriorating bridge reduces to the bi-objective minimization problem(5)minimizeCM(x)FP(λ(x))As aforementioned, there exists significant uncertainty in describing the deteriorating process of the bridge components. Thus, the reliable maintenance planning should be able to guarantee that the scheduled maintenance scenarios can keep the structure safe even under the worst conditions. It is termed as robust maintenance planning in this study. For the realization of the robust multi-objective maintenance planning, we need a new measure of representing the robustness of the maintenance scenarios over the changes in system parameters. Fig. 3illustrates the concept of the robustness of the solutions, where the left figure corresponds to the solution space (y1 and y2) and the right figure represents the objective space (f1 and f2). For illustration purpose, it is assumed that we deal with minimization problem of two objective functions, and two solutions A and B are found. As seen in Fig. 3, the solution A is better than the solution B since both objective functions of the solution A are smaller than those of the solution B. However, let us assume that any perturbation occurs in the solutions as depicted by a circle in the left figure of Fig. 3. The perturbation of the solution A is denoted by light gray circle, and that for the solution B is shaded by dark gray circle. Under these perturbed conditions, the corresponding objective functions also show some perturbations which are depicted by ellipses in the right figure. It is noteworthy that solution A shows large dispersion in objective space, whereas the solution B is just perturbed by small amount in objective space. Considering the worst condition, the solution B is preferred to the solution A because the maximally perturbed objective functions of the solution A are larger than those of the solution B. Thus, the solution A is inferior to the solution B in the worst case. In other words, the solution B is more insensitive to the perturbation in terms of objective functions, and such insensitive solutions are said to be robust. Several researchers suggested different procedures to achieve the robustness of the solutions in the optimization problems [25–28]. In this study, a measure to represent the solution robustness, denoted byRf(·),is defined as an averaged value of the objective function with respect to the perturbation of the parameters such that(6)Rf(y)=1Ns∑m=1Nsfm(y+Δym)where f(⋅) is the objective function in Eq. (5); the subscript m is an index of perturbed sample; Nsis the total number of random samples; and Δymis mth perturbation of the system parameters y. It should be noted that the perturbation could occur in any system parameters, e.g., either design variable or condition grade model or both. It should be also mentioned here that the proposed approach is not only limited to Eq. (6) and can be generally extended to different robustness measure [28]. The choice of the robust objective function is dependent upon the problem involved.In this study, we consider that the performance degradation model is uncertain and can indicate the incorrect status of the real structure. Such an erroneous estimate on the structural condition is represented by perturbation factor δ, and the factor is applied into Eq. (1) to simulate the possibility of the incorrect performance estimation, as follows:(7)Smδ=Sm×(1+δm)where the factor δ is randomly generated by using Latin Hypercube Sampling (LHS) technique [29–31]; the subscript m represents mth sample; and Smis the condition grade function in Eq. (1).This equation is newly used through Eqs. (1)–(5) to evaluate the robustness of the maintenance scenario against the perturbation of the performance estimation. Now, the bi-objective minimization problem in Eq. (5) is replaced by(8)minimizeRCM(x;δ)=1Ns∑m=1NsCM(x;δm)RFP(λ(x);δ)=1Ns∑m=1NsFP(λ(x);δm)where δm=[δ1,δ2,δ3] is a vector of the mth perturbation factors for the estimation of the deck, girder, pier performance degradation. The index m is the sample number.Minimization of the bi-objective function enables us to find out the insensitive solutions to the variations of the system parameters. It is also interesting to note that the simultaneous minimization of the averaged values of the multi-objective functions still makes it possible to minimize the multi-objective functions themselves. Hence, this robust multi-objective optimization for maintenance planning enables us not only to maintain the bridge performance above the prescribed level but also to guarantee its robustness against the uncertainty in the performance models.Computation of the objective function in Eq. (8) requires the generation of Nsrandom samples. If this random generation of Nssample set is performed repeatedly in every optimization step, it causes additional randomness even in evaluating the same solution. Thus, the solution will not converge because the optimal solution will keep changing. Hence, random generation of the perturbed parameters is carried out once in the beginning and it applies to the parameters iteratively in the optimization, which assure the solution convergence. Furthermore, computation of Eq. (8) causes Nstimes more function evaluation than the usual non-robust optimization approach. Thus, the number of perturbed points is closely related to both numerical efficiency and accurate estimate on the robustness of the solution. The more points are used, the more accurately the robustness is evaluated, but the more evaluation time is required. As aforementioned, this study adopts LHS method for numerical efficiency since it can provide wide distribution of the sampling variables with small points.In summary, the previous non-robust multi-objective optimization approach was based on GA. The sampling technique to simulate the uncertain perturbation of the parameters is further incorporated into the present multi-objective optimization approach since the sampling technique matches well with the GA features such as multi-point, direct and parallel searching. One more advantage is that the sampling-based approach does not necessarily require the probability distributions of the parameters, and thus can be applied to both cases; probability distributions of the parameters are given or not. If the probability distributions of the parameters are given, the samples are generated from the distributions. Even if the distribution is undecided, the bounds on uncertain parameters can be used to generate randomly perturbed points of the parameters involved. The overall procedure of the proposed robust multi-objective maintenance planning approach is illustrated in Fig. 4. Note that using “m=1” and “the bi-objective functions in Eq. (5)” instead of “the perturbed bi-objectives in Eq. (8)” reduces to the non-robust approach.To illustrate the method, a typical prestressed concrete I-girder bridge [9] is considered as a numerical example. The bridge is a 3-span continuous viaduct with a total length of 110m and a width of 9.6m. Its substructure consists of four rectangular single-column piers that are all 10.8m high with the same cross-section of 3m×2m.The maintenance planning problem is formulated as bi-objective optimization problem of Eq. (5) or Eq. (8). Eq. (5) is used by the non-robust multi-objective maintenance planning approach, whereas Eq. (8) is used by the newly proposed robust approach. It is assumed that, for the simplicity, the major uncertainty lies only in the performance models Sj(x;t) of deck, girder and pier in Eq. (1). Note that the uncertainty in the cost model can be also accommodated in the proposed framework without any difficulties. The uncertainty of the bridge performance model is incorporated into Eq. (8) which calculates the averaged objective function value. Total 100 sets of perturbation points are randomly generated in a range of ±10% of each nominal condition grade curve by using the LHS method. Fig. 5depicts 20 condition grade curves of the pier selectively among a total of 100 perturbed condition grade curves for clear illustration of the curve perturbation.The design lifetime of the bridge TSis 50years, and a discount rate ν is set to 4.5%. The coefficients in Eq. (3), α and n, are chosen as 5 and 2, respectively. The boundscjk,(k=1,2,3)correspond to the values of the condition grades such as 3, 2 and 1.Given the parameters, the proposed robust multi-objective GA approach has been performed with 100 chromosomes and 1000 generations. Each chromosome in an individual is encoded as sequential strings by attaching the design variables in sequence. Since the design variables consist of annual maintenance actions taken for each component of the bridge during the bridge lifetime, the length of each chromosome is equal to the life cycle in year times the number of the bridge components (50×3=150), as illustrated in Fig. 6. Three maintenance types are numbered from 1 to 3 which respectively correspond to ‘repair’, ‘reinforcement’ and ‘rebuild’ actions. No maintenance during a given year is indicated by 0.Fig. 7shows the generation history of the Pareto-optimal solutions obtained by the proposed GA approach. The horizontal and vertical axes respectively represent the mean values of preference and cost objective functions. Note that the smaller aggregate preference function corresponds to the better performance of the bridge. In Fig. 7, it is clearly observed that the two objectives are mutually conflicting to each other. As more investment is spent for maintenance, the performance is improved, and vice versa. It also appears that the solutions converge to the global Pareto-optimal front within 1000 generations of the searching process.The finally-obtained optimal annual maintenance scenarios are sorted from low maintenance cost to high maintenance cost in Fig. 8. The horizontal axis represents the 100 optimal maintenance scenarios. The left vertical axis denotes the cumulative number of the maintenance actions and the corresponding maintenance locations. The locations are indicated by three columns for the deck (■), girder () and pier (□), respectively. At the same time, the total maintenance cost of each optimal scenario is indicated by dotted line on the right vertical axis. Note that all the optimal scenarios exhibit only repair actions of deck, girder and pier, which implies that the more frequent but small maintenance cost is more favorably selected.Even with the same number of maintenance actions, it is found that each maintenance schedule has distinct effects on the performance of the bridge and the maintenance cost. This is due to the fact that the performance of the bridge and the maintenance cost are functions of the time when the maintenance actions are applied. The early performed maintenance interventions make it possible to maintain better performance during the life span of the bridge, but it may cause significant increase of the maintenance cost. In order to investigate the effect of the maintenance schedule on the performance enhancement of the bridge, two optimal scenarios with the same number of maintenance actions, denoted by #60 and #97 in Fig. 8, are chosen, and their performance variations of deck, girder and pier during 50years are drawn in Fig. 9a–c. The scenario #97 repairs the three components of the bridge about 3–4years earlier than the scenario #60, and the corresponding life-cycle maintenance cost turns out 115.50million won, which is about two times the cost amount required by scenario #60 (59.63million won). By contrast, the minimum condition grades of deck, girder, and pier by scenario #97 are maintained above 2.27, 2.92, and 2.81, which correspond to the improvement of the bridge conditions by 13.5%, 15.0% and 16.1%, compared with scenario #60.In this section, we will investigate the robustness of the proposed maintenance scenarios through comparison with the nominal maintenance scenarios. For this reason, the non-robust multi-objective optimization approach is also performed using Eq. (5). Fig. 10depicts two optimization results, i.e. the nominal and robust maintenance planning scenarios that are denoted by markers ‘*’ and ‘○’, respectively. It should be mentioned that the nominal maintenance scenarios are represented by the original value of the objective functions in Eq. (5) but the robust maintenance scenarios are described by the averaged value of the perturbed objectives in Eq. (8). Therefore, it is natural that the robust maintenance scenarios look mostly inferior to the nominal maintenance scenarios in terms of both objectives.In order to verify the robustness of the proposed maintenance solutions, three representative solutions are chosen from the nominal and robust Pareto-optimal solution sets, as shown in Fig. 10. Two nominal scenarios and one robust scenario are labeled as NS1, NS2 and RS, respectively. As seen in Fig. 10, the solution NS1 is chosen as the one that has similar performance to the solution RS but smaller maintenance cost than RS. The solution NS2 is selected as one that requires similar maintenance cost to RS but shows better performance than RS. Fig. 11shows annualized sequences of maintenance actions and associated time-varying condition grades of the deck for the three solutions NS1, NS2 and RS. For the uncertain condition grades, the 100-sampled perturbation curves in Fig. 5 are used. In Fig. 11a and b, under the perturbations of the condition grade model, both nominal scenarios NS1 and NS2, in some cases, fail to manage the bridge during the life time. For illustration purpose, the three annualized sequences of maintenance interventions for the deck by the scenarios NS1, NS2 and RS are redrawn in Fig. 12, which are chosen out of the 100-perturbed maintenance actions in Fig. 11. Fig. 12a represents the maintenance actions of the three scenarios under the nominal conditions with no perturbations. Two nominal scenarios NS1 and NS2 repair the deck at the 24th and 23rd years and the robust scenario RS repairs the deck at the 21st year. As seen in Fig. 12a, the condition grades of the bridge deck during the 21st–24th years remains between 2.07 and 2.27, which involves the repair action to enhance the condition grade up to 4. However, under the perturbed (worst) conditions, the actual condition grade of the bridge deck possibly drop below 2 as shown in Fig. 12b. At this time, the pre-planned maintenance action is a “repair” action, which will only improve the condition grade from 2 and below to 3, although the “reinforcement” action should be applied normally for the condition of “2 and below”. The condition grades of the bridge deck are significantly degraded after the first repair actions at 24th and 23rd years by NS1 and NS2, and finally become 0 at the time of 37th and 36th years, in which the second repair actions of two nominal solutions NS1 and NS2 are supposed to be taken at 41st and 39th years. Thus, it shows that the pre-planned “repair” actions of NS1 and NS2 may not sufficiently improve the performance of the deteriorating bridge, which can result in the early failure of the bridge. On the contrary, in spite of the perturbed condition grade, the “repair” action by RS at 21st successfully improves the deck conditions. This early performed “repair” action makes it possible that the bridge girder can survive until the second action at 37th year. Similar results are also observed for the bridge girder.The robustness of the proposed method can be illustrated by investigating the minimum condition grade under the worst case. In general, it can be said that a maintenance scenario is robust when it secure the sufficient minimum condition grade even if the degradation model is perturbed. Fig. 13represents the variation of the minimum condition grade when the maintenance scenarios RS, NS1 and NS2 are subjected to perturbed degradation model. The left three bars represent the variations of the condition grades of deck by RS, NS1 and NS2, respectively, in which the minimum condition grade in nominal conditions is denoted by circle. The center three bars correspond to those of girder, and the perturbed condition grades of pier are drawn in the right three bars. As shown in Fig. 13, in nominal conditions, NS1 and NS2 successfully maintain the minimum condition grades above 2 for all bridge components. However, in perturbed conditions, their worst values of the minimum condition grades become less than 2 for deck and girder, in which the reinforcement action should be required in order to keep the bridge safe. Considering there is no reinforcement action in NS1 and NS2 solutions, this shows these nominal scenarios are not adequate and hence not robust when the performance models are perturbed due to the uncertainties. Unlike the nominal scenarios NS1 and NS2, the robust scenario RS maintains all the perturbed performances of the three components above 2 and obviously demonstrates well-balanced performance for deck, girder and pier. In fact, the solution NS2, the dotted line, shows significantly improved performance in maintaining girder and pier, compared with the scenario RS. The performances of the girder and pier by NS2 are quite insensitive to the perturbations. However, the minimum condition grade of the deck by NS2 shows considerable fluctuations and its worst value is degraded below 2, which causes the failure of the deck. This result implies that the maintenance planning of nominal solution NS2 is focused on performance improvement of girder and pier at the expense of failure in preventive maintenance of deck. In nominal conditions, the robust solution RS may not be the best maintenance scenario. However, it guarantees that the maintenance scenario remains insensitive to the unexpected variations in performance models. Consequently, it is verified that robust maintenance scenarios considering the uncertainties of bridge degradation can achieve the successful preventive maintenance without excessively sacrificing any specific performance under the perturbations of the bridge degradation model.The superior robust performance of the proposed method can be also shown by the comparative results of the mean effective objective functions between nominal and robust maintenance scenarios. The nominal maintenance scenarios are re-evaluated in terms of the mean effective values of the objective functions with respect to the same perturbations as used in robust optimization process. Fig. 14shows that the effective values of the robust maintenance scenarios remain unchanged, whereas the nominal maintenance scenarios show significant increases due to the changes in bridge degradation model. Note that increase of the aggregate preference function implies the degradation of the bridge performance. Hence, it demonstrates that, without consideration of the possible uncertainty, the non-robust design of the maintenance planning can show not only significant degradation of the performance but also increase of the maintenance cost in the presence of the uncertainty in the bridge deterioration process. On the other hand, it is demonstrated that the proposed robust multi-objective optimization method can provide effective maintenance scenarios with most desirable balance between the performances and maintenance cost, and further guarantee the bridge performances to remain insensitive to uncertainties of the bridge performance during the entire lifespan.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study proposes a new robust multi-objective maintenance planning approach of the deteriorating bridges against uncertainty in performance degradation model. The sampling technique is introduced to simulate the perturbation of the system parameters, and it is incorporated into the GA-based multi-objective optimization framework for the bridge maintenance planning. The bridge performance is characterized by three performance functions representing deck, girder and pier conditions, and it is aggregated into single measure of representing the overall performance of the bridge degradation. The maintenance cost is formulated by a life-cycle maintenance cost that is defined as the sum of the direct expenses caused by all the maintenance interventions during the designated service life.The applicability of the new maintenance scheduling approach is demonstrated by the numerical example of a typical prestressed concrete girder bridge. For comparison purpose, non-robust multi-objective maintenance planning without considering uncertainty of the bridge performance is performed as well. The numerical results show that both approaches provide the Pareto-optimal solutions maintaining well-balanced maintenance strategy both in terms of bridge performance and maintenance cost. However, the solutions by non-robust multi-objective maintenance planning show significant fluctuation of the performance due to the variations of the condition grade models, whereas the maintenance scenarios obtained by the propose approach show very robust performance. Thus, it is verified that the proposed approach can guarantee successfully-performing maintenance scenarios under the perturbation of performance grading models while maintaining well-balanced maintenance strategy both in terms of bridge performance and maintenance cost.