@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Process parameter optimization of lap joint fillet weld based on FEM–RSM–GA integration technique

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A welding process design tool is proposed for arc welding parametric optimization.It is based on integrated Finite Element Method, Response Surface Method and Genetic Algorithms.Simulation based process parameter optimization is possible without expensive experiments.The method effectively determines optimum parameters for minimum distortion.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Welding simulation,Finite element modeling,Process optimization,Genetic algorithms,Response surface method,Welding distortion,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study introduces a welding process design tool to determine optimal arc welding process parameters based on Finite Element Method (FEM), Response Surface Method (RSM) and Genetic Algorithms (GA). Here, a sequentially integrated FEM–RSM–GA framework has been developed and implemented to reduce the weld induced distortion in the final welded structure. It efficiently incorporates finite element based numerical welding simulations to investigate the desired responses and the effect of design variables without expensive trial experiments. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed methodology, a lap joint fillet weld specimen has been used in this paper. Four process parameters namely arc voltage, input current, welding speed and welding direction have been optimized to minimize the distortion of the structure. The optimization results revealed the effectiveness of the methodology for welding process design with reduced cost and time.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Arc welding is a popular metal joining process that finds wide range of applications in various manufacturing industries especially automotive, shipbuilding, and aerospace industries. Its major advantages are reduced cost, enhanced joint strength, and efficiency. However, welding induces a permanent deformation known as weld induced distortion in the final welded product. Distortion has critical negative impact on the quality of the welded product especially on joint strength and dimensional accuracy. Therefore, expensive and time consuming post-weld treatments are required to achieve desired level of dimensional accuracy of the welded products. For applications where cost control is critical, the goal is to keep the distortion level as low as possible.Several parameters in the welding procedure contribute to the distortion. These include heat input, welding sequence, degree of restraint, welding conditions and joint details. Better control of these welding variables will eliminate the conditions that promote distortion [36]. Several researchers investigated experimental process parameter optimization techniques for arc welding process. In experimental optimization, a mathematical model is developed correlating the process parameters with desired objective function using statistical techniques such as Design of Experiments (DOE), Taguchi method and Response Surface Methodology (RSM). Next, the developed mathematical model is executed in optimization algorithm for parametric optimization. Evolutionary Algorithms and Artificial Neural Networks are the most frequently used optimization methods for this purpose. Benyounis et al. [2] and Dhas et al. [1] provided a detailed review of experimental optimization of welding process parameters.Sudhakaran et al. [35] investigated optimization of process parameters using particle swarm optimization to minimize angular distortion in 202 grade stainless steel gas tungsten arc welded plates. Correia et al. [6] investigated the implementation possibility of using GA as a method to decide near optimal settings of a GMAW process and compared its performance with RSM. Kim et al. [21] suggested a GA and RSM combined approach for determining optimal welding conditions. Later, Kim et al. [20] have proposed a method for determining the near-optimal setting of GMAW process parameters using a controlled random search (CRS).Experiment based process parameter optimization is by far the most popular technique for welding. However, it is often a very costly and time consuming approach due to many kinds of nonlinear events involved [5]. Numerical welding simulations can help in this regard. For more than three decades, Finite Element Method (FEM) has been the most popular and powerful tool for simulating the thermo-mechanical behavior of a structures during welding process. Lindgren has provided a detailed description on computational modeling of welding process in his papers [22,23,25]. Many researchers successfully used FEM for welding simulation especially for residual stress and weld induced distortion prediction. The initial welding simulations were highly simplified based on two-dimensional (2D) approach and plane strain condition [22]. Although the 2D analysis gives indications of the welding residual stresses involved in quasi-static, plane strain conditions, it does not provide the total out-of-plane deformations [4]. Brown and Song [3] used both two-dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) models to investigate fixturing impact on large structures and concluded that full 3D models are essential in predicting welding distortion. Michaleris et al. [26,27] used two step numerical analysis approach that combines 2D welding simulation with 3D structural analysis for predicting buckling distortion; 2D welding simulation substantially reduces the computation time of their analysis. Tsai et al. [36] investigated distortion mechanism and the effect of welding sequence on panel distortion using FEM based on inherent shrinkage method. Deng et al. [7,8,9,10,11,12] conducted substantial research on predicting welding distortion of welded structures.It is evident that FEM is a very useful and reliable welding process modeling and analysis tool. However, FEM weld models still contribute little to the development of modern welding technology. One of the major application fields of welding simulations can be process parameter optimization because it can effectively replace the expensive experiments. Very few research works have been conducted in this domain. Kadivar et al. [19] linked Genetic Algorithms (GA) with a transient 2D FE model to determine optimum welding sequence of a circular pipe for minimization of distortion. Song et al. [32], Song et al. [33]) investigated sensitivity of thermo-mechanical responses of welded joints to variation in material properties and optimized quasi-static weakly coupled thermo-elasto-plastic FE process for side heater design. Islam et al. [16], Islam et al. [17] developed a direct computational framework based on integrated computational tools, which allows automatic optimization of welding process parameters without the requirement of expensive experiments.In this paper, an innovative FEM–RSM–GA integrated approach for process parameter optimization is proposed. The proposed approach essentially mimics the experimental optimization procedure except it incorporates finite element (FE) models in lieu of expensive experiments for required analysis. First, a 3D thermo-elastic–plastic FE model is developed and validated by experimental results. RSM is then applied for Design of Experiments and analyzing the responses of interest by developing required mathematical models. GA, for its wide acceptance for process optimization, is subsequently implemented to determine optimum process control parameters. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed optimization approach, a lap joint specimen has been investigated. Optimization of process parameters has been carried out to minimize the weld induced distortion in the final welded structure. Total weld induced distortion is set as objective function (that will be minimized) and minimum weld quality requirement in the form of sufficient weld fusion or melting is set as optimization constraint. The important parameters including welding speed, input current, arc voltage and welding direction or sequence, etc. are treated as design variables during the analysis.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In next section, the general framework of the proposed FEM–RSM–GA integrated optimization approach is discussed and then FE based welding simulation and model validation approach has been briefly introduced. In Section 4, experimental design and response surface modeling strategy have been discussed in detail. Finally, genetic algorithm based optimization problem formulation and optimization results have been summarized in Section 5.The proposed FEM–RSM–GA approach is based on three different sequentially coupled stages as illustrated in Fig. 1. The first stage consists in setting up the numerical simulation of considered welding process problem through finite element modeling. The welding simulation tool chosen for this research work is simufact.welding©, which is a Pre- and Postprocessor-GUI for FE welding process analysis. There are several fundamental reasons for the selection of this FEM package, foremost among which are its ability to simulate complex welding process model with multiple welding robots working at the same time or different times, flexibility to define or modify welding parameters, paths, directions and simple automatic batch running option useful for simulation-based design optimization. Simufact also provides a user-friendly interface for configuring process modeling properties, solver settings, welding robot settings, heat source parameters and geometric boundary conditions.The second stage is focused on Design of Experiments and development of response surface model. This stage consists of following four steps-•Systematic design of a series of experiments and generation of the response data.Selection of a suitable RSM model to adequately represent the data.Training and fitting the mathematical model with measured data.Validation of the model by measuring different accuracy or error parameters.Simulation model developed and validated in stage one is used here for conducting the experiments and recording required response data. Next, a quadratic response surface model is fitted to the obtained data. A customized computer program is developed in the MATLAB programming environment to facilitate the development and performance analysis of the model. During this stage, it was ensured the developed mathematical model represents an adequate and reliable correlation between the design variables (parameters to be optimized) and considered objectives (criterions of optimizations). In this stage, a DOE table is constructed first using the popular Box–Behnken method, and subsequently the response at each design point of the DOE table is evaluated by the welding simulation. After calculating the response values at all the DOE points, a quadratic PRS is developed using the least squares technique. Accuracy of the response surface model largely depends on the nonlinearity of the system, the number and range of design points in the DOE table. The PRS model is not guaranteed to be adequately accurate in the first trial. As such, an iterative process of DOE table construction-PRS fitting-error checking is carried out to fit the PRS with adequate accuracy within the design space defined by the DOE table.The third stage is concerned with the process parameter optimization based on Response Surface Model. Genetic Algorithms (GA) has been used as optimization method as it is well known to be efficient and to converge to global optimum point specially for manufacturing process related problems. MATLAB® GA solver is used as the optimization tool. A customized GA variant is developed by varying different default solver properties to meet the problem-specific requirements. The PRS is linked with GA for design optimization in this stage. The overall optimization process based on FEM–RSM–GA integrated technique is depicted in the flowchart of Fig. 2. Details of each of the three stages are discussed in later sections of this paper.The problem we are considering to demonstrate the implementation of our optimization system is a simple lap joint of two plates at the middle section of the plates. All the dimensions of the specimen have been illustrated in Fig. 3. The material of the plates is ASTM A591M-89 sheet metal steel. The total weld length is 70mm and four clamps have been used to restrain the movement of the plates during welding process. The corresponding three dimensional FE model has been illustrated in Fig. 3.Computational modeling of welding is a coupled thermo-mechanical problem. It involves several coupled phenomena such as complex weld pool physics, nonlinear heat flow, nonlinear material behavior at elevated temperature, generation of thermal stresses and mechanical deformations. Lindgren [24] and Goldak [14] have provided an extensive review on different interactions present in welding process and their impact on numerical modeling of welding. However, the main stream in computational welding mechanics (CWM) is the use of weakly coupled models where the physics in the weld is replaced by a simplified heat input model and thermal analysis is performed independent of mechanical analysis. Such approach is useful and computationally efficient when the primary objective is to investigate transient temperature, deformation and stress field other than complex metal physics properties. In this paper, since our objective is to investigate weld induced distortion in the welded structure, weakly coupled modeling approach has been adopted for welding simulation.Three-dimensional thermo-mechanical FE simulations were carried out using Marc solver of simufact.welding©. Marc uses a staggered solution procedure in coupled thermo-mechanical analysis, where it first performs a thermal analysis, then mechanical analysis. An automatic local mesh refinement has been implemented to improve simulation result accuracy while not increasing the computational time considerably. As such, the focus is not directed on the meshing the entire model but on the areas of welding zones. Each refinement level halves the element size in the heat input area. A refinement level of two was used in this analysis which results in quartering the element length in the vicinity of the weld zone. Heat source area is treated as refinement criterion and the criterion is set by means of a scaling factor (equal to 2), which is a multiplier of the heat source size for the local refinement area around the heat source. Fig. 4illustrates the locally refined mesh in the vicinity of the weld bead during analysis.The classical heat conduction formulation using temperature dependent material properties and a moving heat source constitutes the thermal problem that needs to be solved to obtain temperature history at each node of the FE model. The popular double ellipsoid heat source model, first proposed by Goldak et al. [13], is used to simulate the arc welding heat input. It is a non-axisymmetric heat source where the front half of the source is the quadrant of one ellipsoid and the rear half is the quadrant of another ellipsoid. The Gaussian heat flux distribution has been implemented along the longitudinal axis of the heat source model. Heat losses due to convection, radiation and contact have been considered by taking into account the corresponding thermal coefficients.In mechanical analysis, the basic equations are the equilibrium equations, constitutive stress–strain relations and geometric compatibility equations [24]. Temperature history obtained from thermal analysis is input as thermal loading into the structural model to calculate the stress–strain field. The change in the temperature distribution contributes to the deformation of the body through thermal strains and influences the material properties. Large deformation and large plastic strains are accounted for and the additive decomposition of elastic, plastic and thermal strain contributions is utilized for the stress recovery process. The analysis uses a regular elasto-plastic material model with von Mises yield criterion. Phase transformation effects are not considered in the current analysis.The heat source and out-of-plane distortion predictions of the present FE model of lap joint specimen have been validated by experimental results. Physically, the width and depth of heat source correspond to the weld bead cross-section dimensions. As such, the heat source model was validated with respect to the weld macrograph of experimental weld cross-sections and a fairly good agreement was achieved in terms of weld pool boundary shape and size as shown in Fig. 4. Experimentally obtained weld pool shape is shown in Fig. 5(a) by yellow1For interpretation of color in Fig. 5, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.1dotted line and the corresponding simulation prediction of weld pool shape has been depicted in Fig. 5(b) with the black dotted line.After validating the heat source, the simulation predicted out-of-plane distortion pattern was compared with the experimental results as shown in Fig. 6. Experimental out-of-plane distortion pattern is illustrated in Fig. 6(a) which indicates the upper plate is distorted into a convex shape after complete cool down where its high ends are separated from the lower plate. On the other hand, the lower plate is distorted into a concave shape where its middle section toward edge has moved up after complete cool down. Out-of-plane distortions at left and right edges of the upper plate were around 0.1mm and 0.4mm respectively. Moreover, the maximum distortion occurred at the middle section of the lower plate which is around 0.6mm. The corresponding simulation predicted out-of-plane distortion pattern has been shown in Fig. 6(b) and the contour plot of z-distortion indicates good agreement with experimental results as well. The simulation prediction is scaled two times for better visualization purpose. Readers are referred to paper [16,17] for details of FE modeling and validation of this model.RSM is a collection of statistical and mathematical techniques useful for developing, improving and optimizing processes [29]. Despite the steady growth in computing power, the complexity and high cost of FEA seem to keep pace with computing advancement [31]. As such, it may not be feasible to conduct iterative optimization directly using computation intensive simulations for objective function evaluations as this may greatly increase the overall design cost. The common approach to deal with this problem is to carry out a number of computer simulations based on Design of Experiments (DOE) method and develop an inexpensive response surface model approximating the relationship between input variables and desired responses. RSM approximates the unknown functional relationship between a response of interest and input variables by a polynomial response surface (PRS). The quadratic polynomial model is the most popular PRS because of its flexibility to take on a wide variety of functional forms, ease of estimating the parameters and several practical success experiences in solving real engineering problems. The mathematical model of quadratic response surface is described as(1)y=βo+∑i=1kβixi+∑i=1kβiixi2+∑i=1k-1∑j=k+1kβijxixj+∊where k is the number of variables, ε is the error and βs are the constant regression coefficients. The quadratic model in Eq. (1) includes p=(k+1)(k+2)/2 unknown coefficients (β0, βi, βii, and βij) that are found using the least squares technique based on the true response values at a set of n⩾p training points. Various DOE techniques such as Latin Hypercube Sample (LHS), Taguchi orthogonal arrays, Central Composite Design (CCD) and Box–Behenden Design may be used for identifying the training set in the design space bounded by the lower and upper bounds of xi, i=1, k. The accuracy of a surrogate model is dependent on the number of training points and how these training points are distributed in the design space. For a PRS, at least 3k training points are necessary to build a good surrogate model [29].A two-level DOE-based sensitivity analysis is conducted as a first step to investigate the sensitivity of the chosen output (max weld induced distortion) to the selected design variables (current, voltage, speed and direction). The arbitrarily selected baseline point and its corresponding response are given in Table 1. Since welding direction is not a continuous variable, it is difficult to interpret the response of the output to the change in welding direction. Therefore, a separate sensitivity analysis was carried out with the other three design variables for arbitrarily selected welding direction (i.e., X4 value). Physical meaning of each welding direction is described in Table 5. The difference of the highest relative to the lowest max distortion value in Table 1 is approximately 25%.The sensitivity analysis was formulated such that each variable can take either a high or a low value for each design point while the other two variables are kept at their respective baseline values. As such, the calculated sensitivity represents the percentile main effect of each design variable on the max weld induced distortion. The high and low values for each design variable were selected as ±33.33% of their baseline value. Fig. 7presents the percentile main effect of each design variable on the max welding induced distortion for four arbitrary welding directions. Blue color indicates the corresponding design variable has been set at [baseline−33.33%] value and it is termed as low value. On the other hand, the maroon color indicates the corresponding design variable has been set at [baseline+33.33%] value and it is termed as high value.It can be seen through the investigation of the sensitivity results that the main effects of current, voltage and speed on distortion are highly dependent on welding direction for the lap-joint model. Current and voltage have less effect on distortion than welding speed for welding direction 1 but more effect for welding direction 2. For example, decrement of current from baseline value to low value (blue column) causes maximum distortion increment of 9.68% and 43.57% for welding direction 1 and welding direction 2 respectively. Increment of voltage from baseline value to high value (maroon column) reduces maximum distortion by 15.7% for direction 1. However, same adjustment of voltage from baseline value to high value (maroon column) actually increases maximum distortion by 4.14% for direction 2. Again, same adjustment of voltage reduces maximum distortion by 32.43% and 20.63% respectively for welding direction 4 and direction 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Over the past decade, a tremendous growth has been observed in the use of CAE tools in manufacturing process design and analysis. By using CAE tools for numerical simulation of manufacturing processes, it is possible to predict the quality of finished product and identify potential defects during early design phase. Since a computer simulation is faster and cheaper than performing a real welding experiment, it reduces manufacturing cost and the time-to-market. Design optimization always requires a loop of design-evaluate-redesign. Therefore, the ability to quickly and easily assess desired process dependent responses accelerates the ultimate process of optimum design. In this context, this study proposed a computational approach of optimizing process variables for arc welding process using Finite Element Method, Response Surface Methodology and Genetic Algorithms. In order to reduce the computational cost of simulation, a second order response surface model is developed and used in the Genetic Algorithm based optimization loop.The illustrative example of lap joint welding specimen optimization presented in this paper showed that the proposed FEM–RSM–GA integrated method is able to search for optimum set of process parameters for minimum distortion while ensuring sufficient weld penetration. In this optimization problem, a straightforward solution approach was to run all possible combinations and select the best one as optimum solution. In this approach, obviously the number of combinations will be very large and it would be computationally inefficient and infeasible to try to run all combinations. Using RSM and GA, we achieved optimum results with 75 FE simulations. So, the method was certainly effective for this case study. In this case study, effect of welding direction was nominal, as such capability of RSM to predict optimum discrete design variables like welding direction could not be examined in detail. Therefore, application of RSM based optimization system to predict optimum welding direction where direction has critical impact will be an excellent extension of this research work. Consideration of additional design variables such as clamping position, clamp apply/release time and cooling time between sub-welds will also be among the topics for future research.