@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Simulation analysis of thermal influential factors on crude oil temperature when double pipelines are laid in one ditch

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Thermal influential factors affecting crude oil temperature in double pipelines system have been analyzed in detail.Insulating layer and changes of crude oil physical characteristic are considered to correspond with practice.Ambient temperature is a key parameter to determine pipeline interval.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Crude oil,Double pipelines,Temperature field,Thermal influential factor,Numerical simulation,Computational fluid dynamics (CFD),Ambient temperature,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Crude oil pipeline laid with products pipeline in the same ditch is a new technology to save investment and protect environment. In order to provide reference to construction and operation optimization, the majority of this paper investigates the thermal influential factors affecting the crude oil temperature in double pipelines system using the computational fluid dynamics methodology. A two-dimensional rectangular region including the two pipelines is selected as computational domain in this investigation. Heat transfer models are proposed to obtain the temperature field distribution and the crude oil temperature drop. The impacts of pipeline interval, crude oil temperature at the outlet of heating station, diameter of crude oil pipeline and atmosphere temperature have been reasonably captured and analyzed in details.radial fraction concentration of wax moleculars, –specific heat capacity, Jkg−1K−1inner diameter of oil pipe, mcoefficient of molecular diffusion, m2s−1per unit mass of internal energy, m2s−2coefficient of friction resistance, –acceleration of gravity, ms−2per unit area of wax molecular diffusion quality, kgm−2per unit mass of enthalpy, m2s−2entrance lengths, mNusselt numberpressure, PaPrandtl numberper unit area of heat flux density of crude oil, Wm−2per unit mass of radiant heat transfer rate, m2s−3radius, mthickness of wax deposition, mReynolds numbertime, stemperature, Ktemperature of inner pipe wall, Ktemperature of soil thermostat layer, Kvelocity, ms−1coordinate, mheat transfer coefficient of oil flow, Wm−2K−1heat transfer coefficient of air, Wm−2K−1coefficient of heat conductivity, Wm−1K−1density, kgm−3viscous stress, Pacircumferential direction,°kinetic viscosity, Pasper unit mass of energy dissipation by viscous friction, m2s−3air1, 2 or 3, represents pipe wall, insulating layer and corrosion protective covering respectivelywaxwatersoil

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the last few years, a new pipe-laying technology, laying a crude oil pipeline and a products pipeline in one ditch, has been used in China in order to save excavation investment and protect environment [1,2]. In western China, more than one thousand kilometers of crude oil pipeline and products pipeline were laid in one ditch, which is the first and only application of this technology in long distance oil transportation in China until now. The main reason for restricting the promoted application of this technology may be the changes of temperature field distribution and crude oil temperature drop, which are key parameters for safe transportation, energy consumption and economic investment.The majority of crude oil extracted in China is either waxy oil with high pour point or high viscosity oil, which brings about enormous pressure-drop consumption. One effective method adopted in transportation is heating the crude oil to a certain temperature at heating station. While the temperature of crude oil decreases along the pipeline due to heat transfer with external environment. So heating stations should be constructed in appropriate positions along the pipeline to keep the temperature of crude oil being above the pour point all the time. Great energy consumption and construction cost are the chief disadvantages of heating transportation [3–6].If the new pipe-laying technology accelerated the crude oil temperature drop, higher temperature would be reached at heating station or more heating stations would be constructed. It may lose the original purpose of cost savings. Therefore, it is meaningful to investigate and gain a deep understanding of thermal influential factors on crude oil temperature drop when double pipelines are laid in one ditch, and it is important to provide technical support to ensure operation safety and at last, really save energy and investment.Extensive studies have been carried out to investigate the thermal characterization of hot crude oil pipeline [7–12], while few researches are about double pipelines laid in one ditch. Ling et al. [13] and Yu et al. [14,15] had simulated the temperature field of double pipelines system and analyzed the effect of pipeline interval and diameter combination on thermal impact. However, there are several points in their studies that do not conform to the actual conditions. Firstly, coupled heat transfer presents between crude oil and soil, which includes convective heat transfer between oil and the inner wall of steel pipe, heat conduction between the inner wall and outer wall of steel pipe, heat conduction between the inner wall and outer wall of insulating layer, heat conduction between the inner wall and outer wall of corrosion protective covering, and the heat emission between the outer wall of corrosion protective covering and the soil. So neglecting the heat conduction in insulating layer is unreasonable, which plays an important role in temperature drop. Secondly, the physical characteristic of crude oil changes with temperature, especially the viscosity, which cannot be seemed as unchanged in transportation. Thirdly, pipelines are usually laid in the same plane bottom of one ditch. So pipeline buried depths of the two pipelines, the depths from the center of pipelines to ground surface, are different. Fourthly, atmosphere temperature also influences the temperature field distribution, especially the extreme cold or hot atmosphere temperature should be considered. Last but not least, the grid used in their research is sparse. A denser grid should be adopted to ensure reliable accuracy. So a more accurate and comprehensive study is needed.Since numerical methods can take more factors into account with fewer assumptions and have advantages of low cost and short research time [16,17], in this paper, simulation method is proposed to explore the changes of temperature field distribution in double pipelines system. And main factors affecting the crude oil temperature are discussed.For incompressible oil flow, both crude oil and products oil, the universal averaged Navier–Stokes equations are employed to obtain the oil flow field [18], including the conservation of mass, momentum and energy, taking the following form:(1)∇·ν→=0(2)∂ν→∂t+∇·(ν→ν→)=-1ρ∇p+g→+1ρ∇·τ→(3)∂e∂t+∇·(ν→e)=-pρ∇·ν→+ϕ+1ρ∂∂xiλ∂T∂xi+qRThe heat transfer of the whole thermal system of double pipelines laid in one ditch is composed of five components, namely, the convective heat transfer between the flowing oil and the inner wall of the pipe, the heat conduction in steel pipe, the heat conduction in insulating layer, the heat conduction in corrosion protective covering, and the heat emission between the outer wall of the corrosion protective covering and the soil around the pipeline, which includes the soil heat conduction and heat emission of the soil to the air [19]. In order to save computing costs, two spatial dimensions computational region is used in simulation, which calculated the temperature variations in radial. While unsteady model is employed to obtain the axial temperature gradient of oil, in which axial distance is determined by multiplying time step by velocity of oil flow. Therefore, the governing equations are simplified as following:(4)∂ν∂z=0(5)∂ν∂t+ν∂ν∂z=-gsinα-1ρ∂p∂z-fdinν22(6)∂(h+ν2/2+gz)∂t+∂[ν(h+ν2/2+gz)]∂z-ϕ=-4q0ρdinwhere(7)dh=cpdT+1ρ+Tρ2∂ρ∂TdpAnd polar coordinate is adopted to express the heat conductive equations of pipe wall, insulating layer and corrosion protective covering, which are listed below:(8)ρicpi∂Ti∂t=1r∂∂rλir∂Ti∂r+1r2∂∂θλi∂Ti∂θin which, i=1, 2 or 3, represents pipe wall, insulating layer and corrosion protective covering respectively.While heat transfer equation of soil is:(9)ρscps∂Ts∂t=∂∂xλs∂Ts∂x+∂∂yλs∂Ts∂yFor heat transfer in soil, the closer the soil is to the oil pipe, the more it affected by the pipe. If the soil is sufficiently far away from the pipe, the soil temperature is hardly affected by the oil. In order to save computation time, thus, a finite thermal influence region should be adopted as computational region. It has been reported that the soil 10m away from the center of pipe is usually not influenced by the oil pipeline and the soil temperature at the depth of 8m can be similarly seemed as constant through the entire year [20]. Therefore, a 20m×10m rectangular region is selected as computational region, as shown in Fig. 1.GAMBIT 2.3 mesh-generator is employed to perform all geometry generation and meshing. As shown in Fig. 2, computational domain is divided into several blocks, namely, the soil region, the oil region, the steel pipe region, the insulating layer region and the corrosion protective covering region. Progressive triangle mesh is used to discretize the soil region. The closer the soil to the oil pipe, the denser the grid is. Remaining blocks are discretized with rectangular cells. And boundary layers present near the oil pipe inner wall with four-layer grids (the cell height of the first layer is 1mm and the growth factor is 1.2). The suitable grid density is reached by repeating computations until a satisfactory independent grid is found.At the inner wall of oil pipe, convective heat transfer between oil and pipe wall and heat conduction in steel pipe are coupled as:(10)λ1dT1dr=α0(T0-T)As crude oil flow belongs to laminar flow (Reynolds number ranges from 946 to 1821 for selected pipelines used for investigation), the heat convective transfer coefficient is obtained by calculating simultaneous two equations of Eqs. (10) and (11).(11)Nu=α0dinλ1=1.86RePrdinl1/3μμwa0.14At the ground surface, convective heat transfer between soil and atmosphere and heat conduction in soil are coupled as:(12)λsdTsdy=αa(Ta-Ts)At the horizontal direction boundary of computational domain, X=±10, there is no heat transfer:(13)∂Ts∂x=0Constant temperature is set at the bottom of computational domain, being equal to the temperature of soil thermostat layer:(14)Ts=TnOne section of double pipelines system in Western China, 302.4km from the outlet of one heating station to the inlet of next station, is selected to simulate. And the physical characteristics of materials used in simulation are listed in Table 1.In order to obtain the initial temperature distribution of computational domain (especially the temperature field of soil region), the temperature of initial crude oil and products oil are set fixedly as that they are heat reservoir to release steady heat. After initial temperature distribution having been received, unsteady heat transfer model is began to be used in calculation, and crude oil and products oil temperature then change with time. Finally, we can obtain the temperature drop of oil and the temperature distribution changes along the pipeline.Fifteen cases are simulated to compare the different influences among different pipeline intervals, crude oil temperature at the outlet of heating station, diameters of crude oil pipeline and atmosphere temperature, as listed in Table 2. With the same economic flow rate, 1.2m/s, throughput increases with the increase of diameter. Combined with Tables 1 and 2, the range of Reynolds numbers used in simulation is from 18.5 to 807.3. So laminar flow model is employed.All computations in this study are performed using the finite-volume commercial CFD code, FLUENT 13.0. The flow computations have been solved using the coupled implicit iterative solution procedure. And a Second-order upwind scheme is adopted for the momentum equation and heat conductive equations. Changing physical characteristic of crude oil is added to the flow governing equations using User-Defined Functions (UDFs). And time step Δt used in computation is 0.1s. Convergence is examined by noting the diminishing normalized residual levels (<10−5).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
CFD analysis has been used to simulate the effects of several key thermal influential factors on temperature field and oil temperature drop when double pipelines are laid in one ditch. From calculation results, following conclusions are drawn.(1)Products pipeline inevitably absorbs heat from crude oil pipeline in the same ditch. And the heat absorption is different at different pipeline intervals. In cold winter, the heat absorption does not increase with the decrease of interval. So proper pipeline interval should be determined by considering the impact of ambient temperature.High temperature crude oil provides great heat for absorbing, and big-diameter pipe provides large area for heat transfer. Therefore, the higher the crude oil temperature at the outlet of heating station, or the bigger the diameter of crude oil pipeline, the more the heat loss of crude oil is.Heat transfer may be in different directions under different atmosphere temperatures. In cold winter, both crude oil pipeline and products pipeline release heat into soil and atmosphere. However, in hot summer, soil absorbs heat from atmosphere and crude oil pipeline, and products pipeline absorbs heat from soil and crude oil pipeline. The lower the atmosphere temperature is, the quicker the temperature of crude oil drops.