@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fuzzy modeling of combined effect of winter road maintenance and cyclic loading on concrete slab bridge

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Approach to analysis of durability of reinforced concrete slab bridge.Fuzzy model of response of concrete to compressive cyclic loading.Fuzzy model of stiffness reduction of concrete due to freeze–thawing.Fuzzy model of stiffness reduction of concrete due to chloride contamination.Combined fuzzy model of concrete fatigue in hostile environment.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Bridge,Chloride ion contamination,Cyclic loading,Durability analysis,Fuzzy logic,Mamdani-rule based modeling,Freeze–thaw cycles,Material model,Reinforced concrete,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The reinforced-concrete slab road bridges in their simplest form are used as a cost-effective solution for local infrastructure in various parts of the world. Since the reinforced concrete slab is the load-carrying element whose upper surface is directly exposed to both road traffic and weather, the integrity of the upper layer of the concrete slab becomes the decisive factor for estimation of durability of these bridges. This paper presents a fuzzy-logic based approach to estimation of stiffness reduction of concrete in the compressed zone of the cross section which takes into account the combined effect of the cyclic loading, freeze–thawing and chloride contamination. The fuzzy logic is used for derivation of numerical relations from available experimental data on the three relevant effects, which can be readily implemented in or used with existing finite element codes. The proposed approach is demonstrated in an example of a model bridge subjected to moderate road traffic and mountainous climatic conditions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Reinforced concrete slab bridges have been used since the broader introduction of reinforced concrete at the beginning of the twentieth century for spanning obstacles, such as rivers and streams, no wider than ten meters. The simple construction, which comprises in situ placement of concrete and ordinary quality local workers, renders their range of application for roads in remote mountainous regions. Even though the reinforced concrete slab bridges are viewed as a cost-effective, or low-cost, solution by local authorities, in some regions such as North India this simple structural system is the only choice due to the limited access of construction equipment via the narrow roads, while its durability is the critical factor for viability of the local economy. Hence, the inherent feature of the reinforced concrete slab of the bridge, which is the combination of the load-carrying function with the direct exposure of its upper surface to both road traffic and weather (Fig. 1), becomes the key issue to be considered in the design.Bearing in mind the fact that the reinforced concrete slab bridges are quite simple to design and thus the project work presents little cost, it is natural that the analysis of the durability should be in a similar range of expense. One can imagine that this goal can be achieved by asking an expert who would go through the meteorological and traffic data for the particular location and provide some recommendation. The approach proposed in this paper follows the same line of reasoning.The analysis of durability of the reinforced concrete slab bridge is a complex process that should take into account at least the effect of cyclic loading, freeze–thawing and chloride contamination on concrete performance. Based on the literature review, it is evident that relevant experimental data, in terms of combination of fatigue of concrete and freeze–thawing for typical types of concrete used, for example, in North India, are non-existent. Therefore, it is necessary to draw conclusions based on the data that is most suitable for the given case. The fuzzy logic [1,2] was selected for this task because it allows to include relevant experimental data in the knowledge base and to combine them through optimized decision-making rules, which eventually provides quantitative results that are readily applicable in existing finite element codes related to structural dynamic analysis, heat and moisture transfer, and the like.In this light, this paper presents an approach to the durability analysis of reinforced concrete slab bridges which is based on fuzzy logic. The durability of the bridge is closely related to damage of concrete caused by cyclic and climatic loading, which are commonly analyzed using the finite element codes. Therefore, the loss of stiffness in terms of the modulus of elasticity can be taken as the measure of the damage as it enters directly the calculations. Even though the theoretical background for behavior of concrete under cyclic loading is less developed than that for metals, useful concepts such as the fatigue damage function have been developed [3]. This concept, which corresponds with assumptions included in construction standards and in a modified version, was defined using the fuzzy logic [4]. The developed approach is implemented in the presented analysis for its simple applicability. The effect of freeze–thawing has been studied and relevant experimental data suitable for the presented analysis were obtained from [5,6]. The effect of chlorides on structural integrity of concrete has been studied mostly in relation to marine environment; however, several studies on the effect of deicing agents on concrete surfaces can be also found. The relevant data for chloride induced damage were taken from [7–9]. The definition of the fuzzy-logic models for the three effects and the combination of theirs are described in the following sections, which also include detailed explanation of the optimization of the fuzzy sets. The flow of the simulation, which includes standard finite element analyses, is described in an illustrative example of a reinforced concrete slab bridge situated on Mughal Road in North India.The fuzzy set theory, first introduced by Zadeh [10], corresponds to a natural way of thinking where verbally expressed rules are applied to deal with vagueness and imprecision. This represents an interesting solution because it allows for dealing with verbally expressed phenomena to obtain a numerical solution [2]. The use of fuzzy logic is a relatively new approach for solving problems where it is necessary to input expert opinions into a controlling or simulation system.Within the applications of fuzzy logic, an emphasis is put on Mamdani’s publication [1], which was the first to demonstrate that fuzzy logic could be used in a profitable manner in controlling systems. After that, several applications followed, e.g., in commercial systems [11] and improvement of car performance [12]. The application of fuzzy logic has also presented successful results in concrete technology, e.g., for the prediction of bond strength of concrete [13], diagnosis of concrete bridge deterioration [14], simulation of cement hydration [15] and control of Ready-mixed concrete production process [16], to mention a few.Fuzzy logic is represented by fuzzy expressions that consist of mapping functions from [0,1]n→[0,1], where n relates to the number of relations from the fuzzy sets. The fuzzy expressions can be translated as if–then rules, e.g., “if x is a, then y is b”. The rules are composed of an antecedent, i.e., the if part “x is a”, and a consequent, i.e., the then part “y is b”. In fuzzy logic, the antecedent and the consequent are usually linguistic variables. The if-then rules can be declared by the relation Rn, which is expressed as(1)Rn:A∼(x)→B∼(y).whereA∼represents the input fuzzy set defined on X, whereasB∼is the output fuzzy set defined on Y, and the index n is the number of rules of the system.The interpretation of rules in fuzzy systems involves three basic steps: fuzzification, inference engine and defuzzification. The fuzzification is the process of mapping the input data to compute the degree of membershipμA∼(x)of an input x in each of the nth rules of the system. The inference engine is responsible for deducing an output for a corresponding input by operating the n rules of the system. The output from the inference engine depends on the type of operator that is used to deal with the input variables. Among the several methods, emphases are put on Mamdani, Larsen, Tsukamoto and Sugeno methods since they are usually applied in fuzzy systems [2,17]. The defuzzification, which is the last procedure of the system, consists in converting a fuzzy value into a crisp value that will correspond to the output of the system. In general, the defuzzification methods can be classified in two types: composite moments and composite maximum. The former is connected to the first moment of inertia of the sets, while the latter relates to the maximum value from the output fuzzy sets [18]. It should be noted that selecting the most suitable inference engine and defuzzification techniques is a context-dependent problem. Although strategies for selection are not properly defined, some criteria can be considered for guidance, e.g., continuity and computational simplicity. Additional criteria are discussed by [19]; however, it is important to observe that the decision is always connected to how well the output relates to the analyzed problem.The combination of the above described steps provides a decision-making framework of representing human expert rules to infer human decision. The key factors to achieve an acceptable performance in a fuzzy system are connected to the number of fuzzy sets and consequently the size of the system’s rule base. Commonly, there are mkfuzzy rules, where m and k are the number of fuzzy sets and input variables, respectively.In the classical fuzzy-logic approach, the number of fuzzy rules can be reduced by the user’s experience, and the shape of the fuzzy sets is usually linear in order to simplify calculations. Examples of the classical approach in the designing of different material models can be found in [15,20,21]. Nonetheless, when this approach is implemented to model the behavior of non-linear materials, the final result is a rather roughly shaped piecewise curve. Notice that the use of the classical approach is also feasible for material modeling; however, a larger number of linear fuzzy sets is required to obtain smooth curves [15,22]. As a result, this leads to a longer data collection time and high computational cost. Then, in this paper, to improve the modeling process for fatigue of concrete and thus reduce the user’s workload, the shape of the membership functions from the prediction model will be adjusted when necessary. The adjustments are performed based on an approach that is similar to the one presented in [22].The proposed approach combines fuzzy logic and genetic algorithms to optimize fuzzy decision-making, which is achieved by optimizing the shape of the membership functions. The adjustments are performed through the definition of the exponent value e that is related to each of the membership functions of the system. Taking into account three fuzzy setsA∼,B∼andC∼defined on X, the general equation of these membership functions can be written as(2)μA∼(x)=1,x<x1,x2-xx2-x1eA∼,x1⩽x⩽x2,0,x>x2,(3)μB∼(x)=0,x<x1andx>x3,1-μA∼(x),x1⩽x⩽x2,x3-xx3-x2eB∼,x2⩽x⩽x3,(4)μC∼(x)=0,x<x2,1-μB∼(x),x2⩽x⩽x3.1,x>x3.Notice that, when existent, the left branch of each fuzzy set corresponds to the complement of the right branch of the corresponding fuzzy set. An example of the membership functionsμA∼(x),μB∼(x)andμC∼(x)is depicted in Fig. 2.Prior to starting the optimization process, the user has to determine the number of representative intervals (Nint) of the curve to be modeled. Each representative interval comprises an initial point (xa, ya) and a final point (xb, yb). The more complex the shape of the curve, the higher the number of intervals needed to achieve optimal results. After that, the user specifies the size of the population (Spop) to be used in the genetic part of the algorithm. From this point on the optimization process is automatic.Based on Nint, the encoding of each individual from the population is defined. It comprises a string of nenc=Nint−1 numbers which correspond to the exponent values e related to the membership functions to be optimized. As the next step, a random population is generated and the fitness function f(xi) is evaluated, where the index i represented the number of the population. In particular, the fitness function corresponds to the mean square error between the predicted values and the training data of the system.Then, three genetic operators (i.e., selection, crossover and mutation) are applied to generate a new population. The selection operator (tournament selection) chooses the chromosomes for reproduction. To create a new individual to be included in the population, the selected chromosomes are crossed over by one-point crossover scheme with a probability Cprobof 90.0%. Further, mutation by disturbance with a probability Mprobof 10.0% is performed. After a new population is generated, the fitness function re-evaluates all individuals from the new population. The obtained results, i.e., f(xi+1), are then compared with those from previous populations (f(xi)). Further, the best overall solution is stored. In case none of individuals from the new population shows better fitness than the stored solution, the individual with the worst solution from the new population is replaced with the best overall solution.The automatic process of generating a new population and evaluating the best fit is repeated until convergence occurs. In this case, convergence is considered as achieved when more than 150 consecutive iterations do not lead to any improvements in the fitness function result. The final result consists of a group of optimized fuzzy sets that will compose the fuzzy decision-making. The decision-making is composed of rule base, whose size depends on the number of input parameters selected for the prediction model, and the number of optimized fuzzy sets. The general form of the rule base is(5)Rn:IfInput1isI∼1,Input2isI∼2…InputkisI∼k,thenOnisO∼n,where n is the number of curves in the database, k the number of input parameters,I∼kandO∼nthe group of optimized fuzzy sets for the kth input and nth output of the system and Onthe crisp output of the nth rule of the system. The decision-making is based on the Mamdani method; in particular, the firing strength assigned to each rule is computed by(6)μn(I1,I2,…,In)=μI∼1(Input1)∧μI∼2(Input2)∧…∧μI∼k(Inputk)and the final output of the system (Osystem) is calculated by(7)Osystem=∑1nμn(I1,I2,…,In)·On∑1nμn(I1,I2,…,In),The proposed prediction model consists of three independent fuzzy-logic models, namely for the effect of cyclic loading, freeze–thawing and the chloride ion contamination. These models are then combined so that a single value of the modulus of elasticity, which takes into account the three effects, is obtained. The partial combinations of two effects only, i.e., cyclic loading with freeze–thawing and cyclic loading with chloride contamination, by using fuzzy logic have been already proposed in [23] and [24], respectively. Based on these previous works, which helped to understand the relations between the two effects, the extension to the three effects was developed. The basic concept of the prediction analysis, which makes use of the proposed fuzzy-logic modeling, can be best explained on the flowchart of the analysis shown in Fig. 3. It can be seen that the three independent fuzzy-logic models and the combining fuzzy-logic module are readily applicable with existing numerical tools such as the finite element procedures for structural dynamic analysis, the thermal analysis and the diffusion. In the following sections, the physical background and the definition of the fuzzy-logic modeling are explained.The behavior of concrete under cyclic loading is less known than that of metals mostly due to the variety in composition of concrete which results in the lack of experimental data necessary for definition and verification of material models. However, the basic influences have been described and implemented in various theoretical approaches, e.g., [25]. The mechanical parameter that has a direct influence on the analyses of concrete under cyclic loading is the modulus of elasticity. Its reduction is caused by gradual degradation of the concrete microstructure which is transparented by development of cracks and microcracks and initiation of yet new ones.For the fuzzy modeling of fatigue of concrete due to cyclic loading presented in this paper, two sets of experimental data, summarized in [23], were considered. These data provide the range of applicability of the model for concrete of compressive strength between 25.0MPa and 45.0MPa.The freezing of water or chloride solution in concrete pores often causes significant reduction of durability of concrete structures. Easiest to imagine is the case when concrete is fully saturated with water. Then there is no room for water to escape. The tensile stresses, which result in cracking, are then caused by the 9.0% volumetric increase of water when it freezes. However, usually concrete is not fully saturated and yet the freezing of water causes damage to the concrete. Although a variety of theories has been proposed on this effect during the past decades, the full understanding of the freezing mechanism has not been achieved; therefore, the available experimental data on the freeze–thaw resistance of concrete have been found and used for definition of the fuzzy-logic model. The experimental data considered in this paper can be found in [5,6].Generally, chlorides are considered only in connection with reinforcing steel and its protection with concrete cover. However, a fuzzy model for description of the development within concrete microstructure when it is exposed to chlorides and its effect on stiffness of concrete has been developed.Two distinct stages can be recognized in the development of concrete stiffness when chloride enters concrete. In the first stage, the voids are filled with water and the products of the reactions between the sodium chloride or calcium chloride and the calcium hydroxide, which cause the relative increase in stiffness of concrete. And in the second stage, these reaction products, which are soluble, are leached out of concrete and thus they cause decrease in concrete stiffness. The decrease in concrete stiffness is also caused by the loss of material on the walls of the affected voids. The experimental data published in [7–9] are used for definition of the fuzzy-logic model.As discussed in the previous sections, the entire prediction model takes into account three effects on concrete stiffness: (i) cyclic loading, (ii) freeze–thawing and (iii) ion chloride penetration. Each of these will have its own rule base, which depends on the factors and training data that were considered as input parameters.For the effect of cyclic loading on concrete stiffness, the following variables were selected as input parameters: (i) load level (LL) and (ii) characteristic compressive strength (fck). The effect of cyclic loading on concrete stiffness for mixtures with fckof 20.0MPa and 45.0MPa and LL of 0.10 and 0.90 is illustrated in Fig. 4. These data were used as training data in the optimization process that was described in Section 2.2. Notice that, although the LL in structures is not likely to exceed 0.50, the range of 0.10 through 0.90 was selected in order to cover the possibility of severe loading, which may occur in specific points after considerable damage occurs in the structure.The fuzzy sets for the load level(LL∼)and the characteristic compressive strength(fck∼)are shown in Fig. 5. These sets were kept as linear since only two curves were used for each input parameters.For each data set from Fig. 4, three representative intervals were selected, i.e., Nint=3, and the population size was chosen as Spop=10. The initial and final point of each representative interval are listed in Table 1. The optimization process was then performed and convergence was achieved after around 350 iterations. The exponent values for the optimized fuzzy sets that compose this part of the system are shown in Table 2. The optimized fuzzy sets are depicted in Figs. 6 and 7.Based on the fuzzy sets from Figs. 5–7, together with Eqs. (5) and (7), the rule base and the output of the first part of the prediction model can be written as indicated by the relations(8)Rng:IfLLgisLL∼G,nandfckisf∼ck,n,thenEG,ngisE∼G,n,(9)EG,ng=∑1nμng·EG,ng∑1nμng,where LLgis the load level in concrete at the gth cycle,LL∼n,f∼ck,n,E∼G,nare the optimized group of fuzzy sets for the load level, characteristic compressive strength and the corresponding stiffness,μngis the degree of membership assigned to each rule Rngand EG,ngis the crisp output, namely concrete stiffness, obtained from each rule Rng.For the effect of freeze–thawing on concrete stiffness, the load level (LL) at the moment when the freezing occurs was considered as input parameter. In addition, the characteristic compressive strength (fck) of concrete was taken into account. The effect of freeze–thawing on concrete stiffness for mixtures with fckof 20.0MPa and 45.0MPa and LL of 0.10 and 0.50 is illustrated in Fig. 8. These data were used as training data in the optimization process that was described in Section 2.2. Note that, on the contrary to the effect of cyclic loading, which encompasses LL from 0.10 to 0.90, the effect of freeze–thawing covers only the load level up to 0.50. This is because the experimental data that account for the effect of freeze–thawing on concrete stiffness are not currently available.For each data set from Fig. 8, three representative intervals were selected, i.e., Nint=3, and the population size was chosen as Spop=10. The initial and the final point of each representative interval are listed in Table 3. The optimization process was then performed and convergence was achieved after about 400 iterations. The exponent values for the optimized fuzzy sets that compose this part of the system are presented in Table 4. The optimized fuzzy sets are depicted in Figs. 9 and 10.The fuzzy sets for the load level(LL∼)and characteristic compressive strength(fck∼)are the same as those from the fuzzy system that accounts for the effect of cyclic loading on concrete stiffness, see Fig. 5.Based on the fuzzy sets that area presented in Figs. 5, 9 and 10, together with Eqs. (5) and (7), the rule base and the output of the second part of the model can be written as indicated by the relations(10)Rmf:IfLLfisLL∼F,mandfckisf∼ck,n,thenEF,mfisE∼F,m,(11)EFf=∑1mμmf·EF,mf∑1mμmf,where LLfis the load level in concrete at the fth freezing cycle,LL∼F,mandE∼F,mare the optimized group of fuzzy sets for the load level and the corresponding stiffness with the effect of freeze–thawing,μmfis the degree of membership assigned to each rule Rmfand EFfis the crisp output, namely decrease on concrete stiffness caused by freezing cycles, from each rule Rmf.For the effect of chloride contamination on concrete stiffness, the ion chloride concentration (CC) on concrete was considered as input parameter. This value is determined based on the level of damage expressed in terms of the modulus of elasticity and the ion diffusivity of the concrete in the structure, which depends on the current load level LL and quality of concrete. The effect of ion chloride contamination on concrete stiffness for concentration of 3.0% and 15.0% are is illustrated in Fig. 11. These data were used as training data in the optimization process that was described in Section 2.2.For each data set from Fig. 11, two representative intervals were selected, i.e., Nint=2, and the population size was chosen as Spop=10. The initial and the final point of each representative interval are listed in Table 5. Next, the optimization process was performed and convergence was achieved after about 300 iterations. The exponent values for the optimized fuzzy sets that compose this part of the system are shown in Table 6. The optimized fuzzy sets are depicted in Fig. 12.The fuzzy sets for the ion chloride concentration(CC∼)are depicted in Fig. 13. As forLL∼andfck∼, these sets are linear because only two curves were used for each input parameters due to the scarcity of experimental data.Based on the fuzzy sets that area presented in Figs. 12 and 13, in combination with Eqs. (5) and (7), the rule base and the output of the second part of the model can be written as indicated by the relations(12)Rpd:IfCCdisCC∼D,p,thenED,pdisE∼D,p,(13)EDd=∑1pμpd·ED,pd∑1pμpd,where CCdis ion chloride concentration in concrete at the exposure duration d,CC∼D,pandE∼D,pare the optimized group of fuzzy sets for the ion chloride concentration and the corresponding stiffness with the effect of chloride contamination,μpdis the degree of membership assigned to each rule Rpdand EDdis the crisp output, namely effect of ion chloride contamination on concrete stiffness, from each rule Rpd.The performance of the three independent fuzzy-logic models is graphically represented by the output surfaces. An example of such surfaces for concrete with fck=30.0MPa at various load levels, freeze–thawing cycles and ion chloride concentration is shown in Fig. 14.The combination of the effect of cyclic loading, freeze–thawing and chloride contamination can be approached from different viewpoints, but the key issue is always related to the assessment of tensile stresses in concrete microstructure when it suffers from the expanded frozen water or salts in pores and the potential increase in the tensile stresses due to the cyclic loading. Another valid issue is the absence of experimental data which consider this very real combination of effects.The principal idea in the modeling of the combination of the three effects is that all the effects are of the same importance, and that all the three effects are considered independently from each other. The combination is then governed by the only connection among the three effects which ensures continuation of the damaging process at the value of the reduced modulus of elasticity where one effects ends and the other effect starts. Here it should be noted that a suitable time step should be selected. However, the selection of the time step length also should reflect the change in the modulus of elasticity that occurs during the time step. It can be also noticed that the changes due to the different effects actually occur at very different time spans. Specifically, the fastest change is caused by freezing, which is an instant. Usually, the next is the effect of chlorides, which causes changes within weeks of exposure. The slowest is the load cycle, especially at the intermediate stage of the damage, which is in the interval between about 10.0% and 90.0% of the total number of cycles, when it can take month and years to register a change in stiffness of concrete. The selection process then can be automated and decided by the fuzzy logic with respect to which part of the respective surface is addressed. Such feature saves a considerable amount of computation time. It can be also noticed that all three fuzzy models keep their own intrinsic times and that the evolution of the stiffness is then mapped on the real duration of time at the combining stage.The application considers a reinforced concrete slab bridge situated on Mughal Road, North India, at the altitude of 3000m, similar to that shown in Fig. 1. The average yearly temperatures in the location, shown in Fig. 15, indicate that winter road maintenance is required. The span and width of the simply supported bridge is 5m. The thickness of the slab is 300mm. The load-carrying reinforcement consisted of 5 rebars of 20mm diameter per meter. The concrete used in the structure corresponds to the class C30/37. The traffic load counts ten 2-axle vehicles per hour with the average weight of 12.5 tons, which causes initially the maximum load level of 0.28 at the top surface in the mid-span. The deicing agent, which is used continually during the winter season (November through February), is a 20.0% solution of NaCl that contains 12.0% of chloride ions.Since the objective of this example is to show applicability of the proposed fuzzy-logic modeling, the computational effort was minimized by using one-dimensional finite element model for thermal and diffusion analyses, which were performed along the normal of the slab, and analytical solution for the structural dynamic analysis of the slab. The cross-section at the mid-span was divided into layers 5mm thick layers whose modulus of elasticity was updated using the fuzzy-logic model. These analyses can be readily extended to more dimensions using the SIFEL software, as can be seen in [26,27].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The motivation for this study was the commonly encountered detrimental phenomenon, which causes significant damage to concrete in winter, which is the combination of traffic load, freezing temperatures and application of deicing agents. Since there is no experimental data whatsoever on the combination of the three self-standing effects of cyclic loading, freeze–thawing and chloride contamination, an approach that provides mathematical environment for combination of the existing experimental data and expert information was proposed. The fuzzy logic proved useful as it allows interpolation between the scarce experimental data while the extra information can be included in the shape of the fuzzy sets and the optimized decision-making rules.Three independent prediction models for concrete were defined based on fuzzy logic. The model for effect of cyclic loading on the decrease of stiffness takes into account the quality of concrete in terms of compressive strength, the number of accumulated load cycles and the load level. The model for the effect of freeze–thaw cycles on the decrease of stiffness also takes into account the quality of concrete in terms of compressive strength, then the number of freeze–thaw cycles and the load level at which the freezing occurred. The model for the effect of chloride contamination on the decrease of stiffness takes into account the chloride ion concentration and the duration of exposure to the solution. All these three models considered only those factors which were included in the experimental program and all models showed good accordance with the available experimental data.The fuzzy logic proved most useful when the three independent models were combined into one material model describing the fatigue of concrete under the combined effect of the load cycles, freeze–thaw cycles and exposure to chlorides. The advantage of the proposed model is that it can be readily used in finite element codes in the form of a routine or a function which returns the estimated value of the modulus of elasticity.Applicability of the proposed approach was demonstrated in an example of an analysis of a simple reinforced concrete slab bridge, which due to their low cost may not allow room for a full-scale analysis, but whose durability is essential for local economies. Even though the obtained results cannot be compared to any experimental data, due to their non-existence, the results correspond with the common engineering experience with this type of bridges.