@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An enhanced 3D data transfer method for fluid–structure interface by ISOMAP nonlinear space dimension reduction

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The impact of self-parallel interfaces on the accuracy of the data transfer methods is investigated.A method is proposed to transfer data through the planar projection spaces.A new technique is set up to project 3D interfaces into the planar space by an ISOMAP nonlinear dimensionality reduction.The proposed method is compared with some methods in a pressure transfer of a turbine blade.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data transfer,Non-matching meshes,Nonlinear dimensionality reduction,ISOMAP,Self-parallel,Turbine blade,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
With the accuracy limitation of some transfer methods in the self-parallel fluid–structure interfaces, a data transfer method is proposed by an ISOMAP (Isometric Mapping) nonlinear dimensionality reduction. Through this new method, the data transfer problem of the self-parallel interfaces is solved. Example of a 3D turbine blade shows that the proposed method can improve the transfer accuracy in the non-matching meshes.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Many engineering applications involve fluid–structure interaction (FSI) problems, for example, designing of airplane wing or jet-engine. Partitioned method is the most important method for the simulation of FSI problem. It requires transferring coupling data(pressure or motion) over meshes of fluid–structure interfaces [1,2]. However, the meshes of the interfaces are commonly non-matching [3]. Transferring the coupling data over the meshes of the interfaces becomes a hard task [3].In literature, a lot of methods are proposed to transfer data between non-matching meshes [1,3–16]. The first kind is function interpolation methods [3,6]. The function interpolation methods transfer data by approximating scattered data using functions, like, polynomial function or radial basis function (RBF). The second kind is projection methods [3,4,6–9]. The projection methods project the fluid mesh to the structure surface elements to extract the load vectors on the structure nodes.These two kinds of methods provide good transfer results for fine meshes. But, when the meshes are non-matching, the transfer results of the methods are not always desirable [3,4,6,9]. More for that, the authors found that some of these methods may provide bad transfer results in the self-parallel interfaces (Fig. 1).In order to achieve better transfer results, virtual surface methods [1,6,9,11–16] create additional meshes of the interfaces as the medium. Coupling data of the interfaces is transferred through the virtual surfaces in the method. As a development of the virtual surface methods, the authors proposed a method to transfer data through a planar projection space [17]. Similar methods are proposed by Refs. [18,19].In this paper, the impact of self-parallel interfaces on the accuracy of the data transfer methods is investigated. A method is proposed to transfer data through the planar projection spaces. In the proposed method, a new technique is set up to project 3D interfaces into the planar space by ISOMAP [17], an isometric mapping method of nonlinear dimensionality reduction. The proposed method is compared with some methods in a pressure transfer of a turbine blade.Fig. 1 shows a self-parallel interface. Consider a structure point K at the topside of the interface. The value of the point K is calculated by the selected neighboring fluid points. The selected topside points are on the same side of the point K. The selected underside points are on the opposite side. However, these two sets of points are used equally by some data transfer methods. On this condition, the transfer result of the point K may be influenced by the selected underside points. This may lead to wrong transfer result (see Section 2.2).To solve this problem, this paper suggests unfolding the curved interfaces and transferring FSI data through the planar spaces. The reason can be found from Fig. 2. By unfolding the curved interface, only the nodes on the same side of the point K can be selected in data transfer.There are also other benefits of unfolding the curved interfaces in transferring data.Fig. 3shows a data transfer problem of a 2D curve. This is an interpolation problem in the space of coordinate x and coordinate y. If the transferring is through the space of the parametric coordinate u of the curve, the interpolation will become easier.Beside, If the data of the interface is transferred by a second-order polynomial functionF(x,y)=A+Bx+Cy+Dx2+Ey2+Fxyin the space of coordinate x and coordinate y, six points are needed in solving the coefficients. If the data is transferred by the functionF(u)=A+Bu+Cu2on the space of the parametric coordinate u, just three points are needed. Fewer points needed means that the closest points have more influence on the transfer results.In addition, the points(xi,yi)(i=1,⋯,n) of the interface are already parameterized to(x(ui),y(ui)). The interface can be reconstructed from the point(x(ui),y(ui))in the planar space by surface fitting. The normal and the area of the interface can be calculated from the reconstructed interface surface.The same benefits of unfolding the interfaces are also true with the 3D data transfer problems (Fig. 4).Some transfer data methods are used in the test case. They include:(a)Nearest-neighbor interpolation (NN) [3].Nearest-neighbor interpolation selects the value of the nearest point as interpolation result.(b)Polynomial least squares method (L2).Consider fitting a selected set of pointspi(xi,yi)(i=1,2,⋯,n) neighboring a target point by a polynomial functionF(x,y)=ax+by+c,where a, b, c are unknown coefficients, andx,yare coordinates. The fitting problem is to find the coefficients a, b, c to makeaxi+byi+c=pi.This can be written inmatrixform asA×B=P, whereA=x1y11x2y21⋮⋮⋮xnyn1,B=abc,andP=p1p2⋮pn. To find the coefficientsB is the same as solving the minimizationproblemmin∑i=1n|pi-axi+byi+c|2. This minimization problem has a unique solution byB=AT×A-1×(AT×P).Then, the value of the target point is calculated by the best-fit functionF=ax+by+c.(c)Projection method (PROJECTION).The projection method tested here is a point-to-element scheme [9]. The data is transferred by projecting the structure nodes to the nearest fluid element. The nearest element is selected according to the smallest distances between the structure nodes and the fluid elements of the interface.(d)Radial basis function (RBF) [21].Aradial basis function (RBF) is a function whose value depends only on the distance from data pointx¯i=(xi,yi),called acenter, so thatϕ(x¯,x¯i)=ϕ(r),where, where,r=‖x¯-x¯i‖andx¯=(x,y). Radial basis functions can be used to build up function approximation of the formF(x¯)=∑i=1nwiϕ(‖x¯-x¯i‖),where the functionF(x¯)is represented as a sum ofnradial basis functions, each is associated with a different centerx¯i, and each is weighted by an appropriate coefficientwi. The weightswican be estimated using the matrix methods oflinear least squares. The RBF used here is in the formF(x,y)=∑i=1Nwix-xi2+y-yi2+a+b×x+c×y.As mentioned above, some data transfer methods will be troubled by the self-parallel interfaces. To reveal this phenomenon, a wall blown by wind is selected as test case (Fig. 5). The fluid pressure of the wall interface is transferred to the structure nodes. It is a 2D case. In the model of the wall, the interface contains 3 edges, the left edge, the right edge, and the top edge. The left edge and the right edge are parallel and close together. The parallel edges of the fluid model are coarsely meshed (Fig. 6).Transfer the pressure of the test case by the methods above. The transfer results show in Fig. 7. The figure contains two columns of figures. The left column shows the results of the left edge. The right column shows the results of the right edge.Fig. 7a and b shows the transfer results of using the data of the interface by NN. It can be seen that the transfer result is not good. The figures also provide the transfer results of using the data of the left edge or the right edge. It can be seen there is no difference between the results.Fig. 7c and d shows the transfer results by L2 of using the data of the whole interface. The error is obviously. The figures also provide the results of using the data of the left edge or the right edge. The transfer results are more accurate. By comparing these results with the results of using the data of the interface, it can be concluded that the self-parallel interfaces influence the data transfer accuracy of L2.Fig. 7e and f shows the transfer results by the projection method of using the data of the interface. The figures also provide the transfer results by the projection method of using the data of the left edge or the right edge. For the meshes of the interface matches very well, the results are accurate.Fig. 7g and h gives the transfer results by RBF of using the data of the interface. By the figures, it can be seen that the transferred value of the left edge is lower than the data and the transferred value of the right edge is higher than the data. The figures also provide the transfer results by RBF of using the data of the left edge or the right edge. The transfer results of using the data of one edge are more accurate. By comparing these results with the results of using the data of the interface, it can be concluded that the self-parallel interfaces influence the data transfer accuracy of RBF.From the figures, it can be found that the errors of using the data of the whole interface are the largest around the root. The fluid mesh is coarse near the root. For a target point near the root, the fluid nodes of the opposite edge may be closer than the fluid nodes of the same edge. So, the fluid nodes of the opposite edge make larger impact on the transfer result and the transfer error is large.Fig. 7i and j gives the transfer results by the proposed method of using the data of the interface. The results show the method is accurate.To transfer data of 3D curved interfaces through planar space, it must define the projection of the interfaces to the planar space first. Ref. [17] uses additional meshes in projecting the interface of a turbine blade. Refs. [18,19] uses a CAD software in projecting the interface of a tube and a turbine blade. But, their techniques are complex and needs human intervention. By literature research, the authors found the nonlinear dimensionality reduction [20] is a way in unfolding curved interface. So, this paper builds up a method in projecting the interfaces into the planar space by an ISOMAP nonlinear dimensionality reduction.The theory of nonlinear dimensionality reduction is just like drawing a global map according to the geodesic distance between two different positions of the earth. It unfolds a manifold (high-dimensional geometry) according to the geodesic distance between point pairs of the manifold (Fig. 8). It tries to find a group of pointsy¯1,…,y¯nin t-dimensional space Y that the distancesdij(Y)=‖y¯i-y¯j‖between any two of points equals to the geodesic distancesdij(X)=‖x¯i-x¯j‖between any two of points in original m-dimensional space X. Where, the pointsy¯1,…,y¯nare projections of the pointsx¯1,…,x¯n, m is larger than t andi,j=1,…,n. The geodesic distance is the shortest paths between any point pairs of the manifold [22]. In this paper, the manifold is the FSI interface. The pointsx¯i=(xi,yi,zi)are the points of the interface in the Euclidean space. The pointsy¯i=(ui,vi)are the projected points in the planar space. The m-dimensional space X is the Euclidean space. The t-dimensional space is the projection planar space of the interface. t is two and m is three.The techniques of the nonlinear dimensionality reduction are unrelated to the shape of manifolds. No human intervention is needed for dimensionality reduction. The techniques need only the data of the pointsx¯iof the interfaces. The geodesic distances between point pairs and the projections of the points can be calculated automatically.A lot of techniques are proposed for the nonlinear dimensionality reduction [20,23–25], for example, generative topological mapping(GTM), locally linear embedding (LLE), ISOMAP, Laplacian eigenmaps, Hessian eigenmaps, local tangent space alignment (LTSA), self-organizing map (SOM), and visualization induced SOM (ViSOM). In this paper, the ISOMAP is used. ISOMAP is programmed by Ref. [17] and the codes are available at the webpage of ISOMAP [23].The data transfer method of this paper generally contains two main steps: (1) project the discrete 3D interfaces into planar space by ISOMAP; (2) interpolate coupling data of the interfaces through the planar space. The method can be divided into seven sub-steps. The procedure is described by transferring pressure (Fig. 9):Step 1.Get the fluid nodes (1), the fluid pressure (6) and the structure nodes (2) of the interface from the CFD model and the CSM model.Add the fluid nodes(1) and the structure nodes (2) together. Transmit the coordinate data(x,y,z)of the nodes to ISOMAP.Project all the nodes into a planar space by ISOMAP and get the coordinate(u,v)of the projected points (3) in the planar space.Separate the projected points (3) into the projected fluid points (4) and the projected structure points (5).Associate the projected fluid points (4) with the pressure (6) of the corresponding fluid nodes and get the fluid pressure (7) in the planar space.Transfer the pressure (7) of the projected fluid points (4) to the projected structure points (5) in the planar space according to the coordinate(u,v)of the projected points (3) and get the pressure (8) of the projected structure points in the planar space.Associate the structure nodes (2) of the interface with the pressure (8) of the corresponding projected structure points.Fig. 10shows the fluid mesh and the structure mesh of a turbine blade. Fig. 11shows the blade’s fluid pressure. The pressure is transferred to the structure mesh by the proposed method.During pressure transfer, all the structure nodes and the fluid nodes of the interface are projected into the planar space together by ISOMAP. Fig. 12shows the projected points. The projected points can be separated into the projected fluid points (Fig. 13) and the projected structure points (Fig. 14). Associate the projected fluid points with the pressure of the corresponding fluid nodes and get the projected fluid pressure in the planar space (Fig. 15). Transfer the projected fluid pressure to the projected structure points and get the pressure of the projected structure points (Fig. 16). Associate the pressure of the projected structure points with the structure nodes of the 3D interface. Then, the pressure transfer is finished. The final pressure of the structure is shown in Fig. 17. By comparing the fluid pressure with the structure pressure, it can be seen that they are same.Fig. 18shows the absolute transfer error in the planar space. The largest absolute error is 22,400Pa. The errors are calculated by the difference between the fluid’s pressure and the pressure interpolated back to the fluid nodes from the structure pressure. The largest relative error is 3% shown in Fig. 19.It is found that ISOMAP is not effective in unfolding the interface of torus, like the interface of the blade. So, the interface of the blade is divided into two parts by a plane parallel to the coordinate plane YOZ between the leading edge and the trailing edge of the blade. Accordingly, the nodes of the blade interface are divided into two groups, the left group and the right group. These two groups of nodes are projected into the planar space independently. Besides, ISOMAP is not efficient. It uses eight hours to unfold the interface of the turbine blade.The pressure of the turbine blade is transferred by the 3D version of the methods of Section 2.2.1. Table 1provides the transfer errors of the methods. The transfer errors of NN is the largest. Projection method failed at three points. L2, RBF, and the proposed have higher accuracy.The absolute error and the relative error are shown along the chordwise direction and the spanwise direction of the blade in Figs. 20 and 21. It can be seen that the error is larger at the leading edge and the trailing edge. In these positions, the level of non-matching of the meshes and the gradient of the pressure are large. As the projection method is seriously influenced by non-matching, it failed at three points. In this case, the proposed method gets the best transfer result.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
