@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Parametric modeling and comparative finite element analysis of spiral triangular strand and simple straight strand

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new parametric geometric model of spiral triangular strand is developed.Both strands show elasto-plastic behaviors under axial tensile and torsional loads.Triangular strand has smaller tensile and torsional stiffness than simple strand.Discontinuous contact of triangular strand cause nonuniform stress distribution.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Spiral triangular strand,Simple straight strand,Parametric model,Finite element analysis,Tensile load,Torsional load,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Spiral triangular strand (STS) and simple straight strand (SSS) are widely used in practical applications, but comparative analyses aimed for a better comprehension of the service behavior are seldom conducted due to the complex geometric configuration of STS. In the present study, a new parametric geometric model of STS, considering the effect of lay angle on the wire cross section, is proposed by means of parametric equations and Pro/Engineer software. Full 3D finite element (FE) models of the STS and SSS are developed with ANSYS software. Under axial tensile and torsional loads, the behaviors of the STS and SSS with the same lay angle and total wire sectional area are comparatively studied, and the comparison are conducted at different lay angles and outer wire diameters. The results of FE analyses show that nonlinear overall behaviors happen to the both kinds of strands. The STS results in smaller axial force and torque, but severer plastic deformation and von Mises stress than the SSS, and the discrepancies increase with increasing lay angle and outer wire diameter. The discontinuous contact lines of the STS lead to the nonuniform distribution of von Mises stress and significant contact pressure.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Spiral wire strands and ropes are widely used in engineering applications such as suspended bridge, tower and harbor crane, elevator and mine hoist. They are strong, flexible and economical options for many lifting devices, owing to their abilities to support large axial tensile loads with relatively small torsion and bending stiffness. Therefore, it is desired to understand, predict and improve their comprehensive performances.In the past years, different linear analytical models were presented to predict the mechanical behaviors of the spiral strands [1–6], but the precision of the models are very limited due to the simplifications used. In these models, some influencing factors are ignored, such as the complex helical configuration, Poisson's ratio effect, symmetric stiffness matrix, torsion, bending, contact, friction and local plastic yielding of wire ropes. Elata et al. [7] presented a new model for simulating the mechanical behavior of a wire rope subjected to axial loads. Compared with previous models that take the strand as an effective unit, their model considers the complete double-helix structure of the independent wire rope core (IWRC), and the performance solution of the rope is extended to the wire level. However, the torsion and bending stiffness of the rope are neglected in their work. Using general thin rod theory, Usabiaga and Pagalday [8] proposed a theoretical model that gives reasonable results of wire ropes subjected simultaneously to tensile and torsional loads. Based on the beam assumption, their work takes account of the double helical wires by using the general thin rod theory, but the inter-wire sliding is ignored. Further, effects of Poisson's ratio and local contact deformation of the rope on its performances are studied by Argatov [9]. In his research, the constitutive equations used are close-formed but the inter-wire contact is treated as being frictionless. From the comparisons between results obtained with the associated analytical models and 3D finite element (FE) method, Ghoreishi et al. [10] found that the analytical models used in the past can estimate accurately the rope's elastic stiffness for the lay angles only below 20°, beyond which a significant computation error occurs. The error is caused by the fact that the analytical models ignore some influencing factors such as the inter-wire contact. Hence, the above analytical models are not versatile in practical applications.Since experimental works on wire strands and ropes are usually expensive, FE methods are being adopted gradually to analyze the mechanical behaviors of spiral strands and ropes. Considering the friction and contact effect, Jiang et al. [11–13] proposed a concise FE model based on the geometrical feature of a strand and corresponding boundary conditions. Their model is time-saving because only a sector of the strand needs to be meshed in FE analysis, while its application is limited due to the complicated constraints for the FE model. By using computer-aided design software, Imrak et al. [14–16] presented a modeling technique of the double helical wire rope. They also conducted FE analyses for axial tensile load condition in which the elasto-plastic property of the strand material, frictions and contacts between the wires are involved. Almost at the same period, Stanova et al. [17,18] made a mathematical representation of single and double helixes, using parametric equations with varied input parameters to determine the centerline of an arbitrary circular wire. And they studied the elastic behaviors of a multi-layered strand with a construction of 1 + 6 + 12 + 18 wires under tensile loads by using Abaqus/Explicit software, but they did not take account of the elasto-plasticity of the wire. Judge et al. [19] made a comprehensive review on the study of wire strands and ropes, and established a full 3D FE model of multi-layer spiral strand cables including the elasto-plastic deformation, complicated contact evolution, and the local material failure. Their model is novel due to its accurate prediction of not only the axial load-axial strain curves, but also failure loads of the wire cable. In the cable's FEM analyses, the realizations of axial loading and contact condition are also important concerns. Kastratovic et al. [20] obtained the load distributions rules of wire strands and ropes by using two different types of axial loading (evenly distributed axial force and axial strain) and two different types of contacts (linear bonded and nonlinear frictional contact). Their work shows that the resulting numerical results are influenced by the way applying loading and the contact model chosen. Besides the above researches on the longitudinal behavior and stiffness of wire strands and ropes, the lateral behavior of a seven-wire strand, along with the interface stress state and friction effect, was studied by Yu et al. [21].Most of the above studies are focused mainly on round strands and wire ropes. These strands and ropes are easy to manufacture and can be used under slight wear conditions (such as in control or aeronautic devices), in which case the friction interface is relatively smooth and the contact force at the interface is relatively small. While in cases with severe wear such as devices in dusty environment, the spiral triangular strands and ropes are good alternatives. Although the galvanization and sheath of wire rope with round strands both help to reduce the rope wear, they also lead to the complexity and high cost in manufacturing them. Featured by high structural stabilities and high fill factors, the spiral triangular strands and ropes have overall wear resistance when they are twisted about the sheave, which is due to their large bearing area. Moreover, their advantages are more significant in cases with heavy end loads or severe abrasive wear [22].Owing to the complex configuration, however, the mechanical behaviors of the spiral triangular strands and ropes have been studied by only a few researchers. Rebel et al. [23] conducted tension–torsion tests of spiral triangular strand ropes for deep-level winding, and pointed out that the torque–tension properties of the ropes are important factors in the analyses. Based on the test results of two spiral triangular ropes in an accredited testing station, Molnar et al. [24] adopted a statistical method to evaluate and compare the quality of the ropes. Song et al. [25] depicted a 3D model of triangular strand rope and also analyzed the geometric characteristics of double helical wires. Their analysis shows that the curvature and torsion of the helical wires in the triangular rope will change greatly with its center line. However, the mechanical performance of the rope was not studied deeply and comprehensively. Through mathematical parametric equations and Pro/Engineer software, Fedorko et al. [22] proposed geometric models of spiral triangular strands that consist of two or three layers of steel wires. The computer modeling procedure can be applied to model strands of different configurations owing to the variable input parameters, providing a good approach for modeling and analyses of spiral triangular strands.The above researches provide good references for the study and further application of spiral strands and ropes. Nevertheless, the elasto-plastic property and detailed mechanical behaviors of spiral triangular strands have seldom been studied, let alone the comparison of mechanical behaviors between spiral triangular and simple straight strands. In a comparison between bending performances of the spiral triangular strand and simple straight strand, Chen et al. [26] considered the wire's elasto-plasticity. Their conclusion shows that the bending stiffness, equivalent stress and plastic deformation of the former strand are smaller than the corresponding values of the latter strand. However, the extensile and torsional performances of the strands were not analyzed.To well understand the service performances of the spiral triangular strands so as to prevent their failure and to select them reasonably, the present study proposes a new parametric geometric model of a spiral triangular strand by using parametric equations for the wire center lines and Pro/Engineer software [27]. Based on the proposed geometric model, 3D FE models of the spiral triangular strand are established in which some important influence factors, such as the elasto-plastic property of wire, inter-wire friction and contact, are considered. Besides this, FE models of a simple straight strand are formulated, which incorporate the same lay angle and total wire sectional area as those of the triangular strand. Further, a comparison of mechanical performances for the two kinds of strands is conducted under axial tensile and torsional loads and then associated conclusions about the spiral triangular strand are obtained.The spiral triangular strand (STS in short) considered in the present study is composed of three parallel-lay straight wires in its core layer and m1 wires in its outer layer. The outer wires are laid around the core with a lay angle αt, which is assumed to be positive when the right hand lay direction is applied. The wire diameters in the core and outer layers are Dt1 and Dt2, respectively. The minimum gap between wires in the core and outer layers is zero due to tight twist between them. The cross-section schematic of the strand in the x–y plane is shown in Fig. 1a, in which the section centers of the core wires are Oi(i = 1, 2 and 3) and that of one outer wire is H. And the bracketed symbols denote the projections of the foregoing spatial points onto the x–y plane.With the origin at the central point O of the strand cross-section, we build a right hand Cartesian coordinate system so that the z axis is identical with the strand axis, and the x axis is perpendicular to the line going through points O2 and O3. Then the coordinates of Oi(i = 1, 2 and 3) are (−3Dt1/3, 0, 0), (3Dt1/6, −Dt1/2, 0) and (3Dt1/6, Dt1/2, 0), respectively. The STS modeled by the present study considers the influence of the lay angle on the sectional configuration of the outer wires, which is neglected by Fedorko et al. [22]. In the present research, the sectional shape of the outer wires in x–y plane is taken to be an ellipse, instead of a circle in the previous research [22]. Thus, the present dealing is more close to the engineering practice, which is agree with the point of view of Cartraud and Messager [28]. However, Cartraud and Messager did not make a performance study of STS. Here, the major and minor axes of the ellipse are Dt2/cos α and Dt2, respectively. In light of the symmetric feature, the outer wire with a section profile centralized on point H in the x–y plane and satisfyingyH=yO2is used for the following derivations.As shown in Fig. 1a, the projection of the outer wire axis with a lay length is composed of 3 straight line segments (the blue parts in the figure) and other 3 arc ones (the green parts). The straight ones are distributed on the regular triangle ABC, and any arc one is tangent to the two adjacent straight ones on both sides. According to the geometric character of the projection, the whole expression of the outer wire axis can be obtained once the curve segments of HI and IJ are known.Points M and N are arbitrary ones on segments HI and IJ, respectively. The HI segment of the outer wire axis is a line segment, whose spatial expression can be written with the following equations.(1-a)xl(φ)=3+36Dt1+Dt22(1-b)yl(φ)=(3+36Dt1+Dt22)tanφ(1-c)zl(φ)=[(3+36Dt1+Dt22)tanφ+Dt12]cotαtwhere φ∈  [-φ1, φ1] is the rotation angle from the increasing x direction to OM1, and φ1 is defined as π/2 - arctan(1 +3/3 + Dt2/Dt1), as shown in Fig. 1a.The projection of IJ helical segment of the outer wire axis is the arc I1J1, whose radius and angle are (Dt1+Dt2)/2 and ω1, respectively. The parametric equations of the IJ segment of the axis can be obtained as(2-a)xh(ω)=36Dt1+(Dt1+Dt22)cosω(2-b)yh(ω)=Dt12+(Dt1+Dt22)sinω(2-c)zh(ω)=[Dt1+Dt1+Dt22ω]cotαtwhere ω∈  [0, ω1] is the rotation angle from O3I1 to O3N1, and ω1 is taken as 2π/3 through geometrical deduction [22].Regarding the HJ segment as a basic unit of the outer wire axis, the geometric feature indicates that the unit repeatedly appears with, respectively, a turning angle in the circumferential direction and a translation in the axial direction. Thus, the general expressions of all the outer wire axes can be expressed as [22](3-a)xij(ψ)=xq(ψ)cosθ−yq(ψ)sinθ(3-b)yij(ψ)=xq(ψ)sinθ+yq(ψ)cosθ(3-c)zij(ψ)=zq(ψ)+(j−1)Δh+(i−1)s1where q and ψ are curve property identifier and generalized coordinate, q = l and -φ1 ≤ ψ ≤ φ1 for the line segment, while q = h and 0 ≤ ψ ≤ 2π/3 for the helical segment. The symbol i (i = 1, 2, 3, …, m1) and j (j = 1, 2, 3, …) denote the indexes of outer wire and the HJ segment, respectively. θ is the circumferential turning angle, defined as (j - 1)2π/3. The term of (j - 1)∆h is the axial direction translation, where ∆h is the axial length of the HJ segment (i.e., the z coordinate difference of J and H) and ∆h = [Dt1 + (Dt1 + Dt2)π/3]cot αt. s1 denotes the axial distance between two adjacent outer wires of the STS, defined as 3∆h/m1.As shown in Fig. 1b, the simple straight strand (SSS) considered in the present study consists of a core wire helically surrounded by m2 outer wires, with the lay angle αs. The diameters of the core and outer wires are Ds1 and Ds2, respectively. With the origin at the central point O of the core wire, we build a right hand Cartesian coordinate system so that the z axis is identical with the axis of the strand. Then the projection of the core wire axis on the x–y plane is point O, and the section configurations of the outer wires in the plane are ellipses with major and minor axes of Ds2/cos αs and Ds2, respectively. The general expressions of all the outer wire axes can be written as(4-a)xi=rcosγ(4-b)yi=rsinγ(4-c)zi=rγtanαs+(i−1)s2where the helical radius r = (Ds1 + Ds2)/2, γ denotes the circumferential coordinate shown in the figure. And the variable s2 is the axial distance between two adjacent outer wires of the SSS, defined as 2πr cot αs/m2.The parametric geometric models of the STS and SSS can be established with the use of Pro/Engineer software. Circular profiles of outer wires are moved along the spatial trajectories expressed in Eqs. (1)–(4) so as to model the outer wires of the strands, and the core wires can be modeled by the Extrude command with circular profiles. Subsequently, the Cut command is applied to obtain the models of required length.It should be pointed out that the geometric parameters are given to guarantee no initial wire contact, except the initial contacts between adjacent core wires of the STS, and between the core and outer wires of both STS and SSS. Here, the initial contact is defined as a state in which the contact bodies are just in touch with each other, and no penetration or deformation of the contact bodies occurs. For the purpose of comparative study, the outer wire number, lay direction, lay angle and strand length of the STS are the same as those of the SSS, respectively. Meanwhile, the total sectional areas of the core wires of two strands equal to each other (i.e., Ds1 =3Dt1), and so do those of the outer wires (i.e., Dt2 = Ds2 = D). The outer wires of the SSS are not in touch with each other if the parameters meet the following discriminant(5)Ds21+tan2(π2−πm2)cos2α<Ds1+Ds2.For the STS, the separation between the outer–outer wires is guaranteed, since the circumscribed profile length of the STS is larger than that of the SSS, and the outer wires diameters of the two strands are equal to each other. Besides, choosing a reasonable strand length is important in FEM analysis, because an oversize of the strand will lead to a heavy computational burden, while an undersize will bring out a distinct end effect that seriously affects the stress distribution in the strand. Considering the above fact, the strand length is chosen as 40 mm. Thus, the minimum ratio of strand length to lay length is about 33.6%, which means that the boundary effect is negligible according to the work of Jiang and Henshall [11]. And it can also be demonstrated by the longitudinal pressure distributions given in what follows (see Figs. 8 and 13). In addition, the same lay angles and outer wire diameters are also used for geometric models of the two strands to further analyze the performance of the strands. The geometric parameters in the simulation are presented in Table 1.The geometric models of the strands stated above are then used for the FE analyses. To analyze the elasto-plastic behavior of the cold drawn steel wire, a material with von Mises yield criterion and bilinear isotropic hardening is defined in the FE analysis software ANSYS. The material widely used in previous studies [12,14] are applied to the above two kinds of strands: the Young's modulus E = 188 GPa, the Poisson's ratio υ = 0.3, the yield stress σ0.2 = 1.54 GPa, the plastic modulus Ep = 24.6 GPa and the ultimate tensile stress σu = 1.8 GPa. In the environment of ANSYS, the meshed models of the STS and SSS are obtained with sweepings along the wire axes, and the mesh density can be realized by setting the element division numbers along the sectional profile lines of wires and the sweep directions. The hexahedral element of SOLID 186 with 20 nodes is adopted to mesh the models, which is suitable for the plasticity, hyperelasticity, creep, stress stiffening, large deflection and large strain of analyzed object. The meshed models are shown in Fig. 2.As stated previously, there are initial contacts between the core and outer wires of the both strands, and between the core wires of the spiral triangular strand. Besides this, the contact between adjacent outer wires may also happen to deformed strands. Therefore, the core–core wire contact, core–outer wire contact and the possible outer–outer wire contact are considered in the FE analyses. A symmetric frictional contact model with a friction coefficient of 0.115 is adopted to describe the inter-wire behavior [11]. To prevent the contact bodies from penetrating each other in the FEM analysis, the augmented Lagrange contact algorithm is applied. This algorithm can realize solving the contact at the interface by an iterative process. The contact pressure p is expressed as(6)p={K|u|+λifu≤00ifu>0where K is the normal contact stiffness. u denotes the contact gap, which is negative if the penetration happens during the contact process. λ is determined by the solver of ANSYS in the iterative process. In addition, a normal contact stiffness factor of 0.1 was adopted so as to achieve stable numerical results quickly.Correct numerical solutions can be obtained only when the both ends of the strands are properly constrained. Before being constrained, all the wire ends of at both terminals of the strands are respectively defined as fixed and loading ends through the ‘named selection’ tool in the ANSYS software. With this tool, the above ends behave as rigid surfaces, implying that no relative movement between the nodes at the ends happens during the loading process. The fixed end is fully constrained in all degrees of freedom (i.e., translation in three coordinate directions and rotation about three coordinate axes) in all cases to simulate the clamp behavior, and the loading end is applied with specific load according to the analysis type. In the axial tensile analysis, a longitudinal displacement calculated from the initial length and tensile strain of the strand is applied to the loading end, with all the freedoms except the longitudinal movement disabled. A tensile strain ε = 0.016 is simulated with an increment of 0.001 in the present study. For the torsional analysis, the loading end is applied with a rotation angle calculated from the rotation strain (β), with all the freedoms except the rotation about the z axis set zero. And a rotation strain β = 12 rad/m is applied with an increment of 1 rad/m. Besides this, the constraints applied to the fixed and loading ends are converted to nodal constraints at the two ends in ANSYS software during the solution process.Both the parametric geometric models and 3D FE models of the STS and SSS are to be verified in this section. First, the parametric geometric models are verified by means of the coordinate display and geometry check tools in Pro/Engineer software so as to confirm the correct location of the wire and no occurrence of geometry penetration, in which case the parametric modeling methods can be adopted to generate the geometrical model of the strands successfully. As to the verification of the 3D FE models, only experimental data of the SSS is available to date. However, the FE model of the STS can be indirectly verified through the validation of the SSS, since the constraint conditions of the FE models for the two strands are the same. The verification of the 3D FE models is given in what follows.Because the mesh density affects the FEM results, the mesh sensitivity analysis is first conducted to achieve reasonable solutions. Tensile loading simulations of the simple straight strand (α = 24°, Ds1 = 3.94 mm, Ds2 = 3.73 mm and ε = 0.002) are carried out at three different mesh densities (cases I, II and III in Table 2). The variation of density is realized by setting different element division numbers along the sectional profile lines and the axes of wires. The axial force (F), torque (T), maximum von Mises stress (σVM_max) and maximum contact pressure (pmax) obtained at different densities, along with their percent differences relative to those at case III (i.e., Dif.), are presented in Table 2.In principle, a dense mesh system contributes to a smaller discretization error, but an excessive one will result in considerable computation time. On account of that all the relative percent differences at case II are smaller than 2%, the subsequent simulations can be conducted approximately at this mesh density until otherwise specified, which guarantees both the computation accuracy and efficiency.The results by present FE models are first compared with the experimental data reported by Utting and Jones [29,30]. In their experiment, tensile tests with nominally fixed-end, free-end and partially-restrained-end were conducted on simple straight strand specimens with six different lay angles, all of which Ds1 = 3.94 mm, Ds2 = 3.73 mm, E = 197.9 GPa and υ = 0.3. With a load of 40 kN, the torques (T) in the fixed-end tests and the rotation strains (β) in the free-end tests were recorded. To verify the FE model for tensile loading calculation, simulations with the same boundary conditions as those in the fixed-end tests are carried out on the specimen number 1, 4 and 6. Meanwhile, the relation between the tensile tests implies that with the same tensile load, the torque generated in the fixed-end case corresponds to the rotation in the free-end case. And the torque will lead to the corresponding rotation if a torsion test with free-end is conducted, according to the reciprocal theory of Betti [31]. Therefore, torques with values of 34.4, 26 and 18.8 N m are applied to the loading ends of the above three specimens to verify the FE model for torsional loading calculation.The comparison in Table 3shows that the results of FEM simulation and experiment match with each other in spite of some discrepancies. It should be noted that some small rotations (i.e., 0.064, 0, and 0.058 rad/m for specimen number 1, 4 and 6, respectively) were reported by Utting and Jones during the nominally fixed-end test, which illustrates that the discrepancies are reasonable.To further verify the elasto-plastic model, results of another axial tensile loading simulation of a simple straight strand are compared with those by Imrak and Erdonmez [14], as shown in Fig. 3. The material properties used are the same as those in Section 3, and the geometric parameters are given in Fig. 3.The comparison shows a good agreement between the results of present study and literature [14] in whole, though there exists a little discrepancy at the intermediate range of the axial strain. The discrepancy results from different solvers adopted. In the present study, software ANSYS is used, while software Abaqus/Explicit is adopted in literature [14]. Therefore, the above verification proves that the given FE models can be employed in following calculations of the strands under axial tensile and torsional loads.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The present study proposes a new model of the spiral triangular strand by using parametric equations and Pro/Engineer software. With the elasto-plastic behavior of the wire material, the inter-wire friction and contact condition taken into consideration, full 3D finite element models of the spiral triangular strand (STS) and simple straight strand (SSS) under axial tensile and torsional loads are established in the environment of ANSYS. Based on the validated models, the comparative studies of the STS and SSS are conducted at different lay angles and outer wire diameters. The associated conclusions are given as follows.Considering the effect of the lay angle on the cross sections of wires, the new parametric model gives a precise description on the geometric configuration of the strands, and can be applied in modeling and analysis of wire strands and ropes with more complex configurations.Both the STS and SSS perform nonlinear overall behaviors due to the stress yield and hardening of the cold drawn steel wire. And delays in the nonlinear changes of the strand behaviours relative to the yield are observed.With same lay angle and total wire sectional area, the STS has the smaller tensile and torsional stiffness, and results in greater plastic deformation and von Mises stress than the SSS. And most of the discrepancies between them become great with the increase in the lay angle and outer wire diameter.Under the axial tensile and torsional loads, the outer wires of the STS and SSS contact with the corresponding core wires in discontinuous and continuous way, respectively. The contact between the adjacent outer wires is more likely to happen to the STS than the SSS. And the maximum contact pressures of the core and outer wires of the STS are both larger than the corresponding values of the SSS.The cross-sectional von Mises stress distributions of the STS and SSS under the tensile and torsional loads are cyclic symmetric with the cyclic angles of 120° and 60°, respectively. Due to the non-uniform von Mises stress in outer wires, uneven failures are more likely happen to the STS than the SSS.The present study models the rope strands of two different types, and analyzes the performances of the strands under pure extension and torsion. Future work will consider the configuration of the entire wire ropes (i.e., the wire-strand-rope structure) and more complex working conditions, such as in cases simultaneously with extension, torsion and bending loads, or in situations with hard particles filled in the inter-wire gaps.None declared.