@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Numerical simulation on the effect of welding parameters on welding residual stresses in T92/S30432 dissimilar welded pipe

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The peak residual stress is located at HAZ of T92 steel side.By changing welding parameter to reduce residual stress on dissimilar welds.Small groove angle greatly reduces peak residual stress in HAZ of T92 steel side.More layer number reduces peak tensile residual stress on welds and S30432 steel.Small heat input reduces peak tensile residual stress on welds and S30432 steel.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Dissimilar welded joint,Residual stress,Finite element analysis,Welding parameter,Groove angle,Welding heat input,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Dissimilar welded joints are commonly used in fossil power plants to connect martensitic steel components and austenitic stainless steel piping systems. The integrity for such welded structures is depended on residual stresses induced by manufacturing process. In this paper, the characteristics of residual stresses on the dissimilar welded pipe between T92 steel and S30432 steel were investigated using finite element method. Moreover, the effects of heat input, groove shape and layer number on the residual stress distribution were studied to find the approach to reduce the residual stress. The numerical results revealed that the hoop and axial stress in heat affected zone (HAZ) of T92 steel side of the dissimilar welded joint had sharp gradients. By decreasing the groove angle, the peak values of the hoop and axial stress on T92 steel side were reduced greatly while the peak values in welded metal and HAZ of S30432 steel side differed little. Furthermore, more layer number and less heat input decreased the peak value of the tensile residual stress on welded metal and S30432 steel side, but had little effect on the residual stress in T92 steel side.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The increasing demands in recent decades for reduction of CO2 gas emission and enhancement of thermal efficiency in electrical power generation have resulted in the increasing application of the low emission coal-fired plants-Ultra Super Critical (USC) power plants, which operate at an increased steam temperature and pressure [1,2]. By increasing the steam temperature to 600°C and the steam pressure to 30MPa, the thermal efficiency can be arisen to around 45% in comparison of 41% for Super Critical (SC) boilers [3]. For this aim, materials with improved creep rupture strength and steam-oxidation resistance at elevated temperatures, which can sustain the severe service conditions, are needed. Consequently, many new heat-resistant steels, mainly referring to martensitic steels and austenitic stainless steels, have been pursued simultaneously for applications in USC boiler components, including superheater, reheater, header, turbine, steam piping and so on. Among them, T92 steel (9Cr0.5Mo2WVNb) and S30432 steel (0.1C18Cr9Ni3CuNbN) are the two typical representatives of new grade martensitic steels and austenitic stainless steels for their superior creep and heat resistance strength and have been widely applied in USC boilers [4–7].In the power generation industry, various components operate at different service conditions and hence appropriate materials are required for these components. The steels employed are location dependent in the same structure for effective and economical utilization of the different mechanical properties of every steel [8]. Thus, S30432 steel due to superior properties is widely used for superheaters and reheaters with elevated temperature and severe corrosion in USC boilers while T92 steel is always used at a low temperature compared with that of S30432 steel and is employed as pipes to link superheaters and reheaters [6,9]. Hence, T92/S30432 dissimilar welds are inevitable.Operating experiences with dissimilar weld joints had shown that a significant number of failures occurred in less than the designed service life [8,10,11]. Thus, the integrity of these welds plays a significant role for USC boilers in service. Failure analyses carried out on the dissimilar weld joints presented, had shown that a significant number of premature failures occurred in the heat affected zone (HAZ) region on the martensitic steel side of such dissimilar weld joints [8,10]. These also demonstrated that welding residual stresses were shown to be an important contributing factor of the premature failures. The combination of welding residual stress and operating pressure had a great effect on the failure and increased the stress concentration and thus could accelerate the crack propagation in the dissimilar welds. Therefore, reducing the welding residual stress is very important to decrease the risk of premature failures in T92/S30432 dissimilar welded joints.Welding residual stresses are formed in the structure as a result of non-uniform contractions which occur as the weld metal solidifies and cools to ambient temperature [12,13]. Generally, there are two approaches for determining welding residual stress [14]. One is experimental method, and the other is numerical simulation technology. Limited by physical conditions, experimental method, such as hole drilling, X-ray, neutron diffraction methods and boundary element method [15–17], can just measure the as-weld residual stress and cannot measure the stress evolution during the whole welding. With the development in computer technology (software and hardware), it is nowadays possible to employ numerical techniques, as finite element methods (FEM), to satisfactorily calculate the residual stresses in various welded joints [18–21]. Recently, a number of finite element models had been developed to simulate welding temperature field, residual stress and deformation of the multi-pass welded joints. Deng et al. [22,23] studied welding residual stress in similar SUS304 welded pipe with 6mm thickness and compared the simulation results with the measured data and then demonstrated that the numerical simulation results could give a good correlation with experimental results. Smith et al. [24] simulated residual stresses in austenitic Type 316 stainless steel weldments using a mixed hardening model. Dimitrios and Anastasius [20] compared a simplified 2-D axisymmetric model with a detailed 3-D model in determination of residual stresses across the dissimilar welded pipe. However, there are very limited studies on characterizing the effect of welding parameters on residual stresses in dissimilar welded joints and the approach to reduce the residual stress.Therefore, in this paper, the residual stress state across the T92/S30432 dissimilar welded joint is investigated firstly and then the effects of the welding parameters such as heat input, groove shape and layer number on the residual stress are studied in order to find some solutions to decrease the welding residual stress and improve the reliability of the dissimilar welded joint in service.The process of welding includes the melting of metal and then allows it to cool down and solidify to form beads in the weld region connecting both parts of the steel pipes. In principle, the welding process is a coupled thermo-mechanical process that involves in a thermal analysis in which the temperature and phase evolution are determined as a function of time and a mechanical analysis which employs the temperature history obtained from the thermal analysis. The thermal field strongly affects the residual stress field while the stress field has a weak influence on the thermal field. Therefore, a sequential coupling FEM analysis is employed to calculate the welding temperature and residual stress by general purpose FE software code ABAQUS. The solution procedure consists of two steps. Firstly, the temperature histories of all nodes in the finite element model are computed according to the given welding conditions and the thermal boundary conditions. The heat conduction problem is solved independently from the stress–strain problem to obtain the temperature histories. Secondly, the temperature histories obtained at the first step are fed into the mechanical analysis as the thermal loading for the stress evolution.Fig. 1shows the geometrical shape and dimensions of the employed dissimilar welded pipe. The left pipe is martensitic T92 steel and the right pipe material is austenitic S30432 steel. These pipes have an outer diameter of 45mm and a thickness of 8.9mm. The filled metal is Inconel 82 (ErNiCrMo-3). The chemical compositions of these materials are summarized in Table 1. This dissimilar welded pipe is manufactured using tungsten inert gas (TIG) welding with a multi-pass welding method. The sequence of welding pass and the dimensional details of the groove are also given in Fig. 1. The welding conditions for each pass are shown in Table 2.Due to the symmetry, an axisymmetric FE model with linear four-node finite elements was developed to simulate the welding temperature filed and residual stress distribution on the T92/S30432 dissimilar welded joint. In general, the 3-D finite element analysis is the optimum method to ascertain the thermal cycle during the welding process, but it costs a very long calculation time. Furthermore, if it is assumed that the welding speed is sufficiently fast compared with the heat conduction rate of the welded metal, the heat transfer process of the pipe welding can be simplified to the 2-D axisymmetric analysis [20,25]. Therefore, an axisymmetric FE model was employed and the geometry and the mesh are shown in Fig. 2. The geometrical shape and dimensions of the model are identical to the experimental welded joint. For the aim of obtaining the reasonably temperature fields and the residual stress distributions induced by TIG welding process and avoiding excessive solution time, a finer mesh is designed at the welded metal zone and its adjacent HAZ while the coarse mesh is employed far away. In this FE model, the total number of elements is 4884.Temperature-dependent thermo-physical properties such as thermal conductivity, specific heat and density, and temperature-dependent thermo-mechanical properties such as elastic modulus, thermal expansion coefficient and yield stress, are shown in Figs. 3 and 4, which are employed in the subsequent numerical simulations.In the thermal analysis, a nonlinear heat transfer analysis was conducted to determine the time dependent temperature field throughout the welded pipes. At this step, temperature fields at all nodes were computed during the multi-pass welding process. In the course of welding, the heat input due to moving arc is treated as a body heat flux with uniform density. The total net heat input Q can be calculated as:(1)Q=ηUI/υwhere U is arc voltage, I is welding current, v is the welding speed and η represents the arc efficiency factor, which represents the quantitative measure of the fraction of total arc energy delivered to the substrate. For TIG welding process, the arc efficiency is in the range from 0.7 to 0.8 [16,22]. A high arc efficiency factor of 0.8 is employed to assure that the good welding quality is obtained even at the smallest heat input. The total net heat input of each layer can be calculated according to Table 2.Besides considering the moving heat source, heat losses due to radiation and convection are also taken into consideration. During the thermal cycle, radiation heat losses are dominant in and around the weld pool; whereas, away from the weld pool convection heat losses are dominant. In the thermal analysis, all surfaces of the finite element model are assumed to lose heat by convention to the surrounding air. Heat loss due to convection (qc) is taken into account using Newton’s law:(2)qc=-hc(Ts-T0)where hcis the heat transfer coefficient; Tsis the surface temperature of the welds; and T0 is the ambient temperature. The ambient temperature is assumed to be 20°C. In the present simulation, the heat transfer coefficient (hc) is assumed to be 15×10−6W/(m2°C) [22].In addition, the heat loss due to radiation is modeled using Stefan–Boltzmann’s law:(3)qr=-εσ[(Ts+273)4-(T0+273)4]where ε is the emissivity, which is assumed to be 0.8 [25] and σ is the Stefan–Boltzmann constant, which is 5.669×10−8W/(m2K4).To account for heat transfer due to fluid flow in the weld pool, the thermal conductivity was artificially increased linearly above the melting point by a factor of three to allow for its convective stirring effect. In addition, the liquid-to-solid phase transformation effects of the weld pool are also modeled by taking into account the latent heat of fusion. The latent heat, the heat energy that the system stores and releases during the phase transformation, is accounted for assuming the value 260J/g between the solidus temperature 1340°C and the liquidus temperature 1390°C [13].In the thermal analysis, both preheating temperature and inter-pass temperature were considered. The preheating temperature was assumed to be 100°C which is the same as in the experiments, and the inter-pass temperature was assumed to be lower than 50°C during the multi-pass welding process through setting appropriate cooling time duration between two passes. The interpass temperature was checked for each step and confirmed to fall within this temperature range.Furthermore, the element “birth and death” technique was employed to simulate the weld filler variation with time. All the elements, including the base pipes and weld filler, were created at the beginning. However, the elements in the weld filler were deactivated before analysis. Once the welding starts, the corresponding elements of the welded pass were activated and heated, then they were cooled down.In subsequent mechanical analysis, the transient and residual thermal stress distributions were calculated by using the temperature fields obtained from the preceding thermal analysis as an input thermal loading.To make reading temperature from the output database into stress analysis easy to handle, the same mesh used in the thermal analysis was employed in the subsequent mechanical analysis. However, the element type was different.In the mechanical simulation, the elastic behavior was modeled using the isotropic Hooke’s rule with temperature-dependent Young’s modulus. The thermal strain was considered using thermal expansion coefficient. For the plastic behavior, a rate-independent plastic model was employed. The yield criterion obeys Von Mises yield. In addition, the strain hardening was taken into account using the linear isotropic hardening law. The element activate and deactivate technique was still employed in the mechanical analysis to avoid the incompatibility which would be introduced due to the thermal analysis producing strains in the parent material that would not be compatible with the strain-free weld elements during their application to bring them to existence in the structural analysis.Generally, metallurgical factors in the dissimilar welded joint may have significant effects on the welding residual stresses. As an elementary study, the material properties variation in the dilution zone, the solid-state phase transformation of the martensitic steel and the influence of tempering on the yield strength change were completely neglected. The mechanical boundary conditions were constrained only for preventing rigid body motion with considering symmetry.A butt-welded pipe made of SUS304 steel were developed to compare with the experimental measured data presented by Deng [23] for the aim of confirming the accuracy of the present finite element method. The residual stress distribution in the welded joints is calculated according to the same parameters as used by Deng. Fig. 5presents a comparison of the axial residual stresses computed by FEM and Deng. It can be observed that the calculated FEM results demonstrate a good coincidence with experimental result. This phenomenon indicates that the developed finite element model could be employed to predict the residual stresses induced by the welding process.Fig. 6shows the temperature contour of the second weld bead. Because the other lumps of the weld were deactivated, the heat was mainly propagated into the base metal of T92 and S30432 steels. It can be seen that the maximum temperature is located in the center of the welded metal, at 2088°C. The temperature distribution is asymmetric. The size of the heat affected zone of T92 steel is a little larger than that of S30432 steel.Fig. 7compares the temperature variations of the same point at the HAZ of S30432 and T92 steel during the welding process. It can be observed that the peak temperature of the point in S30432 steel is lower than that in T92 steel. This is because that although austenitic stainless steels have advantageous mechanical properties at temperatures around 650°C, the thermal conductivity is inferior to that of the martensitic steels.Fig. 8(a) shows the axial residual stress distribution in the inside and outside surfaces of the dissimilar welded joint. It can be observed that the residual stress distribution in the dissimilar welded joint is asymmetric due to three different materials present. In addition, the axial residual stresses on the inside and outside surfaces have opposite distribution due to the self-balancing nature of the residual stress, the similar residual stress distribution tendency on the dissimilar welded joint were also obtained by Akbari and Sattari-Far [26]. On the outside surface of the dissimilar welded joint, the maximum tensile residual stress is located at the interface between welded metal and T92 steel which corresponds to the weld toe of T92 steel and the value is around 360MPa, lower than the yield strength of T92 steel (see Fig. 4). The welded metal has a region with a compressive stress magnitude and the value is lower than that occurring in the adjacent parent metals.However, on the inside surface of the dissimilar welded joint, the maximum tensile axial residual stress occurs at the HAZ of S30432 steel while the highest compressive axial residual stress occurs at HAZ of P92 steel. However, the value of the peak compressive residual stress is still higher than that of the peak tensile residual stress.Fig. 8(b) demonstrates the hoop residual stress distribution in the inside and outside surfaces of the dissimilar welded joint. Compared with the axial residual stress distribution as shown in Fig. 8(a), the hoop residual stress distribution shows similar tendency. On the outside surface, the peak hoop residual stress is still located at the weld toe of T92 steel and the stress decreases away from the weld toe. On the inside surface, the maximum tensile residual stress is observed in welded metal and the stresses decreases away from the weldment. At the weld root of T92 steel, a maximum compressive residual stress is observed and the peak value is higher than that in welded metal.As stated in the above, it can be clearly observed that the peak residual stresses all are located in T92 steel side. This may be caused by the higher yield strength of martensitic steel in comparison with that of S30432 steel. Lee and Chang [27] had found that by increasing the yield strength of the materials the residual stress values increased. In addition, the microstructure of this zone is coarse and the corresponding ductility is weak. With the external effect of high residual stress, the T92/S30432 dissimilar welded joint is apt to fail at this zone during service at high temperature, which was observed in Ref. [9].Axial residual stresses along the weld centre line through the thickness direction of the dissimilar welded joints are shown in Fig. 9. It can be observed that with increasing the thickness, the axial residual stresses firstly change from compressive stress to tensile stress and then change from tensile stress to compressive stress. The residual stresses in the outer surface and inner surface are compressive and the value is similar. The peak value is located near the middle of the thickness.Heat input plays an important role in quality control during arc welding. Because welding heat input can influence the cooling rate, which affects the mechanical properties and microstructures of the welded metal and HAZ, and consequently can affect the residual stress distribution. Hence, in this paper, the effect of heat input on the residual stress across the T92/S30432 dissimilar welded joint is studied. Three FE models with heat input at 0.8Q, Q, and 1.5Q (where Q is calculated according to Table 2), are employed, respectively. Fig. 10(a) and (b) shows the axial residual stress on the inner surface and outer surface across the dissimilar welded joint of different employed heat inputs. On the outside surface (see Fig. 10(a)), as the heat input increases, the peak of the axial residual stress distributions across the welded joint does not significantly differ as the heat input is changed. One possible explanation is that the maximum stress is more affected by yield strength of the material rather than the welding heat input [26,28]. In addition, a large heat input brings a wider distribution of compressive axial residual stress in S30432 steel side. On the inner surface (see Fig. 10(b)), with decreasing the heat input from 1.5Q to 0.8Q, the peak stress in T92 steel side changes little while the peak of the tensile residual stress in S30432 steel side increases from 106MPa to 163MPa.Results of hoop residual stress distribution with various heat inputs are shown in Fig. 11(a) and (b) and the similar tendency as axial residual stress is observed. The changes only are observed in S30432 steel side. The peak tensile residual stress at the inner surface of S30432 steel side decreases as the heat input is decreased.As shown in Figs. 10 and 11, it can be observed that as the heat input decreases, the reduction of the residual stress in the S30432 side is larger than that in the T92 side. This phenomenon may be due to that the effect of decreasing temperature distribution in S30432 steel is larger than that in T92 steel. In the welding process, the heat input affects the temperature distribution across the welded joint. With decreasing the heat input, the temperature distribution is decreased. As stated in Fig. 3, it can be found that the heat distribution coefficient of S30432 steel (austenitic stainless steel) is less than that of T92 steel (martensitic steel). As a result, the temperature of the farther points in the stainless steel is less than that of the martensitic steel at the same points.Therefore, smaller heat input should be used to decrease the welding residual stress for the aim of guaranteeing the entire reliability of the dissimilar welded joints.The groove angle of the welded joint plays an important role in the residual stress distribution. Therefore, in this paper, the effect of various groove angles on the residual stress is investigated. The groove angles are assumed to be 30°, 50°, 70° and 90°, respectively. The corresponding FE models are created and the rest welding parameters are remained fixed in these analyses.Fig. 12(a) and (b) shows the axial residual stress distribution in the inside and outside surface of the dissimilar welded joint, respectively. It can be noted that although the residual stress shows similar distribution as the groove angle changes, a steep reduction of residual stress is observed. On the outside surface, the maximum tensile residual stress occurred in T92 steel side decreases as the groove angle decreases and the value decreases from 400MPa to 220MPa. While on the inside surface, the maximum compressive residual stress occurred in the T92 steel also decreases and the value changes from 425MPa to 150MPa. However, the groove angle has minor effects on the peak residual stresses in the welded metal and S30432 steel.The variation of the hoop residual stress distribution of the dissimilar welded joint with various groove angles is shown in Fig. 13. As shown in Fig. 13(a), on the outside surface, it can be observed that a deep decline of tensile hoop residual stress is also observed at the weld toe of T92 steel and the maximum value decreases from 350 to 250MPa. The residual stress in other zones of the dissimilar welded joint differs little.However, on the inside surface, a different trend that the hoop stress distribution of the dissimilar welded joint demonstrates a reverse tendency is observed in comparison with the outside surface. With decreasing the groove angle, the maximum compressive residual stress at the weld root of T92 steel side similarly decreases from 350MPa to 250MPa, but the maximum tensile residual stress of the welded metal increases from 100 to 200MPa.A small groove angle can reduce the peak value of the residual stress (tensile or compressive) in T92 steel side while can increase the value of the residual stress in welded metal. A FE model with dissymmetrical groove angel is employed to investigate residual stress distribution across the dissimilar welded joint. The left side of the dissimilar welded joint, corresponding to T92 steel, is set to be a small groove angle of 15° while the right side corresponding to S30432 steel, is set to be a large groove angle of 35°. The hoop residual stress distribution on the inside surfaces of the dissimilar welded joint is shown in Fig. 14. The residual distributions of the dissimilar welded joints with the symmetrical groove angle of 30° and 70° are provided for comparing. It can be observed that the dissymmetrical groove angel does not reduce the peak stress in welded metal. The residual stress distribution of the welded joint with dissymmetrical groove angle is similar to that of the welded joint with groove angel of 30°.Keeping the rest welding parameters constant, three models with a welding layer number of 4 and 6 are calculated to find the influence of weld layer number on residual stress, as shown in Fig. 15. During the simulation, besides the first and second weld layers, the other weld layers all consists of two passes.Figs. 16 and 17show the effect of weld layer on residual stress distribution across the dissimilar welded joint. It can be noted that the layer number has minor effects on the axial and hoop residual stress on the outside surface. By increasing layer number, no significant changes are observed on T92 steel side. However, on the S30432 steel side and welded metal, it can be noted that the peak axial residual stress of S30432 steel and the peak hoop residual stress of welded metal at the inside surface both decrease from 100MPa to 50MPa (about 50%) with increasing layer number. In other zones, the reduction of residual stress in S30432 side and welded metal is larger compared with that in T92 steel side.As the weld layer number increases, the weld pass volume is decreased. According to Eq. (1), the distributed heat flux is increased when all the rest welding parameters remain constant, which leads to an increase of the welding temperature at weld pool. Once the welding temperature is increased, the welding deformation is increased, which can release more residual stresses [28]. As a result, the residual stresses decrease with the welding layer number increasing.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study performs a finite element analysis to determine the residual stress in T92/S30432 dissimilar welded joint. The technique of element birth and death is used to simulate the welding process. Furthermore, the effects of heat input, groove shape and layer numbers have been discussed. The obtained conclusions could be drawn as follows:(1)The residual stress distribution on the T92/S30432 dissimilar pipe joint is asymmetric due to differences between the material properties of two sides of the dissimilar joints. The maximum residual stresses (compressive or tensile) are located at HAZ of T92 steel, which may lead to that the dissimilar welds are apt to fail at this zone.By decreasing the heat input, the reduction of residual stresses in the stainless steel side is more than in the T92 steel part. Tensile axial and hoop residual stresses on the inner surface of the dissimilar joint decrease on the S30432 steel side, but only a small variation is observed on the T92 steel side.The groove angle has significant effect on residual stress. As the groove angle is reduced, the residual stress distribution across the dissimilar welded joint changes little, but the peak axial and hoop residual stresses on the T92 steel side decrease deeply.As the welding layer number is increased, the tensile axial and hoop residual stress on the dissimilar welded joint is decreased, but the compressive axial and hoop residual stress changes little,For the aim of enhancing the reliability of the joints, smaller heat input and groove angle with more layer numbers should be employed to decrease the residual stress.