@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Temperature heterogeneity during travelling fire on experimental building

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Temperature distribution in medium fire compartment is investigated experimentally.Numerical simulation of the travelling fire test is completed by using FDS.Measurements from the travelling fire test are used to validate the simulation.Travelling fire is compared to compartment fire with uniform temperature conditions.A potential impact of temperature heterogeneity on a structure is highlighted.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Structural fire design,Travelling fire,Fire test,Thermal gradient,Homogenous temperature conditions,CFD modelling,Structural response,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In order to follow modern trends in contemporary building architecture which is moving off the limits of current fire design models, assumption of homogeneous temperature conditions used for structural fire analysis needs to be validated. In this paper it is described, how temperature distribution in a medium-size fire compartment has been investigated experimentally by conducting fire test in two-storey experimental building in September 2011 in the Czech Republic. In the upper floor, a scenario of travelling fire was prepared. It has been observed that as flames were spreading across the compartment, considerable temperature gradients appeared. Numerical simulation of the travelling fire test conducted using FDS (Fire Dynamics Simulator) has been compared with simulation of compartment fire under uniform temperature conditions to highlight the potential impact of the gas temperature heterogeneity on structural behaviour. The temperature measurements from the fire test have been used for validation of the numerical simulation of travelling fire. The fire test has provided important data for design model of travelling fire and shown that its impact on structural behaviour is not in agreement with the assumption of homogenous temperature conditions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The traditional fire design methods used in structural fire analysis are based on the assumption of homogeneous temperature in the entire compartment. However, the justification of small temperature gradient in vertical and even smaller in horizontal direction has not been evaluated for large compartments which are typical for contemporary architecture.Observations of real fires in large compartments such as in the World Trade Center or the Windsor Tower in Madrid, show that fires tend to travel across the area of an enclosure to consume fuel. Due to travelling of flames, regions of higher and lower temperatures appear. In order to validate this, experimental studies aimed at investigation of fire dynamics in modern buildings are needed, covering large open spaces, areas with high ceilings, atria or glass facades. Range of applicability of Eurocode [5] to modern architecture should be validated.For the purpose of investigating dynamics of travelling fire, a full-scale compartment test was executed in Czech Republic in 2011 [12]. In the upper floor of the experimental building, a travelling fire scenario was prepared. Since the scale of experimental enclosure was not large in comparison to the scale of real buildings, high degree of temperature non-uniformity appeared. Differences in temperature of 400°C of the upper smoke layer confirm that the homogeneous temperature assumption does not hold good by compartment fires.To study travelling fire, CFD method with aid of FDS 5 [8] is used. Numerical results are validated by experimental measurements and compared to homogeneous temperature assumption of zone model to highlight the level of difference between both assumptions – traditional fire design model versus travelling fire model. Effect of heterogeneous temperature fields on the structural behaviour is discussed.The traditional fire design methods used for structural fire analysis are based on assumption of homogeneous temperature in the entire compartment. Regardless whether the standard temperature–time curve (ISO 834) or parametric temperature–time curve [5] is used, both analytical methods give one temperature distribution in all locations of an enclosure. Zone models as well as introduced analytical methods are based on energy balance which leads to uniform temperature distribution across the floor area. All methods based on the homogeneous temperature assumption adopted the justification that there is a small gradient in vertical temperature distribution and even smaller in horizontal direction. However, according to Stern-Gottfried et al. [11] the justification has not been evaluated any further. Due to lack of fire experiments in large compartments with real compartment conditions, fire loads, ignition sources and due to limited number of measuring devices, the presence of horizontal temperature heterogeneity was not investigated and is rarely reported [11].Recently, traditional fire design methods have been criticised, mainly for post-flashover fires. In the test on compartment of 4.6×4.6×2.5m performed by Bohm and Hadvig, experimental measurements showed variance of gas temperature of 300°C [11].The experimental evidence of non-uniform temperature in the whole compartment was presented by Cooke [3] who undertook four tests with uniform fire loads of wooden cribs in compartment of 4.5×8.75×2.75m, ventilated at one end. As the fuel was ignited at the opposite side from the ventilation, burning moved quickly towards the opening. After fuel was consumed in well ventilated region, fire progressed away from the opening, back to the place of ignition, see Fig. 1.In 2007, Welch described fire tests in a compartment of area of 12×12m and height of 3m [13]. Thanks to advanced technical equipment and measuring devices, temperature fields were recorded, see Fig. 2. In this figure, moving fields of higher and lower temperatures can be observed. Although the maximum temperature difference was not significant, the difference in heat flux at the ceiling structure was considerable.Observations of real fires in large compartments such as in the World Trade Center or the Windsor Tower in Madrid, show that fires tend to travel. As flames spread within the floor to consume fuel, regions with high temperatures and regions with elevated temperatures are created. Temperature distribution in the entire enclosure is highly non-uniform.Recently, several models of travelling fire have been introduced. Clifton [2] developed a model for fire in large compartments in which the assumption of uniform burning cannot be applied. The fire can be described by dividing the compartment into a number of design areas. In these areas, fully-developed burning occurs before moving to other areas. The gas temperature–time relationship within a design area is assumed to follow a parametric fire curve and the maximum size of the design area should not exceed 100m2. In case of recommended ventilation and specified fire load, the time during which fire occurs in each design area is 20min [2].More recently, Rein [9] and Stern-Gottfried [10] have developed an alternative method for modelling travelling fires in large compartments. They suggest that due to localised burning, the gas temperature consists of near-field (temperature of flames, usually around 1200°C) and far-field temperatures (temperature of hot gases layer). The far-field temperature Tffvaries with the distance from the fire. Its distribution can be determined with aid of computational fluid dynamics models or by hand calculation suggested by Rein and Stern-Gottfried as(1.1)Tff=∫rnfrffT4dr0.25rff-rnf0.25where rffis the radius of the far-field, rnfthe radius of the near-field and T is the near-field temperature [10]. Using this model, the temperature–time curve for any structural element is showed in Fig. 3, where Tnfis the near-field temperature in °C, Tffis the far-field temperature in °C, T∞is ambient temperature in °C, tpreis the time after ignition but before the fire arrives, Tbis the time of fire burning locally at the element and tpostis the time after the fire has travelled past the element, see [9].In order to investigate dynamics of travelling fire, a full-scale compartment test was constructed in the Czech Republic in 2011 [12]. Since the scale of experimental enclosure was not large in comparison to the scale of real buildings, high degree of temperature non-uniformity appeared. Differences in temperature of the upper smoke layer of 400°C confirm that the homogeneous temperature assumption does not hold good in compartment fires.A two-storey composite steel–concrete experimental structure of dimensions 10.4×13.4×9m was designed, representing a part of an administrative building. Composite ceiling slab consisted of simple trapezoidal sheets (thickness 0.75mm, steel S350) and 60mm of concrete C30/37 reinforced with steel fibres. Beams under the slab designed as IPE 270 and IPE 240 (steel S355) were supported by circular tubular columns (TR 245/8, steel S355) filled with concrete (C30/37) and by columns of sections HEB 200. The lateral stiffness of the building was provided by two cross braced fields. Fin plate connections and reverse channel connections were designed to resist shear force only at ambient temperature. Classic and simple assembled cladding was used. Load-bearing structure is shown in Fig. 4and described in detail in Wald et al. [12] and Jána et al. [7]. In the upper floor of the experimental building, travelling fire scenario was prepared.The fire load scenario using wooden cribs of dimensions 50/50/1000mm placed into 24 piles (8×3 wooden piles placed closely together, total area 24m2) was prepared. Wooden pile consisted of 6 layers of 7 cribs each, a total of 42 cribs. Total volume of ligneous mass used was 2.52m3 (9.9kg/m2). The fire load corresponded to value of 173.5MJ/m2. Spruce wood was dried to moisture of 12%. A thin-walled channel filled by mineral wool and penetrated by paraffin placed on the south side of fire compartment served as outbreak of burning. The linear ignition source ensured spreading of fire from the south side of the compartment to the north side, see Fig. 5. A photo of the experiment is shown in Fig 6. Fig 7demonstrates the fire load before and after the fire test.The opening of size 2.0×5.0m with parapet of 1.20m ventilated the fire compartment. No glass was installed in order to allow for a smooth development of the fire. Mechanical load was not applied during the fire scenario.The gas temperature in the fire compartment was measured by 20 jacketed thermocouples (from total of 97 thermocouples) with diameter of 3mm. They were located at the levels of the lower beam flange and the upper beam flange (TG2–TG4, TG6–12, TG1 and TG5). The temperature profile along the compartment height was measured by seven thermocouples in the south-east corner of compartment (TG14–TG20), see Fig. 8. Measured values confirmed the spread of flames from the ignition point to the opposite side. The highest temperature 979°C was measured on thermocouple TG3 close to the column B2 in time 26min.Besides jacketed thermocouples, seven plate thermocouples were used to measure adiabatic surface temperature. The highest temperature 988°C was measured at level of 100mm below the bottom flange of the beam 2 in time 19min. Development of fire in 5th, 10th, 15th, 20th, 25th, 30th, 35th and 40th min of the experiment is shown in Fig. 9.Numerical simulation based on CFD analysis is the most suitable method to solve a fire dynamics problem. Travelling fire scenario is studied numerically by FDS 5 [8].One of the FDS models of the experimental building is shown in Fig. 10. The dimension of the computational domain corresponds to the size of the upper floor of the tested structure. Four distinct materials – steel, concrete, mineral wool and wood – are used in the model. The properties of these materials are shown in Table 1. Properties of wood come from cone calorimeter tests executed immediately after the fire experiment. Surface properties of obstructions in the FDS model include steel column filled with concrete, steel beams, concrete walls, floor, ceiling and wooden piles. Outbreak of burning is simulated by burner block of dimensions 0.15×3×0.05m placed under wooden crib in the south edge of the fire load. Ignition time of wood is ensured by using ramping function (whole fraction in 30s). The model is compiled from a total of 24 computational grids of two sizes of cells. Basic cell size is 10×10×10cm, cell size around the fire load is 5×5×5cm. The total number of computational grid cells reached almost 1 mil.Heat release rate and gas temperature below the ceiling are measured in several positions to obtain data for comparison with the fire test. Other sensors measuring temperature of steel beam (TEMPERATURE) and inner surface temperature of concrete ceiling (WALL TEMPERATURE) are installed to investigate the degree of temperature non-uniformity.Visualisation of numerical results in Smokeview [6] in Fig. 11shows that the fire spreads from the south to the north to consume the wooden fuel in the compartment. In the beginning, flames spread slowly over the fire load. After 17min the gas temperature increases rapidly and all wooden cribs are ignited at 20min. At 25min, the peak value of rate of heat release (RHR) reaches more than 17MW, see Fig. 12. At 1min after reaching its maximum, RHR starts to decrease. At 40min all wooden fuel is burnt and RHR falls to zero level.Gas temperatures in several locations bellow the concrete slab, at lower beam flange and around the central column are obtained from numerical calculation. Development of gas temperature at sensors TG1, TG2, TG3 and TG4, placed in the direction of fire spread bellow the beam No. 2 (for lay-out see Fig. 8), is shown in Fig. 13. Temperature variances in different locations at the same time confirm the spread of flames in direction of the travelling path. The highest temperature calculated on the sensor TG3 is close to 1000°C. Peak temperatures on neighbouring sensors vary by 100°C.In Fig. 14, development of gas temperatures in four corners (indicated by letters of the cardinal points) and in the centre (indicated as C 7,5) of the compartment are shown. All sensors are placed bellow the ceiling. As the fire starts at the south side, temperatures obtained in south-east and south-west corners are lower than peak temperatures at the opposite side of the compartment. However, the growth of temperatures in these corners is faster than in the north corners. The fastest increase of temperature in growing phase is observed in south-east corner. This fact is caused by oxygen sufficiency in this area. The maximum gas temperatures below the ceiling vary from 550°C to 750°C. Peak temperature in the centre of the compartment is about 200°C higher than the lowest corner temperature.To obtain temperature of structural members, several sensors are installed along the length of the beam 2 and on the surface of the ceiling. Fig. 15shows development of beam temperature calculated on eight sensors placed at 1m centres from the south side of the enclosure, where the fire starts to burn. Beam temperature sensors are placed in the middle of the IPE web. Length of the beam is 9m. As it is shown in the figure, temperature distribution along the beam length is not uniform. It is highly affected by phenomena of the travelling fire which causes developing of fields with higher and lower temperature of gas. Although heat conductivity of steel is very high, variance of gas temperature together with direct temperature of flames create fields of temperature increasing in accordance to fire spread. Temperature difference between the first (B1) and the last sensor (B8) reaches 250°C.Surface temperature of the concrete slab is calculated in four corners and its centre, i.e. in the same locations where the gas temperature sensors are placed. In Fig. 16, curves of temperature distribution in corners are marked with letters of the cardinal points similarly to Fig. 14. As the heat conductivity of concrete is lower than that of steel, response of slab temperature to the gas and flame temperature is slower. Maximum inside surface temperatures in corners reach 300°C, whilst in the centre of the slab peak temperature of 600°C is calculated.The temperature measurements from the fire test are used to validate numerical results in FDS. Comparison is focused on distribution of gas temperature along the length of beam 2 where the highest degree of temperature non-uniformity appeared.Numerical calculation confirms spreading phenomena from the initial outbreak of fire to the opposite side of fire compartment. During growing phase of fire, the model shows slower increase of temperatures compared to the measured values. However, in 20min calculated temperatures rise sharply and reach its peak in about 25min. Regarding maximum temperatures which are close to 1000°C, tolerable agreement is obtained. In decay phase differences between measured and calculated results are observed.Fig. 17shows measured (with index ex) and calculated results at thermocouples TG2, TG3 and TG4, located in the direction of fire spread below the lower flange of beam 2. Positions of sensors are shown in Fig. 8. In the middle of the compartment where the thermocouple and sensor TG2 are located, calculated values of hot gas temperature are in better agreement with measured values (growing phase) than below the beam 1/2 which is closer to the window opening. Distribution of gas temperature below the beam 1/2 in locations of thermocouples TG6, TG7 and TG8 (for locations see Fig. 8) is shown in Fig. 18. As the beam 1/2 is closer to the window opening, boundary conditions of numerical model are losing their accuracy because of wind fluctuations which appeared during the fire test.However, calculated values are slightly delayed in comparison to the measured values. The numerical model represents the tendency of the measured temperatures mainly in the growing phase, where the highest temperature differences appear. Despite the fore-mentioned, numerical simulation appears to be sufficiently applicable to investigate temperature heterogeneity and its impact on structural behaviour.During travelling fire, high degree of temperature non-uniformity is observed. Maximum degree of heterogeneity is reached between 15min (measured values) and 20min (FDS calculation) on thermocouples TG2 and TG4. Despite the distance between these thermocouples being only 6m, a significant temperature difference of 400°C observed from both measured and calculated values confirms the presence of inhomogeneous temperature fields also in the medium-size fire compartment. In Fig. 19, temperature variance in the same times is highlighted by lines connecting maximum and minimum values (data from calculation).Temperature heterogeneity of structural members is observed from the numerical results. In Figs. 15 and 16, its difference can be compared in several locations on beam 2 and concrete ceiling. Maximum degree of heterogeneity on beam No. 2 (300°C) is reached in 20min. Inner surface temperature of the concrete slab differs significantly between 20 and 30min when the temperature in the middle of the slab is from 300°C to 400°C higher.In order to compare the travelling fire simulated using FDS with a simulation of compartment fire with uniform temperature conditions, a calculation of the same case is performed in Ozone V2.2 [1]. The only difference is the fire outbreak. In Ozone, which works with the assumption of uniform temperature in upper layer, wooden piles burn in different manner compared to FDS calculation. In Fig. 20, temperatures of upper layer from FDS calculation (assumption of travelling fire), zone model completed in Ozone (uniform temperature assumption) and nominal temperature time curve (ISO) are compared. In this figure it can be observed that the uniformly burning fire within the compartment (Ozone) generates high temperature in short time, and as fast as it grows it decays. Contrarily, the travelling fire creates regions with high temperatures and areas with elevated temperatures with longer duration. In given case the duration of travelling fire is almost twice longer. The travelling fire can therefore cause worst-case fire scenario.As the fire spreads in the compartment, gas temperature under the ceiling fluctuates significantly, which affects structural members. Difference in calculated surface temperatures of 300°C can be observed between the centre and the corners of the fibre reinforced concrete slab. Non-uniform temperature is also confirmed by sensors in different locations in the middle part of beam 2, in which case the difference exceeds 200°C. Close to the window opening, changes in the peak temperature can be observed, as fire dynamic fields with cyclic heating and cooling can appear. Because the fields with peak temperature are in action only for a short period in one location, the pattern of cyclic temperature changes can cause cyclic deflection, which can lead to a dangerous scenario. The structural response to a travelling fire is compared in detail with that of based on the common design assumption of a uniform fire in Ellobody and Bailey [4].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
