@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Dynamic axial crashing of tailor-welded blanks (TWBs) thin-walled structures with top-hat shaped section

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Crashing analysis of tailor-welded blanks with top-hat sections is proposed.Numerical results show that the effects of weld line and spotweld cannot be ignored.The results can provide information for light-weight and crashworthiness of TWBs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Dynamic crashing,Thin-walled structures,Tailor-welded blanks (TWBs),Weld line,Energy absorption,Light-weight,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, dynamic axial crashing analysis of tailor-welded blanks (TWBs) thin-walled structures with top-hat shaped section under front impact is presented. The crash tests are performed through a sled test in order to model a car-to-car front impact. The strain rate dependence of both high strength steels (DP590 and DP780) is considered to study its influence on acceleration and energy absorption involved into high speed impacting process. The FE model about the front dynamic crashing is conducted, and different weld line modeling types on the dynamic simulation results such as acceleration history are compared. It demonstrates that coincide node (CN) model is considered appropriate for simulating the dynamic impacting. Additionally, the effects of weld line locations and spotweld spacing are also performed. It may be concluded that the material and thickness properties of front end have certain influence on the crashworthiness performance of TWBs. The simulation results show that the acceleration curves of three TWB combinations are insensitive to spotweld spacing. A comprehensive analysis including the crash mode, the acceleration curves and the energy absorption is carried out for crashworthiness assessment. The obtained results can provide some insightful guide information and fundamental supports for light-weight and crashworthiness design of TWBs to a certain extent.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the road safety analyses, it is common to separate the active safety (the possibility to avoid road accidents) and passive safety (aimed to the reduction of the effects of an accident). Regarding the passive safety, researchers and designers try to propose solutions able to mitigate the effect of impacts such as vehicle to vehicle or vehicle with other objects around the road. In order to reduce the injuries to the users, the automotive industry has experienced the greatest demand for better crashworthiness of the vehicle structure in recent years.Crashworthiness provided a measure of the ability of a structure and any of its components to protect the occupants in survivable crash. On other hand, significant attention has been paid to reduce the weight of vehicle for such environment related critical issues as material usage and fuel consumption. Understanding the effect of the collapsing structures on the vehicle's deceleration-time history during crashing is an example of the needed knowledge. Therefore, the goal of crashworthiness is to design vehicle structure to absorb the crash energy by controlled vehicle deformation while maintaining adequate space. Thus the residual crash energy can be managed by the restraint systems to minimize crash loads transfer to the vehicle occupants.Efficient methods and tools are necessary to enable development of a sound design at the early concept phases of development. As one of most typical energy absorbers, thin-walled structures have been widely used in automobile, aerospace and transportation engineering for their high ratio of energy absorption induced by progressive axial folding to structural weight. Essentially, those structures have been most commonly used to convert kinetic energy into irreversible plastic energy in modern automotive engineering especially as effective protective devices for their proven high efficiency and cost-effectiveness [1–5].Unfortunately, most of those thin-walled structures were made of uniform material and the same thickness, which prevented from exerting their maximum performance. Furthermore, those uniform thin-walled structures may not meet the growing requirements of vehicle lightweight [6–8]. Thus it is significant to introduce new structural configurations with different materials and/or different thickness. Fortunately, the applications of tailor-welded blanks (TWBs) technology have proven effective to tackle the abovementioned problems of reducing the weight and increasing production efficiency [8–12]. The advanced structure refers to blanks with multiple sheets of material and/or thickness welded together to create a single high-performance structure, and then to be formed to special components. To satisfy the requirements of productivity and quality, the laser welding type has given many successful advantages in manufacturing engineering such as deep penetration with narrow welds, low heat input, very short times welding processing, high productivity, small distortion level and no secondary processing [13–18].During the past decades, the TWBs design focused mainly on their formability and applications [19–23]. The formability improvement and minimizing weld line movement of the TWBs had been presented via different material combinations to manipulate this type of preferential straining in the TWBs [24,25]. The evaluation on the forming characteristics of weld line or TWB sheet metals has been performed by different physical experimental methods, such as uniaxial tensile test, limit dome height (LDH) tests and deep drawing tests [26–30]. The formability analysis impelled to some extent the wide applications of TWBs structures especially in the automotive field. It can be found that the TWBs structures have greater advantage than common steel sheets with single material and/or uniform thickness in automotive components such as side panel, door inner, front side member and many other auto body panels [31].After being formed as typical TWB components, other performances such as dynamic crashing characteristic are also very important and should be analyzed. It is also possible to make full use of TWB technology to improve the crashing performance of automotive components. For instance, through optimal distribution of thicknesses in different B-pillar areas, the resistant ability of side impact of automotive structures could be enhanced [12,32]. Although TWB structures could be designed through some advanced optimization methods [12,32–36], some relative important characteristics such as collapsed modes must be obtained from physical experiments which have seldom been reported in the published literatures.In this paper, crashworthiness analysis of tailor-welded blanks (TWBs) structures with top-hat thin-walled section subjected to front dynamic impact is performed. To enable better assessment, three different TWBs combinations are considered. The crash tests are performed through a sled test in order to simulate a car-to-car front impact. And the strain rate dependence of both high strength steels (HSS: DP590 and DP780) is also considered to study its influence on acceleration and energy absorption. The FE model about the front impacting is established, and the effects of several weld line modeling types on acceleration curves are analyzed. In addition, the effects of weld line locations and spotweld spacing are also presented. It could be concluded that the weld line location of TWBs has a significant effect on the crashing characteristics such as acceleration curves. The obtained results can provide some basic guide especially for numerical modeling at the early design stage of TWB absorbed-energy structures.Due to the high cost, it is significantly difficult to perform the impact test in an order of a full vehicle level. Therefore, design of a vehicle whose performance meets the safety requirements can be tested using an apparatus (a sled carriage) for dynamic testing by rapidly accelerating a test specimen. As preparations before impacting, both the acceleration transducers are fixed at the left and right edges of the sled car. At the same time, a data-acquisition instrument is also installed on the impacting apparatus. During performing the impact test, the sled car is driven by the draught attachment though a drag rope at a certain initial velocity (30km/h). At the final time of impacting when a vehicle crashes into a rigid fixed barrier, some impacting data and video are recorded by a speed-recorded instrument and high speed camera system. The whole flow chart of the experimental platform for the impacting process is illustrated in Fig. 1.The dual-phase steel (DP-steel) is a type of high strength steel (HSS) designed especially for the automotive applications. It is particularly suitable for structural components such as absorbed-energy components (front longitudinal beam, etc.) and engine cradles because of its superior combination of ductility and strength [37]. Compared to conventional steels, weld-ability of the DP-steel is nearly comparable [38], though slightly worse than the mild steel [39,40].To evaluate the dynamic axial crashing performance of TWB front longitudinal beam, different combinations (grade+thickness) with single top-hat shaped section are used to carry out the impact tests. Three different configurations and combinations are considered in Table 1, i.e., the same grade and different thickness; different grade and the same thickness; and different grade and different thickness.Vehicle crash processes often involve high rates of deformation. So the effect of strain-rate sensitivity on the HSS is considered herein. The stress-strain properties of both HSS are obtained at several different strain rates, respectively (see Fig. 2). The mechanical properties of DP590 and DP780 sheets are measured for this work in an effort to improve the accuracy of evaluating the dynamic crashing performance of DP-steel automotive parts.The geometrical configuration of TWB specimen which can simply represent the side rail in real vehicle crash is a single top-hat shaped section as a box of 80mm × 80mm. And spot-welds are located in the center of flange with a weld pitch of 30mm (see Fig. 3). Both parts has the same geometrical configuration with single top-hat shaped section and the same length value of 200mm, thus the location of weld line lies in the middle position of the whole specimen. All the geometry parameters of the single top-hat structures are shown in Table 2.A frontal or axial crashing simulation of the sled car is performed through LS-DYNA FE code as shown in Fig. 4. In the model construction, the load end of the thin parent material is applied at an initial velocity of 30km/h, while another end of thick parent material is fixed. The numerical model of top-hat specimens for impact test is also built. The spot welds are modeled by solid element which could represent the real geometrical feature. Generally, the smaller the friction force, the larger the stopping distance, thus the longer the vehicle will take to stop under an identical initial condition for a given velocity. As for numerical model of the crashing system, the friction coefficient between the sled car and floor is defined as zero herein.Beside the different grades and/or thickness, the main discrepancy between the common or uniform steel blanks and TWB structures is the existence of the weld line. Therefore, it is significantly important that how to model the weld line, especially for dynamic crashing with a good balance of accuracy and efficiency [36,43–47].Coincident nodes (CN) model is the simplest method to tie adjacent shell elements around the weld on two parent sheets (see Fig. 5). The model can be often used to simulate the forming operations of TWBs without the presence of weld zones [19,48]. The middle layers of parent sheets have to be in the same plane after welding and the material geometry and properties are excluded. As there is no need to consider extra procedure beyond the normal mesh process, it has a great advantage of computational efficiency especially for high nonlinear physical process such as vehicle crashing. But its fatal defect lies in that the model neglects some important characteristics of weld zone such as its actual geometry features, material properties and much higher strength than parent materials [49–51].A set of rigid links (RL) connecting adjacent nodes on two parent sheets is also a type of popular treatment [52–55]. For the model, both end nodes have the same freedoms (see Fig. 6). Thus, no translations and rotational degrees of freedom can be available in the local coordinate system. Comparing with CN model, the advantage of RL model is that the middle layers of parent sheets can be set in different planes. However, the material properties of weld line are still not taken into account.Herein, a novel crossover (CO) beam model is developed to approximately model the weld line geometry and shown in Fig. 7. Not only can the model represent the tensile behavior, but also better depict the bending and torsion deformation. The strategy seems be reasonable especially in whole vehicle crashing which may involve in TWBs with different thickness combinations.The Huges–Liu beam element with cross-section integration and 2 × 2 Gauss quadrature is used for the integrated beams. The Hughes–Liu beam is an integrated element that allows to model rectangular or circular cross-section using an array of integration points at the mid-span of the element. In this study, the rectangular cross-section is considered and needs to define the beam thickness. Alternatively, cross-section integration is required to model arbitrary cross-section. The beam effectively generates a constant moment along its length. For this reason meshes need to be reasonably fine to achieve adequate accuracy.In terms of the accuracy of numerical simulation, it seems that only solid elements are capable to represent the exact geometry and material properties of weld line. However, the models including weld geometry and properties may be not suitable for dynamic crashing which has dramatically high computational cost. In addition, the two-fold or two-layer beam elements with nodal rigid bodies connecting beams and shell elements around the weld zone can to some extent conquer the defect of one-fold or common beams to model the weld zone geometry [36]. However, the modeling technique can mainly be implemented with a different thickness to model the geometry along the thickness direction. What is more, the modeling was very time-consuming especially when the mesh was very fine.Deformation modes of TWBs tubular structures with top-hat shaped section after axial crashing tests were shown in Fig. 8. It shows that the TWBs specimens collapsed generally in a regular progressive mode. In addition, no failure of the spot welds or material separation was observed and hence the structures can be considered as being still continuously joined during the dynamic axial crashing process. Thus, the spot-welds do not influence the collapse performance of the TWB tubes with single top-hat sections, i.e., the effects of spot-welds themselves could be ignored. This local characteristic around spot-welds was similar to the common tubes examined and observed by White et al. [56].Three repeatable crashing tests were examined, and dynamic behavior and collapsed modes were observed for the different combinations. The discrepancy among deformed characteristics of various specimens focuses mainly on the deformation degree and subsequence. As for the first combination, the end of DP590/1.0mm (at the front) collapsed totally and the part of DP590/1.5mm (at the back) deformed slightly. For combination 2 with different materials (DP590/DP780) and the same thickness (1.5mm), the weaker end (DP590/1.5mm) was contacted dynamically with rigid wall and another stronger end with the material (DP780/1.5mm) was fixed at the sled car. Thus, it can be found that the rear stronger material did almost not deform. Since the front material of combination 2 has a higher thickness than that of combination 1, the front part of combination 2 collapsed fewer layers of lobes. For the deformation modes under the high speed impacting, the combination 3 with different materials (DP590/DP780) and different thickness (1.0mm/1.5mm) were to some extent similar to the combination 1, i.e., the front or weak material collapsed fully and in a form of regular deformation, but the rear material of combination 3 was considered enough strong to not undergo the drastic deformation so much. Those collapse modes are important and could provide some useful information of TWB structures at initial stage of vehicle design.The stopping distance after crashing test depends largely on crash pulses. Those pulses are in fact signals representing vehicle acceleration time histories measured by accelerometers mounted at the non-crash zone of the occupant compartment. The vehicle impact response is best described by the acceleration history with the peak acceleration typically used as a rough indicator of impact severity.Fig. 9shows the acceleration-time history of the sled car during a fixed barrier impacting test at a high speed of 30km/h. Note that both accelerometers are installed at the two edges (left and right) of the sled car. It can be observed that both accelerations have a good agreement with each other, which demonstrates that the data from the sled car are reliable. To be specific, the change tendency of combinations 1 and 3 is generally similar, i.e., there is the first peak value at about 5ms. Another higher acceleration peak value occurs subsequently at about 35ms. Differently, the time history of acceleration for combination 2 has a maximum peak value at about 5ms and then the change tendency is decreasing gradually. The main reason of the obvious differences is that the stronger material of combinations 1 and 3 collapses which results in the existence of two peak values. However, for the combination 2, the impacting process has been finished before the stronger material (rear part) starting to deform. A crash deceleration pulse with an early peak in time and a gradual decay is more beneficial for protection of a restrained occupant [57]. Therefore, it seems that the combination 2 has a more beneficial protection than the other two combinations.In addition, the first integration of the acceleration yields a velocity change as a function of time. Further integration of the velocity-time curve gives the vehicle displacement time history. Thus, the acceleration vs. displacement curve can be circumscribed with a “square-wave or rectangular pulse” whose height and width are the peak acceleration (Gmax) and the maximum dynamic crush (Dmax), respectively (see points A and point B respectively in Fig. 10). Assuming the frictional forces are negligible, it is noted that the area under the acceleration vs. displacement curve is equal to the initial kinetic energy of the vehicle (Eq. (1)).(1)12mv2=∫0DmaxmG(x)dx(2)η=∫0DmaxmG(x)dxmGmaxDmax×100%The efficient utilization of the vehicle available package space in front-end structure, which depends on the pulse waveform efficiency (η), is of vital importance. It is defined as the ratio of two areas: one area under the curve of acceleration vs. displacement and another area enclosed by the circumscribing square wave or rectangular pulse respectively (see Fig. 10 and Eq. (2)) and corresponding values are shown in Table 3. It can be observed that the combination 1 of TWBs which is fabricated with the same material and different thickness has the highest efficient utilization ratio. And the second combination with different material and the same thickness has a relatively lower energy utilization ratio than other two TWBs combinations.As far as TWBs with a top-hat shaped section is concerned, there are two kinds of welded interface, i.e., weld line and spotweld. Some properties including weld line locations and spotweld spacing to a large extent have an influence on energy absorptions and crashing performance of TWBs. In Section 4, specimens of only one kind of weld line location (located in the middle of specimens) and one type of spotweld spacing (only 20 spotwelds) are performed experimentally due to the cost consideration. To overcome this shortcoming, numerical analysis is further conducted for specimens with different weld line locations and spotweld spacing.Besides weld line locations and spotweld spacing, it is also of interest for TWB structures to analyze qualitatively the effect of weld parameters such as weld line models and divided segments. Those factors are relatively important in FE simulations procedure which is often used to estimate the dynamic characteristics without conducting actual high-cost crashing tests.Although there is no geometry discontinuity in the weld position for the CN model and the plastic hinges do not appear in the weld position until the last state during the impacting process [36], the CN model is still popular and used in deformation history analysis to compare with other weld line models. The acceleration curves of three TWBs combinations based on different weld line modes are illustrated in Fig. 11. Although there are some discrepancies between experimental curve and different models, the dynamic change trend is generally acceptable for such a real engineering problem. It can be also observed that the impact results are similar for both CN and RL models. Furthermore, the results from the RL model are relatively closer than those from the CN model comparing with the experimental data. In addition, the CO model might make the weld line have the higher strength due to the crossover technique, which results into the existence of a higher peak acceleration value during impacting.A series of deformed modes of the TWB tubes between the experiments and numerical simulation are presented in Fig. 12. It can be seen that the front structure of the combinations 1 and 3 collapses fully at the final stage, which has a good consistence with the impacting models of three weld line models. For the combination 2, it seems that the errors are much larger especially at the final stage for the RL model compared with CN and CO models. As for the RL model, the reason of the difference between different combinations lies in the thickness properties of both base materials with different thickness (1.0mm/1.5mm) of combinations 1 and 3, and the same thickness (1.5mm/1.5mm) of combination 2. Therefore, it can be speculated that the usage of the RL model has a certain limitation and can be used in a special context. Based on the comprehensive comparison results, the CN model is considered appropriate for carrying out the following further design analysis.The effects of weld line locations are analyzed to study their effects on the crashing performance of TWBs structures. For each combination, the distance x that weld line is away from front end of TWBs is arranged from 140mm to 260mm every 30mm, i.e., 140mm, 170mm, 200mm, 230mm, and 260mm (see Fig. 13), respectively. To compare more integrality, common or uniform structures with both materials which have not existence of weld line are also used to compare the crashing performance.Comparisons of the acceleration curves of TWBs front longitudinal beams with three combinations for different weld line locations based on FE simulation are shown in Fig. 14. It can be observed that the curves of TWB combination 1 have a significantly different tendency with each other, i.e., the peak accelerations of TWBs with different weld line locations are different and occur at different stages (see A–G in Fig. 14(a)). If the distance of the weld line location away from the front end (impact end) is farther, the time when the peak acceleration happens is much longer. It can be speculated that the acceleration curve or crashing performance of the combination 1 has a relatively large sensitivity of weld line locations. The similar characteristics can be found in those of the combination 3 (Fig. 14(c)). However, the combination 2 undergoes almost similar change trend and peak acceleration occurs at the same time (Fig. 14(b)) which demonstrates the combination 2 is not sensitive to weld line location.It is very difficult to exactly describe the relationship between the weld line locations and accelerations with accuracy as an explicit formula. However, the change tendency of accelerations with the increase of weld line locations can be determined qualitatively. The peak accelerations of three TWB combinations with the increase of distance x are presented in Fig. 15. The accelerations of both combinations 1 and 3 have a severe decreasing tendency with the increase of the distance x. The decreasing range for combination 2 is relatively not obvious. Based on the abovementioned discussion, it may be concluded that the weld line location of TWBs has a significant effect on the impacting characteristics such as acceleration curves.Apart from weld line locations, the effects of spotweld spacing are also performed to study how it affects on the crashing performance of TWBs structures. Similarly, the spotweld spacing d is given from 20mm to 50mm every 10mm, i.e., 20mm, 30mm, 40mm, and 50mm (see parameter d in Fig. 3). Thus, the total number of spotwelds is calculated as 19, 16, 9, and 7, respectively.Fig. 16 shows the comparisons of the acceleration curves of the TWBs front longitudinal beams with three different combinations for different spoweld spacing based on FE simulation. It can be seen that the change trend and peak acceleration are close to each other. Thus, the FE results show obviously that the acceleration curves of three combinations are insensitive to spotweld spacing when the failure or fracture of spotwelds is ignored.The number of segments, i.e., different parts combined into TWBs is also considered to study their effects on crashing performance. It is assumed that the length of each segment is same (see Fig. 17). As such, the thickness of ith segment is defined as follows:(3)ti=tmin+(tmax−tmin)x/Lwhere x is the distance of weld line from the front end of the column along with the velocity direction, L represents the total length of column, and tmin and tmax denote the thickness of segment 1 and segment NS, respectively. The assumption can guarantee that the weight of the whole structure is same for any segment number. It is noted that the thickness has a natural sequence rule: t1<t2<…tNS, i.e., the thickness of front segment is smaller than the rear segment according to linear arrangement in sequence.The length of each segment and the total number of segments of TWB thin-walled column is defined as Le and NS. To better demonstrate the advantages of the divided segments of TWBs, those uniform tubes with the same structure weight of TWBs are considered herein. The thickness of uniform structures can be calculated as follows:(4)tavg=∑i=1NS(tiLe)/(NSLe)=∑i=1NSti/NSIn an ideal continuous TWB model, the column wall should be divided into an infinite number of segments. However, it is significantly different and even unpractical for welding engineering. Furthermore, increasing the number of divided segments could increase the risk of numerical instability and this would lead to very costly computational time due to smaller element sizes. Based on the abovementioned considerations, the total number of segments is defined as 2, 4, 5, 8, and 10 and the thickness of the thinnest part (front end, i.e., segment 1) tmin and the thickest part (back end, i.e., segment NS) tmax are assumed to be 0.8mm and 2.2mm, respectively. Thus, the thickness of corresponding uniform tubes is set to 1.50mm. The segment thickness profiles for TWBs are listed in Table 4.By a series of FE simulations, the comparisons of the force and displacement relationship of the TWBs front longitudinal beams with different segments and uniform tubes are shown in Fig. 18. In fact, the peak force is an important evaluation indicator of crashing performance [11]. It can be seen that the initial peak force and the corresponding displacement are very different for TWBs with different segments and uniform tube. The initial peak force of uniform tube is much higher than that of each TWB feature, which indicates that the crashing performance of TWB is superior to that of common structures with uniform thickness.In addition, with the increase of divided segments, the deformed modes of TWB structures are more and more stable, i.e., the collapse folds are more regular and sufficient (see Fig. 19). It demonstrates that the more divided segments would result in the better crashing performance. The important information provides very useful design fundamentals for the distributions of weld line locations and thickness value of each segment.Experimental and numerical analysis of tailor-welded blanks (TWBs) thin-walled structures with top-hat shaped section have been performed to study the dynamic axial crashing performance in this paper. The crash tests are performed through a sled test at an impact velocity of 30km/h. For high velocity impact, the strain rate dependence of both high strength steels (HSS: DP590 and DP780) is considered to study its influence on dynamic crashing performance. Some remarkable conclusions are obtained as follows:1.Dynamic crashing tests including the crash mode, the acceleration curves and the effective utilization are performed to analyze and assess crashing performance of TWB tubes. The FE model about the front impacting is created, and different weld line modeling types are compared. The coincide node (CN) model is considered appropriate for simulating the dynamic impacting.The material and thickness properties of front end have certain influence on the crashworthiness performance of TWBs. The acceleration changes vary with the different weld line locations for a given TWB combination. In addition, it shows that the acceleration curves of three TWB combinations are insensitive to spotweld spacing.The more divided segments would result in the better crashing performance, i.e., the deformed modes of TWB structures are also more and more stable when the more segments are divided. The information provides useful design fundamentals for the distributions of weld line locations and thickness value of each segment.The obtained results can provide some fundamental guides for vehicle light-weight designs. And it demonstrates the effectiveness and feasibility of the TWBs technology. In addition, optimal weld line locations and spotweld spacing should be also conducted in accordance with crashing behavior and characteristics thought advanced design methods.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
