@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Simultaneous optimization of photostrictive actuator locations, numbers and light intensities for structural shape control using hierarchical genetic algorithm

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Controlling and geometrical parameters are simultaneously optimized.A two-level bi-coded chromosome is proposed.HGA can avoid premature convergence and converges fast.Proposed FE computation using sparse FE mesh is comparable to available ones.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Simultaneous optimization,Wireless shape control,Finite element,Photostrictive actuators,Hierarchical genetic algorithm,Coupled opto-electro-thermo-mechanical fields,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The present paper introduces an investigation into simultaneous optimization of the PbLaZrTi-based actuator configuration and corresponding applied light intensity for morphing beam structural shapes. A finite element formulation for multiphysics analysis of coupled opto-electro-thermo-mechanical fields in PbLaZrTi ceramics is derived and verified with the theoretical solution and the commercial software ANSYS. This element is then used to simulate beam bending shape control using the orthotropic PbLaZrTi actuators and the simultaneous optimization. In this procedure, the controlling and geometrical variables are simultaneously optimized via a hierarchical genetic algorithm. A bi-coded chromosome is proposed in a hierarchical mode, which consists of some control genes (i.e. actuator location and number) and parametric genes (i.e. applied light intensity). Whether the parametric gene is activated or not is managed by the value of the first-grade control genes. The numerical results demonstrate that the achieved beam bending shapes correlate remarkably well with the expected ones and the simultaneous optimization of photostrictive actuator locations, numbers and light intensities can result in optimal actuator layout with less PbLaZrTi actuators and irradiated light energy. The simulation results also show that the hierarchical genetic algorithm has more superior performance over the conventional real-coded genetic algorithm.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Static structural shape control is one key application of smart structures with embedded or surface mounted actuators and/or sensors using intelligent materials, such as piezoelectric (PZT) actuators and shape memory alloys (SMA). In this application, it is required that the intelligent structure is able to morph its shape to fulfill evolutionary structural property demands in response to alterations in circumstances and operating situations. At present, the research on the application of piezoelectric actuator concentrates mainly on two parts. One is active shape control for beam, plate and shell structures. The other is vibration reduction.For static shape and vibration control, the allocation of piezoelectric actuators and associated electrical voltage distribution are crucial design parameters for performing an expected structural property. Considerable investigations have been dedicated to explore the optimized allocation of the PZT actuators in active vibration or sound radiation control [1]. Some essential problems in the optimizing issues originating from static shape and vibration control applications are mutual. However, most of the existing works on quasi-static shape control concentrates on optimizing the applied voltage distribution for performing the expected structural shape. To the authors’ knowledge, the investigation on simultaneous optimization of both the shape and location of an actuator are limited. Liu et al. [2] presented a two-level algorithm for simultaneous optimization of geometrical magnitudes of an actuator and its correlative optimal control variables. In level one, the optimal control variables are confirmed for a pre-defined actuator allocation, while in the second-level of the procedure, the scales of actuators can be optimized for a given control parameters. Nguyen and Tong [3] presented an iterative alternative voltage and evolutionary piezoelectric actuator design optimization method to synchronously optimize the piezoelectric actuator allocation and the associated voltage. A combined optimization algorithm of the topologies of both host and actuation layers with spatial layout of applied voltage had been introduced, see [4–6]. However, in some cases, the host structure is, if not impossible, too difficult to alter. Thus, optimizing the locations and voltages of piezoelectric actuators is the primary solution.Compared with usual piezoelectric transducers, the emerging photostrictive ceramics can induce actuation strain due to the irradiation from ultraviolet light, thus removing the requirements for electric wires and circuits. Hence, PbLaZrTi (PLZT) actuators are comparatively free from electrical disturbance and also prospective to be acted as a “electro-magnetic-noise free” driving component for wireless shape and vibration control [7–12]. With respect to piezoelectric shape control, the investigation on wireless shape control via photostrictive actuators is relatively rare. Shih et al. [13] presented an analytical approach to study the effect of photostrictive actuators locations on the deflection of various beams with different boundary conditions. Rahman and Nawaz [14] established a finite element method for multiphysics analysis of coupled optoelectro-thermo-mechanical fields in PbLaZrTi (PLZT) ceramics and studied how the location, size of a photostrictive actuator affect the transverse deflection of a beam. Sun and Tong [15] optimized the light intensities applied to PLZT actuators at a given actuator configuration. Luo et al. [16] used topology optimization to find the best topological distributions for both the photostrictive layers and the host elastic material layers, as well as the best actuating light intensities. To the authors’ knowledge, most of the available investigations for piezoelectric or photoelectric shape control focus on the simultaneous optimization of spatial distribution of matrix structure and actuator configuration. An investigation into simultaneous optimization of actuator locations, numbers and applied inputs was presented in this paper.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, an optimal shape control method via hierarchical genetic algorithm is established. Section 3 derives a solid-shell element for multiphysics analysis of coupled optoelectro-thermo-mechanical fields in PbLaZrTi (PLZT) ceramics. Then, numerical simulations were carried out, and results were shown in Section 4. Finally, some conclusions are made in Section 5.There are usually two schemes [17] used to polarize PLZT materials: 0–1 and 0–3 polarization. The former is to electrically pole the material along length direction, and the 2–3 planes are the planes of the electrodes. The latter is to pole the material through thickness direction and the electrodes are located in the 1–2 planes. This paper is only limited to 0–1 polarized PLZT actuators.PLZT actuators possess both the photovoltaic and converse piezoelectric effects. The UV light gives rise to not only the photovoltaic voltage(El)and mechanical strain but also temperature rises, which in turn generate an extra voltage due to the pyroelectric effect. Thus, the total induced strains in PLZT actuators can be defined as following:(1)εii=εiic+εiip+εiitwhereεiicandεiipare respectively the strains related to converse piezoelectric and pyroelectric effects, and the thermal strainεiitis a result of body temperature variations.When UV light is used to irradiate the surface of a 0–1 polarized PLZT wafer, an electric fieldElopposite to the polarization direction is generated due to the photovoltaic effect. The electric field produces a photovoltaic voltage between the two metalized electrodes which induces tensile strainε11because of the converse piezoelectric effect. The photo-induced electrical field and mechanical strain are uniform across the thickness because of the same electrical potential happened between two electrodes on left and right sides, which causes a wafer to deform in extension. The 0–1 polarized PLZT actuators have been studied by many researchers. The strain for a 0–1 polarized PLZT wafer is given as follows [18]:(2)εiic=d11El(t)=El(tj-1)+Es-El(tj-1)ααsI(tj)e-(α/αs)I(tj)ΔtΔt-El(tj-1)βe-βΔtΔt(i=1)(3)εiip=d11Eθ(t)=d11Pnςθ(t)(4)εiit=αTθ(t)Where the induced electric fieldEl(t)and the body temperatureθ(t)at the time instanttjcan be estimated by Eqs. (5) and (6)(5)El(tj)=V(tj)a=El(tj-1)+Es-El(tj-1)ααsI(tj)e-(α/αs)I(tj)ΔtΔt-El(tj-1)βe-βΔtΔt(6)θ(tj)=θ(tj-1)+I(tj)P-γθ(tj-1)Δt/H+γΔtin whichEsis the saturated photovoltaic field, α is the opto-electromechanical actuator constant, β is the voltage leakage constant,Δtis the time step, P is the power of the absorbed heat, H is the heat capacity of the opto-electromechanical actuator,I(tj)is the light intensity at timetj, andαs=a/b(length/width) is the aspect ratio,Pnis the pyroelectric constant and ς is the permittivity.The wireless shape control problem is regarded as best meeting the expected shape of elastic structures by appropriately optimizing the actuator configuration and designing the illuminated light intensity. For the shape control problem, there are usually two kinds of design parameters: one is the location and number of the actuators and the other is the illuminated light intensity. Thus, the shape control problem falls into three categories. The first kind called light intensity problem, merely uses light intensity as design variable, and the second one (topology optimization problem) optimizes the topology distribution of actuators, as well as the last one simultaneously optimizes light intensity, location and number of actuators.In nature, shape control is an inverse problem with a pre-defined desired shape as the output and actuation parameters to be resolved as the input. Solving this kind of inverse problem frequently demands nonlinear optimization of an objective function representing the differences between the gained and expected (pre-defined) shape. One primary purpose of wireless shape control is to find some control variables (e.g., the layout of the PLZT actuators, as well as the illuminated light intensities, etc.) so that the deviations are minimized. Genetic algorithm (GA) have been usually employed as optimization methods in a wide variety of fields, and have also demonstrated their superior performance in resolving complicate, non-linear, discrete and barely known optimization problems [19]. This is the main reason why we choose GA to resolve the present wireless shape control problem.In this problem, the layout of photostrictive actuators and the corresponding illuminated light intensities are tuned automatically by minimizing an error function about the achieved and the pre-defined shapes. The shape of the structure is represented by normal deflections of the finite element nodes. Most literatures took a weighted sum of the squared error between the actuated and the desired shapes as the objective function, but this paper defines a fitness function by Eq. (7) which is the weighted summation of all the absolute deviation of the normal deflections between the expected and the fulfilled shape at a group of established nodes. Here the weights are chosen as unity,(7)f=∑iwd(i)-wc(i)wherewd(i)is the given desired transverse displacement,wc(i)is the actuated displacement.Unlike the routine of the traditional genetic algorithm operation, where the genotype structure is supposed to be established, the hierarchical genetic algorithm was devised to imitate the planning of a biological DNA structure with no consideration of these restrictions. In general, a bi-coded chromosome scheduled in a hierarchical mode consists of some control genes and parametric ones. The first-level control genes can only be assumed as either “1” or “0”. Whether activating the second level parametric genes depends upon the value of associated control genes. A control gene appointed an integer “1” implicit that the corresponding parametric gene is active and an integer “0” is for inactive. One of the main differences between hierarchical genetic algorithm (HGA) and GA is that HGA can dynamically vary the presentation approach due to the existence of active and inactive genes, which shows that the phenotype with different lengths is available within the same chromosome representation. Hence, HGA will search over a larger search space and converge to the right solution with an ever-higher grade of accuracy. Those chromosome structures of the conventional genetic algorithm are assumed pre-defined or fixed, while the hierarchical genetic algorithm works without these constraints.For shape control, parameters such as numbers, locations, and intensities of irradiation light for photostrictive actuators need to be determined. Hierarchical genetic algorithm is one of the good choices which can optimize these parameters simultaneously. In this paper, we propose a two-level bi-coded description, where the first binary chromosome carries the implication of presence (one) or absence (zero) of PLZT actuators. While the second chromosome represents the magnitude of the illuminated UV light intensity associated with the corresponding actuator. In the present paper, each control gene corresponds to a photo-electric element. Either “1” or “0” are assigned to control genes. If the ith bit of control genes is “1”, the ith actuator exists in the candidate solution; otherwise, the ith actuator is precluded. While for parametric genes, illuminated light intensity was denoted as a real number representation. Whether a control gene is set to “1” or not governs the activation or de-activation of the associated parametric gene.The initial population is a group of randomly generated individuals. In the conventional GA-based approach to shape control, applied light intensities are represented by a binary or real numbered string called a chromosome, which is initialized as a uniform random number between the upper and lower limits. The length of the chromosome is equal to the total number of discretizing photo-electric finite elements. Each gene of the chromosome is always active. While for HGA, each gene of the first-level chromosome is initialized as “1” or “0” with the same probability 0.5. The initialization parametric gene is same as that of conventional GA. Moreover, if the value of a control gene becomes zero from one due to genetic operations, the associated parametric gene gets inactive too. By using the present bi-coded approach, the amount of candidate photo-electric elements is remarkably decreased. When the value of a binary bit in the first level changes due to genetic operations, the lower level parametric genes must also vary, such that the length of the individual changes. This explains the reason that the HGA can not only gain a list of reasonable applied light intensities, but also minimize a topology distribution for the layout of PLZT actuators.For HGA, different crossover operator and mutation one can be used independently to different level genes of the bi-coded representation. In this paper, single-point crossover operator is used for control genes. For parameter genes, arithmetic crossover operator is employed. These two type operators can use the same rate of crossover. The basic bit and non-uniform mutation are respectively used for control genes and parameter genes, while mutation rates take the same value. It is worth noting that the inactive genes still take part in the genetic operations within the chromosome.Selection operator is an important part of genetic algorithm, as it determines the search direction. In this paper, tournament selection and elitist selection (or elitism) are used. If tournament selection is applied only, a tiny fraction of individuals with higher fitness would reproduce rapidly. After several iterations, these high fitness individuals would be full of the population. Before each iteration portion individuals of an offspring are achieved from father generation, others are generated randomly in a certain range. This strategy is defined as partial selection tournament strategy. Elitist selection maintains the best parent individuals which pass on to offspring without any genetic operations.Fig. 1shows the flow diagram of HGA. The algorithm can be outlined as follows:(1)Initiation. Random populations of control genes and parameter genes are generated.Calculation transverse displacements.(a)Light intensities are got from parameter genes based on control genes. If a control gene is ‘1’, light correspond to ‘1’ will illuminate photostrictive actuator.Finite element models are generated based on control genes. If a control gene is ‘1’, a photostrictive actuator will appear in the corresponding location. Consequently, a photo-electric solid-shell element participate the calculation of transverse displacements.Transverse displacements of nodes are calculated via the finite element method.Fitness. The fitness of each individual in the population is evaluated.Test. If the convergence condition is met, the evolution will stop and the best solution in the current population is output. If the convergence condition is not satisfied, then continue.Genetic algorithm operation.(a)Selection. Parent individuals are selected from a population according to their fitness by a partial tournament selection and elitist selection (the better the fitness, the greater the possibility to be chose).Crossover. Crossover the selected parents form a new offspring. This operator includes single-point crossover for control genes and arithmetic crossover for parameter genes.Mutation. New offspring is created by mutating at a random position in the individual. Non-uniform mutation is used for parameter genes. Basic bit mutation operator is employed for control genes.Loop. Go to step (2).In this paper, an 8-node brick element for multiphysics analysis of coupled opto-electro-thermo-mechanical fields in PbLaZrTi (PLZT) ceramics is derived. The conventional geometrical and displacement interpolation can be expressed as:(8)X(ξ,η,ζ)=∑i=14Ni(ξ,η)1+ζ2Xi+1-ζ2X4+i=N+(ξ,η)+ζN-(ξ,η)XeU(ξ,η,ζ)=∑i=14Ni(ξ,η)1+ζ2Ui+1-ζ2U4+i=N+(ξ,η)+ζN-(ξ,η)UewhereNi’s is a two-dimension bilinear interpolation functions,XeandUeare the nodal coordinates, nodal displacement vector, respectively. BothN+andN-are 3×24 matrices.Ni+andNi-represent the ith sub-matrice ofN+andN-respectively.(9)Ni+=Ni+4+=181+ξξi1+ηηiI3Ni-=-Ni+4-=Ni+,i=1,2,3,4According to the natural covariant strain definition, we can get:(10)εij=12(X,iTU,j+X,jTU,i)wherei,j=ξ,η,ζ.The assumed natural strain (ANS) [20] and enhanced assumed strain (EAS) [21] methods are used to improve the performance of the present element. By truncating the second order ζ-terms in Eq. (8) and coordinate transformation, the local physical strains can be reformulated as [20]:(11)ε==εm+ζεb+ε̃meas=BmUe+ζBbUe+Bmλλ1=B=Ue+Bmλλ1(12)εs=BsUe(13)εz′=εz′m+ςεz′bEAS=Bz′mUe+ςBz′bλλ2where:Bm=T=XeTN+,ξTN+,ξXeTN+,ηTN+,ηXeT(N+,ξTN+,η+N+,ηTN+,ξ),Bz′m=Tz′XeTN-TN-,Bb=T=XeT(N-,ξTN+,ξ+N+,ξTN-,ξ)XeT(N-,ηTN+,η+N+,ηTN-,η)XeT(N+,ηTN-,ξ+N+,ξTN-,η+N-,ξTN+,η+N-,ηTN+,ξ),Bs=TsXeT(N-TN+,ξ+N+,ξTN-)XeT(N-TN+,η+N+,ηTN-)T=,Tz′,Tsare coordinate transformation matrices.In this section, a cantilever aluminum beam and plate are considered. Geometrical parameters and material properties for beam are described in Table 1. Photostrictive actuators are produced by PLZT ceramic. Material properties are shown in Table 2.Firstly, the response of the beam bonded with a 0–1 polarized photostrictive actuator (shown in Fig. 2) will be examined, where c is the coordinate of the middle point of the actuator. In order to demonstrate the effect of the actuator thicknesses(ha)on the solution, two different cases with actuator thicknesses chosen as 1mm and 0.01mm are considered.The beam is divided evenly into 22 8-node solid-shell elements and one 8-node opto-electric solid-shell element. Numerically predicted transverse deflections at the free tip calculated by using the present solid-shell element, computational results gained via the commercial software ANSYS, and the modified theoretical solution [22] are shown in Table 3. The computational results of ‘ANSYS (1) and (3)’ are respectively computed by using SOLSH190 and SOLID185 elements with the same mesh as that of the present element. For ANSYS (2), the beam and actuator are divided evenly into 115 and 230 SOLID185 elements, respectively. From Table 3, a good agreement among the predicted results of the present element and ANSYS (1) and (2) is found, nevertheless the simulated results of ‘ANSYS (3)’ is very poor. The inaccurate results of ‘ANSYS (3)’ result from the excessive shear strain energy stored in the thickness direction when the element thickness to span ratio is much higher, nevertheless the SOLSH190 and the present element overcome the deficiency by adopting some special techniques such as the assumed natural strain and the enhanced assumed strain methods. With the assumption of ignoring the actuator thicknesses, Ref. [13] presented a theoretical solution. When the actuator thicknesses is 0.01mm, the theoretical solution is 4.190μm and matches well with the numerically results. But as the actuator thickness is 1mm, the theoretical solution is very different from those of the simulations. This is mainly because the actuator stiffness is ignored in the derivation of theoretical solution. After the actuator stiffness is considered [22], the theoretical solution becomes3.64×10-5and is in good agreement with the predicted results of the present element and ANSYS (1) and (2). It can be observed that the theoretical solution in Ref. [13] is merely limited to very thin actuators whose stiffness can be ignored and the modified theoretical solution [22] is applicable to both thick and thin actuators. This is the major reasons of choosing the actuator thickness as 1mm and 0.01mm in this paper.After validation the FE model, two shape control examples of a cantilever beam with more PLZT actuators are considered. Geometrical parameters of PLZT ceramic are lengthL=5mm, widthb=5mmand thicknessh=1mm. And material properties are shown in Table 2. The first example considers a desired monotonic function defined as [13]wd(x)=Adcosπx3L-1wherewd(x)is transverse displacement.Ad=4.0×10-4m. L is the beam length,0⩽x⩽L.This paper considers two kinds of wireless shape control problem, i.e. light intensity optimization-based problem and simultaneous optimization of light intensity, location and number of actuators. These two kinds of problems are respectively solved by the conventional real-coded genetic algorithm (RCGA) and the hierarchical genetic algorithm. In the simulation, it is assumed that one photostrictive actuator exactly covers one beam element.The beam is divided evenly into 22 8-node solid-shell elements. One by one, these elements are numbered from one to twenty-two and left to right. The length of each individual is 22 which are equal to the numbers of beam elements. The control genes adopt binary code. ‘1’ indicates that the corresponding location exist an actuator. The parameter genes adopt real code, whose values are created in a certain range randomly, describing incident light intensities.Arithmetic crossover, nonuniform mutation, and partial selection tournament strategy and elitism are employed for genetic operators. Partial selection tournament strategy means that a percentage of father generation is inherited to offspring. This percentage is defined as selection ratio.When crossover rate value is 0.75, selection ratio is 0.75, mutation rate value is 0.01, ultimate generation is 450 and light intensities are created between 0 and 600W/m2randomly. The final results for control genes are 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1. It means that there are 9 actuators on the top surface of the beam. The light intensities contained in parameter gene correspond to ‘1’ are shown in Table 4. Fig. 3gives the distribution of actuators obtained by HGA.In order to show the property of the present algorithm, the results are compared with that of conventional real-coded genetic algorithm. For RCGA, the pre-defined actuator configuration is shown in Fig. 4and only light intensities are chose as design variables. The achieved applied light intensities for actuators are shown in Table 4.In the first kind light intensity GA-based problem, all discretizing photo-electric finite elements are regarded as the design variables, so the amount of possible applied light intensity is large and there are many suboptimum solutions in optimization respect. Consequently, many intermediary parameter values may occur at the end of the optimization procedure and thus the location of photo-electric finite elements will get very hard to be recognized. Some light intensity values are so small as to close to zero. A alleged progressive design variable reduction (PR) strategy can be used repeatedly until a converged result is obtained(deleting unnecessary light intensities). This strategy is based upon the concept that possible actuator location are chosen after the first-level application of the present method, and only the selected elements are regarded as the possible actuator location at the second-stage application of the developed method. But this method suffers the difficulty of assuming a reasonable threshold for design variable. While for the HGA case, each element is assumed as whether or not being fully covered with photostrictive material. HGA method can simultaneously optimize the location and number of PLZT actuators and corresponding light intensities, such that the optimal light intensities are much more reasonable.The evolution history of the result obtained by conventional genetic algorithm is compared with the result gained by hierarchical genetic algorithm illustrated in Fig. 5. Fig. 5 demonstrates that the convergence of the evolved fitness with generation number for both the conventional GA and HGA of the cantilever beam. It could be observed from Fig. 5 that the HGA control method results in the minimum of the fitness functions much faster than conventional GA.Fig. 6illustrates the difference between optimal results and desired shape. As can be seen from Fig. 6, the result gained by hierarchical genetic algorithm is extremely close to the desired shape.Figs. 5 and 6 clearly shows that, it is more availability to get the better solution via simultaneously optimizing the locations, numbers and light intensities of actuators than by optimizing light intensities only.Another example considers a desired non-monotonic function defined aswd(x)=Bdcos3πx5L-1sin5πx4Lwherewd(x)is transverse displacement.Bd=3.0×10-5m. L is the beam length, x belongs to[0,L].The same strategies are applied for desired non-monotonic function shape control. But there are two pairs of control and parameter genes. One pair is used to describe the messages of actuators on the top surface of the beam. The other is to represents the information of actuators on the bottom surface of the beam. If an actuator appears on the top surface, there would be none actuator on the bottom surface at the same location, and vice versa.Crossover rate value and selection ratio are 0.75, mutation rate value is 0.1, ultimate generation is 500 and light intensities are got between 0 and 500W/m2randomly. The optimized results of the top twenty-two control genes are 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, which mean that there are 3 actuators on the top surface of the beam. The light intensities applied to these actuators can be obtained from the parameter gene correspond to the positions of non-zero value of control gene. The optimized results of light intensity for these three actuators from left to right are 128.0, 338.1 and 1.694W/m2, respectively. The best solution of control gene for bottom surface is 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1. It means that there are 7 actuators on the bottom surface of the beam, and the optimized light intensities for these seven actuators from left to right are 160.6, 6.156, 195.4, 366.5, 254.2, 495.5 and 175.0W/m2, respectively. Fig. 7gives the optimized distribution of actuators.Then, a real-coded conventional genetic algorithm is employed to optimize light intensity for a distribution as shown in Fig. 8. Genetic operators are arithmetic crossover, nonuniform mutation, and tournament selection and elitist selection for selection. The optimized illuminated light intensities for actuators on the top surface are 2.957, 0.0,6.042×10-5and 49.74W/m2, respectively. The optimized applied light intensities for actuators on the bottom surface are 2.728, 192.2, 149.8, 175.6, 106.6 and 390.0W/m2, respectively.Evolution history of the result obtained by conventional genetic algorithm is compared with that of hierarchical genetic algorithm as illustrated in Fig. 9. Fig. 9 proves that the hierarchical genetic algorithm has the capability to find the better solution again.Fig. 10shows the difference between optimal results and desired shape. As can be seen from Fig. 10, the result gained by hierarchical genetic algorithm is much closer to the desired shape.For the cantilever plate shape control protocol, HGA was also used to get the distribution of actuators. And the distribution of actuators obtained by a conventional real genetic algorithm (RCGA) was treated for contrast. The plate geometrical parameters are lengthL=80mm, widthb=80mmand thicknessh=0.8mm. Material properties are given as Young’s moduliE=70GPa, densityρ=2.71×103kg/m3, Poisson’s ratioμ=0.3. For PLZT ceramic, geometrical parameters are lengthL=10mm, widthb=10mmand thicknessh=1mm. Material properties are presented in Table 2.In this paper, the following function is used to define the desired bending shape of the host plate:wd(x)=cosh10x-111000wherewd(x)is the transverse displacement. x belongs to[0,L],Lis the length.As described above, HGA was employed to find the proper distribution of actuators (including numbers and positions) and the light intensities for each actuator. Fig. 11gives the result of actuator distribution produced by HGA.RCGA was employed to optimize light intensity only for a distribution as shown in Fig. 12.Evolution history of the result obtained by RCGA is compared with that of HGA as illustrated in Fig. 13. Similar to the above-mentioned monotonic and non-monotonic function shape control, the HGA control method results in the minimization of the fitness function much faster than RCGA.Fig. 14shows the differences between desired and controlled shapes.For indicating the advantage of HGA further, four kinds of accuracy index were used to describe the differences between desired shape and controlled shapes produced by using HGA and RCGA, respectively. Assuming desired transverse displacement set was defined aswd=wd(1),wd(2),…,wd(M), controlled transverse displacement set was defined aswc=wc(1),wc(2),…,wc(M), where M was the maximum sampled node number. Table 5shows four error calculation methods.Table 6gives a comparison of the accuracy between HGA and RCGA. The controlled shape of HGA is in better agreement with the desired shape than that of RCGA. The present example demonstrates once again the superior performances of HGA over RCGA.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In the present paper, a new FE formulation for 0–1 polarized photostrictive ceramics is derived. The precision of computational results of the present finite element analysis using sparse finite element mesh is comparable to those of available FE computation, the numerical analysis using the commercial finite element software and theoretical solution. Moreover, a two-level bi-coded GA is used to optimize the locations, numbers as well as applied light intensities of PLZT actuators for a beam structural shape control. The first-level control genes assigned as either “1” or “0” carries the implication whether or not a PLZT actuator is active, while the second level chromosome represents the magnitude of the illuminated UV light intensity associated with the actuator corresponding to the relative control gene. Comparisons with the results from conventional GA illustrated that hierarchical genetic algorithm can not only avoid premature phenomenon but also remarkably improve convergence efficiency. It is not difficult to draw a conclusion in this study that the present bi-coded algorithm may identify multiple actuator elements in the respect of optimizing their numbers, locations, and the magnitudes of applied light intensities. Numerical simulations for several shape control instances show that the present algorithm is very effective.