@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-objective optimization model for multi-project scheduling on critical chain

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A multi-project scheduling in critical chain problem is addressed.This paper introduces a multi-objective optimization model.Cloud genetic algorithm is designed to generate priority of multi-project scheduling activities.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Critical chain,Multi-project scheduling,Multi-objective optimization,Cloud genetic algorithms,Project scheduling,Resource-constrained,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a multi-project scheduling in critical chain problem is addressed. This problem considers the influence of uncertainty factors and different objectives to achieve completion rate on time of the whole projects. This paper introduces a multi-objective optimization model for multi-project scheduling on critical chain, which takes into consideration multi-objective, such as overall duration, financing costs and whole robustness. The proposed model can be used to generate alternative schedules based on the relative magnitude and importance of different objectives. To respond to this need, a cloud genetic algorithm is proposed. This algorithm using randomness and stability of Normal Cloud Model, cloud genetic algorithm was designed to generate priority of multi-project scheduling activities and obtain plan of multi-project scheduling on critical chain. The performance comparison shows that the cloud genetic algorithm significantly outperforms the previous multi-objective algorithm.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A multi-project scheduling problem involves defining feasible start times and feasible resource assignments for activities so that the different optimization objectives, defined as part of the problem, are reached. Moreover, to solve the various uncertainty factors, it is necessary to have knowledge about the effectiveness of the uncertainty factors in relation to different project activities. Compared with multi-project scheduling, multi-project scheduling on critical chain for decisions had superiority in more complex since multi-objective and related to different aspects of the project (i.e., overall duration, idleness of resources, financing costs) must be considered in order to arrive at a efficient schedule. Decisions therefore cannot be based solely on optimizing a single criterion such as cost or duration, but require a multi-objective approach. To address this need, new methodologies and approach should be developed to meet decision support system. In this paper we explore the multi-objective of decision making in multi-project scheduling on critical chain (MPSCC) and propose a multi-objective optimization model formulation.Critical Chain Method (CCM) is first proposed by Goldratte [13], which can optimize overall objective of projects better, raise rate of completion on time and shorted overall span by considering the uncertainty of task duration in projects. Considering the problem form the view of system, which eliminates the influence of “students syndrome” and “Parkinson Law”, effectively solve the problem existed in multi-task between project interrelation and internal project. In multi-project management environment, multi-project scheduling on critical chain (MPSCC) have five steps: generating the priority of subprojects; planning and scheduling each subprojects according to Critical Chain Method; avoiding resource conflict among subprojects; setting various project buffers in multi-project environment, analyzing the buffer manage way to meet the objective of completion rate on time of the whole projects.The fluctuation of duration and cost that involve subproject of multi-project, which bring serious challenge to the scramble for limited resources between subprojects [1,2]. In the literature, various kinds of multi-project scheduling problems have been described and addressed until now, nevertheless, few multi-project scheduling problems have efficient method for considering the uncertainty factors, which a important aspect in multi-project scheduling contexts. These problems state multi-objective optimization about the effectiveness of multi-project scheduling.With advantages have received gradually, Critical Chain Method has being widely used in project management. In order to realize global optimization of multi-project scheduling on critical chain (MPSCC), the multi-objective optimization of time–cost–quality–robustness, which fits actual demand of engineering project better and provides theory basis for integrated management of project schedule in enterprises, was proposed in this article. The research target about multi-project scheduling in critical chain is mainly focused on time, cost and quality in China and abroad. However, the robustness will be an extremely valuable subject because of uncertainty and complexity in multi-project scheduling, which has become a hot topic with deeper research.The existing techniques for multi-objective optimization can be classified into three categories: global search algorithms, mathematical programming models and heuristic algorithms. Previous research efforts have developed several scheduling techniques for multi-project scheduling. Several approaches to solve the multi-project scheduling problems, a one-stage and two-stage linear programming approach is proposed by Slowinski [20]. In order to solving lager-sized projects, heuristic and meta-heuristic procedures are proposed. Knotts et al. [21] design agent-based algorithm and Lova et al. [22] propose a multi-pass heuristics to solving the problems based on priority rules. However, previous researches do not consider the problem in dynamic scheduling, to find the optimal solutions, the multi model is proposed. To the best of our knowledge, no further research has been performed on the multi-project scheduling on critical chain. In this paper, we introduce a cloud genetic algorithm approach for solving the addressed problem.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, presents a literature review with regard to classification of multi-project scheduling and associated scheduling models and methodologies. In Section 3, we introduce a multi-objective optimization formulation for modeling the scheduling of multi-project scheduling on critical chain (MPSCC), which allows multi-objective optimization with respect to duration or cost related criteria in the parametric design. In Section 4, designs cloud genetic algorithm, to solve the problem is described. In Section 5, the computational experiments developed to evaluate the performance of the cloud genetic algorithm are presented, and these results are analyzed. Finally, in Section 6, the conclusions of this paper are presented.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
