@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Assessment of engine thermal management through advanced system engineering modeling

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A physically based approach to model all relevant domains of the vehicle is presented.Innovative solver framework considers characteristic time scales of different domains.Time domain decoupling results in very short computational times of the overall model.An electric coolant pump allows for minor fuel savings of the analyzed passenger car.An electric coolant pump contributes to faster engine warm-up and catalyst light-off.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
System level vehicle model,Engine thermal management,Electrically driven coolant pump,Mechanically driven coolant pump,Transient drive cycle,Fuel consumption,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A physically based approach to model vehicle dynamics, transient engine performance and engine thermal management system is presented. This approach enables modeling dynamic processes in the individual components and is the dynamic interaction of all relevant domains. The modeling framework is based on a common innovative solver, where all processes are solved using tailored numerical techniques suited to account for characteristic time scales of individual domains. This approach enables achieving very short computational times of the overall model. The paper focuses on the integration of cooling and lubrication models into the framework of a vehicle dynamics simulation including transient engine performance demonstrated on a modern passenger car featuring split cooling functionality. A validated model with a mechanically driven coolant pump provides the base for analyzing the impact of introducing an electrically driven coolant pump. Analyses are performed for two drive cycles featuring significantly different velocity profiles to reveal their influences on the operational principles of the powertrain components and their interaction. The results show for both drive cycles fuel saving due to the application of the electric water pump is relatively small and amounts between 0.75% and 1.1%. However, it is important to address that application of the electric coolant pump results in higher turbine outlet temperatures and thus in faster catalyst heat-up. Detailed analyses of the interaction between vehicle dynamics, transient engine performance and engine thermal management system provide insight into the underlying mechanisms. This is made possible by the application of physically based system level model.brake mean effective pressurecrank-anglecombustioncombustion productscentral processing unitdifferential algebraic equationengine control unitexhaust gas recirculationengine thermal managementelectrical water pumpfuel burnedfriction mean effective pressurefuel vaporheat transferliquid heat exchangerconductive heat transfer elementconvective gas heat transfer elementconvective liquid heat transfer elementinternal combustion engineJapanese test cyclelumped massmechanical water pumpnew European drive cycleordinary differential equationrate of heat releasespark ignitionturbocharged gasoline direct injectionthree way catalystelement acceleration vector (m/s2)area (m2)capacity matrix (variable)momentum to mass connection matrix (–)constrain matrix for accelerations (–)heat capacity (J/kgK)constrain matrix for momentums (–)diameter (m)flux vector (variable)generic right-hand-side function (–)gravity acceleration (m/s2)specific enthalpy (J/kg)enthalpy flow (W)loss coefficient (–)length (m)mass (kg)mass flow (kg/s)mass matrix (kgm2)element torque (Nm)speed (rpm)perimeter (m)pressure (Pa)specific gas constant (J/kgK)system matrix (variable)time (s)temperature (K)specific internal energy (J/kg)volume (m3)velocity (m/s)mass fraction (kg/kg)species flow vector (kg/s)state vector (variable)spatial coordinate (m)efficiency (–)thermal conductivity (W/mK)friction coefficient (–)density (kg/m3)torque (Nm)state vector (variable)integration increment, time, crank angle (–)angular position (rad)channel shape factor (–)angular velocity (rad/s)active speciesalladditionalblow bycombustioncross sectioncomponentcylinderdownstreamelementheat transferhydraulicelement indexinletinjectionelement indexelement indexlossesoutletpassive speciespiston ringpumpupstreamwall∗The “bold B” represents two different matrices.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Global concerns on sustainable energy use and environmental protection call for innovative powertrain technologies. Optimizing the vehicle thermal management is considered as one of the measures to reduce fuel consumption and to lower exhaust emissions. This paper therefore analyzes differences in fuel consumption and in catalyst heat up caused by two different approaches for propelling and controlling the coolant pump, a mechanical belt/gear propulsion and an electric motor propulsion are compared.Different topologies of electrified cooling system for internal combustion engines are investigated in [1–3], where results indicate that advanced thermal topologies can reduce fuel consumption for 1–3% through lower parasitic losses of the coolant pump and minimized coolant temperature fluctuations. In [4] the authors focus on mechatronic components used in cooling system (i.e. smart thermostat valve, electric coolant pump, variable speed radiator fan), on proper controlling and on synchronized data exchanges between selected components as all these aspects are important to realize fuel economy enhancements under different driving scenarios. Similarly, in [5] the proper controllability of components is exposed as the key element in achieving enhanced fuel economy. It is further reported in [5] that when the electric water pump runs with a higher coolant temperature set point of 110°C, a fuel reduction of 2–5% is achieved compared to the baseline set point of 90°C. This is also in line with results presented in [6], reporting that higher coolant temperatures reduce brake specific fuel consumption (BSFC) and that the warm-up period can be shortened by maximum 25% through a zero flow strategy of the coolant pump. In [7] the authors present a theoretical analysis of an optimized cooling system applied to an internal combustion engine (ICE) powered passenger car. It was shown that the largest fuel saving potentials, even up to 6–28%, can be achieved in urban driving condition. These very high fuel saving values mainly originate from the fact that study is based on a theoretical assessment of potential improvements, which among others include the assumption of instantaneous engine warm-up. One of the main motivations to integrate an electric coolant pump is a significantly reduced power consumption of the electrically driven over the mechanically driven pump. The study [8] reports that the electrically driven pump reduces the energy consumption by 99% compared to mechanically driven pump. This reduction mainly arises from operation of the coolant pump at much lower speeds being correlated with the actual cooling demand. However, in general it also needs to be considered that a minimum coolant flow should be ensured to avoid potential hot spots in engine as reported in [9].The assessment of vehicle thermal management requires simultaneous consideration of multiple interacting domains, since its response depends on the driving condition, vehicle parameters, engine operation and overlaying control strategies. System engineering simulations are widely applied to support analyses of complex interactions between components in multi domain models [8,10–13]. Complete vehicle models generally includes the domain of mechanical drive train, electrical circuit, internal combustion engine, exhaust aftertreatment, cooling circuit and corresponding control units. To efficiently support these analyses, system engineering models have to feature fast computational times in off-line (office) applications, as vast numbers of configurations need to be examined during early concept and design phases of the powertrain development. Besides the computational speed, accuracy and predictability also significantly influence the applicability of system engineering simulations. In the context of this paper predictability is the degree to which an adequate prediction can be made by the model without any prior model calibration. A high level of predictability is particularly required when evaluating powertrain performance in different operating regimes, where physically plausible response of individual components and adequate interaction between the components is mandatory.System level studies on vehicle thermal management systems that include their interaction with the engine performance and emissions parameters generally rely on the data driven models of particular domains, i.e. powertrain subsystems. Similarly, data driven engine models are also widely used in other system level studies, where besides steady state maps, e.g. [8,14,15], surrogate models are used also, e.g. [16]. Such models feature significant limitations when applied to transient conditions that are far from steady-state. This is even more pronounced for turbocharged engines with exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) as analyzed in [17]. To overcome these deficiencies hybrid engine models are often used combining surrogate approaches like Static Neural Networks [18] or Support Vector Machines [19] with physical based model parts. In addition, there have been several attempts to develop data driven transient emission models [14,15,20]. However, both steady-state and transient data driven models require upfront data for populating maps for training the surrogate models. These data might not yet be fully available at very early stages in the development process. It is therefore advantageous to use physical based models, e.g. [12,13,21–25], as they rely on first order principles and physically motivated correlations. In addition, they also inherently consider changes in engine controls, thermal behavior of the engine, variations in gas state and composition as well as turbocharger lagging via deterministic approaches. This enables more adequate modeling of the engine performance.In order to comply with the mentioned requirements on computational speed and predictability, this paper presents an advanced modeling approach that is capable of modeling dynamic processes in the individual components and dynamic interaction of all relevant domains using a common numerical solver framework. This brings advantages over the co-simulations of specialized tools for modeling particular domains due to the possibility to optimally couple different domains [12].This is reached by introducing an innovative tailored solver framework suited to account for the characteristic time scales of the individual domains and the domain coupling. All modeled domains do not depend only on current state, i.e. behave quasi-steady, but they also depend on the recent history, whereby each domain features one or more distinct characteristic time scales as presented in [13]. The paper at hand focuses on the integration of an Engine Thermal Management (ETM) model into a vehicle dynamics simulation [26,27] also taking into account transient engine performance [27–29].The modeling framework, as it includes a very detailed ETM model, is applied to analyze different thermal management approaches of a passenger car under a variety of realistic driving scenarios. The analysis is based on a validated model of a 1.2ton passenger car powered by a 4 cylinder 1.6l turbocharged gasoline direct injection engine (TGDI) that interacts with a split ETM circuit. A baseline cooling topology with a mechanically driven coolant pump is compared to a cooling topology incorporating electrically driven coolant pump. Both cooling topologies are assessed under different driving conditions to reveal drive cycle specific differences of the two cooling concepts.Modeling of system engineering configurations requires a careful selection of the physical depth of the models used to describe phenomena in particular domains to optimize the computational performance of the overall model. In addition, it is necessary to consider the characteristic time scales of the modeled phenomena to improve computational speed and numerical robustness by avoiding stiffness of the overall system matrix, as discussed in [13,26]. In such an approach, domains that are integrated with the same time steps represent sub-matrices in the overall system matrix. This time domain decoupling goes along with the application of dedicated routines that ensure inter-domain flux conservation. The characteristics of the individual domains are discussed in detail in the following sections.The vehicle model presented in Fig. 1accounts for aerodynamic drag and longitudinal vehicle dynamics. The mechanical drivetrain comprises library components such as gearboxes, transmissions, clutches, final gears, tires, and brakes [30]. A dedicated driver model steers acceleration and brake pedal, steers the clutch pedal and also selects the gears for the manual transmission gearboxes. Following the forward facing approach, the driver model observes difference between the actual vehicle velocity and the velocity given by a drive-cycle profile and acts appropriately to meet the target velocity.The vehicle and the driveline can be seen as a mechanical multi-body system represented by rotational degrees of freedom. According to [26] such systems can mathematically be represented by(1)MBCD·am=0τ,whereMis the diagonal mass matrix andBrepresents the acting of momentums between the individual components and on the components.Cdescribes constraints between the mechanical parts andDcovers the relation between the momentums. The accelerations of the individual components are represented by a. The variable m describes all torques in the system while τ comprises all torques calculated in the individual components which act on the mechanic system as well as losses.The presented analysis use an explicit time integration scheme, where time steps the order of one millisecond are commonly used to integrate the mechanical system [26]. Thereby it is ensured that the typical drivetrain dynamics of interest in the energy management studies is appropriately resolved.On the system level, there is a great demand on establishing an appropriate level of model details and its prediction accuracy. This is particularly challenging for models of internal combustion engines [12]. Physical based modeling is a sound approach for analyzing a wide variety of steady state operation points and also transient operating conditions. This is important in the present study as cold start runs of turbocharged engine with split cooling of engine head and block are analyzed.The 0D engine model of this study relies on an advanced time domain decoupling approach where physical domains featuring higher and lower frequency effects are splitted. The high frequency in-cylinder and associated heat and mass transfer phenomena are resolved with smaller time steps whereas the 0D gas path models applies a larger time steps able to capture the main flow characteristics. The interaction between the domains is performed in a flux conservative manner. As presented in [27–31] the concept of 0D gas path modeling relies on the coupling of so called storage and transfer components in an alternating manner. Storage elements comprise elements with finite inertia that are described by a state, e.g. the cylinder and plenum state comprises mass, temperature/pressure and species mass fractions. In the solid structure elements, the temperature is the one and only considered state. The transient variation of the state itself is a result of fluxes from adjacent transfer elements. Fluxes of the gas path, comprise mass, enthalpy, species flows, whereas heat transfer elements feature only heat fluxes. This generic framework enables the generation of model equations for arbitrary engine gas path topologies. It is given by(2)B·dΦdt=∑ḞUS,j-∑ḞUS,k,(3)ḞDS,j=ḞUS,j+∑ḞADD,l,where the state vectorΦmultiplied by the capacity matrixBequals the sums of all fluxesḞat the upstream (US) and downstream (DS) side. The distinction betweenḞUSandḞDSis made in order to model sources within transfer elements, e.g. the enthalpy flow through a compressor element is augmented at its downstream side by power coming from the shaft. Thus, the second term on the right side of Eq. (3) sums all additional fluxesḞADDadjoined to the transfer components.This generic framework also enables the coupling between the high frequency engine block and low frequency gas path domain as presented in [12]. It is coupled to a mean value gas path model. These two domains are indicated in Fig. 2, where the cross domain coupling is performed in the transfer elements attached to the cylinder. These elements ensure inter-domain flux conservation. Thus, they feature a twofold functionality. First, they provide cyclic mean fluxes to the mean value gas path model. Second they provide cyclic resolved fluxes to the crank angle resolved cylinder model. Refs. [12,13,27] confirm capability of this modeling approach to adequately model phenomena in the engines that do not exhibit significant enhancements of volumetric efficiency due to wave dynamics. This is the case for the analyzed engine as shown in [27].The engine block domain is indicated with blue dashed line in Fig. 2. All in-cylinder phenomena comprising heat and mass transfer, combustion and generation of indicated work transferred to the piston are modeled on a crank-angle (CA) basis. The basic modeling ideas on 0D cylinder modeling are presented in [31], whereas a detailed description of the governing equations applied in the model is given in [28,29]. The main equations are only briefly summarized subsequently. The state and flux vectors in the cylinder are represented by(4)Φ=[m,T,wA,wP]T,and(5)Ḟ=ṁ,Ḣ,ẆA,ẆpT,where m, T,wA,wPrepresent mass, temperature and vectors of active and passive species mass fractions. The flux vectorḞcomprises mass flowṁ, the enthalpy flowḢand two species flow vectorsẆAandẆPfor active and passive species, respectively.In the presented approachWArepresents burned fuel (FB), combustion products (CP) and fuel vapor (FV). This is given by(6)WA=[wFB,wCP,wFV]T,wFBdescribes the concentration of fuel that was burned andwCPgives the concentration of the corresponding combustion products andwFVis the mass fraction of fuel vapor.The mass balance of the cylinder is expressed by(7)dmdξ=∑jnvalvesdmjdξ+dmbbdξ+dminjdξ,where ξ represents the independent variable for time (t) or CA rotation (φ). The mass change depends on the mass flows through elements connected to the cylinder. These are flows through the attached valves (mj), blow-by (mbb) through the piston rings and mass of injected fuel (minj).The rate of species concentration comprises species concentration variation due to mass transfer and species concentration variation due to combustion. This is given by(8)dwkdξ=1m∑jnvalves(wk,GE-wk,cyl)dmjdξ+(wk,GE-wk,cyl)dmbbdξ+(wk,GE-wk,cyl)dminjdξ+dwk,Cdξ,The index GE denotes(9)GE=cylinderdm⩽0plenum or crank-case→dm>0′,where a positive value of dm indicates that mass flows into the cylinder as given in Eq. (7).From the first law of thermodynamics for an open system the energy balance equation can be expressed as temperature derivative [12]. This is given by(10)dTdξ=Bm·dQdξ+dHdξ+(K·m-1)·p·dVdφ·dφdξ-(u+K·T·R·m)·dmdξ-m·K·m·T·∂R∂wk+∂u∂wk·dwkdξConsidering an open system the heat release dQ and the enthalpy flux dH are given as(11)dQ=dQC+dQHT,(12)dH=∑jnvalveshGEdmj+hbbdmbb+hinjdminj,where dQC and dQHT represent heat sources due to combustion and all wall heat losses, respectively. dH comprises all enthalpy fluxes due to mass transfer between the cylinder and its attached elements as given in Eq. (7).The parameters K and B in Eq. (10) are given as(13)K=∂u∂p·1V·1-pR·∂R∂p,(14)B=1K·m·R·1+TR·∂R∂T+∂u∂T,where V is the volume and GE is the index defined in Eq. (9). The volume derivative with respect to pressure in Eq. (10) depends on the given piston kinematics. The engine torque is calculated from the indicated work of the cylinders by considering frictional losses. The latter are empirically modeled with the help of experimental data.Eq. (10) is evaluated considering dependencies of gas properties, i.e. internal energy (u), specific gas constant (R) and all partial derivatives of both properties, on temperature (T),pressure (p), and species concentrations (wFB,wCP,wFV,wair). In presented work physical properties for gasoline fuel are used considering the real gas characteristics covered by a compressibility factor.The mass flow rates through the intake and the exhaust ports are calculated by the compressible orifice equation [32]. Direct fuel injection is modeled by connecting an injector element to the cylinder, where operation point specific injection timings and flow rates are applied. In the present model, heat transfer from the combustion chamber to the cylinder walls (connected by so called heat transfer components in Fig. 2) is modeled by correlations taken from literature [33]. The heat transfer in ports is modeled according to the model proposed in [34]. The combustion is approached by Vibe’s functions [35] where the Vibe parameters are given in tables over the entire speed-load engine operation map. The Vibe parameters are determined from rate of heat release data that are evaluated based on the experimental in-cylinder pressure traces. The Vibe combustion model is used, since it well describes the RoHR curves of the analyzed engine and since in the case of the analyzed engine a large experimental data pool is available.The engine gas path domain is indicated by the red color in Fig. 2. The engine gas path is discretized on the level of components such as plenums representing intake and exhaust manifolds, air cleaner, compressor, inter-cooler, throttle valve, turbine and catalyst. It is modeled by a mean value approach [36].The gas path is also solved using a generic set of model equations, i.e. Eqs. (2) and (3). The state vector in the plenum is given by(15)Φ=[m,p,wA,wP]T,where p is pressure. The first law of thermodynamics in the volume components is solved using a reformulated expression where the pressure is explicitly given. This approach is beneficial because all flows between storage elements strongly depend on pressures, which are primarily solved by the numerical integration scheme. Fluxes in transfer elements (Eq. (3)) are evaluated considering component specific characteristics , i.e. air cleaner, compressor, inter-cooler, throttle valve, turbine and catalyst, as given in [27,29], whereas ports exchange mass with the gas path by cyclic averaged values of the fluxes [12].Transient 1D models are generally used to model either single catalysts or also entire exhaust lines [29,37–39]. In a generic bond-graph approach the exhaust aftertreatment devices are also split to transfer and storage elements. The transfer characteristic describes the flow through the catalyst, while the storage characteristic is considered for the catalyst substrate and the surface reactions. In the present TGDI engine a simplified Three-Way-Catalyst (TWC) model is included to adequately cover only heat transfer phenomena in the exhaust system. Pollutant formation in the cylinders, its transport through the gas path and its subsequent conversion in the catalytic converter are not considered as this study focuses on the thermal behavior of the powertrain.This advanced modeling approach ensures a high level of predictability and accuracy during transient engine simulations [27]. In-cylinder phenomena and fluxes through the attached transfer components are integrated with integration increments that correspond to 1deg CA and the gas path is integrated with integration time steps of 1ms. Such an approach enables adequate modeling of the interaction between the cylinder and intake at exhaust manifold, since the exchange of mass, enthalpy and species masses is based on physical models for the flow through the valves. Moreover, this modeling approach inherently considers turbo-lagging and all its consequences [27]. Additionally, wall heat losses and fuel injection are modeled on crank-angle basis. This is also beneficial for the adequacy of transient results, where it is important to capture back-influences from the solid structure temperature on the indicated cylinder work. An adequate distribution of cylinder heat losses to the engine block and head is mandatory for the heat-up analysis of the engine featuring split cooling between block and head. This heat distribution varies depending on engine operating conditions and with varying temperature of the combustion chamber walls. Thus a physical based modeling is required to adequately distribute all heat fluxes that further influence the responses of each cooling branch.Components of the Engine Thermal Management (ETM) domain (Fig. 3) serve as heat sinks of the heat released during combustion, of the heat generated by frictional losses in the engine and in the turbocharger.The ETM topology is composed out of a series of base components. These components can be split into three groups. The first group comprises liquid fluid flow and related heat transfer components. The second group comprises solid structure components and the third group comprises convective heat transfer components to the gas path. The liquid flow network group consists of elements for pumps, valves, nodes, junctions, pipes, liquid heat exchangers elements (LHE) and convective liquid heat transfer elements (CvLHT). All components feature generic mass flow functionalities. The last three components additionally feature heat transfer to the solid structure and thus represent the interaction components for the flow to the solid structure group. The solid structure group comprises lumped mass (LM) components that are used to generate various solid structure configuration and conductive heat transfer components (CdHT) that transfer heat between LM components. Components of the solid structure group interact with the engine domain via the third group of components that comprise convective gas heat transfer components (CvGHT). In addition, CvGHT components are also used to model heat transfer to the surrounding including the passenger compartment.CvGHT components represent the interaction between the ETM and the engine domain as indicated in Figs. 2 and 3. This framework is applied to transport heat from the combustion chamber via the CvGHT and LM components to the coolant and oil circuit and further to the ambient (Fig. 3). The applied modeling depth thus enables adequate description of the heat fluxes from the combustion chamber to the piston, the liner and the head. In addition, this component topology is also used to model the heat flux between coolant and oil circuit. The proposed approach enables adequate modeling of the heat capacity of the block engine structure and of the liquids in the ETM domain. The complex structure of the engine block and head is resolved using LM and CdHT components that are appropriately compiled to represent their geometries (Fig. 3). Thereby heterogeneous temperature fields can be modeled in the larger components. In addition, an appropriate coupling of these engine structure components with components of the liquid circuits allows for modeling heat fluxes in all three spatial dimensions as shown in Fig. 3.The liquid flow model of the ETM domain assumes incompressible, non-isothermal conditions. The assumption of incompressibility is well justified with the operating conditions of cooling and lubrication circuits focusing on thermal management investigations. The ETM circuits additionally feature two different characteristic time scales. The shorter time scale is related to establishing the mass flow pattern, whereas the longer one is related to the thermal response of the cooling circuits. In addition, the energy equation of incompressible flows is not directly coupled to the continuity and momentum balance equation. Thus, governing equations of the liquid flow can be solved in a decoupled manner, where the flow field equations (mass and momentum) are solved as quasi-steady and the energy flow field equations are solved transiently. Due to the fact that the thermal response of the engine’s liquids is very slow, the energy equation was integrated with time step in the order of 100ms.The solid structure of the engine connects domains that are integrated with different time steps, the high frequency domain of the cylinder, the medium frequency domain of gas path and the low frequency domain of the cooling circuit. Here, it is necessary to ensure energy conservation in all lumped mass elements. This is made possible by the fact that characteristic time scale of the solid structure components, representing the engine on a system level, is much larger than the integration time steps of the cylinder, the gas path and the energy flow field in the cooling circuits.The LMs are attached integrated together with energy flow field of the cooling circuit. Therefore it can be assumed that temperature of LM elements does not change significantly within one time step of the energy flow field of the cooling circuit. With this assumption, consistent heat fluxes from engine gas path or from the cylinder to the LM elements can be integrated over the period of one integration step of the coolant energy flow circuit.The solution of the model equations describing an incompressible flow field can be seen in analogy to electrical networks described by Kirchhoff laws. The mass conservation is given by(16)∑iṁi=0,whereṁirepresents ith mass flow attachment at a non-dimensional node element. Due to the quasi-steady assumption, the momentum equation simplifies into a pressure balance equation according to(17)pup-pdn-Δpelem=0,where pup and pdn denote in a coolant flow component pressure values from the up- and down-stream node components, respectively. The term Δpelem accounts for two types of pressure differences. First, it represents a pressure rise as given in pumps (Δppump) and second, it covers flow pressure losses through components like pipe, heat exchangers and valves (Δploss).For the pump characteristic the following correlation is applied by(18)Δppump=f(ṁ,n),whereṁpresents the mass flow through the pump and n is the pump speed. Here typically manufacturer provided maps are applied.The pressure drop in the valve is modeled using the orifice equation [40], which dependents on valve type and on valve opening ratio. The pressure loss Δploss in pipes and LHE components is calculated as(19)Δploss=ψ·ζ·lDhyd·ρ·v22,where ψ is the channel shape factor, ζ is a generic friction coefficient, l presents a characteristic flow length,Dhydis the hydraulic diameter and ρ indicates the fluid density. The mean flow velocity v is calculated directly from the mass flowṁthought the component. The friction coefficient is calculated using the Hagen–Poiseuille equation [41] for laminar flow conditions and the Chen equation [42] for turbulent flow. A similar approach can also be used in a CvLHT component. The friction coefficient in LHEs is evaluated depending on Reynolds number [43]. Here, the coefficients of the Reynolds correlation are adjusted to the specific LHE components with the help of the experimental data.The junction component is aimed for modeling three-way junctions. A generic pressure drop is calculated from [44] based on the flow pattern, which is steered by the pressures in all three attachments, and the junction geometry. This is given by(20)Δpij=Kk·ρ·vi22,fori=1,2,3;j=2,3;k=1,…,12;,where i and j denote the branches of the junction, ρ is the fluid density and v is the fluid velocity. The index k represents the number of all possible combinations for joining and separating flows in the junction. The loss coefficient Kkis determined though empirical correlations [44]. Based on the pressure drops calculated by Eq. (20), the pressure drop between the ith and the jth branch is given by(21)pi-pj-Δpij=0.The mass flows calculated by the incompressible flow network serve as inputs for the energy flow network. Based on the calculated mass flow pattern, enthalpy balance in nodes, junctions and valves are calculated. This is given by(22)∑ihi,inṁi,in+∑jhj,outṁj,out=0,where the inflow enthalpy flows are calculated considering the specific outflow enthalpy of the upstream components.In the pipes, heat exchangers and the pump, the enthalpy balance is calculated by(23)Ḣi,out-Ḣi,in-ΔḢelem=0,whereḢi,outandḢi,inrepresent outflow and inflow enthalpies respectively.ΔḢelemdenotes enthalpy sources/sinks within the component taking into account for heat transfer with the solid structure.In the pump, an enthalpy augmentation is considered according to(24)ΔḢpump=ṁ·cp·ΔT,whereṁis the mass flow and cpis the specific heat capacity of the fluid. ΔT is the fluid temperature rise due to frictional and hydrodynamic losses. This is given by(25)ΔT=Δppumpρ·cp·1η-1,whereΔppumprepresent the pressure difference between pump pressure inlet and outlet and η is the total pump efficiency.Heat transfer typically depends on flow conditions the fluid and wall temperature and on the element geometry. For an infinitesimal section of a pipe and LHE component, the heat transfer rate is given by(26)dḢelem=P·α·[T(z)-Tw]·dz,where P represents wall perimeter, α is a generic heat transfer coefficient and dz is the length of section. The variables T and Tw are the fluid and wall side temperatures, respectively. The heat transfer in the pipes and LHE components is thus modeled by coupled transient 1D energy balances for the fluid and wall, respectively. This is given by(27)ρ·cp·dTdt=-ṁAcross·dhdz+PAcross·α·(T-Tw)ρw·cp,w·dTwdt=ddz·λw·dTwdz-PAcross,w·α·(T-Tw),where ρ, ρw, cp, cp,w, T, Tw, Across,Across,ware the density, specific heat capacity, temperature and cross section area of the fluid and wall, respectively. The perimeter of the fluid-to-wall surface is described with P,λwis the wall heat conduction and z is the characteristic length in space domain. This approach describes a 2D temperature field in pipes and LHE components. The fluid temperature changes along the flow direction and, perpendicular to this direction, the heat is transferred to the LM components. Here, in addition to the convection on both surfaces also conduction along the 1D discretized LM elements is considered.In the generic CvLHT components 0D heat transfer model is applied. This is given by(28)ḢHT=A·α·[T-Tw],where A is the surface of the CvLHT component.The heat transfer coefficient in pipes is calculated using Sieder and Tate’s correlation [41] for laminar flow conditions and Gnielinski correlation [41] for turbulent flow. In CvLHT components which aim at simulating convection between LM components and the liquids flow, the heat transfer is either explicitly given (Eq. (28)) or modeled by a constant Nusselt number in laminar flow conditions and by the Dittus–Boelter correlation [41] in turbulent flow. In case of LHE component, the heat transfer coefficient follows Hausen’ correlation [41] for laminar flow while for turbulent flow Sieder and Tate’s correlation [41] is taken. As an additional option in heat transfer modeling, the LHE components also include external 3D maps with measurement data to cover different geometrical configurations.In order to operate the engine, cooling, drivetrain and vehicle during transient conditions several closed and open loop controls are integrated into a simple model of an engine control unit (ECU).The engine operation is controlled by steering position of the throttle in the intake, position of the waste-gate, mass of injected fuel, injection profile, ignition timing and camshaft phasing of the intake valve. The ECU model includes also an idle speed controller that over rules fuel injection control depending on engine operating conditions. In addition, ECU model steers fan operation and pump speed in the case of the electric coolant pump topology. All input data of the ECU, except the ones of the control strategies of the electric coolant pump, are based on experimental values measured for a wide range of parameter variations.The governing equations of the different domains described above are compiled into a generic system of differential and algebraic equations. The second order mechanical system is transformed into a first order system of double size. This is given by(29)M·dωdt=τ(ω,φ),whereMrepresents the mass matrix, ω is the angular velocity and τ(ω,φ) is the net sum of all external torques. The angular velocity is given as the derivative of the angular position φ. This is given by(30)dφdt=ω.The engine block and the engine gas path equations as well as the liquid circuit energy flow equations follow the above given generic form of first order ODEs. The mechanical system typically features additional linear constraints which can be algebraically substituted into the system.To optimize the computational performance, tailored solver techniques are applied, that do not integrate the entire system with the time steps dictated by the phenomena featuring the shortest characteristic times. Instead, phenomena with the shortest characteristic times are modeled quasi-steady. This is the liquid circuit mass flows. As a result, the entire equation system is represented by a system matrix, whereas domains that are integrated with the same time steps represent sub-matrices in the overall system matrix. Within such an approach it is of utmost importance to reserve conservation principles, which is done by integrating fluxes of the domains integrated with shorter time steps.Input parameters of the model include geometrical characteristics of the elements and specific characteristics of the elements, e.g. characteristic maps of compressor, turbine and pumps, heat transfer and pressure drop characteristics of the heat transfer elements, losses in driveline components and combustion parameters. These specific component characteristics rely either on manufacturer’s data or are derived from the measured data. Within a particular domain, network of elements exchanges parameters in a domain specific manner as described in previous sections, i.e. Eq. (1) for the vehicle and driveline domain, Eqs. (4) and (5) for the engine domain and Eqs. (16) and (22) for the engine thermal management domain. In addition, Fig. 4schematically shows exchange of parameters between different domains.The capability of the overall vehicle and powertrain model to adequately simulate transient vehicle operation was presented in [29], where chassis-dynamometer measurements were compared to numerically simulated results of a conventional ICE powered vehicle equipped with a 6-speed manual gear box. Therefore, in-line with the objective of this study, results related to the integration of an engine thermal management model into a vehicle dynamics simulation are addressed in the next section.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
