@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Influence of groove type on welding-induced residual stress, deformation and width of sensitization region in a SUS304 steel butt welded joint

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An advanced computational approach for simulating multi-pass welding process was developed.The influence of groove shape on welding residual stress distribution was studied.The influence of groove shape on angular distortion was examined.Groove shape has significant influence on residual stress, deformation and sensitization zone.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Finite element,Groove type,Numerical simulation,Residual stress,Sensitization region,Welding deformation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
To join a medium or thick plate weldment with a full penetration, a groove is usually prepared in the space between two sections of metal. Because weld metal needs to be deposited within the groove to form the joint, it is expected that different groove type will require different heat input, which may consequently have influence on welding residual stress and deformation. Generally, different groove corresponds to different bead layout, so it can be foreseen that the groove type has a significant effect on temperature history, shape and size of heat affected zone, and region of sensitization in certain alloys such as austenitic stainless steel. The influences of groove type on residual stress, angular distortion and width of sensitization region in a SUS304 butt-welded joint were investigated by means of numerical simulation and experiment. Based on ABAQUS code, a computational approach with considering thermo-mechanical coupling behaviors, moving heat source, strain hardening and annealing effect was developed to simulate temperature profile, stress field and deformation in multi-pass joint. Welding temperature cycles, residual stress distributions and deformations in V, K and X groove joints were calculated through using the proposed computational procedure. Meanwhile, experiments were carried out to obtain residual stress distributions and angular distortions. Through comparing the numerical results and the measured data, the effectiveness and accuracy of the developed computational approach were verified. The simulation results show that groove type has a significant influence on welding residual stress distribution, angular distortion and width of sensitization region.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Austenitic stainless steels have been widely used in nuclear power plants as in-core and surrounding structural materials. Stress corrosion cracking (SCC) is still a problem found in austenitic stainless steel weldments [1,2] even though it has a comprehensive advantage in strength and corrosion resistance. The mechanism of SCC in austenitic stainless steel has not been completely clarified yet, however, a number of investigations on weldments used in nuclear power equipment indicated that SCC is the primary damage owing to the confluence of stress, material and environment factors [3,4]. Since welding residual stress is often inevitably produced in welded joints and its peak value tends to be equal or larger than the yield strengths of the base metal and the weld metal, it has been regarded as one of the most significant factors leading to SCC [5].A variety of experimental methods [6,7] to measure welding residual stresses have been proposed in the past years. However, these methods are either too expensive or very difficult to obtain satisfactory results especially in engineering structures. In recent years, a number of finite element models [8–10] have been proposed to predict welding residual stresses in multi-pass welded joints. With the development of computer technology and the maturity of computational welding mechanics, numerical simulation technology has been regarded as one of the most promising methods to obtain welding residual stress and deformation [11].Besides the tensile residual stress induced by welding process, another important issue is the sensitization in an austenitic stainless steel or a nickel alloy joint. Sensitization resulting from grain boundary chromium (Cr) depletion occurs in stainless steels and nickel alloys because various types of Cr carbides form in the temperature range of 500–750°C [12,13]. Chromium carbide formation ties up significant amounts of Cr in and near the grain boundaries, thus rendering the matrix in the boundary poor in Cr, relative to the bulk composition, and susceptible to corrosion and SCC. Therefore, if the welding residual stress distribution and the location of sensitized region in austenitic stainless steel welded joints can be determined, it will be beneficial to the evaluation of SCC tendency for a welded joint.To ensure a full penetration a medium or thick plate joint, a groove is usually needed in the space between two sections of metal. Generally, different groove type requires different number of weld pass and heat input. In the past, the effects of welding method, welding parameters and mechanical boundary conditions on welding residual stress and distortion have been extensively investigated [14–17]. However, the researches on the influences of groove type on welding residual stress and deformation in multi-pass joints are very limited. Therefore, a three-dimensional (3-D) thermal elastic plastic finite element method based on ABAQUS code was developed to simulate temperature field, residual stress distribution and deformation in a SUS304 stainless steel multi-pass joint. Meanwhile, experiments were carried out to measure welding residual stress distribution and deformation. The measurements were used to validate the effectiveness of the proposed computational approach. In addition, the influences of groove type on welding residual stress, deformation and width of sensitization region were clarified using the developed numerical simulation technology.Three mock-ups with different groove types (i.e. V-groove, K-groove and X-groove) as shown in Fig. 1were fabricated in this study. The dimensions of each joint is 300mm×300mm×10mm. The base metal is SUS304 austenitic stainless steel, and the filler wire is GMS-309L with 1.2mm diameter. The welding was performed by a Panasonic KR600 welding machine, and the shielding gas is pure Ar. During welding, the specimens were joined without any external mechanical restraint. Fig. 2shows the three joints with different groove types. There are four weld passes in each joint, and the pass sequences and their arrangements used in those three joints are shown in Fig. 3. The inter-pass temperature was strictly controlled below 100°C. The welding parameters for each pass used in three joints are summarized in Tables 1–3, respectively.After welding, the hole drilling strain gauge method [18,19] was used to measure the residual stresses on the surface of the welded joints. In the present work, the residual stresses including longitudinal stress and transverse stress at seven locations were measured, and the measurement locations are shown in Fig. 1 by the black dots. A device named Sigmar-ASM made by Ji-Nan Sigmar Sci-tech Co., Ltd. was used to measure the released elastic strains. The measuring of residual stress was performed according to ASTM: E837-08e2 standard [20]. After setting Young’s modulus and Possion’s ratio of the material at room temperature, the measured results (residual stresses) can be automatically read from the screen of Sigmar-ASM device. In addition, a three-dimensional (3-D) coordinate measuring system named ROMER INFINITE 2.0 was used to obtain the welding deformation [21]. The measuring accuracy of the system is 0.03mm. Three dimensional coordinates at 49 points of each welded specimen were measured to obtain the contour of welding deformation. In the present study, we plotted the profile of out-of-deformation for each specimen through using MATLAB software [21]. Both the residual stresses and the profiles of welding deformation were used to verify the corresponding numerical results.Based on ABAQUS code, a sequentially coupled thermo-elastic-plastic finite element method was developed to simulate welding temperature field, residual stress distribution and distortion in SUS304 austenitic stainless steel multi-pass butt joints. In the developed computational approach, the thermo-elastic-plastic constitutive relations, moving heat source, and thermal boundary conditions were carefully considered. Also, strain hardening and annealing effect [22] were taken into account in the finite element models.The dimensions of the finite element models are the same as those of the corresponding experimental specimens. To balance the computing time and calculation accuracy, finer grids were designed at the weld zone and its vicinity, while relatively coarser grids were used for the ranges far away from the weld bead. The length of each element in the welding direction is 3mm, so the number of division in longitudinal direction is 100. The smallest element in the finite element models is 1mm×1mm×3mm. In each 3-D finite element model, the total numbers of element and node are 32,000 and 36,865, respectively. It should be pointed out that even though the numbers of element and node in those three models are the same, the sizes and the shapes of elements at fusion zones and their vicinities among three models are slightly different. The element type used in thermal analysis is DC3D8 [23,24]. During the thermal analysis, the “Model Change” option was used to simulate the deposition of weld metal. When the first pass was welded, all elements involved in this whole pass were added to the finite element model, while the other passes were removed from the finite element model. A moving heat source was used to simulate the heat input. After the first pass was performed, the elements involved in the second weld pass were added to the groove. Similarly, the second pass was performed with a moving heat source. With using the similar manner, the rest weld passes were welded till the groove was filled completely.During the welding, the governing equation for transient heat transfer analysis is given by the following equation.(1)ρc∂T∂t(x,y,z,t)=-∇q(x,y,z,t)+Q(x,y,z,t)where ρ is the density of the materials, c is the specific heat capacity, T is the current temperature, q is the heat flux vector, Q is the internal heat generation rate, x, y and z are the coordinates in the reference system, t is the time, and ∇ is the spatial gradient operator.The non-liner isotropic Fourier heat flux constitutive equation is given by:(2)q=-k∇Twhere k is the thermal conductivity.In this study, the heat from the moving welding arc was applied as a volumetric heat source with a double ellipsoidal distribution proposed by Goldak et al. [25], and is expressed by the following equations:For the front heat source:(3)q(x,y,z)=63f1Qπa1bcπexp-3x′2a12exp-3y′2b2exp-3z′2c2For the rear heat source:(4)q(x,y,z)=63f2Qπa2bcπexp-3x′2a22exp-3y′2b2exp-3z′2c2where x′, y′ and z′ are the local coordinates of the double ellipsoid model aligned with the welded plate; f1 and f2 are parameters representing the fraction of the heat deposited in the front and the rear parts respectively. Note that f1+f2=2.0. In this study, f1 is assumed to be 1.4 and f2 to be 0.6 respectively because the temperature gradient in the front leading part is steeper than that in the tailing edge [26].In the above two equations, Q is the power of the welding heat source. It can be calculated according to the welding current, the arc voltage and the arc efficiency [24]. The arc efficiency (η) is assumed to be 70% for the MIG welding process. The parameters a1, a2, b and c are related to the characteristics of the welding heat source. The parameters of the heat source can be adjusted to create a desired melted zone according to the welding conditions. The moving heat source was modeled by a user subroutine in ABAQUS code [24].Considering the welding speed and welding direction (along x-coordinate), the coordinates at the center of heat source model can be expressed as follows:(5)x′=x-vxt(6)y′=y-vyt(7)z′=z-vztwhere vx, vyand vzare the components of welding speed in x, y and z directions, respectively. In the present model, welding direction is along x-direction, so the components in y and z directions are zero.Besides considering the moving heat source, heat losses due to convention and radiation were also taken into account in the finite element models. In the thermal analysis, all surfaces of the finite element model were assumed to lose heat by convention to the surrounding air. Heat loss due to convection (qc) was taken into account using Newton’s law:(8)qc=-hc(Ts-T0)where hcis the heat transfer coefficient, Tsis the surface temperature of the plate, and T0 is the ambient temperature which is assumed to be 20°C.The above thermal boundary condition was employed for all free boundaries of the 3-D model. Furthermore, the heat loss due to radiation was modeled using Stefan-Boltzman law:(9)qr=-εσTs+273.154-(T0+273.15)4where ɛ is the emissivity, and σ is the Stefan-Boltzman constant.The temperature-dependent thermal properties such as thermal conductivity, specific heat and density of base metal (SUS304) used in the finite element model are shown in Fig. 4[27]. Since the chemical components of weld metal are much similar to those of base metal, the temperature-dependent thermal physical properties of the former were assumed to be the same as those of the latter.The mechanical analyses were conducted using the temperature histories computed by the thermal analysis as thermal loads. The same finite element mesh used in the thermal analysis was employed in the mechanical analysis except for the element type and the boundary conditions. The element type in the mechanical analysis is C3D8I [23,24]. Since the experimental mock-ups were performed without external constraint in the experiments, the mechanical boundary conditions of the finite element model were just used to prevent the rigid motion. The mechanical boundary conditions are shown by the arrows in Fig. 3.Solid-state phase transformation does not take place in the austenitic stainless base metal and the weld metal and the creep strain can be neglected, so the total strain increment in each element can be decomposed into three main components as follows:(10){dε}={dεe}+{dεp}+{dεth}where dɛe, dɛpanddεthare the increments of elastic strain, plastic strain and thermal strain, respectively.In the mechanical analysis, the elastic strain was modeled using the isotropic Hook’s law with temperature-dependent Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio as shown in Fig. 5. The thermal strain was computed by using the temperature-dependent coefficient of thermal expansion. For the plastic strain, a rate-independent plastic model was employed with the following features: Von Mises yield, temperature-dependent mechanical properties, and isotropic strain hardening model. In addition, annealing effect was also taken into account in the present model, and the annealing temperature was assumed to be 1000°C [22,27].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A thermal elastic plastic finite element method was developed for analyzing the temperature field, welding residual stress distribution and distortion in multi-pass SUS304 steel joints. Using the developed computational approach, the influence of groove type on welding residual stress, angular distortion and sensitization region was examined. The conclusions can be drawn as follows:(1)The welding residual stresses and angular distortion in V-groove joint predicted by finite element model are in a good agreement with the measured data. It has been proved that the developed computational approach can be used to accurately simulate welding residual stress and deformation for multi-pass joints.The numerical simulation results show that the region with longitudinal tensile stress in V-groove joint is slightly wider than those of the other two joints. The region with transverse tensile stress in V-groove joint is significantly wider than that in K-groove or X-groove joint. In addition, the peak value of transverse tensile stress of V-groove joint is much higher than those of the other two joints.Both the measured data and the simulated results indicate that the angular distortion of the butt joint is significantly affected by groove type.The numerical results show that the total sensitization region on the top surface in V-groove joint is significantly larger than those in K-groove and X-groove joints.From the viewpoint of SCC prevention in austenitic steel butt welded joint, the simulation results suggest that X-groove and K-groove are superior to V-groove.