@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Co-simulation research of a novel exoskeleton-human robot system on humanoid gaits with fuzzy-PID/PID algorithms

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel lower extremity exoskeleton with series–parallel topology is presented.The humanoid gait characteristics decide that the control algorithm should be intelligent.A switch-typed and parameter self-tuning fuzzy-PID/PID controller is presented.Level walking, stair ascent, stair descent, side kick, squatting down and standing up co-simulations are presented.Simulation results show that the fuzzy-PID/PID controllers have great control performances.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Lower extremity exoskeleton,Wearable robotics,Humanoid gaits,Fuzzy algorithm,Co-simulation,Series–parallel mechanism,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Legged exoskeletons supplement human intelligence with the strength and endurance of a pair of wearable mechanical legs that support heavy loads. The exoskeleton-type system is a nonlinear system with uncertainty of parameters, which is not easy to be identified with traditional mathematical model. This paper presents co-simulations of a novel exoskeleton-human robot system on humanoid gaits with fuzzy-PID/PID algorithms, which do not need the precise model. The lower extremity exoskeleton model with series–parallel topology was briefly described and the gait characteristics were analyzed. The co-simulation method integrates ADAMS and MATLAB/SIMULINK with fuzzy-PID/PID algorithms, which were used to develop the control schematic of the exoskeleton-human robot system. Finally, co-simulations of humanoid gaits and movements, which include level walking, stair ascent, stair descent, side kick, squatting down and standing up, were provided to confirm the performances and effectiveness of the proposed control approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nowadays many people, such as patients and older people, have difficulties in their mobility, needing assistive devices to accomplish certain daily life activities [1]. And sometimes people have to bear heavy loads to walk on rough terrains in many situations, such as soldiers with heavy loads, disaster relief workers and wildfire fighters [2,3]. Legged exoskeletons have been developed to enhance the physical ability to fulfill daily life or carry heavy objects [4]. During walking, the exoskeleton transfers loads to the ground, makes the operator feel that the weight of loads is far less than the actual weight and improves the carrying capacity of its operator.Exoskeletons equipped with actuators do not have a long history. The first active exoskeleton named Hardiman [5] was developed by General Electric in the late 1960s. Almost at the same time, an anthropomorphic exoskeleton was developed at the Belgrade University and its researchers firstly proposed ZMP (Zero Moment Point) algorithm [6]. Following the 1970 attempts, due to the limitation of basic technologies, relatively few people investigated exoskeletons and no great success was achieved until 2000.The resurgence in exoskeleton investigation is now being witnessed by the 21st century and many great exoskeletons has been invented [7–10]. Exoskeletons, which are worn by operators, can be used for two conceptually different applications: one is medical rehabilitation, such as HAL [10] (Hybrid Assistive Limb), and another is power amplifier, such as BLEEX [9] (Berkeley Lower Extremity Exoskeleton). BLEEX is one of the most advanced power amplifier, demonstrated to support up to 34kg and walk at the speed of 0.9m/s [11]. The legged exoskeletons discussed in this paper are mainly developed for power amplifier.Almost all legged exoskeletons adopt serial mechanisms, which have larger workspace compared to parallel mechanisms. But parallel mechanisms have better load-carrying capacity, better stiffness, and better precision than serial mechanisms [12]. In order to help the operator carry heavier loads walking on rough terrains, it is a vital topic to adopt series–parallel mechanisms to design a novel legged exoskeleton [13].The control methodology is a key technology in the exoskeleton area all the time. A master-slave control system was developed and used in the first active exoskeleton Hardiman. Due to its complex system, Hardiman could not walk, or even stably move. ZMP algorithm was developed for balancing the exoskeleton by the researchers of Belgrade University, which achieved more successes in humanoid robot area. EMG (Electromyography) signals [14] are successfully used in the control of HAL-5, but they highly rely on individual characteristics and the EMG sensors are easy to fall off from the operator. Hybrid control methodology, which includes PD (Proportional Differential) position controller and SAC (Sensitivity Amplification Controller), are used in BLEEX [9,15] for level walking. But SAC requires precise dynamic models of legged exoskeletons and human legs, so it can hardly get a wide range of applications. Nowadays, intelligent algorithms, such as fuzzy theory, have great adaptability to the exoskeleton systems with uncertain parameters [16] and arise more and more interest in exoskeleton fields [17]. At present, they are mainly used in upper limb exoskeletons, or combines with EMG signals [18,19]. Besides, intelligent algorithms need a large amount of calculation.Exoskeletons have to follow the humanoid gaits and movements generated by operators, which always make the nonlinear exoskeleton systems more complex. Level walking [11] is the most important gait for any walking robots. Besides, slope walking is also important [20], which can examine whether a walking robot can adapt to rugged terrains or not. Moreover, some movements cost much energy, such as squatting down and standing up, which can test the battery performance and the bearing capacity. The more gaits and movements an exoskeleton can achieve, the more dexterous the exoskeleton is. However, little research is done about the simulations of humanoid gaits and movements of exoskeleton systems. Inspired by the hybrid control method in BLEEX, this paper attempts to design a new hybrid control algorithm for a novel lower extremity exoskeleton with series–parallel topology. The algorithm, which integrates fuzzy theory and the traditional PID algorithm, is switch-type and parameter self-tuning. To demonstrate the controller’s advantages and performances, several co-simulations of humanoid gaits and movements are presented.The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the lower extremity exoskeleton model with series–parallel topology and establishes the position mapping from human leg joints to the exoskeleton joints. Section 3 shows the control schematic of lower extremity exoskeletons and analyzes the gait characteristics. A hybrid algorithm, which is the switch-type parameter self-tuning fuzzy-PID/PID controller, were designed and presented in Section 4. Section 5 shows several co-simulations of humanoid gaits based on the algorithm. Finally, concluding remarks are presented in Section 6.Before introducing the lower extremity exoskeleton, the mechanism of the human lower limb should be described. As shown in Fig. 1, a single leg of the human being has 6 DOFs (degrees of freedom) and the local DOFs of the foot are not counted. These DOFs are hip external/internal, hip flexion/extension, hip abduction/adduction, knee flexion/extension, ankle flexion/extension and ankle abduction/adduction respectively, which are all revolute pairs. The space coordinate system of human body was also drawn in Fig. 1.Our exoskeleton-human system was shown as Fig. 2(a), which mainly includes loads, actuators, the exoskeleton and an operator. The mechanism topology of the right leg of the exoskeleton was shown as Fig. 2(b), which adopts a series–parallel structure. This topology can be divided into T–P, I–G and J–Q parts, where T–P and J–Q are series and I–G is parallel [13,21].The single leg of the exoskeleton has 6 DOFs, and not all the DOFs need to be actuated [22]. In Fig. 2, joint T, joint J, link IB and link IC that can rotate around I are actuated because these joints need much more torque and power than others. In many situations, such as walking, joint P and joint Q do not need to rotate and cost little energy. To simplify the exoskeleton, they are compliant with reset springs and can follow the rotations of corresponding joints of the operator. In general, since series mechanisms cannot bear heavier loads than parallel mechanisms and parallel mechanisms have smaller workspace of mobility than series mechanisms, this series–parallel topology was designed and used in legged exoskeletons.When the exoskeleton-human system works, the legged exoskeleton’s movements should be in accordance with human leg’s behaviors. Thus, the position mapping from the positions of human lower extremity joints to the exoskeleton joints should be established.Since the humanoid gaits mainly generate motions in the sagittal plane (x′–y′ plane and x–y plane shown in Fig. 3), the mapping is based on the following assumptions.1.Joint I in Fig. 3(b) is equivalent to joint H (Hip) in Fig. 3(a). As shown in Fig. 3, the x and y coordinates of joint I in the Fig. 3(b) should be equal to the x′ and y′ coordinates of joint H in the Fig. 3(a) respectively.Joint J in Fig. 3(b) is equivalent to joint A (Ankle) in Fig. 3(a). As shown in Fig. 3, the x and y coordinates of joint J in the Fig. 3(b) should be equal to the x′ and y′ coordinates of joint A in the Fig. 3(a) respectively.As shown in Fig. 3(a), the position of joint A can be obtained as formulae (1).(1)xa′=ltsin(θhf)+lssin(θk)ya′=-ltcos(θhf)-lscos(θk)where θhf, θkand θadenote the angle of each joint, and lt, lsand ladenote the length or height of thigh, shank and foot. For the height of man is 1750mm, lt=496mm, ls=396mm, la=105mm and these leg parameters were adopted in the following calculation and simulation.And the position of joint J can be obtained as follows.(2)xj=xi-2(L1+L2)sinα2+α12sinα2-α12-l1sinα2-α12yj=yi-2(L1+L2)sinα2+α12cosα2-α12-l1cosα2-α12where L1 denotes the length of link IB and IC, L2 denotes the length of link EG and FG, and l1 is the length of GJ. α1, α2 and α3 denote the angle of the actuated joint IB, IC and J.To know how the exoskeleton walks, α1, α2 and α3 are required to be calculated. α1 and α2 can be solved by the following formulae(3)xj=xa′yj=ya′(4)α1=12arcsin12(L1+L2)yj2xj2+yj2-l1+xj2xj2+yj2-arcsin-xjxj2+yj2α2=12arcsin12(L1+L2)yj2xj2+yj2-l1+xj2xj2+yj2+arcsin-xjxj2+yj2α3=θawhere L1=L2=230mm, l1=100mm, and other parameters in formulae (1)–(4) will be given in the simulation section.In addition, although most energy are cost in the sagittal plane in most humanoid gaits, as shown in Fig. 4, the hip abduction/adduction in the coronal plane also needs to be actuated, where θha≈α4. This powered joint can help the operator overcome obstacles and offer more powered movements, such as side kick.Lower extremity exoskeleton robot is integrated with an advanced man–machine intelligent system, which was shown as Fig. 5. Different from humanoid robots or other biped robots, the operator also takes part in the control process, which is called “man-in-the-loop” [23]. Feedback signals collected by the operator and the exoskeleton keep interchanging bilaterally between each other. The intelligence of the exoskeleton is strengthened while the power of the operator is also enhanced.Man–machine interaction can be regarded as the brain of the control schematic, which gives orders to other parts. The function of the brain includes sense perception and decision-making. The content of sense perception includes the environment condition, motion state of the man–machine system and signals interchanging bilaterally between the operator and the exoskeleton. The decision-making is a process to synthesize, estimate and plan the perceptual information, and then gives orders to other parts.The control algorithm of data processing can be regarded as the heart of the control schematic, which obeys the command from the brain and processes data. Thus, the heart is essentially doing the job of signal processing. Although the exoskeleton-type system has higher integrated intelligence than traditional biped robots, the control algorithm of data processing in the exoskeleton field is far behind that of humanoid robots [24]. For example, neural network, fuzzy theory and other intelligent algorithms have already been used in the humanoid robots. However, the research of these intelligent algorithms in the exoskeleton area is inadequate.The exoskeleton machine can be regard as the body of the control schematic, which obeys the signals and generates corresponding motions. The body behaviors also give feedback signals to both the brain and the heart. The machine should absolutely obey the orders, or may hurt the operator. Thus, the function of body can be summarized as executing the commands and giving feedback signals.As shown in Fig. 5, the control algorithm, which is regarded as the heart, should be designed according to the gait characteristics of the exoskeleton-type system. Generally, the exoskeleton-type system has the following gait characteristics.(1)The dynamic models of exoskeletons, which are very complex, cannot be obtained exactly by mathematics. For example, frictions and vibrations sometimes cannot be measured easily, which are always ignored. Besides, the mass and inertia distribution of each link cannot be measured accurately.The operator is an important part of inputs of the control system, which is totally different from traditional biped robots.The physical conditions of different operators are different, which generates different signals to the exoskeleton even though the signals are generated by the same movement of operators.Generally the humanoid gaits are periodic [20]. In different phases during the period, the motions are different from each other [25]. For example, during the stance phase of the level walking, the ranges of motion of each joint are relatively smaller and the speed is slower than those of the swing phase.These characteristics show that the lower extremity exoskeleton system is very complex and nonlinear, whose dynamic models cannot be described exactly by mathematics. Moreover, the unknown signals, which vary with different operators, make the system more complicated. In addition, if the control effect is not ideal, the exoskeleton machine may hurt the operator. Therefore, it is extremely important to design an intelligent control algorithm to satisfy all the requirements above.The conventional PID control algorithm is adaptable to many controlled objects and plays a dominant role in the industrial control field [26]. However, the shortage of PID algorithm is evident that its parameters cannot be self-adjusted to control the complex and nonlinear systems well.Intelligent algorithms, such as neural network and fuzzy theory, have been gradually developed in recent 30years. They are born to cope with the difficulty of complicated nonlinear systems, which do not need precise dynamic models. Intelligent algorithms can self-adjust their parameters during the control process, whose rules are designed by experience or experiments. They have stronger adaptability to complicated nonlinear systems than PID algorithms. However, intelligent algorithms need a large amount of calculation, so they require high speed computers.So it is easy to think about developing an algorithm which combines intelligent algorithms with PID algorithms. This algorithm should not only integrate the advantages of both intelligent algorithms and PID algorithms, but also eliminates their disadvantages so as to realize smooth switching between the two kinds of algorithms.Due to clear and strong logic, fuzzy theory can deal with all kinds of complicated nonlinear control problems, which is very popular among intelligent algorithms. Thus, fuzzy theory was adopted in the rest paper to develop a controller which combines fuzzy theory with PID. There are multiple combinations, such as switch-type fuzzy/PID controllers, P-fuzzy-PID controllers, fuzzy-PI controllers and parameter self-tuning fuzzy-PID controllers.The switch-type controllers can realize smooth switching between different algorithms. Besides, the parameter self-tuning controllers have stronger adaptability to input signals. Thus, to achieve the best control effects, a switch-type parameter self-tuning fuzzy-PID/PID controller was designed as Fig. 6, which will be called the fuzzy-PID/PID controller for short in the rest paper. As shown in Fig. 6, when |e| is greater than or equal to the threshold u, the fuzzy-PID/PID controller will choose the fuzzy-PID controller, which can adjust PID parameters online; otherwise, the fuzzy-PID/PID controller will choose PID controller to release the computer’s burdens.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
