@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A generic cloud platform for engineering optimization based on OpenStack

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We transform components in engineering optimization applications into virtual types.We build VEOA using VEOMs and other related structures.We use domains for optimization problems, resources are dynamically managed.Two real engineering applications have been conducted for testing purpose.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cloud computing,Engineering optimization,OpenStack,Optimization algorithm,High performance computing,Scheduling algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Optimizations have been applied in many different engineering fields. Most of these applications may have similar characteristics: intensive on computing resources, time-consuming on calculation iterations, similar on computing environments and so on. This paper describes a generic cloud platform for engineering optimization by leveraging the compute resources hosted in cloud datacenters. The methodology developed was to decompose the engineering optimization processes into several interconnected sub-tasks, which were further converted and implemented as virtual applications for dynamic cloud deployment using OpenStack. The system can dynamically allocate and recycle the compute resources according to the specific engineering optimization applications. The research presented in the paper contributes on the generic engineering optimization process virtualization and cloud computing based implementation with innovative algorithms development. The system test results showed a way that potentially engineering optimization problems could be embedded into the put forward platform due to the developed large scale and intelligent cloud based optimization services. Further applications for building energy simulation and optimization, stents optimization, water distribution optimization are currently under development.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Optimization has a long application history in lots of engineering domains. It can be oversimplified defined as searching for a solution to enable the objective function to achieve the maximum or the minimum value. Design variables, objective function and constraints are normally seemed to be the three key components in an engineering optimization application. There are many different types of optimization problems such as multi-objective optimization (MOO) and single-objective optimization (SOO), to which different optimization algorithms can be applied to find out the best solutions [1]. However, the implicit function between the design variables and the objective function which exists in huge amount of engineering applications, together with the purpose of obtaining much more accurate solutions, have always caused a significant number of iterations while doing these optimization applications [1,2]. Besides, getting the value of objective function through an engineering analysis software may be an extremely time-consuming and resource-intensive mission, which has further aggravated the cost of performing an engineering optimization application.Thousands of researchers which consist of mathematics experts, engineering academics and computer scholars have engaged into the engineering optimization field with the purpose of making it more efficient to perform: better optimal solutions, less iterations, less resource consumption, etc. Means reached from these advanced studies have got huge influences on the development of engineering optimization, topics related include optimization algorithms, generic engineering analysis software development, and high performance computing technologies [3–5].Cloud computing has offered a novel way to support the various engineering optimization applications: problems that developed as standard services could be automatically started up and shut down, with their resources timely scheduled for computing and withdrew for recycling. In addition, the applications established could also meet the requests for optimization algorithms and environments that asked by the engineering problems. Cloud platforms are normally defined as three different types: IaaS, PaaS and SaaS on the basis of their different virtualization and application levels. Many public and private cloud platforms have been proposed in the recent years, most of which focus on the low level hardware and simple web services, e.g., website service, net disk service, and mail service [6–10]. Generic cloud platform supporting engineering optimization applications has not been widely investigated.The generic platform developed in this article which seamless integrated cloud computing technologies and engineering optimization applications may lead to many advantages: better resource deployment, greater efficiency at implementation, better user experience, convenient management and further expansion, etc. The research of this paper focuses on virtual engineering optimization application creation, virtual engineering optimization machines scheduling, dynamic computing resources management, system design and other related topics. The cloud platform presented in this paper is based on OpenStack IaaS. Several engineering optimization problems have been conducted on the developed platform into applications used for testing; other engineering optimization applications such as building energy optimization, stents optimization and water distribution optimization applications are also scheduled for further development.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section ‘Related work’ investigates the background research regarding the engineering optimization methods and the high performance computing technologies; Section ‘System design and implementation’ explains the developed methodology, which includes the methods and algorithms applied in this paper as well as the system design, including the platform hardware structure and supporting database; Section ‘System testing’ shows the test cases describing two real optimization applications implemented on the platform and their computing consequents; conclusion and future work are given at the end.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
