@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A submarine arrangement design program based on the expert system and the multistage optimization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An arrangement method of submarine compartments and equipment based on an expert system and a multistage optimization is proposed.An optimization method that can yield a better arrangement design of a submarine is proposed.We develop a prototype program based on an arrangement template model, an expert system module, and an optimization module.We apply the program to a problem of a small submarine.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Arrangement design,Expert system,Optimization,Arrangement evaluation model,Submarine,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The arrangement design of a submarine depends on the data of the parent ships and the knowledge of experts. Some delay in design can occur when data or experts are absent. An arrangement design problem of a submarine can also be difficult to solve due to the number of compartments and equipment placed in the limited space, as well as the numerous potential alternatives for the arrangement design. Thus, a compelling need arises to accumulate data regarding the parent ships, the knowledge of experts, and design rules as a systematic structure, increasing the demand for optimization of the arrangement design. In this study, we proposed an arrangement method of the submarine compartments and equipment based on an expert system and a multistage optimization. For this task, we used a template model for the arrangement design of a submarine proposed by the authors in the previous study to store the arrangement data. We also improved and used an expert system that can systematically computerize the knowledge of experts, previously developed by the authors. Then, we proposed an optimization method that can yield a better arrangement design after formulating a submarine arrangement problem as an optimization problem, solving it with the use of an efficient optimization algorithm. To evaluate the applicability of the proposed method, we developed a prototype program consisting of an arrangement template model, an expert system module, and an optimization module. Finally, we applied the developed program to a problem with regard to the arrangement design of a small submarine. The results showed that the developed program can be used as a new tool for the arrangement design of a submarine.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Designers have performed the arrangement design of a ship by referring to previous ships as examples, modifying certain parts as needed. In the case of the arrangement design of a submarine, however, limited data is available about previous submarine designs. Thus, the role of experts is extremely important in the stage of the arrangement design of a submarine, being dependent on the limited data regarding parent ships and the knowledge of experts. Some delay in design can occur when data or experts are absent. Thus, an expert system can represent one of the alternative solutions to such problems. An expert system involves systematically computerizing the knowledge of experts. Arrangement design experts have difficulty calculating complicated, quantitative values (e.g., material flows and space efficiency), but they can take account of many things (e.g., the efficiency, manufacturability, and maintenance aspects of the submarine) by relying on their knowledge. If well developed and applied in the stage of the arrangement design, an expert system can be used to evaluate the feasibility of an arrangement design alternative, rather than relying solely on experts for each design instance. Thus, the authors of this study had previously developed an expert system (that could systematically computerize the knowledge of experts in the stage of the arrangement design of a submarine), further improved for use in this study.In general, such design efforts place a number of compartments and equipment in a limited space (called a pressure hull), with many potential alternatives for its arrangement design. Finding the best arrangement for a submarine requires finding an optimal arrangement among many alternatives by considering specific criteria (e.g., the feasibility of the arrangement, the operational performance of the submarine, and the convenience of the crew). While difficult, this problem can be effectively solved within the allowable time if using an optimization technique. Thus, we mathematically formulated an optimization problem in this study for finding an optimal arrangement based on the evaluation results for design alternatives obtained from the expert system. As formulating an optimization problem with all the variables to be used in the arrangement design presents difficult challenges, we divided the optimization process in this study into three steps, then formulated a multistage optimization problem to consider and solve all these steps.In other words, in order to solve the difficult problems regarding the arrangement design of a submarine (including the problem of delay in design due to missing data or the absence of experts), we proposed in this study a submarine arrangement design method based on the expert system and the multistage optimization, and we developed a prototype program for the proposed method.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
