@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Feature recognition and volume generation of uncut regions for electrical discharge machining

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The definition and classification of the hint feature points are proposed.The heuristic rules are proposed to rapidly identify uncut regions and their types.The geometric reasoning-based algorithms are presented for the decomposition of the interacting region.The CAD model of volume feature can be generated, which can be used for the shape design of electrodes.The related parameters of volume feature are extracted, which can be used for the parametric design of electrodes and the setting of processing parameters.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hint feature point,Region recognition and decomposition,Volume feature generation,Machining process preparation,CAD and CAM,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Feature techniques have played an important role in CAD/CAM integration. These techniques need to be developed for each type of manufacturing process owing to its unique characteristics. Therefore, an approach is proposed in this paper to extract the machining feature of region containing internal sharp points for the process preparation of electrical discharge machining (EDM). The hint feature points are innovatively defined and classified into three types: internal sharp points, cutting-into points and interacting points. Based on this, our approach firstly identifies the faces and the type of the region. Secondly, the interacting region is decomposed into isolated regions through reconstructing the topological structure of the region. Thirdly, the reconstructed faces and original faces are stitched together to form a closed surface, and the CAD models of volumetric features are constructed. Finally, the position and dimension parameters are extracted and saved. The shape and parametric information extracted can be used for subsequent procession preparation, so as to promote the CAD/CAM integration of EDM.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In mold machining, typical machining process consists of milling (roughing and finishing) and a number of subsequent EDM operations [1]. Since EDM is inefficient and needs extra design of electrodes, machining assistants tend to adopt milling technology. With the wide use of multi-axis machining equipment and ball-end milling cutter, milling has been applied in machining the majority of part surfaces [2–4]. However, milling process cannot machine the region containing internal sharp corners, as shown in Fig. 1, because of the restriction of cutter diameter and feeding direction. EDM is still the only effective technology for such region [5–11].As non-traditional machining method, EDM needs extra electrode design and meanwhile the setting of its technological parameters is complicated. Recognizing machining feature is the prelude to these process preparations. The researches [5–7] have presented the criteria of characterizing the EDM region. The criteria are in the form of high-level description, and the feature recognition is not considered. Mahajan et al. [8] presented the basic rules for automatic electrode design. But these rules were implemented by machining assistants. Ding et al. [9] developed an algorithm of detecting sharp corner regions for electrode design by calculating the surface angles at their common edges. As the interaction of machining volume was not considered, the machinability of the electrode cannot be ensured. Lee and Li [10] developed an intelligent tool for electrode generation. With the tool, the automaticity of electrode design was improved by at least 50%. However, the machining region was partly recognized through the interactive selection. Zhou and Zhang [11] proposed a volume decomposition-based algorithm to generate the electrode CAD model. But their method assumed that the machining features had been identified. In summary, the related researches have not achieved the recognition of EDM machining feature.The research work reported in this paper is motivated by the above observation. The work focuses on developing an algorithm for the recognition of EDM regions and the generation of their volumetric features. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the literature review on feature recognition. Section 3 introduces technical definitions. Section 4 outlines the approach proposed here. Section 5–7 details the approach. Section 8 illustrates the algorithm analysis and experiment results, and, finally, Section 9 concludes this paper and discusses future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
EDM is the only effective technology for uncut regions. The volumetric feature promotes the CAD/CAM integration of EDM, such as the electrode design and the processing optimization. In this research, a novel method has been proposed to generate volumetric features for orthogonal or non-orthogonal EDM region. The innovation in our work is concluded as follows.1.According to the characteristics of EDM technology, the hint feature points of uncut region are defined and classified into three types: internal sharp points, cutting-into points and interacting points. Based on this, a set of heuristic rules are proposed to rapidly identify the uncut region and its types.Through executing various geometric reasoning-based algorithms, the interacting regions are decomposed into isolated regions so as to ensure the machinability of electrodes designed on the basis of the generated volumetric features.The CAD models of feature volumes and their relevant parameters are extracted to promote the CAD/CAM integration of EDM.However, our future work can further focus on the following two aspects.1.The rapid design of single electrode tool.The optimal combination of multiple electrode tools.