@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Domain decomposition methods with nonlinear localization for the buckling and post-buckling analyses of large structures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Nonlinear localization can deal with larger increments than the classical NKS methods.Mixed DDM can use larger increments and pass limit points, with respect to NKS methods.Important reduction on the number of global iterations.The amount of exchanged data between processors is reduced.Sensitivity study for the Robin operator.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Primal and mixed domain decomposition methods,Nonlinear structural analysis,Post-buckling,Nonlinear localization,Aeronautical structures,Stiffened pannel analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The paper is focussed on the robustness of parallel computation in the case of buckling and post-buckling analyses. In the nonlinear context, domain decomposition methods are mainly used as a solver for the tangent problem solved at each iteration of a Newton–Raphson algorithm. In case of strongly nonlinear and heterogeneous problems as those encountered in buckling and post-buckling, this procedure may lead to severe difficulties regarding convergence and efficiency. The problem of convergence is regarded as the most critical issue at the industrial level. Indeed if a method, which can show efficiency for some problems, is not robust with respect to convergence the method will not be implemented by industrial end-users. Therefore, two paths are explored to gain robustness when making use of domain decomposition methods: (1) a nonlinear localization strategy which may also improve the robustness by treating the nonlinearity at the subdomain level; and (2) a mixed framework allowing to circumvent the problem of local divergence (i.e. at the subdomain level). It is to be noted that those two ingredients may also be used to improve the numerical efficiency of the method but this is not the main focus of the paper. Simple structures are first considered to illustrate the method performances. Results obtained in the case of a boxed structure and of a stiffened panel are then discussed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The design of complex structures, such as aeronautical ones, requires a large number of physical tests up to failure through all different scales (structural details, assemblies, complete sections or full structures). In order to reduce the costs and the total time of these procedures, engineers introduce, at earlier stages of the design, numerical simulations to guide, complete or replace one part of the experimental approach.The aeronautical structures are composed of slender elements, which are designed to stand local skin buckling but not global one. With increasing loads, the nonlinear zones can extend and redistribute the stresses through the structure. Direct computations at the detailed scale of industrial structures are inaccessible at the moment due to computational costs and/or computational memory issues. In this context, analyses at different scales (complete structure, structural details) are often introduced in the computation. At the industrial level they are today mainly performed in a “descendant” approaches, by doing in a first step a simplified, often linear, simulation of the whole structure. A local analysis is then performed with possible geometrical and material nonlinearities by prescribing the boundary condition obtained from the upper, linear, computation while taking into account the desired refinement in order to handle possible nonlinearities. Such procedure ignores therefore possible stress redistribution or nonlinearities expansion in the rest of the structure. In the case of buckling a previous study [1] shows that very large errors can be induced by such a procedure.Multiscale methods are a way to overcome the limitations of descending approaches. They have been developed at first for the computation of large linear problems. In the context of nonlinear problems they can be used to solve each of the subsequent linear problems, which comes from a Newton–Raphson or quasi-Newton strategy. This is the case of nonlinear geometrical analysis based on the Newton–Krylov–Schur (NKS) method [2–4]. In case of strongly nonlinear and large heterogeneous problems as those encountered in buckling and post-buckling, this procedure may lead to severe difficulties regarding convergence and efficiency. The problem of convergence is regarded as the most critical issue at the industrial level. Robustness is therefore crucial.The first difficulty comes from the fact that the larger the model, the higher the number of possible buckling modes may lead to divergence even for a direct solver. The second difficulty is specific to domain decomposition method (DDM). Indeed, classical DDM preconditioners, which have been mainly designed for linear problems, may not be adapted to deal with large stiffness modifications as those encountered in buckling and post-buckling analysis. The paper proposes to circumvent these two effects by introducing two ingredients in the domain decomposition framework:1.A nonlinear localization strategy which improves the robustness by treating the nonlinearity at the subdomain level avoiding to deal with a high number of local buckling modes.A mixed domain decomposition scheme which favors nor interface displacement continuity, which is a too stiff condition, nor the interface equilibrium, but a combination (Robin-like condition). For the resulting condensed interface problem, this scheme shares similar features with continuation methods to control the algorithm convergence.Nonlinear localization strategy was first proposed in [1] to improve the convergence rate for the post-buckling analysis of stable structures. A dual version has been applied to damage analysis in [5]. The present paper focuses on the robustness of this approach to deal with problems which exhibit possible unstable global behaviors and multiple solutions. Moreover, the strategy has been parallelized to address more complex structures. This paper is an updated and revised version of the conference paper [6].In this study, a corotational formulation dedicated to slender structure is adopted [7–9]. Under the assumption of small strain in local frames, this formulation proposes to choose as a reference configuration the one obtained by a rigid rotation of the element, and to express strains and stresses in a coordinate frame, attached to the element, called corotational frame. This allows a linear treatment of the behavior inside the elements in their attached frame, while the geometrical nonlinearity remains in the rotation of these frames. More general finite elements methods for shells can be found in [10].In this paper, a primal and a mixed domain decomposition methods with nonlinear localization are first presented. Second, these approaches are illustrated on simple structures which exhibit various unstable behaviors in order to appreciate the robustness of the different approaches as well as the interest of nonlinear localization. Third, parallel computations of a boxed structure and a stiffened panel are proposed and discussed.The studied structures are composed of beams, plates and shells, which may be prone to geometrical nonlinearities. The following assumptions are used: small strains, large displacements, isothermal quasistatic state and linear elasticity.Let us consider a structure denoted byΩrin its reference configuration (Fig. 1),Ωtbeing its current configuration. It is subjected to a dead body forceb̲and a dead surface forcesg‾̲on a portion∂2Ω. On the complementary part of the boundary∂1Ω, the displacementu‾̲is prescribed. The problem to be solved consists in finding(u̲(M̲,t),π̲̲(M̲,t)),M̲∈Ω,t∈[0,T], that verifies:•Kinematic admissibility of displacement field, defining spaceUad:(1)u̲(M̲,t)=u‾̲(M̲,t)on∂1Ω,∀t∈[0,T]SpaceUad,0is the corresponding vector space.Static admissibility of stress field:(2)∀u̲∗∈Uad,0∫Ωrπ̲̲:eˆ̲̲[u̲∗]dΩr=∫Ωrb̲ru̲∗dΩr+∫∂2Ωrg‾̲ru̲∗dsrwhereπ̲̲is the second Piola–Kirchoff stress tensor andeˆ̲̲the rate of the Green strain.Constitutive law,(3)π̲̲=C(F̲̲)withF̲̲=du̲dM̲rCis a nonlinear operator which corresponds to a linear elastic behavior under small strains assumption in the rotated configuration. In practice, we followed the approach of Felippa and Haugen where the corrotated configuration is defined at the element level after discretization by finite element method [9] (Fig. 2).For sake of simplicity,u̲will now refer to the nodal vector of displacement unknowns. Using classical notations, Eq. (2) now reads:(4)f̲int(π̲̲,u̲)+f̲=0̲wheref̲are the nodal external forces andf̲intthe internal forces. These types of nonlinear equations are generally solved by classical incremental/iterative procedures, such as Newton–Raphson methods through a linearization of (4), leading to (5) and (6)(5)(f̲int)(t+Δt)≅(f̲int)(t)+∂f̲int∂u̲(t)·δu̲(6)≅(f̲int)(t)+KTu̲(t),π̲̲(t)·δu̲whereδudenotes the displacement increment.The domain decomposition methods allow the resolution of large problems with parallel computers. A review is presented in [11]. The reader could refer to [12–14] for the primal methods, to [15–17] for dual methods and to [18–24] for mixed methods, among others. When these methods are used with a Newton iterative procedure for solving nonlinear problems, they are often called Newton–Krylov–Schur (NKS) methods. These methods have been described in [2] for nonlinear elastic problems, in [3] for the computation of large slender structures and in [25] for multi-contact problems. These NKS methods are based on:•The Newton method for the linearization and the incremental iterative scheme.The domain decomposition and the Schur condensation of the tangent problem to define the interface problem.A Krylov parallel iterative solver for solving the linear problem condensed on the interfaces.Fig. 3presents the different stages of a classical NKS method, where DDM is used to solve the tangent problem after linearization.Such method involves a large number of linear systems (interface problem and substructure problems), which produce a large number of communications between the processors (assembly of global residual). When dealing with large nonlinear problems, an important computational effort is spent to treat regions that behaves linearly when the nonlinearities are not equally distributed. These efforts are amplified in the case of a geometrical nonlinear problem when a large number of loading steps are necessary to pass a limit or a bifurcation point.In nonlinear domain decomposition approaches, the nonlinear problem is decomposed before any linearization. These allow to propose various iterative schemes. The one proposed in this paper is called, nonlinear localization [1]. This strategy is based on NKS methods, with additional local iterations per substructure after each global computation in order to enforce nonlinear behavior and equilibrium at the substructure level. This leads to the iterative scheme depicted in Fig. 4. In comparison with classical DDM for nonlinear problems (Fig. 3), a nonlinear problem is solved within each substructure at the local stage.The idea is to overcome the rather poor convergence for unbalanced nonlinear effects, i.e. when the nonlinearity has a significant spatial variation as discussed in [26]. In this approach, the computational effort is concentrated on the sensitive zones of the structure to treat nonlinear phenomena (local buckling) at the scale where they are actually occurring, i.e. within substructures. Nonlinear problems within each substructure are much simpler than the initial unsubstructured one since fewer multiple solutions are to be handled. One other potential outcome is the decrease of the number of global iterations which reduces the number of communications between processors in case of a parallel implementation of the method.The local stage, on each substructure, corresponds to solving a geometrical nonlinear problem with prescribed interface displacementsU̲, computed by preliminary solving the global condensed interface problem (see Section 3.2.2). This substructure problem is solved by a Newton method. The tangent problem can be written as:(7)KTiis(u̲s)KTibs(u̲s)KTbis(u̲s)KTbbs(u̲s)δu̲isδu̲bs=r̲isr̲bswhere i represents the internal degrees of freedom (d.o.f.) of substructure s, while b the d.o.f. of substructure s connected to an interface,δu̲srepresents a displacement correction. Quantitiesr̲is,r̲bsrepresent the associated residual of the substructure equilibrium at the considered iteration.To solve this problem, a direct elimination method of interface unknownsδu̲bs=δU̲obtained at the previous global stage is performed. Penalization or Lagrange multipliers techniques could be also used:(8)δu̲is=KTiis-1r̲is-KTibsδU̲The iterative procedure is stopped when reaching the local error criterion,ηlocalcrit. This criterion is defined as the ratio between the norm of the current residual over the norm of the initial one.A correctionδU̲of the interface displacementU̲, allowing to verify in a weak sense the equilibrium of interface forces is searched (superscripts:.sand.s′represents two neighboring substructures):(9)F̲s+F̲s′=0̲The tangent interface problem can be written as (in matrix form):(10)STδU̲=r̲whereSTis the classical tangent Schur operator, obtained by the assembly of the local tangent operatorsSTs:(11)ST=∑sAsSTsAst=∑sAsKTbbs-KTbisKTiis-1KTibsAstwhere A is the assembling operator linking boundary d.o.f. of substructure(s)to the global boundary unknowns.Second memberr̲is the condensed interface residual:(12)r̲=∑sAsr̲s=∑sAsr̲bs-KTbisKTiis-1r̲isAlgorithm 1 presents the different steps of the approach. It only differs from the classical NKS by the nonlinear local problems that are solved when needed (depending on the local error criteria) and that replace the classical linear localization step.Algorithm 1Nonlinear localization with a primal DDMDo [Global Newton iterations]– Assemble local tangent operatorsKTs(u̲)– FactorizeKTiis– Assemble local residualsr̲s– Solve condensed global problem [Krylov solver]:STδU̲= r– Do[Local Newton iterations]– Computeδu̲is=KTiis-1r̲is-KTibsAstδU̲– Updateu̲i,KTs(u̲)andr̲is– Untilηlocal<ηlocalcritUntilηglobal<ηglobalcritA mixed domain decomposition scheme is here proposed. This approach favors nor interface displacement continuity, which is a too stiff condition, nor the interface equilibrium, but a combination (Robin-like condition). The connection of nonconforming meshes based on a mixed link can be found in [27]. For the resulting condensed interface problem, this scheme shares similar features with continuation methods and helps to control the algorithm convergence. The result is that it can deal with larger load increments at the global level, and reduces the number of global iterations and, consequently, the amount of exchanged data between processors.The Robin operator of substructure s, denoted byksin the following, is a parameter of the method. It corresponds to an interface stiffness. This operator is chosen to be symmetric positive definite to have well-posed local substructure problems. When this interface stiffness is large(∥ks∥→∞)the method behaves like a primal DDM (enforcing displacement continuity at the interfaces) solved with a penalization method. If it is small(∥ks∥→0), the method behaves like a dual DDM (enforcing force continuity at the interfaces). In this case, rigid body modes of the substructures have to be handled. Nevertheless, the choice of the interface stiffness is done in order to avoid such a difficulty.This stage consists in solving the global condensed interface problem. Its goal is to ensure the admissibility of interface unknowns, namely equilibrium of interface forcesF̲and continuity of interface displacementsU̲, while transmitting the mechanical information to the entire structure in order to ensure the numerical scalability of the algorithm. More precisely, knowingf̲bsandu̲bs(local interface forces and displacements coming from a previous local stage (see Section 3.3.2) or initialization stage), the interface quantitiesF̲andU̲are sought such that they verify the continuity of displacement (13) and equilibrium of forces (14) at each interfaceΓss′connecting two neighboring substructures s ands′. For each interfaceΓss′, one has:(13)U̲s=U̲s′onΓss′(14)F̲s+F̲s′=0̲onΓss′The following search directions are introduced:(15)STsU̲s-u̲bs=F̲s-f̲bs(16)STs′U̲s′-u̲bs′=F̲s′-f̲bs′where quantitiesu̲bs,u̲bs′,f̲bsandf̲bs′are known. The choice ofSTsas a search direction, was a priori made in [1] so that it propagates global information between the substructures.STsis the tangent primal Schur complement of substructure s. In this case, search directionSTs(resp.STs′) is an operator that connects all the interface d.o.f. of substructure s (resp.s′).The mixed nonlinear condensed problem that arises from the equilibrium of interface forces (F̲s+F̲s′at the interfaces between substructures s ands′), after linearization and a displacement formulation, reads:(17)STδU̲=∑sAsSTsu̲bs+r̲bs-KTbisKTiis-1r̲is=∑sAsR̲s=R̲(18)U̲s=U̲olds+δU̲andF̲s=f̲bs+STsU̲s-u̲bsThis system is similar to the one of the primal method (10). It only differs by the right-hand side termR̲. It can be solved in the same manner as for the classical NKS methods, in particular with the same type of preconditioners. Balanced boundary forcesF̲from global displacementU̲are obtained using (18). This problem can be treated independently within each substructure.The second stage consists in finding fieldsf̲sandu̲s(interface forces and displacements) in each substructure s that verify the nonlinear behavior and the mixed boundary conditions, knowing the interface forcesF̲s(balanced) and the interface displacementU̲s(continuous at interfaces), coming from the previous global condensed interface problem (see Section 3.3.1):(19)f̲ints(u̲s)+g‾̲s+f̲s=0̲onΩs(20)u̲s=u‾̲son∂1Ω∩∂Ωs(21)(f̲s-F̲s)+ksu̲bs-U̲s=0̲onΓswere Eq. (21) is a Robin-like condition. Variables in capital refer to interface quantities that are known at this stage (see Section 3.3.1).This problem is solved by a Newton method. The linear system obtained at each iteration, taking into account the Robin operatorks, allows the computation of the displacement correctionsδu̲s. The tangent discretized problem reads (using index i as internal unknowns and index b for interface unknowns):(22)KTiis(u̲s)KTibs(u̲s)KTbis(u̲s)KTbbs(u̲s)+ksδu̲isδu̲bs=r̲isr̲bs+ks·ΔU̲s-F̲swhere the known quantityΔU̲s=U̲s-u̲bsrepresents the displacement jump between the interfaces and the substructure. This Eq. (22) is similar to Eq. (7). It differs by the introduction of the Robin operators,ks, on the left-hand side and the interfaces variables (U̲sandF̲s, by means of the same Robin parameterks) on the right-hand side.In case of linear elasticity problem, the theoretical optimal value ofksis the Schur complement of the rest of the structure, but this computation is very expensive. Some classical approximations are the Schur complement(S‾s)of the neighboring substructures or a Schur complement of several layers of elements of the neighboring substructures [28] for instance. For this study, the Schur complements of the neighboring substructures is used,ks=αS‾s, where the choice of the coefficientαwill be studied in Section 4.4.Algorithm 2 presents the different steps of the method. The main advantage of this method with respect to the previous one is its ability to relax the constraints imposed on the nonlinear local problems by mixed boundary conditions.The robustness of the different approaches and the interest of nonlinear localization are illustrated through three simple beam structures of increasing complexity (stable, snap-back, snap-through behaviors). It is shown in [1] that in order to minimize the computational cost, the local error criterion is chosen such that:(23)ηlocalcrit=ηglobalcritAlgorithm 2Nonlinear localization with a mixed DDMDo [Global Newton iterations]– Assemble local tangent operatorsKTs(u̲)– FactorizeKTiis– Assemble local residualR̲s– Solve condensed global problem [Krylov solver]:ST·δU̲=R̲– Do[Local Newton iterations]– Computeδu̲is=KTs+ks-1(r̲s+ksΔU̲-F̲s)– Updateu̲i,Ks(u̲)andr̲s– Untilηlocal<ηlocalcritUntilηglobal<ηglobalcritThe idea is that local nonlinear substructure problems do not have to be solved precisely in order to avoid unnecessary local iterations. Since the residue of the global interface problem is obtained by the assembly of the local residual, global convergence at a given precision implies local convergence at the same precision. In the following examples, the convergence criterion is set toηglobalcrit=10-6.In order to test the methods, a Newton–Raphson method with an adaptation of the load increment size is implemented. In case of divergence, the load increment is halved, and for two consecutive successful convergences, it is doubled.In addition to test the robustness of the different strategies, this section aims at showing the benefit of nonlinear localization. Therefore, the solving of the tangent interface problem with an iterative solver is not of main interest. Thus, for the three examples presented in this section, the interface problem is solved with a direct solver without resorting to an iterative solver. The different problems are solved in a sequential way, not in parallel. Moreover, no continuation methods are used.The studied structure is presented in Fig. 5. It is a frame structure submitted to a bending force. It is made of beams and partitioned into 10 substructures. Each substructure is composed of three beams, which are discretized into 10 corotational Navier–Bernoulli beam elements. Each beam is 1m long and has a cross-section area of0.16m2. Each substructure has 4 interface nodes. The material is linear elastic with a Young modulus of 200GPa and a Poisson’s ratio of 0.3. In order to induce local buckling, the lower beam of substructure 1 has been weakened, by reducing its section to half the original.Table 1presents the results for the various strategies: classical primal NKS (NKS Clas.), primal (NKS-P) and mixed (NKS-M) NKS with nonlinear localization. The behavior of the structure is shown in Fig. 6, where are also shown the converged points for the mixed NKS method with nonlinear localization (third row of Table 1).The classical NKS method (first row in Table 1) cannot start with an initial load step larger than 55 N. For comparison purpose, the same initial loading step has been used for the two nonlinear localization strategies (second and third row). Less global and local iterations are required for the nonlinear strategies, especially the mixed version, with respect to the classical NKS method. The last row shows that the mixed approach can compute the final loading (450N) in a single load step. This is the only method that can achieve it, and the result shows a very important reduction of the number of global and local iterations.Nonlinear localization strategies, especially the mixed one, show a gain in robustness since convergence is obtained even with very large load steps. Moreover, a gain in numerical efficiency can also be appreciated thanks to a significant reduction of the number of global iterations while keeping a reasonable – equivalent – number of local iterations compared with the classical NKS approach.The studied structure is presented in Fig. 7. It is a frame structure with the same type of elements than for the stable structure (see Section 4.1). The structure represents an arch (60°) with a radius ofR=10mand a thickness oft=0.6m, made of beams with a cross-section area of0.16m2. The material is linear elastic with a Young modulus of 200GPa and a Poisson’s ratio of 0.3. It is simply supported at both ends and submitted to a vertical load applied at its middle section. It is decomposed into 10 substructures. Each substructure has several hundreds of inner degrees of freedom and shares 4 nodes (12 boundary d.o.f.) with its neighboring substructures. In order to induce local buckling, the upper beam of substructure 5 has been weakened, reducing the section to its half.The global behavior of this structure is presented in Fig. 8, where the convergence points for the mixed method with nonlinear localization (NKS-M, fourth row of Table 2) are also shown. Table 2 shows that the two primal methods (marked with a*) cannot pass the limit point that occurs for a load of430N. The final and the initial load steps are consequently equal. The computation for the mixed approach (third row) can be continued up to the final loading of1000N(fourth row). The mixed approach (NKS-M) is the only one that can pass the limit point and compute the final loading in a single load step (last row of Table 2).In this case of snap-through behavior, the mixed approach is more robust than the primal approaches since it can pass the limit point without resorting to continuation methods. For the resulting condensed interface problem, the mixed approach shares similar features with continuation methods.The studied structure is presented in Fig. 9, it is a frame structure with the same type of elements than for the two previous examples. The structure represents an arch (15°) with a radius ofR=2040cmand a thickness oft=2.9cm, made of beams with a cross-section of16cm2. The material is linear elastic with a Young modulus of 3100MPa and a Poisson’s ratio of0.3. It is simply supported at the left end and clamped at the right end. A vertical load is applied at the middle section of the structure. It is decomposed into 18 substructures. In order to induce local buckling, the lower beam of substructure 1 has been weakened.The behavior of this structure is presented in Fig. 10, where are also shown the converged points for the mixed method with nonlinear localization (NKS-M, third column of Table 3). The two primal approaches (NKS Clas. and NKS-P) require a load step just before the critical point in order to continue the computation up to the maximum load of10N. Nevertheless a high number of global iterations are required with several divergence situations. The mixed version is the only one that can reach the maximum load in a single load step (fourth column in Table 3).As for the previous example, the two primal approaches, NKS Clas., and NKS-M, encounter convergence difficulties to pass the snap-back. Both diverge. Introducing a continuation method is required. The mixed approach does not diverge without need for a pass following method.Here the effect of the Robin operator on the performances of the strategy is investigated more closely. For a given substructure s, the value ofksis multiplied by a factorαvarying from10-3to102:ks=αS‾s. OperatorS‾scorresponds to the condensed Schur complement of the neighboring substructures of substructure s when the remaining interfaces of these substructures are clamped. Tables 4–6present the resulting number of global/local iterations for the different cases studied in Sections 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3.From these results, it appears that a quite wide range of theαfactor ensures goods results for all types of structure:(24)10-2<α<100The results for low or high value ofαis expected (see Introduction of Section 3.3). Theoretically, the optimal Robin operatorkthsfor substructure s is the Schur complement of the rest of the structure on the substructure interfaces. Here, the chosen approximation ofkthscorresponds to the condensed Schur complementS‾sof the neighboring substructures of substructure s when the remaining interfaces of these substructures are clamped. However, for this one-direction decomposition of this slender structure, a better approximation is given bykths∼1nS‾swhere n is the number of substructures. This explains why, in this case, a parameterαof the order of1/n(n≃17)is a suitable choice. In practice, choosingα=10-1should ensure a good convergence for a similar number of substructures.In the general case, a substructure will have several neighboring substructures, which will generate as much interfaces as neighbors it has (one interface is shared by only 2 substructures). In this case, the computation of the Robin operator is done by interface and relates the two concerned substructures. For 3D examples with plate elements treated in Section 5, a strip band elements in each neighboring substructures close to the interfaces of substructure s as defined in [28] is used. This corresponds to the condensation of the strip band of the neighboring substructure on the considered interface, when its others degrees of freedom are clamped.If multiple substructures are connected at the same point (node), multiplicity of the concerned nodes must be taking into account for the interface force or residual contributions.The efficiency of the three approaches, the classical NKS approach (NKS Clas.), the primal (NKS-P) and the mixed (NKS-M) approaches with nonlinear localization is illustrated through two examples of stiffened structures. Despite their simplicity, they are quite representative of practical cases that aeronautical engineers could face. First example induces a one-direction domain decomposition whereas the second one implies rather a two-directions partitioning based on components and technology considerations. These two examples enables one to illustrate both the contributions and the limitations of the proposed approaches to address large scale complex industrial structures.All the studied structures are made of aluminum and are supposed to remain in their elastic domain even though they undergo large displacements. Young modulus isE=70,000MPaand Poisson’s ratio isν=0.3.Concerning the discretization, three-nodes triangular elements have been used with Reissner–Mindlin formulation for the bending part that accounts for transverse shearing. Order one shape functions are used for both the bending and the tensile parts. Global error criterion is set toηglobalcrit=10-6. For the mixed approach, a strip band of three-element thickness is used to compute search directionks(Fig. 11). Note that no continuation methods are used in the following examples.A complete parallelization of the strategy is made:•The nonlinear local stage (Section 3.2.1 for the primal version and Section 3.3.2 for the mixed version) is by definition a very parallelizable stage, because each substructure problem is computed independently from the rest of the structure and does not need to communicate with any other processor.The tangent condensed interface problem (Section 3.2.2 for the primal version and Section 3.3.1 for the mixed version) is parallelized by means of a BDD-C (Balancing Domain Decomposition by Constraints) [29]. A GMRES iterative solver was chosen because of the non-symmetry of the operator due to the corotational formulation used [7–9].The BDD-C method avoids assembling the operator of the interface problem and exchanging a large amount of data between processors. Only residual vectors are exchanged and assembled. The BDD-C preconditioner enforces the continuity of displacement at the corner nodes between subdomains in order to endow the DDM with good scalability and convergence properties.The structure is clamped and subjected to a prescribed vertical displacement at its other end (Fig. 12(a)). Aluminum sheet thickness is about2mm. The decomposition into eight subdomains (Fig. 13(a)) is induced by the location of the eight internal stiffeners of 4cm in height (Fig. 12(a)). Each substructure introduced2400degrees of freedom leading to a model with about20,000unknowns. On the final configuration of Fig. 13(b), a local skin buckling can be seen in the subdomain close to the clamped zone.Table 7shows that seven loads steps are required with the classical NKS approach but only two (resp. one) for the primal (resp. mixed) strategy with nonlinear localization. The total number of global problems is clearly smaller compared with the classical NKS approach – about six times smaller for the mixed approach. It is worth noting that no divergence occurred with the mixed approach. Primal and mixed nonlinear localization strategies allow larger load steps and consequently required less global iterations than the classical NKS approach. These conclusions corroborate those of Section 4.The length of the structure of Fig. 13 is now changed. It varies from 2 to 32 substructures. As previously, each of them are delimited by a stiffener. In order to have similar nonlinear geometrical effects within the first substructure close to the clamped zone, the prescribed displacement is increased according to the structure length so that the bending moment is similar for the different cases. Thus, the relation between the prescribed vertical displacements of the model withn+1substructures and the one with n is:u¯zn+1=(Ln+1/Ln)2u¯znwithu¯z2=0.025mm. Note that this relation is based on an elastic beam theory without accounting for geometrical nonlinear effects.The convergence rate of the global errorηglobal(see Fig. 14) obtained for the mixed approach with nonlinear localization is quite independent of the number of substructures apart from the case with two substructures. Let us recall that numerical scalability studies are generally performed in the case of linear problem so that unbalanced nonlinear effects do not interfere. Such a study in the case of nonlinear problem is not obvious.For the structure with 16 subdomains (see Fig. 15), the speed-up is about3.3for 4 processors (one processor per substructure) and6.4for 8 processors, which is not optimal. Further improvements can be done specially in the data communication between processors. This work is currently under progress.A stiffened panel under compressive load is studied here (Fig. 16). This test case is quite representative of aircraft fuselage parts. Due to the longitudinal and transverse stiffeners, it exhibits both local skin buckling and global buckling. The interaction between local and global buckling phenomena is particularly difficult to predict and cause many nonlinear solution strategies with or without continuation methods to fail. The reader can refer to [30–32] if interested in the simulation of this type of problem without domain decomposition strategies. This example allows to illustrate two aspects: (a) the benefit of nonlinear localization strategies and (b) the influence of domain decomposition.The structure is clamped on one side and submitted to a18mmprescribed longitudinal displacement along x-direction on the opposite edge. Displacement along z-direction at the extremities of the two transverse stiffeners is set to zero. Thicknesses of components are given in Fig. 16.A first decomposition into 23 subdomains corresponding to the technological components (plates and stiffeners) is “natural” (Fig. 17(a)). Each substructure has2250degrees of freedom on average leading to a model with about50,000unknowns.Fig. 18illustrates the compressive behavior of the structure. Skin buckling occurred for a prescribed displacement of3mm. At about7mm, longitudinal stiffeners buckle which weakens the structure stiffness.Table 8shows that the classical NKS approach fails to pass the skin buckling even by halving the displacement increment when divergence happens. Primal and mixed approaches with nonlinear localization succeed in following the equilibrium path in spite of a large number of displacements increments. Nonlinear localization strategies seems clearly to help convergence.However, the primal and the mixed versions have the same behavior. They both lead to the same number of global and local iterations and require quite small increments. The explanation is that the chosen Robin operatorksis too stiff in this application. Indeed, interfaces between subdomains coincide with the stiffener bases. Consequently, the strip band approximation for interface stiffnessks(Fig. 11) is not suitable and too stiff. One could refer to [33] which proposes a two-scale approximation and to [34] which discusses the choice of this behavior for slender structures.Post-buckling analysis of complex structures exhibits bifurcations of equilibrium paths. In practice, the introduction of defects in the geometry or in the loading enables one to follow one given path. Mesh perturbation (node shaking, dissymmetry) can also help. In this section, it is shown how the decomposition choice can lead to different equilibrium paths depending on the followed “numerical” path.Decomposition into 30 subdomains is here considered (Fig. 17(b)). In this case, the central part of the panel is split so that skin buckling and global buckling spread over several subdomains. Simulation is performed with the mixed strategy with nonlinear localization (NKS-M). In this case, the interface contribution to search directionksat the interfaces located on the middle transverse symmetry plan has been multiplied by 1000 to favor the displacement and rotation continuities.Fig. 19represents the deformed shape when skin buckling and global buckling occur. The decomposition into 30 subdomains (left column) leads to a 4-lobes skin buckling whereas a 5-lobes skin buckling happens with the 23-subdomains decomposition (right column). Actually, for the new decomposition, iterate solutions oscillate between the two solutions and finally converge to the 4-lobes one. Equilibrium path are consequently different and the global buckling deformed shape are different as well as the global compressive behavior (Fig. 20).The choice of the decomposition is consequently crucial regarding robustness. A “technological” decomposition that respects the components and the buckling mechanisms is preferable. In this case, taking advantage from this “physical” decomposition, bifurcation analysis to explore the different equilibrium paths could be investigated by introducing geometrical defects (buckling mode, node shaking) independently in each subdomain.In this paper, domain decomposition methods with nonlinear localization have been investigated in order to improve the robustness of parallel computation in buckling and post-buckling analyses. The problem of convergence is indeed of main importance at the industrial level. This work was an extension of the study proposed in [1], to structures that exhibit a snap-through or a snap-back behavior. Another contribution is the parallel implementation of the strategy to deal with large problems.A mixed domain decomposition method which favors nor interface displacement continuity, which is a too stiff condition, nor the interface equilibrium, but a combination (Robin-like condition) has been compared with a primal version and the classical primal NKS approach. Two remarkable results have been illustrated through simple beam structures as well as on more complex 3D structures closed to industrial applications. The first is that nonlinear localization strategies can deal with larger load increments than the classical NKS approach, which reduces the number of global iterations and, consequently, the amount of exchanged data between processors. The second is that the mixed approach can use even larger increments and can pass limit points (snap-through or snap-back) more easily without resorting to continuation methods. Indeed, for the resulting condensed interface problem, this mixed scheme shares similar features with path following methods to control the algorithm convergence.The parallel computation on structures closed to aeronautical applications, a boxed structure and a stiffened panel, enabled one to exhibit two practical issues. The first one concerns the choice of the Robin operator (interface stiffness) for the mixed approach. More precisely, it was shown that when substructure interfaces coincide with the stiffener bases, the strip band approximation for this operator was not suitable since too stiff. It is consequently important to put an effort on the choice of dedicated Robin operators for common industrial features so that the gain of the mixed approach is recovered. The second issue is about the influence of the domain decomposition. It was shown that a “technological” decomposition that respects the components and the buckling mechanisms is preferable.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
