@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An integrated computer model of a solar updraft power plant

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A one-dimensional flow tube theory for solar updraft power plants is formulated as basis of a computer software.Numerical difficulties arise from highly nonlinearity in T and T4 (absolute temperatures).The problem is separated into a NL initial value problem and a number of NL algebraic power balance equations.The structure of the coded program is elucidated, especially the role of the nonlinear solution modulus Excel-Solver.Computed results demonstrate the stability of solution and applicability of the software.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Solar electricity generation,Solar updraft power technology,Simulation of nonlinear processes,Strong numerical nonlinearities,Fast computer algorithms,Excel-Solver,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Renewable energy technologies are generally complex, requiring nonlinear simulation concepts. This holds true especially for solar updraft power plants, the scope of this treatment, which starts with a short introduction into their functioning. Then the basic physical conditions of the thermo-fluiddynamic processes in such plants including the solar radiation power transfers are summarized, and the expected numerical difficulties in the computer simulation are notified. It follows the discussion of the structure of the program code to be developed which shall compute the power generation of such plants in sufficient exactness and fast computing speed, in spite of strong nonlinearities. Finally, some economic statements for solar updraft power plants close the treatment.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Solar updraft power plants (SUPPs) represent a rather modern and highly efficient technology for electricity generation from solar irradiance. Obtaining satisfactory economy of plant operation, they are conceptually designed for erection in arid areas with highest possible solar irradiation, available in many inner-continental locations of the globe between the two tropics. Up to now, only prototypes have been erected and successfully run [1], but all designs of future professional facilities show rather low levelled electricity generating costs of close to 0.10€/kWh of produced electricity [2,3].As schematically elucidated in Fig. 1, such SUPP consists essentially of the collector area (CA), the turbo-generators as power conversion units (PCUs), and the solar chimney (SC). In the CA, a large glass-covered greenhouse-like area, solar irradiation penetrates through the glass into the soil, and heats the ground as plant-absorber. This component then warms up the air inside the collector, which expands, and streams towards its elevated centre. There, in the turbo-generators PCUs, the kinetic energy of the airflow is partly transformed into electric power. Source of this kinetic energy is the buoyancy of the warm (and thus lighter) air in the SC, creating a pressure sink at the PCUs’ outlets. This pressure sink draws permanently fresh air from the outer collector rim into the collector, creating a continuous flow process of air through the power plant.As just described, SUPPs form wind power generators [2] which produce their required wind flow themselves by thermal conversion of solar irradiance G into heated air flux. The arising wind flow exists at least as long as the sun shines, after sun-down in reduced quantity from stored heat in the soil-absorber. Thus the first task of the glass roof over the CA is to allow a maximum of solar irradiance (UV radiation, visible light, IR radiation) passing through the glass, heating up the ground-absorber to highest possible temperatures. Heated by this soil-absorber, the internal airflow then warms up, also to high temperatures. Thus the second task of the collector glass roof is to prevent convective heat losses from the internal airflow (IR radiation), escaping into the power plant’s ambience. Obviously, the collector glass design is a key-optimization problem for the economy of solar updraft technology.Before starting to model the thermo-fluiddynamic plant behaviour in theory and further as computer program, we should have a look on Fig. 2which shows an artist’s computer vision of two SUPPs with chimney heights of 1000m and collector diameters of 6000m.In [4] the authors had proven that the flow processes in a SUPP can be analyzed in good approximation as one-dimensional. Thus the development of the integrated SUPP computer model shall be based on the following assumptions:•The thermo-fluiddynamics is modelled within one-dimensional flow tube theory.The collector bottom is horizontal with equal ambient air pressure everywhere.The solar radiation heat power transfers are also modelled one-dimensionally, transverse to the flow.Air is assumed as an ideal gas.The entire model is approximated as stationary (time-independent).We now subdivide the collector into a number i of ring elements of characteristic finite volumes of air with ground/top surfacesΔAcolli=πri+12-ri2, and hi, hi+1 as respective collector heights. These finite volumes are idealized as one-dimensional in radial direction r. Point i denotes the outer border of ΔAcolli, point i+1 the inner one. Cross-sections of the airflow are Ai=2πrihi, Ai+1=2πri+1hi+1, in which the collector radii ri, ri+1 stand for distances from the chimney axis [5].All thermo-fluidmechanics in a collector element then can be described by the following conditions:(1.1)Conservation of mass:ṁ=const.,(1.2)Conservation of momentum:ṁui-ṁui+1+piAcoll.i-pi+1Acoll.i+1+supporting forces=0,(1.3)Conservation of energy:ΔQ̇i=ṁcpΔTi.In these equations,ṁabbreviates the mass flow rate of air (kg/s) through the plant, uithe air velocity (m/s), pithe air pressure (N/m2),ΔQ̇ithe specific heat flux increase (W), andΔTithe temperature increase of the airflow (K). cp stands for the specific heat capacity of the air (J/kgK). The solar irradiance G (W/m2) is coupled with the heat power in the collector by the following relations:(1.4)ΔQ̇i=αiGΔAcoll.i⋯⇒⋯Q̇i=ΣiΔQ̇i,denoting by the parameters αithe efficiencies of the different collector rings ΔAcoll.iin transforming solar irradiation G into heat increase ΔTiof the collector airflow.In addition, Bernoulli’s equation is applied to connect the SUPP’s outer ambience with the collector interior at the rim:(1.5)pi+0.5ρiui2=pi+1+0.5ρi+1ui+12.Assuming air as an ideal gas, the gas law(1.6)ρi=pi/RTi,R as general gas constant (J/kgK), ρias mass density of the air, and Tias absolute temperature, couples the fluid-mechanics equations ((1.1), (1.2), (1.5)) with the thermodynamic conditions ((1.3) and (1.4)). All these equations have to be integrated numerically over the collector area, and the final heat flow then has to be coupled to the air velocity potential of the chimney at the turbines’ exits.The heated air within the chimney at the turbines’ exits has a lower mass density than the air outside, so a pressure difference Δp develops leading to the chimney’s buoyancy:(1.7)Δp=g∫0H{ρ0(h)÷ρi(h)}dh.Herein ρ0(h) and ρi(h) represent the height-depending mass densities of the air (kg/m3) outside and inside the chimney, g the gravitational acceleration (m/s2). Both density profiles ρ0(h), ρi(h) influence the chimney’s buoyancy. Applying the standard barometric pressure dependence on height (standard meteorological atmosphere) with air again as ideal gas, and ΔT approximated as constant over h, we solve Eq. (1.7) analytically over tower height H and gain:(1.8)Δpmax=gρ0HΔT/(T0+ΔT)with the ρ0-indexed quantities for the plant’s ambience at chimney foot. Application of Bernoulli’s equation finally delivers the important formula for the maximum air velocity at the chimney’s entrance:(1.9)umax=2gHΔT/(T0+ΔT).Instead of this direct analytical integration leading from (1.7) to (1.8), the publication [6] applies a numerical integration scheme along the chimney height, which allows to study different meteorological model atmospheres.For our global SUPP model we start the approximation of the mechanical process equations in the turbines again with Bernoulli’s equation, applied to the airflow in the turbine:(1.10)Δpturb+12ρuturb2=Δptot.Defining now the pressure withdrawal factor κ of the turbine due to (1.11.1), and introducing the maximum airflow velocity umax from (1.9) we receive the following relation:(1.11)Δpturb=κΔptot:uturb=1-κumax.Herein the terms Δpturb and uturb stand for the average pressure jump and the air velocity in the turbine, respectively. Finally, from the total power of the maximum possible airflow, namelyPtot=ṁumax2/2, the harvested effective power Peleff is gained, introducing ηturb for the turbines’ degrees of efficiency:(1.12)Peleff=ηturbΔpturbṁ/ρ=ηturbκṁumax2/2.For simplicity of presentation, all Eqs. (1.1) until (1.9) have been derived without any consideration of the losses of the airflow due to friction, which reduce the flow pressures, and so the efficiency of the SUPP. In order to concentrate on the numerical simulation aspects, their consideration by identical concepts as in the design of industrial chimneys [7] is just mentioned here and shall not be treated in detail [1].Overlooking now the thermo-fluidal SUPP-processes in the CA, the SC, and in the PCUs up to here, we find as variables the mass flowṁ, the velocities ui, the pressure quantities pi, and the temperatures Ti, all of the internal airflow. These variables and their cited conditions formulate a (moderately) nonlinear initial value problem (NL IVP) in the airflowṁas basis of the determination of Peleff. The numerical solution of this NL IVP requires the knowledge of the collector efficiencies αidefined in Eq. (1.4).Their determination shall now be elaborated.The collector is the most important component for a SUPP’s economy, because the convective/conductive/radiation heat power transfers from the solar irradiation over the soil absorber into heat flux of the airflow influence much of the SUPP’s efficiency. In the determination of the efficiency values αi, the complicated physical process of transformation of solar irradiation G into heat increase ΔT of the air fluxṁhas to be modelled, at which point many specific details of the collector design come into play [8].Bases of this modelling are the convective heat transfers (qc)(2.1)qci=hciTiwith the convective heat power transfer coefficients hci, qc depending on absolute temperature Ti; and the radiation heat power transfers (qr) due to Boltzmann’s radiation law. This reads e.g. for the radiation between two parallel plates [8](2.2)qr1=qr2=QrA=σT24-T141/ε1+1/ε2-1,or between one plate and the sky(2.3)qr1=εσT14-Tsky4.In these conditions, the ɛ-values abbreviate optical emittances of opaque bodies, Tk always absolute temperatures, and σ the Stefan–Boltzmann constant equal to 5.6697×10−8 (W/m2K4). Emittances ɛ can be found in [8], convective heat power transfer coefficient hc in the standard literature.In order to introduce the reader into the formulation of the heat power balance equations of the collector we select due to Fig. 3the simplest collector construction, consisting only of one panel of glass (temperature T1), the heated airflow (T2) and the soil-absorber (T3). We consider a unit cell of the collector and distinguish therein the following thermal transfers qr due to radiation of single components and qc due to heat convection/conduction. As emphasized in connection with Eqs. (2.1)–(2.3), they all depend on their respective absolute temperatures T respectively T4[5]:•qrougl thermal transfer by radiation (qr) from outer air (ou) into glass sheet (gl),qrglou thermal transfer by radiation from glass sheet into outer air,qrglso thermal transfer by radiation from glass sheet into soil, and so on,qcougl thermal transfer by convection (qc) from outer air (ou) into glass sheet (gl),qcglou thermal transfer by convection from glass sheet into outer air,qcglin thermal transfer by convection from glass sheet into inner air, and so on,qcsoso heat conduction from soil surface into soil interior,sisugl solar irradiance from the sun into glass sheet.Stationarity of the physical process requires, that the sum of all heat transfers into/from the glass, the inner air flow, and the soil absorber have to vanish, leading to three coupled heat balance equations, nonlinear in the three temperatures T1, T2, T3:(2.4)glass:qrougl-qrglou-qrglso+qrsogl+qcougl-qcglou-qcglin+qcingl+(1-εgl)sisugl=0,air:qcglin-qcingl+qcsoin+qcinso=αisisugl,soil:qrglso-qrsogl+qcinso-qcsoin-qcsoso+εglαsosisugl=0.In these heat power balance equations (HPBEs), αso denotes the broadband absorptance parameter of the soil-absorber. Obviously, for this simplest collector construction we receive with the first and last equation (2.4.1), (2.4.3) two coupled algebraic conditions, depending on forth (qr) and first (qc) powers of the temperatures T1, T2 and T3. The central algebraic equation of (2.4.2), also coupled to the two others, is written in such a way, that the heat flux increase(2.5)ΔQ̇i=αisisuglin the ith collector element determines directly the desired efficiency parameters αi, if related to the solar irradiation input sisugl (=G). Such nonlinear algebraic conditions like (2.4) have to be formulated for each collector ring element ΔAcoll.i, they are clearly coupled via the temperatures Tint.airi(=T2) of the internal airflow to the earlier formulated NL IVP. They increase the number of unknown temperatures Tkifrom (2.4) in each collector element i, and so the total nonlinearities of the simulation considerably. For more complicated collector constructions (double glazing, water-filled heat reservoirs, double air compartments), these power balance conditions increase in number [9].If we now overlook Chapter 2, we find in Eqs. (1.1) to (1.12) the basis of the global nonlinear initial value problem, describing all fluid-thermodynamics of collector, turbines and chimney. This global NL IVP uniquely – remembering some basic mathematics – determines the air mass flowṁ, the velocities ui, the pressures pi, and the air temperatures Ti, provided the collector efficiencies αiare known.In addition to this global NL IVP we have in each collector ring element ΔAcollithe temperatures Tkiof the collector components which determine the efficiency parameters αi. For their determination one has to solve sets (2.4) of highly nonlinear algebraic heat power balance conditions to evaluate the transformation problem of solar irradiance G into heat flux of the inner airflow of temperature T2i. One attempt to solve all these conditions simultaneously is to apply some general purpose CFD software. If the chosen software is also capable of thermal convective problems, then the fluid-thermodynamics part can be properly solved. But how can one connect to this program part the highly nonlinear radiation thermodynamics? Their coupling generally can – if possible at all – only be carried out at the far end of the CFD program, in the composition of the global system of CFD-equations.If we are aware of the existing strong nonlinearities therein, this procedure will then lead to large computing times, because solution of the nonlinear power balance conditions requires intensive iteration efforts in each collector element. Such iteration interfaces generally are only offered by general CFD software at its end, parallel to the solution of the global system, which leads to large amounts of data I/Os into the program kernel [9–11].In addition to this tardiness of the program runs, one also may overlook mathematical instabilities or ambiguities which are typical for strong nonlinear process simulations. One of such features is discussed in the excellent treatment [6], namely an ambiguity of the power output P from the mass flow rateṁ, which can be rarely found by implementation into CFD software. However, in the following we will concentrate on the principal tardiness of the mentioned implementation into CFD codes. So to overcome this resulting slowness of program runs, rather troublesome for design purposes, we have to construct a special speeding-up-strategy as elucidated in the next chapter.This speeding-up concept consists just in the separation of all nonlinear heat power balance equations in the i collector elements from the global NL IVP, and to iterate the nonlinearities in the now (i+1) constituents of the SUPP simulation separately. This separation then requires an iterative coupling between the i NL HPBE and the global NL IVP, which is carried out via the temperatures Tint.airi, in the example T2i.Fig. 4explains the preferred strategy in the coded program. After having loaded all geometrical, mechanical and optical input data into the program’s pre-processor we select one specific set Sk of (hourly) weather data from the meteorological data bank in order to analyze 1h of plant operation. The meteorological offices world-wide generally provide these data for each hour of a typical day of a month as mean values over certain statistical periods.With these data the several times mentioned NL IVP is solved for a first guess of the efficiencies αi(1) in all collector ring elements, denoted as step 3 (top) in Fig. 4. This leads to a first approximationṁ1(1)for the airflow, and vice versa for the harvested electrical power Peleff(1). For each of the i collector elements we thereby find a 1st approximation of the air temperatures Tint.airi(1) from the NL IVP, which then are inserted into the respective NL HPBE. Separate solutions of these (highly nonlinear) equations as step 3 (below) in Fig. 4 lead to a new set of collector efficiencies αi(2), with which the whole computing process of the initial value problem step 3 (top) has to be repeated. This iteration process is continued until a certain desired exactness for Peleff has been achieved.The described analysis process is extremely stable. It leads to unique solutions in very short computing times, as has been proven and demonstrated in many program runs.For a series of reasons it was decided to code also a program version in Microsoft Excel, imbedded into a Visual Basic frame program. One of the reasons was the enormous potential of the program modulus Excel-Solver for this special purpose. Solver originally has been coded as an Excel-add-in for the solution of mathematical optimization problems. Arbitrary Excel cells can be chosen to define values for objective functions as well as target values, or they can be reserved for sets of constraints/restrictions. In our simulation analysis this modulus is – by addressing different of its algorithms – applied in the incremental-iterative solution of the NL IVP as well as in the iterative solution of the algebraic NL HPBEs.The Excel-Solver contains several well known standard linear (Simplex) or nonlinear (Newton, Gradient) solution algorithms applicable for nonlinear problems. Comfortable criteria for terminating the optimization analysis can be selected, like maximum computing time, maximum number of iterations, arbitrary values of exactness and tolerances. This renders the Solver-modulus an optimal tool for solving nonlinear mathematical problems, like the incremental solution of the (moderately) NL IVP, and the iterative solution of the (highly) nonlinear (algebraic) HPBEs. Fig. 5shows the Solver’s application for the iteration of the heat power balance equations.As a conclusion we state, that the designed algorithm in combination with the double application of the Excel-Solver leads to an extremely fast running program, guaranteeing reliable and stable results.The explained software tool had been coded as fast analysis instrument for solar updraft power plant designs. It shall help to bring the extremely progressive idea of SUPPs [1] finally to a realization, which can serve to supply the world with cheap and sustainable electricity. This consciousness has recently initiated world-wide research efforts [12] to generally optimize the basic concept [8,9], and to study further aspects, e.g. detailed thermodynamic energy balances [13], or to investigate optimal properties of the applied air turbines [14]. The present work clearly will not compete with such fundamental physical research in this field [11,15] to improve the concept, but it will propagate this suitable technology for sustainable electric energy generation under economic costs, like [16].As a final example for our readers we chose a SUPP with a 500m high solar chimney and a collector of 1500m of diameter in a (North African) Mena-location. The facility has been optimized in many respects, so double-glazing with coated glass panels is applied as well as artificial blackening of the soil by nano-particle colour. Table 1shows some typical plant parameters analyzed by the described concept for an actual state of solar irradiance of G=1000W/m2.The most important values of SUPPs of course are the amount of annually harvested electric energy, because this is the income side of each cost evaluation. The author’s team has carried out in recent years several rather detailed cost calculations for SUPPs demonstrating the unbeatable economy of this energy generation concept. Again for a Mena-location with solar irradiance of G=2.20MW/m2a we received in extended optimization studies for plants with•500m of chimney height and 2000m of collector diameter LECs=0.131€/kWh;750m of chimney height and 3500m of collector diameter LECs=0.099€/kWh.As customary in German power plant financing, a depreciation period of 33years has been assumed hereby. The cited levelled electricity costs LECs are evaluated due to IEA-rules; the above values correspond well with those ones published in a further optimization study [17]. As a final impression, Fig. 6demonstrates a computer view up to the top of the 750m chimney.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
