@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Computational analysis of fatigue behavior of 3D 4-directional braided composites based on unit cell approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The unit cell of 3D 4-directional braided composites were built up using ABAQUS.The fatigue behavior of the 3D 4-directional braided composites was analyzed.Effect of braiding angles and fiber volume fraction of on fatigue behavior was analyzed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Unit cell,Fatigue behavior,Braided composites,Fiber volume fraction,Braiding angle,ABAQUS,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The fatigue behavior of 3D 4-directional braided composites was investigated based on the unit cell approach. First, the unit cell models of 3D 4-directional braided composites with different braiding angles and fiber volume fraction were built up using ABAQUS. Then, the fatigue behavior of the 3D 4-directional braided composites was analyzed, and the effect of fatigue loading direction on the fatigue damage evolution and fatigue life was studied. Finally, the effect of braiding angles and fiber volume fraction of the unit cell on the fatigue behavior of 3D 4-directional braided composites was analyzed. These results will play an important role for evaluating the fatigue behavior of 3D 4-directional braided composites in engineering.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Three-dimensional (3D) braided composite has been used widely in engineering. The distinct feature of 3D braided composites is that there is not interlaminar crack and delamination compared with that of laminated composites. However, only when mechanical properties of 3D braided composites are correctly characterized could the composite structures applied in engineering be optimized.The mechanical properties and strength characterizations of the 3D braided composite using the representative unit cell were reported in many references. Yu et al. [1] predicted the mechanics parameters of 4-step three dimensional braided composites, including stiffness parameters and strength parameters using the two-scale method (TSM). Zheng et al. [2] studied the yarn architecture of 3-D braided composites products by the four-step 1×1 braiding technique by means of a control volume method in conjunction with experimental investigation and a numerical method, respectively. Sun et al. [3] used digital element approach, which treats textile composite manufacturing process as a nonlinear solid mechanics problem, to investigate the complicated microstructure of 3D braided rectangular preform. Gu et al. [4,5] studied the influence of the strain rate on the uniaxial tensile behavior of 4-step 3D braided composites, and the ballistic perforation test results of 4-step 3D braided Twaron/epoxy composites, which were subjected to impact by conically cylindrical steel projectile, were presented. Also, the damage evolution of the 3D braided composite is simulated. Fang et al. [6] studied the effect of yarn distortion on the mechanical properties of 3D four-directional braided composites, and analyzed the progressive damage behavior of 3D four-directional braided composites with large braid angle subjected to uniaxial tension [7]. Lu et al. [8] studied the effect of interfacial properties on the uniaxial tensile behavior of three-dimensional braided composites. Drach et al. [9] proposed an efficient procedure to process the textile simulation data and generate realistic finite element meshes of woven composites. Dong et al. [10,11] studied tensile strength of 3D braided composites in the microscope view, where non-linear progressive damages under tensile loading steps were conducted in their article. However, the experimental studies on the properties and strength characterizations of the 3D braided composite are scarce as yet. Zaman et al. [12] fabricated a high density 3D-four directional carbon/carbon composite by hot isostatic pressure impregnation carbonisation using coal tar pitches. And the thermo-oxidative, thermophysical and ablation properties of the composite were determined. Li et al. [13] preformed compressive experiments on the 3D braided composites with different braiding parameters in three directions (longitudinal, in-plane and transverse) at room and liquid nitrogen temperature (low as −196°C). Li et al. [14] presented experimental characterization of the effect of cut-edge on the tensile, compressive and flexure properties in the braiding direction of the 3D braided composites.It is obvious that most of numerical and analytical works devoted to mechanical properties and strength characterizations of the 3D braided composite. However, the fatigue behavior of 3D 4-directional braided composites has not been reported till now. In this paper, the fatigue behavior of 3D 4-directional braided composites was analyzed based on unit cell approach, and the effect of braiding angles and fiber volume fraction of the unit cell on the fatigue behavior was studied.The basic Cartesian braiding process involves four distinct Cartesian motions of groups of yarns termed rows and columns. For a given step, alternate rows are shifted a prescribed distance relative to each other. The next step involves the alternate shifting of the columns a prescribed distance. The third and fourth steps are simply the reverse shifting sequence of the first and second steps, respectively. A complete set of 4-directionals is called a machine cycle, which is shown in Fig. 1[12].The geometric structure of unit cell of 3D 4-directional braided composites is shown in Fig. 2. The length, width and height of the unit cell area×b×cincluding 19 yarns with 7 main fibers (f1–f7 as shown in Fig. 2). As shown in Fig. 2, the braiding angle (γ) is defined as the angle between the yarn and the braided axis as follow:(1)tanγ=a2+b2cAnd the fiber volume fraction (ψ) can be determined as:(2)ψ=πD2a2+b2+c2abcwhere D is the diameter of the yarn.The FEM model of the unit cells of 3D 4-directional braided composites is built in ABAQUS according to the geometric structure in Fig. 2. The unit cells with braided angles of 20°, 25°, 30°, 35° and 40° are shown in Fig. 3, and the unit cells with fiber volume fraction of 30%, 35%, 40%, 45% and 50% are shown in Fig. 4.The degradation of strength during fatigue cycling is assumed to follow a simple linear degradation per cycle. This has the advantage that only the expected life at each stress level is needed and this can be obtained from the SN curve or constant life diagram. A comparison of many candidate models recently concluded that the linear model was preferred based on its simplicity and conservative predictions [15,16]. The residual strength in the fiber and matrix is given by [17]:(3)Rr=Rs-∑i=1m(Rs-σmaxi)ΔnNf(σmaxi)where m is the number of fatigue cycle blocks,Rris the residual strength after the m blocks,Rsis the static strength at the initial,σmaxiis the maximum stress during the ith block,Nfis the number of cycles to failure in constant amplitude fatigue atσmaxi.Nfis obtained from the SN curve which is often approximated with a power law of the form:(4)σmax=ANf-BFig. 5shows a schematic of the drop in strength due to a complex load history. This schematic is composed of blocks of different stress levels each with different mean and alternating stress levels. Fracture occurs when residual strength degrades to a level at or below the stress levels developed during any fatigue cycle.Experimental testing has shown that early stage damage occurs during initial fatigue cycling followed by a long period where the damage accumulation rate is quite low. Finally the accumulated damage reduces the capacity of the material to resist the stresses and there is a relatively rapid drop to failure. The modulus of the material is reduced as damage increases. True modulus is difficult to measure experimentally in fatigue testing and therefore secant modulus and fatigue modulus are used here instead. Fatigue modulus is defined here as the slope of a line which connects the minimum stress–strain point in a fatigue cycle with the maximum stress–strain point in the cycle as shown in Fig. 6. Mao and Mahadevan [18] have proposed the following equation to represent the s-shaped damage evolution with number of cycles(5)D=q∑i=1mΔnNf(σmaxi)m1+(1-q)∑i=1mΔnNf(σmaxi)m2where D is the accumulated damage at n number of cycles,Nfis the fatigue life (number of cycles) at the load being applied and q, m1, m2 are material dependent parameters. Fig. 7shows a schematic of the accumulation of damage during fatigue cycling.The Mao and Mahadevan damage evolution equation is used here to predict the degradation fatigue modulus during fatigue as follows:(6)Ed=Eo-ΔE×DwhereEdis the degraded fatigue modulus,Eois the original fatigue modulus andΔEis the drop in modulus between the first cycle and the cycle just prior to failure. The magnitude ofΔEdepends on the maximum fatigue stress (σmax).The periodicity boundary condition is applied on the unit cells of 3D 4-directional braided composites due to the space continuity must be satisfied after the deformation of the unit cell. Therefore, the mesh of the unit cell must be ensure to entirely the same on the relative face. The mesh on the ridge side of the unit cell is divided firstly, which is ensure the mesh size be the same on the relative face. Then the face mesh of the unit cell is divided, the mesh is mapping to the relative face by reproduction, which is assured the mesh size be the same on the relative face. The four-node tetrahedron element is selected in the simulation of the unit cells of 3D 4-directional braided composites. The mesh of the unit cells with different braided angles is shown in Fig. 8. There are 9846, 8275, 9052, 6250 and 5627 nodes and 49,060, 41,547, 46,267, 31,433 and 28,244 elements on the unit cells with braided angle of 20°, 25°, 30°, 35° and 40°, respectively. The mesh of the unit cells with different fiber volume fraction is shown in Fig. 9. There are 8424, 6653, 5627, 4906 and 4851 nodes and 43,484, 33,880, 28,244, 24,616 and 24,938 elements on the unit cells with fiber volume fraction of 30%, 35%, 40%, 45% and 50%, respectively.The fiber bundle is Kevlar 49 aramid fiber in this simulation, which is considered as transversely isotropic, and the epoxy resin is considered as isotropic. The material constant of fiber and matrix is shown in Table 1, and the strength and stiffness degeneration parameters of fiber and matrix in the simulation is shown in Table 2.Periodicity boundary condition and static load was applied on the unit cell of 3D 4-directional braided composites first, then the maximum stress of the unit cell was determined. The fatigue load with stress level of 90%, 80%, 70%, 60% and 50% was applied to the unit cells, respectively. And the boundary condition is the same as the static load. The FEM calculation is carried out until the material is failure when the element displacement is larger enough or the FEM is not convergence. The element stress distribution is obtained from the FEM calculation. If the element stress is surpassed the material stress limit, the material is considered as failure, then the stiffness and strength of the element is set as zero. If the element stress is in the material stress limit, the material is considered as damage but not failure, then the stiffness and strength of the element is degeneration according to the criterion in Section 2.2. If the material is not failure, the fatigue load will be applied in the next cycle. The fatigue simulation is repeated until the FEM calculation is not convergence. The flow chart of fatigue modeling is shown in Fig. 10.In this section, the unit cell model with a braided angle of 30°and fiber volume fraction of 40% was used to analysis the effect of loading direction on the fatigue behavior of 3D 4-directional braided composites. Fig. 11shows the elastic modulus of the unit cell varied with the fatigue cycles in 90% stress ratio under uniaxial and biaxial tensile–tensile fatigue load. The elastic modulus of the unit cell is decreased with the increasing of fatigue cycles. The elastic modulus of the unit cell is decreased by 10% in 7700 cycles under uniaxial loading and 4100 cycles under biaxial loading, which means that the fatigue life under uniaxial loading is higher than the fatigue life under biaxial loading.The main reason for the stiffness degeneration of the 3D 4-directional braided composites is the damage growth on the fiber bundle-matrix interface under the fatigue load, which cause the local failure of the composites and yet the stiffness degeneration. Moreover, according to Eqs. (5) and (6), the elastic modulus of the fiber and matrix is degeneration under the fatigue load, which also cause the stiffness degeneration of the 3D 4-directional braided composites. It can be deduced from Eq. (6) that the maximum elastic modulus degeneration isΔE1under fatigue load. Substituting the data in Tables 1 and 2 into Eq. (6), it can be calculated that the maximum elastic modulus degeneration of fiber and matrix is 0.2% and 0.4%, respectively. However, the elastic modulus degeneration of the 3D 4-directional braided composites is 10%, so the main reason for the stiffness degeneration of the 3D 4-directional braided composites is the damage growth on the fiber bundle-matrix interface.The fatigue behavior of the 3D 4-directional braided composites was simulated according to the process in Fig. 10. The element was consider as failure when the calculated element stress is larger than the limit stress of the material, then the stiffness and stress of this element is set to zero. Moreover, the damage element is shown in red, and the undamaged element is shown in blue. The damage evolution of unit cell with 30° braided angle and 40% fiber volume fraction under the fatigue load along the braided direction is shown in Fig. 12. The fatigue damage is initiation at the region between two fiber bundles, where stress concentration is located. Because the fatigue property of the fiber is superior to the matrix, the damage initiate in the matrix first, which is shown in Fig. 12(b). The damage extends along the fiber bundle-matrix interface under the fatigue load as shown in Fig. 12(c)–(e). Later, the damage extends in many elements, and the fiber bundle-matrix interface is failure as shown in Fig. 12(f).The damage evolution of unit cell with 30° braided angle and 40% fiber volume fraction under biaxial fatigue load is shown in Fig. 13. The fatigue damage mode of biaxial fatigue is similar with uniaxial fatigue. The damage initiates from the region between two fiber bundles (Fig. 13(b)), extends along the fiber bundle-matrix interface till to failure (Fig. 13(c)–(f)).The fatigue behavior of the 3D 4-directional braided composites was simulated on the stress level of 90%, 80%, 70%, 60%, and 50%. The fatigue life is obtained when the displacement is too large and the simulation is not converge. The S–N curve of unit cell with 30° braided angle and 40% fiber volume fraction is fitted from the five calculated points, which is shown in Fig. 14and Table 3. It can be seen from Fig. 14 that the fatigue life of 90% stress level under uniaxial fatigue load along the braided direction is 7700 cycles, and the fatigue life of 90% stress level under uniaxial fatigue load perpendicular to the braided direction is 5600 cycles. Moreover, the fatigue life of 90% stress level under biaxial fatigue load is 4100 cycles. In the stress level of 50%, the fatigue life under uniaxial fatigue load along the braided direction, uniaxial fatigue load perpendicular to the braided direction, and biaxial fatigue load is 711,200 cycles, 567,800 cycles, and 286,700 cycles, respectively. The fatigue behavior of the 3D 4-directional braided composites is dependent on the fatigue load direction. The fatigue behavior along the braided direction is superior than that perpendicular to the braided direction. Moreover, the biaxial fatigue life of 3D 4-directional braided composites is less than uniaxial fatigue life.Fig. 15and Table 4show the S–N curves of unit cell with 40% fiber volume fraction and different braided angles. It can be seen from Fig. 15 that the fatigue life along the braided direction under 90% stress level and 50% stress level is decreased from 9800 cycles to 6300 cycles, from 853,200 cycles to 627,400 cycles, respectively, when the braided angle is varied from 25° to 40°. However, the fatigue life perpendicular to the braided direction under 90% stress level and 50% stress level is increased from 5200 cycles to 6100 cycles, from 479,800 cycles to 908,700 cycles, respectively, when the braided angle is varied from 25° to 40°. Therefore, the fatigue life along the braided direction is decreased with the increasing of braided angle, but the fatigue life perpendicular to the braided direction is increased with the increasing of braided angle. The main reason for this is that the fiber effect on the composites property along the braided angle is deceased with the increasing of braided angle, while it will be increased in the perpendicular direction.Fig. 16shows the fatigue damage evolution of unit cell with 20° braided angle and 40% fiber volume fraction, and Fig. 17shows the fatigue damage evolution of unit cell with 40° braided angle and 40% fiber volume fraction. The fatigue damage in the unit cell with 20° braided angle is dominated by shear stress, and the fatigue damage in the unit cell with 40° braided angle is dominated by tensile stress. However, the unit cell is under tensile fatigue stress, which will accelerate the damage evolution in unit cell with 40° braided angle. If the damage initiate in the unit cell with 40° braided angle, the failure process is similar to mode I crack propagation, which will cause lower fatigue life of the unit cell with 40° braided angle.Fig. 18and Table 5show the S–N curves of unit cell with 40° braided angle and different fiber volume fraction. Fig. 19shows the fatigue damage evolution of unit cell with 40° braided angle and 30% fiber volume fraction, and Fig. 20shows the fatigue damage evolution of unit cell with 40° braided angle and 50% fiber volume fraction. It can be seen from Fig. 18 that the fatigue life along the braided direction under 90% stress level and 50% stress level is increased from 4900 cycles to 7200 cycles, from 564,800 cycles to 814,100 cycles, respectively, when the fiber volume fraction is varied from 30% to 50%. Moreover, the fatigue life perpendicular to the braided direction under 90% stress level and 50% stress level is increased from 4800 cycles to 6900 cycles, from 55,120 cycles to 727,400 cycles, respectively, when the fiber volume fraction is varied from 30% to 50%. Therefore, both the fatigue life along the braided direction and perpendicular to the braided direction are increased with the increasing of fiber volume fraction, which is due to the increasing of fiber volume fraction will cause the fatigue property of the braided composites promoting.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
