@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Calibration of fracture locus in scope of uncoupled elastic–plastic-ductile fracture material models

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We performed uncoupled elastic–plastic - damage material calibration.We used custom design specimens and testing devices to perform all experiments.We calibrated fracture locus according to Bai and Wierzbicki.We outlined calibration alternative based on target function variants.Experiments with excessive stress concentration showed limitations of used approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Ductile fracture,Damage mechanics,Fracture locus,Uncoupled elastic–plastic-damage,Material experiments,Alternative calibration,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper describes the calibration process for the uncoupled material model of ductile damage designed by Bai and Wierzbicki. This problem has been investigated within the project “Identification of ductile damage parameters for nuclear facilities”. The project includes material experiments, designing the shape of the samples, and using the samples for calibrating the material constants of selected ductile damage models. The calibration process for the Bai–Wierzbicki material model is based on fifteen tested samples corresponding with the literature. In this paper, we discuss some promising modifications of basic calibration approaches for uncoupled models. These modifications are based on variants in the formulation of the target function expressing the calibration error. The result of the calibration process was verified through FE simulation of a comparison of each specimen with experimental data. A material model with a description of the ductile damage in a wide range of stress states was searched within the project. For this purpose, the model was tested on some other specimens which exhibit higher stress concentration and showed the limitations of the Bai and Wierzbicki uncoupled model.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Ductile damage is the process of damage to a metallic material that propagates together with the plastic strain in conditions of monotonic loading, and ends in fracture of the component. Problems of ductile damage are found in a wide range of technical applications. Ductile damage plays a significant role in industry, for example in the optimization of technological processes, in safety evaluations in the automotive and aeronautic industry, in the nuclear industry, in the analysis of steel civil structures, etc. Complex material models of ductile fracture require a cost calibration process based on extensive experimental tests, and also involve extensive computational costs. Thanks to progress in computational methods, namely FEA, models of this type can nowadays be used in engineering.Phenomenological material models describing ductile damage in continuum mechanics mostly introduce an extension of plasticity models. Two types of material models can be distinguished. Uncoupled models describe plasticity, and ductile damage separately. Mechanical response is elastic–plastic until the ductile damage criterion predicts material failure according to loading history. Coupled models couple the description of plasticity and failure. The porous Gurson, Nedleman and Twergaard [1] model is a representative of coupled models. Although these models have huge potential, there have been few practical applications due to the difficulty of the calibration process. An easier calibration process is an essential advantage of uncoupled material models, where the process for calibrating the plastic response and the ductile damage can be separated. The calibration process is distinctly easier if an uncoupled material model is used.From the point of view of interpreting the real process inside the material, ductile damage material models can be classified as phenomenological or micro-structural models. Micro-structural models try to describe damage in a natural way. Damage occurs on the basis of two different mechanisms. In domains with triaxial stress, damage is caused by the initiation, growth and connection of micro-cavities. These micro-cavities are often initiated on the borderline between material inclusions and the basic material matrix. The load-carrying cross section is reduced by this damage process and finally leads to failure. Some micromechanical continuum models have been derived in the basis of both analysis of representative volume with cavity and stress homogenization ([2,3], etc.). Models based on this damage concept exhibit an unrealistic response in the pressure and shear stress dominant domains. In this case, the material is damaged by the localized shear strain in the plane of maximal shear stress that is at an angle of 45° with first principal plane.Phenomenological models are used for describing both of these two mechanisms. These models do not have a physical meaning, and try to best capture the behavior of the real material on the basis of empirically designed relations. These models should be based on the parameters that are assumed to have the main influence on the ductile damage. The parameters are usually designed on the basis of experience or intuition, or can be deduced from micromechanical continuum models. The substantial influence of stress triaxiality was recognized in a micromechanical continuum model. Another crucial point with phenomenological models is the formulation of the failure criterion to provide an efficient description of the damage process. An advantage of these models is the acceptable description of the response in the case of the materials for which they were designed and calibrated. A disadvantage of empirical equations is the cost of the experimental calibration tests and the high level of uncertainty when they are applied to a different type of material.The material model discussed in this paper is based on both a classical incremental model of the plastic response with isotropic hardening and the phenomenological concept of damage in continuum mechanics. This model supposes isotropic behavior of the material, and for a description of the stress state in material point uses von Mises stress q, triaxiality stress η and the normalized Lode angleθ¯. These quantities are defined using the second and third invariant of the deviatoric stressJ2=12S12+S22+S32,J3=S1S2S3·Principal deviatoric stresses S1, S2 and S3 are the principal values of the stress deviatorS=σ+pI,wherep=-13tr(σ)is the hydrostatic stress. The von Mises stress is defined asq=3J2,stress triaxialityη=-pq·The Lode parameter has formξ=cos(3θ)=272J3q,and the normalized Lode angleθ¯=1-6θπ=1-2πarccosξ.The model of the plastic response works with von Mises condition of plasticityq=σY(ε¯pl),with the associated flow rule, and it has only one history-dependent state parameter – the accumulated intensity of the plastic strain, or the accumulated plastic strainε¯pl=∫0tε¯̇pldt,where accumulated plastic strain rateε¯̇pl=23ε̇pl:ε̇pl.The dependence ofσY(ε¯pl)has to be calibrated experimentally.The failure criterion is based on phenomenological quantity damage, which is defined as a non-decreasing scalar parameter(1)ω=∫0tε¯̇pldtε¯f(η,θ¯),that depends on the loading history and can be understood as the linear accumulation of the incremental damage in the process of monotonic loading. Fracture locusε¯fis a function of stress triaxiality and the normalized Lode angle, and it has to be calibrated experimentally. Ductile fracture of the material occurs as soon as critical damage value ωcritis reached. The fracture locus has the physical meaning of the accumulated plastic strain at the instant of ductile failure initiation in hypothetical loading process during that both triaxiality and normalized Lode angle are constant. In such a loading process, the damage at failure has the value ω=ωcrit=1, so the damage defined in (1) can be said to be normalized.In this paper, the Bai–Wierzbicki material model [4] is employed to describe ductile damage. The model is based on exponential dependence of the fracture locus on stress triaxiality. This dependence (2) was extracted from material models, see [2,3], that are based on a description of the growing micro-cavities in the basic material matrix.(2)ε¯f=C1e-C2ηwhere C1 and C2 are material parameters (typically C2=1.5). Bao and Wierzbicki [5] determined this dependence experimentally in a wide range of stress triaxiality, and showed that the dependence of the fracture locus on stress triaxiality need not be a monotonic decreasing function. Xue and Wierzbicki [6] expanded the dependence of the fracture strain on triaxiality by a third invariant of the stress tensor. This invariant was included in the form of the Lode parameter. Xue and Wierybicki used an elliptical function to describe the dependence of the fracture locus on the Lode parameter. They defined the fracture locus as a symmetric function that shows the same dependence of tension (θ¯=1) and pressure (θ¯=-1) of notched round bars.A further generalization is introduced in the Bai–Wierzbicki model [4] which expects the fracture locus to be generally asymmetric, see Fig. 1. The dependence of the fracture locus on the third invariant of the stress tensor introduced using the normalized Lode angle has the form of a parabolic function. The influence of stress triaxiality is described as an exponential form (2). Fracture locus is expressed using round bar tension (θ¯=1), plane strain (θ¯=0) and round bar pressure (θ¯=-1)ε¯f(η,θ¯)=A1(η)θ¯2+A2(η)θ¯+A3(η);ε¯f(η,1)=D1e-D2ηε¯f(η,0)=D3e-D4ηε¯f(η,-1)=D5e-D6η.After some manipulations, the model can be expressed in final form(3)ε¯f(η,θ¯)=12D1e-D2η+D5e-D6η-D3e-D4ηθ¯2+12D1e-D2η-D5e-D6ηθ¯+D3e-D4η.The Bai–Wierzbicki material model was implemented into Abaqus/Explicit FE software, which has a suitable toolset, including linear damage accumulation. The artificial degradation function described by the degradation parameter is implemented in Abaqus software, and is created to prevent a stepped loss of stiffness in the whole element at the instant when the failure criterion is reached. The difference between the damage and the degradation lies in the dependence on the fracture strain. The degradation is not included as a material parameter, and it is therefore not included in the calibration process. Nevertheless the results of numerical simulation can be affected by the choice of degradation. Since failure is indicated in the element of the FE mesh, degradation manifesting itself as a decrease in the elastic modulus E is startedE∗=(1-D)E.After the critical value D=1 is reached in an element, it is removed from the FE mesh. The damage process can be controlled in various ways in Abaqus. In our work we use the description based on Hillerborg’s fracture energy(4)Gf=∫qdupl=∫Lqdε¯pl.The degradation process is defined as(5)D=∫LqGfdε¯pl,where L is the characteristic size of an element. As Eq. (5) shows, the dependence of the damage course on the characteristic size of element L is a disadvantage of this approach. In the domain of expected damage, a mesh with the same element size should be used. Parameter Gfmust be recalculated for different mesh density. From (4), the fracture energy Gfcan be expressed for any characteristic element length L differing from L0, using values of Gf0(6)GfL=Gf0L0=∫Lqdε¯pl→Gf=Gf0L0L.The dependency of degradation development on mesh density can be removed by setting Gf→0. The degradation phase is minimized, and full degradation of the element occurs immediately after the critical damage value ωcritis reached. All samples simulated in this paper have the same element edge size (0.2mm) in expected damage initiation. The small punch is an exception. The element size of this type of specimen is 0.05mm.The calibration process for the material parameters is based on comparing the fracture strain measured response of experimental specimens with the results of FE simulations. For example, the response means the dependence of the load caused by the testing machine and the extension measured using an extensometer in the case of a bar specimen in tension. The aim of the calibration process is to achieve material parameter values such that the simulated response and the experimental response are as close together as possible. For the announced plasticity model, it is necessary to calibrate the dependency of the actual yield stress on the accumulated plastic strainσY=σY(ε¯pl). An uniaxial tensile test on a smooth round bar forms the experimental basis for calibrating this dependence. The output of the tensile test is expressed in terms of nominal (engineering) stress σEdepending on nominal strain εE. If uniform distribution of the strain is assumed and zero change in material volume during plastic deformation, the Cauchy stress, resp. the logarithmic deformation, is determined as(7)σ=σE(1+εE),resp.εln=ln(1+εE).In the von Mises incremental plastic model, the irreversible part of the logarithmic strain for the uniaxial tension test corresponds with the accumulated plastic strainε¯pl=ε¯ln-σE,where E is the elastic modulus. The plastic part of the tensile curve can be determined using this procedure until local necking of the sample occurs, at which point Eq. (7) lose their validity. The stress in the necking domain is no longer uniaxial, and the plastic part of the tensile curve must be modified using a suitable correction (for example Bridgman [7]), or iteratively with the use of FE simulation (for example Ling [12]). In [8], necking of the smooth round bar starts at the time when the maximum force is reached during the experimental test. This force corresponds with the plastic strainε¯neckand the stress σneckwhen necking commences.The resultant functionσY=σY(ε¯pl)is composed of two parts, as in [9]. The first part, which is valid until the instant when the neck is created (ε¯pl<ε¯neck), is formed by the values of the true stress and the plastic strain obtained from a tensile test and calculated directly using Eq. (7). If the interference is strong, the experimental data should be smoothed. The second part of the dependency forε¯pl⩾ε¯neckis described as a suitable approximation function that is chosen in such a way that the condition of tangential connection at the necking pointε¯neckis fulfilled. The tangent in this place cannot usually be determined directly, because the experimental data is influenced by interference. For this reason, the small interval around the critical plastic strain is approximated by a quadratic function, and the directivedσYdε¯plε¯neckis calculated analytically, using this function. For the material discussed in this paper, the plastic part of the tensile curve for a large plastic deformation is replaced by a power function(8)σY=A+Bε¯pln,where A, B, n are material parameters. The following system of equations is obtained if the condition of tangential connection is used.(9)A+Bε¯neckn=σneck,(10)Bnε¯neckn-1=dσYdε¯plε¯neck.In order to solve the system of equations, parameters A and B can be formulated as a functions of exponent n that can be calibrated iteratively. Example of variation ofσY=σY(ε¯pl)with various n is plotted in Fig. 2. When an iterative calibration process is used, it is necessary to remove the value n=0. A more complex approximation function with more parameters can be used to describe a plastic function of complex shape. Finally, the calibrated functionσY=σY(ε¯pl)is expressed as a piecewise linear interpolation, and is sent to the FE program as sequences of corresponding points[ε¯pl,j,σY,j].The Bai–Wierzbicki material model contains six material parameters. At least six specimen types with different values both for stress triaxiality and for the normalized Lode angle at anticipated locations of ductile fracture should be used for successful calibration of this model. Because it is in most cases impossible to use simple formulas to determine the course of quantities[η,θ¯,ε¯pl]during loading, specimens have to be analyzed via FE. The calculated course of these quantities serves as an entry into the calibration process. It is essential to determine fracture strainε¯fexperimentally. The method of digital image correlation can be used for specimens in which the fracture starts from the surface. However, this is really expensive, and not all specimens have a fracture that starts from the surface. The critical extension ΔLfat the instant when failure occurs is mostly determined from experimental data. Fracture strainε¯fin the anticipated failure location is then determined using FE simulation. The critical extension can be determined e.g. via direct surface observation and detection of the first individual cracks. This approach is not universal, for the same reasons as in the case of digital image correlation. Critical extension is identified on the basis of a sudden decrease in loading force in the force–displacement record.In the literature, two approaches are widely cited for use in the process for calibrating the uncoupled ductile damage model. The first approach is based on averaged values for stress triaxiality and for the normalized Lode angle [4]. Averaged values for stress triaxiality ηavand the normalized Lode angleθ¯avare based on the weighted average of the plastic strain(11)ηav=1ε¯f∫0ε¯fη(ε¯pl)dε¯pl,θ¯av=1ε¯f∫0ε¯fθ¯(ε¯pl)dε¯pl.The point[ηav,θ¯av,ε¯f]for each individual specimen can be determined by this approach. The dependence of the fracture locusε¯f(η,θ¯)passes through this point. This method is very simple and undemanding to use. The main disadvantage is the wide range of stress triaxiality η and normalized Lode angleθ¯for some specimen types. Significant error can occur in some cases when these quantities are averaged. The minimum of target functional Favis searched using suitable optimization tools. This functional expresses the total error ofε¯f(η,θ¯)dependence at points[ηav,i,θ¯av,i,ε¯f,i]corresponding with the ith specimen(12)Fav=1N∑i=1N|ε¯f,i-ε¯f(ηav,i,θ¯av,i)|mm,where N is the total number of calibrated specimens, m is the calibration procedure parameter. Balanced deviation by individual specimens can be anticipated as the value of m grows (m=2 corresponds with the least squares method).(13)Fav∗=1N∑i=1N1ε¯f,iε¯f,i-ε¯f(ηav,i,θ¯av,i)is the modified target function that Bai and Wierzbicki used in their work [4]. The individual deviations are weighted by the fracture strain.The optional application of least squares, enabling the use of linear regression, is an advantage of this approach (for example, material model (2) can be calibrated by linear regression), resulting in high effectiveness of the calibration process and guaranteed existence of the global extreme. Material models can sometimes be modified so that linear regression can be used partially. When calibrating the Bai–Wierzbicki material model (3), exponents D2, D4 and D6 have to be determined using some standard procedure minimizing target function (e.g. the simplex method). The remaining parameters D1, D3 and D5 can be solved by linear regression. An optimization problem that must be solved iteratively is reduced to three exponents D2, D4 and D6.The second approach defines the target as the deviation of damage ω integrated up to fracture strain from ωcrit=1 for the ith specimen averaged over all specimens(14)Fω=1N∑i=1N|1-ωi|mm,where(15)ωi=∫0ε¯f,idε¯plε¯f(η,θ¯).This approach eliminates averaging (11), but the calibration costs are higher than for the first approach. In addition there is higher global minimum uncertainty in this case. For these reasons, fine tuning of the parameters found using averaging quantities is the preferred application. This approach was used for example in [10].The disadvantage of both approaches mentioned here is that the target function does not directly use critical extension ΔLf, which is employed to determine the fracture strain. This deficiency has an effect namely in cases when specimens of more than one type are lying near to each other in the space stress triaxiality-normalized Lode angle. Significant differences in the fracture strains of such specimens result in compromises in calibration. Both of the previous calibration methods were modified for this reason. The accumulated plastic strain in loading courseε¯pl(ΔL∼)in dependence on the normalized extension is shown in Fig. 3for three different specimens. The normalized extension(16)ΔL∼f=ΔLΔLf,is defined in such a way that the fracture of all specimens corresponds with the valueΔL∼f=1. Assuming that the fracture locus approximates the fracture strain for all three specimens with the same relative errorδε¯f, different relative errors of critical relative extensionδΔL∼are obtained due to the different gradients of functionε¯pl(ΔL∼)in pointΔL∼=1. For all three specimens, if the fracture locus is lower than the experimental fracture strain with relative errorδε¯f=-0.1, then the butterfly specimens (45° and −10°) will be damaged in 90% of the critical relative extension, but the notched round bar R4 will be damaged in 95% of the critical relative extension. Both previous calibration approaches were therefore later modified, as described, in order to relate the calibration results directly with the normalized extension. If there is relatively low errorδε¯f, the courseε¯plin dependence onΔL∼can be taken as approximately linear. The error in critical extensionδΔL∼is approximately expressed by(17)δΔL∼=1αδε¯pl,where(18)α=dε¯pldΔL∼ΔL∼=1·The target functional of the calibration that expresses the average relative error of the normalized extensions(19)Fav=1N∑i=1NδΔL∼immcan be changed, using Eq. (18), into a form corresponding with the method of average quantities, where individual differences are weighted by inverted value αi(20)Fav=1N∑i=1N1αiε¯f,i-ε¯f(ηav,i,θ¯av,i)mm.This approach again provides us with the option of least squares and partial linearization of the calibration. The second method (14), which uses the damage directly, can also be modified. First, the coursesωi(ε¯pl)are calculated on the basis of the current fracture locus, and the current fracture strainsε¯f,i∗are determined from these courses via the damage criterion(21)ωiε¯f,i∗=∫0ε¯f,i∗dε¯pl,iε¯f(η,θ¯)=1.The appropriate extensionsΔLf,i∗entering the target functional(22)Fω=1N∑i=1NΔLf,i∗-ΔLf,iΔLf,imm,are found for these strains, usingΔLf,i∗=ΔLε¯f,i∗. The Bai–Wierzbicki ductile damage model described in this paper was calibrated using this method.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
