@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Simulation of biaxial wheel test and fatigue life estimation considering the influence of tire and wheel camber

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Camber status and stress distribution of wheel under biaxial loads are analyzed according to the standard EUWA ES 3.23.Fatigue life of the wheel is estimated using stress life (S-N) method based on the stress analysis of the wheel.The comparison is conducted between the simulation results of biaxial wheel fatigue test and uniaxial fatigue test, and the results validate the stringency and practicality of the standard.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Biaxial wheel fatigue test,Finite element model,Numerical simulation,Wheel camber,Damage analysis,Stress fatigue theory,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The traditional fatigue test of wheel comprising the radial and cornering fatigue tests cannot simulate the real stress state of wheel well. Biaxial wheel fatigue test combining these two traditional tests has become an internationally recognized method that can reproduce the real loading condition of the wheel in service. Since the test is time- and cost-consuming, developing the simulation method on biaxial wheel fatigue test is urgently necessary. In this paper, a new method is proposed to evaluate the fatigue life of commercial vehicle wheel, in which the finite element model of biaxial wheel fatigue test rig is established based on the standards of EUWA ES 3.23 and SAE J2562, and the simulation of biaxial wheel test and fatigue life estimation considering the effects of tire and wheel camber is performed by applying the whole load spectrum specified in ES 3.23 to the wheel. The radial and cornering fatigue tests are also simulated, and the results are compared with ones of the biaxial fatigue test. The research shows that the proposed method provides an efficient tool for predicting the fatigue life of the wheel in the biaxial fatigue test.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As one of the most important safety components in vehicle, wheel plays a significant role on driving safety, handing stability and riding comfort. Since the working conditions are random and complex, it is essential to guarantee the required durability of wheel during service life. Currently, the fatigue life of wheel is tested by radial and cornering fatigue tests in the lab. Because of the independence of these two tests, the real stress state of wheel cannot be well reproduced. Biaxial wheel fatigue test evaluates the durability of wheel under combined variable radial and lateral loads, which is demanded by many Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) especially in European market in recent years. Moreover, the complexity of tire-wheel assembly cyclic loading distribution and wheel road conditions are considered synthetically in the test. Therefore, the fatigue safety of the wheel can be tested and evaluated comprehensively by the biaxial wheel fatigue test [1–3]. Since the test is time- and cost-consuming, the development of simulation method on biaxial wheel fatigue test is necessary and meaningful.The two standards: ES 3.23 issued by Association of European Wheel Manufacturers [4] and SAE J2562 issued by Society of Automotive Engineers [5] promote the advancement of the wheel industry and show the great significance of biaxial wheel fatigue test in development cycle of “Design–Evaluate–Improve”. Studies on cornering fatigue test [6,7] and radial fatigue test [8–10] have been conducted extensively, mainly focusing on the life evaluation of wheel under a certain uniaxial load, which cannot reflect the real working life of wheel directly. Few researches were made to investigate the Virtual Experimental Method (VEM) of wheel biaxial fatigue test. Wang [11] applied finite element analysis to calculate the damage of a steel wheel in the biaxial fatigue test, but the effects of wheel camber and the contact property between wheel and driving drum of test bench were not considered. Firat et al. [12–15] had performed a series of research on multi-axial fatigue damage and proposed a prediction method of wheel fatigue life based on local strain-life applied to estimate the fatigue life of an aluminum wheel. However, their work only focused on fatigue damage of wheel under one certain load condition, without considering the load sequence prescribed in the standard ES 3.23. To the best of authors’ knowledge, the research on practical and exact VEM of wheel biaxial fatigue test is limited.To bridge these gaps, a simulation method is proposed for evaluation of biaxial fatigue life of commercial vehicle wheel based on EUWA standard ES 3.23 in this paper. The proposed technique involves the effects of tire model and wheel camber. The camber angles of wheel under biaxial loads are firstly calculated through camber analysis, which is addressed in the next section. In Section 3, the strength analysis of the wheel under biaxial loads is conducted. The fatigue life of the wheel is evaluated based on the stress life (S-N) method in Section 4. The conclusions can be found in Section 5. The proposed simulation method provides an efficient tool for predicting the fatigue life of the wheel in the biaxial fatigue test.The biaxial wheel test machine for commercial vehicle is illustrated in Fig. 1[16]. It consists of the wheel assembly, driving drum, radial/lateral load actuators, kinematic links, main frame, servo motor and so on. The drum is driven by the servo motor, and two inside curbs of the drum are designed to contact with the tire sidewall for reaction of lateral load. The wheel assembly is installed on a dummy vehicle axle inside the driving drum and is rotated by the drum while loaded by the actuators through kinematic links. The LBF load program (Eurocycle) [3,4,16], including 98 loading events describing radial load, lateral load and wheel revolutions, running in a computer is repeated until test termination as specified in the standard ES 3.23.The camber of the wheel assembly occurs when the radial and lateral loads are simultaneously applied in the test. The direction of the wheel camber depends on the direction of the lateral force as demonstrated in Fig. 2. In the coordinate system of Fig. 2, negative lateral load results in positive wheel camber (denoted as +θ), while positive lateral force leads to negative wheel camber (denoted as −θ). When the wheel camber is positive, the bending moments acting on spoke respectively generated by lateral force and radial force are in the opposite direction. Conversely, the two bending moments are in the same direction when the wheel camber is negative. This indicates that wheel camber has a significant effect on stress magnitude and distribution region on the wheel, which will be further discussed in this paper. Therefore, the strength analysis and fatigue estimation of the wheel under biaxial loads should involve the effect of the wheel camber. However, the previous literatures [11–15] on the simulation of wheel biaxial fatigue test did not consider this factor, which leads to inevitable errors.The simulation of biaxial wheel test using finite element method can be performed nominally by directly applying the biaxial loads to the wheel. However, because of the occurrence of wheel camber, the simulation involves strong nonlinear problems including large displacement of the wheel, contact nonlinearity between the tire and drum, and tire material nonlinearity which may lead to divergence of the simulation. On the other hand, the load program (Eurocycle) described in standard ES 3.23 only includes the lateral forces and radial forces, but not wheel camber angles generated automatically during the test and determined by the lateral force, radial force, wheel structure, loading structure and tire properties. To guarantee the efficiency and precision of the simulation, the analysis will be divided into two stages. The first stage is to calculate the camber angle for each load condition through camber analysis of the wheel and test system based on the rigid model. Then the strength analysis is implemented based on the finite element model with wheel camber angles obtained in first stage.According to EUWA standard ES 3.23, a simplified but full scale three-dimensional model of the biaxial wheel test machine for commercial vehicle is established using the software SolidWorks, which consists of a rotating drum, loading frame, flange, tire and wheel, as demonstrated in Fig. 3. The solid model is imported into the finite element analysis software ABAQUS for further analysis. For the calculation of the camber angle through camber analysis, all parts of the model are set to be rigid bodies to improve the convergence speed of the simulation. The drum is completely fixed. The friction contact interaction is defined between the tire and the inside surface of the drum. The tire, wheel, loading frame and flange are all tied together to constrain their relative motion.The calculation process of the camber angle of wheel under biaxial loads contains two steps. At the first step, the lateral loader is connected to the loading frame by the two-force bar and the radial load is applied to the wheel. As shown in Fig. 3, the lateral loader is fixed on all six degrees of freedom (DOFs) at reference point 1 (RP-1, built at the endpoint of lateral loader), and the loading frame is free on DOF of Z axis but constrained on other DOFs at RP-2 (built at midpoint of radial loading frame). Radial load is applied on the loading frame at RP-2. The second step is to maintain the radial load and apply the lateral load to the wheel. In this step, the constraints on X axis and rotational DOFs of the loading frame and the X axis DOF of lateral loader are released. At this status, the wheel simultaneously undertakes the given radial and lateral loads. The simulation results of camber angles of wheel under various biaxial loads are shown in Table 1. Due to some groups of loads are reduplicative, the camber angles of 53 different groups of load sequences are listed in Table 1.The finite element model (FEM) of a rotating drum and kinematic link for loading in the biaxial wheel test machine is established (as shown in Fig. 4) for wheel strength analysis. The drum and loading frame are assumed to be rigid bodies but other parts are set to be elastic. The spoke and rim are modeled using improved tetrahedron element with intermediate node (C3D10I). Because of the incompressible property of the rubber material, the tire is discretized using hexahedral-hybrid element with reduced integration (C3D8R). The tire–wheel assembly tilts with a camber angle corresponding to each loading condition. In order to avoid the interference between the tire and the inside surface of the drum, an initial clearance needs to be set between the tire and drum. The constraint and interaction conditions of the assembly are the same to that set for camber calculation in Section 2.2.The spoke and rim of wheel are both made of steel material BG380L (Chinese Standard). The mechanical properties of steel BG380L with different thickness are obtained by static tensile test according to the standard GB/T 228.1-2010 as shown in Table 2. Because plastic deformation of the spoke or rim may take place during the test, the hardening characteristic of the material is taken into account in the simulation. The effective stress-strain curves of the material after tensile yielding are shown in Fig. 5.Tire rubber is assumed to be incompressible elastic material, and compressive stress cannot be calculated with displacement fields. The isotropic hyperelastic Mooney–Rivlin material model is used to depict the tire. The form of the Mooney–Rivlin model [17,18] is:(1)U=C10(I¯1−3)+C01(I¯2−3)+1D1(Jel−1)2where U is the strain energy per unit of reference volume;I¯1andI¯2are the first and second deviatoric strain invariants, respectively; C10, C01 and D1 are temperature-dependent material parameters; Jelis the elastic volume ratio. Fig. 6shows the relationship between deflection of tire and radial loads, which were obtained by using both the test and simulation methods, and the tire parameters used in the simulation are selected from the related literature [19]. Comparing with the simulation data and the fitting curve of the test data, the simulation data 1 meets the fitting curve well, and the parameters listed in formula (1) are valued as C10 = 30,C01 = 0, D1 = 0.For strength analysis of the wheel, the 53 load sequences of Eurocycle and the corresponding wheel camber angles obtained in Section 2.2 are used to achieve the real working condition as much as possible.The strength analysis of wheel under biaxial loads can be carried out in three steps. In the first step, the loading frame is fixed at RP-3 (the same location as RP-2) and the air pressure is applied to the inside of wheel and tire. The air pressure is set to 0.9 MPa according to the standard ES 3.23. The second step is to apply the radial force to the wheel. In this step, the Z axis DOF of the loading frame is released and the radial force is applied at RP-3. Under the action of the radial force, the wheel assembly and the loading frame move in the radial direction until the tire contacts the drum and the contact force between the tire and drum is equal to the radial force. In the last step, the radial force is maintained at RP-3 and the lateral load is applied on the loading frame at RP-4. It is noted that the lateral loading position (RP-4) and the contact location between the tire and drum should be always on the same horizontal line in order to avoid extra bending moment acting on wheel at the contact position. This indicates that the location of RP-4 varies with the radial load, and can be determined based on the results in step 2.Stress analysis of the wheel under biaxial loads is conducted for 53 groups of loading conditions [5]. For convenience, the simulation results of two loading conditions are presented and compared as examples. In order to demonstrate the effect of wheel camber on stress distribution, the two loading conditions which lead to positive and negative wheel camber respectively are selected. The two loading conditions and the stress results of the wheel are shown in Figs. 7and 8and Table 2.It can be observed from Fig. 7 that the wheel camber does not affect the distribution of stress in the spoke, but the value of stress in the spoke, and we may see that the dangerous areas of spoke mostly locate at the air ventilation hole for both loading conditions. The maximum stress of the spoke with negative wheel camber angle is much larger than that of the spoke with positive wheel camber angle, the values of which are 264.6 MPa and 181.8 MPa, respectively. However, the stress value and distribution of the rim are both affected greatly by the wheel camber as illustrated in Fig. 8. The maximum stress in the rim with negative camber angle is larger than that in the rim with positive camber even if the equal lateral forces are applied. The high stress areas of the rim mostly locate on both the rim well and the hump. The stress on these two areas are approximately equal for the case of negative wheel camber, while the stress in the hump are much larger than that in the rim well for the case of positive wheel camber as shown in Table 3.In this section, the fatigue life of the wheel is estimated using stress life (S-N) method [20,21] in the software Fe-safe. The damage of the wheel under one biaxial load condition is firstly evaluated based on the stress results obtained in Section 3. Then the total damage of the wheel after going through one Eurocycle is calculated and accumulated using Miner method.According to the fatigue theory, the fatigue life of the wheel can be evaluated using the stress fatigue theory when the maximum stress is less than the yield stress. The S-N curve can be commonly described by the function(2)SmN=Cwhere, S is the amplitude of the cyclic stress; N is the fatigue life; m and C are the unknown parameters, and their value are determined empirically by the ultimate tensile strength of material and the previous fatigue test of the wheel. As the ultimate tensile strength (Su) of spoke material is 398.7 MPa, the fatigue strength (Sf) defined by the stress amplitude when the fatigue life is infinite can be formulated empirically using the following formula [17]:(3)Sf=kSuwhere k is a coefficient within the range of 0.3∼0.6. According to the results of radial fatigue test and cornering fatigue test on this type of wheel presented in the literatures [22,23], the coefficient k can be determined as 0.52. Then the fatigue strength Sfcan be obtained as 207.3 MPa, and the fatigue life of spoke (N) under the fatigue strength Sfis approximately considered to be 107. Based on the empirical formula, the fatigue life (N) of spoke under 90% of the ultimate tensile strength is about 103 cycles. Therefore, the S-N curve of the spoke can be approximately calculated according to Eq. (2). The S-N curve of the rim can also be obtained in the same way. The S-N curves are linear in logarithm relationship as shown in Fig. 9.As a rotating part of vehicle, the wheel is subjected to the cyclic loads. To evaluate the damage of the wheel using the commercial software Fe-safe, the cyclic loads acting on the whole circumference of the wheel are required. However, in modeling wheel's rolling process, dynamic explicit approach generates ratcheting effect which greatly influences analysis precision [24]. As the wheel speed in fatigue test is not high enough to excite the first order dynamic mode of the wheel, it is reasonable to replace the dynamic process by static one in finite element analysis [22,23]. In the static simulation, the wheel and drum are both fixed, the biaxial loads are applied to the wheel separately on 10 locations over a span of 36° with uniform space in a circle to simulate the movement of the wheel, which means that ten groups of simulations need to be performed in sequence for each biaxial loading condition. After each simulation, the wheel is rotated by an angle of 36° and the biaxial loads maintain for the next simulation. Therefore, 10 groups of stress distributions are obtained for one loading condition to simulate the cyclic loads acting on the wheel in one rotation period, which can be used for the damage analysis of the wheel. With the stress distributions for all biaxial loading conditions, the fatigue life of the wheel under biaxial loads can be predicted.The simulation results for one loading condition, where the radial and lateral forces are 78 kN and 14.4 kN respectively, are taken as an example of damage analysis of the wheel. Under this loading condition, the wheel appears in negative camber. According to the method presented above, ten groups of stress distribution data of the wheel are imported into the software Fe-safe. The obtained logarithmic fatigue life distribution of the wheel is shown in Fig. 10. It can be seen that the low life areas of rim and spoke mostly locate at the rim well and the air ventilation hole, respectively. The wheel may fail after 527,229 (105.722) revolutions under this loading condition, and the initial crack may emerge at the area of air ventilation hole.Fig. 11illustrates the damage (defined as the reciprocal of fatigue life) generated after acting one cycle of load on wheel. It also demonstrates that the fatigue failure most likely occurs at the area of rim well and air ventilation hole. The results of damage analysis of all biaxial loads specified in Eurocycle are listed in Table 1. It can be found that the lateral force has a great influence on the durability of the wheel. As the maximum stress of wheel with positive camber is much less than that of wheel with negative camber, the fatigue life of the wheel with positive camber is much longer than that of the wheel with negative camber.The fatigue life of the wheel going through all the biaxial loads specified in Eurocycle [4] can be estimated based on the integrated stress distribution obtained through the simulations under all these load sequences. Since the wheel revolutions for each loading condition in Eurocycle are different, Miner method [25] is used to calculate the total damage of the wheel by accumulating the damage generated under each biaxial load and specified revolution. Miner method can be expressed by the following formula:(4)D=∑i=1nniNiwhere, D is the total damage of the wheel; i is the index of biaxial load sequence; niis the specified revolutions of the wheel under the ith biaxial loads; Niis the fatigue life of wheel under the ith biaxial load. When D is accumulated to 1, the wheel fails due to fatigue.The total damage of the wheel after one Eurocycle is shown in Fig. 12. The dangerous areas of rim and spoke are concentrated on the location of rim hump and air ventilation hole, respectively. The maximum damage of the wheel locates at the air ventilation hole inside of the spoke, with the value of 7.393 × 10−3 as shown in Fig. 13.According to the total damage after one Eurocycle of biaxial loads, the maximum driving distance of wheel in biaxial fatigue test can be calculated using the following formula:(5)S≈πDrDmaxwhere, S is the maximum distance of wheel; D is outside diameter of the tire, which is 1.05 m in the simulation; r is the total revolutions for one Eurocycle, which is 15960; Dmax is the calculated maximum damage for one Eurocycle. Therefore the test life of the above wheel under biaxial loads can be approximately calculated as S = 6980.6 km.The standard ES 3.23 requires that the wheel should be in full functionality or only has allowable short technical cracks after running 16000 km in the biaxial fatigue test. According to the results of the simulation, the above wheel cannot meet the durability performance requirements.To demonstrate the difference in fatigue life predicted by different fatigue tests, the simulations of radial wheel fatigue test and cornering fatigue tests are respectively performed, and the fatigue life distribution diagrams of the wheel obtained through these two uniaxial fatigue test simulation are shown in Fig. 14. It can be obtained that the durability performance of wheel in radial and cornering fatigue tests can satisfy each requirement well according to EUWA standard ES 3.11, and the fatigue life of wheel is much higher than that in biaxial fatigue test, meanwhile the wheel can pass the two fatigue test freely on bench tests [22,23]. Obviously, the biaxial fatigue test has provided a more rigorous but more practical standard for the development of wheel.As there is not yet the biaxial fatigue test machine for commercial vehicle wheels in China at present, to validate the FEM of biaxial fatigue test is difficult. However, a great deal of calculation on uniaxial fatigue test of the wheel by using the similar method presented in the paper had been carried out, and the results validated by bench test [22,23] had shown the feasibility of the approach used in the paper.The improved design of the wheel is now in progress based on the simulation results, and the sample of the wheel will be produced and tested at LBF (in Germany) after the improved wheel passes the virtual biaxial wheel fatigue test.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, a method of the biaxial fatigue test of a wheel according to EUWA ES 3.23 is proposed based on the FE-integrated fatigue analysis. The finite element model of biaxial wheel fatigue test rig is established, and the simulation of biaxial wheel test and fatigue life estimation considering the effects of tire and wheel camber is performed by applying the whole biaxial load sequence specified in ES 3.23 to the wheel. The conclusions can be drawn as follows:(1)Biaxial wheel fatigue test is very different from the traditional radial and cornering fatigue tests. The wheel camber is generated by lateral force, which has a significant influence on stress distribution of the wheel. The simulation considering the wheel camber angles may provide more practical results to evaluate the fatigue life of the wheel.The dangerous positions are mostly located at the area of air ventilation hole and rim hump, and the crack will firstly emerge at the area of air ventilation hole after a driving distance of 6980.6 km.The durability performance of wheel evaluated by radial fatigue test and cornering fatigue test can satisfy each requirement well; however, the wheel fails in biaxial fatigue test. Compared with the two traditional fatigue tests, the biaxial fatigue test has provided a more rigorous but more practical standard for the development of wheel.