@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Parametric virtual laboratory development: A hydropower case study with student perspectives

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We investigated common geometrical features of crossflow hydropower rotors.We used the results to create a parametric model to describe rotor geometries.We tested that model in constructive solid geometry.We developed prototype virtual learning software around the model.We explored student perspectives on that prototype in a pilot-study to provide direction for future work.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Graphics,Hydropower,Rotors,Parametric,Virtual learning,3D modeling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In order to take advantage of trends such as genetic-design students need to be familiar, and comfortable, with the concept of parametric computer models and how their parameters relate to physical-forms. Virtual learning software can aid in creating that understanding and help support studies at all undergraduate levels in engineering design disciplines. As an example, hydropower rotors are complex and largely rely on computational analysis of geometries for single rotor types. That problem can be significantly overcome using a parametric algorithm capable of creating an almost-infinite variety of computer models. Therefore, this paper investigates the shared parametric properties of common crossflow hydropower rotor geometries, resulting in a generic model that is then used to illustrate application in real-time interactive virtual learning software capable of producing accurate stereoscopic images and stereolithography files for 3D printing, as well as linking to constructive solid geometry software for slower, but more detailed, analysis. A pilot survey of student attitudes to the virtual learning prototype and resulting geometries is then discussed, illustrating the potential for 3D graphics as an effective addition to virtual learning of parametric design methods, and giving initial direction for future work.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
An almost inexhaustible range of crossflow hydropower rotors (and potentially also wind-powered versions) can be constructed using the single generic base model described herein. That model is fully parametric, with rule-sets differentiating between different rotor types, allowing generation of solid geometries for use in CFD, visualizations and 3D printing of prototypes. It is also suitable for use with genetic algorithms to allow optimisation and investigation of improved designs. Therefore, it provides a complete base upon which students can develop an understanding of parametric design and visualize how adjustment of key parameters leads to changes in physical form through 3D computer graphics.That hypothesis has been tested through development of a real-time virtual laboratory and a pilot-study survey of attitudes toward the use of such virtual laboratories, in curricula, from undergraduate students. It was found that while the majority of students undertaking first year classes had not used similar virtual learning software, the majority also expressed a desire for its use as part of their studies. A number of caveats are obviously attached to that including a need to ensure that learning-goals are comprehensively covered, and a desire for such systems not to replace human-led lectures where possible.However, the development of software discussed in this paper has been shown by first year engineering students at Birmingham City University to be an important step toward their learning systems of tomorrow, and so deserving of further research and implementation. But, it is apparent that they require virtual laboratories to provide accurate portrayals, and integration with later learning systems, which requires a considerable depth of design and testing (e.g. the work described in Sections 2 and 3) if virtual learning is to achieve its full potential in engineering design.