@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Wind flow simulations on idealized and real complex terrain using various turbulence models

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Speed up factors are calculated for various idealized and real topography.Both 2D and 3D topography are studied and their differences highlighted.Various turbulence models are implemented and tested for predicting wake flow.LES simulation at full scale dimensions are conducted using wall functions.Validation of result against available literature and field observations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Computational fluid dynamics,Topography,Complex terrain,FSUR,Turbulence models,RANS,LES,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The effect of topographic features on wind speed and wake turbulence is evaluated by conducting Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) simulations using an in-house CFD program that features various turbulence models. The simulation results are assessed by computing Fractional Speed Up Ratio (FSUR) along longitudinal lines at different elevations. Such information is useful for evaluating wind loads on long span structures and micro-siting of wind turbines on complex terrain. Simulations are conducted on both idealized and real topographic features in both 2D and 3D domain. The turbulence structure behind hills is examined using several turbulence models such as the mixing-length, standardk–∊, RNGk–∊, realizablek–∊and Smagorinsky LES models. All turbulence models predicted FSUR values on upstream side of hills adequately; however, the performance of simple turbulence models, such as mixing length, is found to be insufficient for characterizing wakes behind hills. RANS turbulence models gave results close to one another; however, those models that incorporate modifications to account for adverse pressure gradient conditions performed better at wakes behind hills. LES conducted at full scale dimensions, and using wall functions, failed to give results that are comparable to the other turbulence models. Re-conducting the simulations at model scale dimensions, hence at relatively small Reynolds number, and without using wall functions gave results that are comparable to those found in the literature. Therefore, use of wall functions can degrade quality of results in LES of high Reynolds number flows of practical interest.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Several building codes and standards incorporate the effect of topographic features on wind speed using idealized models of isolated and symmetrical orography [1]. On the other hand, real topography contain irregular three dimensional topographic features that are surrounded by other topographic features; thus, they are neither symmetrical nor isolated. Using such simplifications often leads to overly conservative design of structures located on complex terrain. The problem is pronounced for long span structures, such as transmission lines, that cross multiple zones with different speed-up and turbulence characteristics. Thus, mean wind speed and turbulence intensity information are required at several locations above the topography. Especially at crest of hills and escarpments, the Fractional Speed Up Ratio (FSUR) (Eq. (10)) can be high enough to cause major structural failures. Therefore, many national codes such as NBCC (Canadian standard), ASCE-7 (American standard), AS/NZS 1170.2 (Australian/New Zealand standard), and EUROCODE 1 (European standard), provide general guidelines to estimate topographical multiplication factors for wind speed over hills and escarpments. Experimental investigations, such as field observations and boundary layer wind tunnel tests, are recommended for complex terrain that are not covered well in national codes. This work focuses on Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) approach to asses the effect of topographic features on wind speed and turbulence.A number of numerical studies over complex terrain have been conducted since Jackson and Hunt [2] first analyzed flow over isolated hills of low slope using linearized forms of fluid flow equations. Their approach is still in common use for large scale wind mapping, where a quick estimation of wind speed is required for turbine micro-siting or similar purposes. One such program developed at Risϕ-DTU is Wind Atlas Analysis and Application Program (WAsP) that includes a complex terrain flow model, and a separate wake model for accurate prediction of flow separation. Linear models are known to have problems in predicting flow separation behind high hills and mountains; thus, such models must not be used in alone. Some researchers [3,4] conclude that even non-linear steady-state numerical models have problems in recirculation regions, because orography can induce unsteadiness. The motivation for use of linear models in the past [2,5,1] is limitation of computational resources, but the problem is still present in case of large area wind flow simulations conducted for wind mapping. Therefore, choosing the most complex turbulence model, for simulation of wind flow on complex terrain, is not always appropriate in light of applicability issues. This work also investigates the simplest turbulence model, namely the mixing length model, to emphasize this view. Complex turbulence models, such as Reynolds Averaged Navier Stokes (RANS) and Large Eddy Simulation (LES), have been used by many researchers to get accurate information about the turbulence structure in wakes. LES has been used for various studies in wind engineering: pollutant dispersion [6], complex terrain [7–11], wind loading [12]. Many studies have been carried out using RANS as well: isolated hills [13,14], multiple hills in succession [15,6,16], real complex topography such as Askervein hill [17,18].The choice of turbulence model is important for simulation of separated flow behind hills. RANS models have the most appeal for industrial applications due to their relatively low cost of computation, while still reasonably matching field and experimental observations. Nowadays, Large Eddy Simulation (LES) is increasingly being used for simulating flows with moderately high Reynolds numbers. This is partly motivated by the fact that LES usually gives better results than RANS models in regions of flow separation. This has led to development of various RANS models aimed at curing their deficiency in separated flows. The different turbulence models and wall functions that are implemented in the in-house CFD program, and used for the current study, are briefly discussed in the following sections.The mixing length model is the simplest turbulence model that is known to give good results for simple two dimensional flows such as wakes, jets, mixing layers and boundary layers [19,20]. Its limitation is that the length scale (l∗), and also the velocity scale (u∗), depend on the nature of flow, therefore different values may need to be specified in different regions. For boundary layer type flows with high Reynolds numbers, Prandtl’s mixing length formulalm=κyis commonly used. However, the formula is not accurate in regions with adverse pressure gradient, such as the one behind hills.(1)l∗=lm;u∗=lm|S|where S is the mean strain tensor. Calculating the wall distance y for irregular three dimensional topography is a non-trivial task. A partial differential equation (Eq. (2)) first proposed by Spalding [21] should be solved to get y.(2)∇·∇ϕ=-V;y=∇ϕ·∇ϕ+2ϕ-|∇ϕ|where V is the volume of a cell. The boundary conditions forϕare Dirichlet at ground surface and Neumann elsewhere. This partial differential equation is solved only once at start up; hence, it is not as costly as solving an additional set of turbulence equations at each time step.The first improvement to the mixing length model is to calculate the velocity scaleu∗from the turbulent kinetic energy k using Eq. (3). One-equation turbulence models solve an energy transport equation for k from which velocity scale is determined [19,22,20].(3)u∗=ck1/2lmFor a complete model, i.e. one that does not require any flow-dependent specification, the length scale has to be calculated from the flow as well. Two-equation turbulence models such ask–∊andk–ωsolve one additional transport equation for turbulence dissipation or similar quantity to determine time/length scales, thereby completing the model. However the standardk–∊model can overestimate turbulence production in separated flow regions. To address this problem many modifications have been proposed, of which the simplest is probably an ad hoc modification [23] that incorporates vorticity termω¯in Reynolds stress formula as follows.(4)R=νt2S‾ijω¯ijMore formal approaches to the problem have lead to different RANS models with moderate degrees of success. RNGk–∊and Realizablek–∊models are implemented and used in the current study to analyze the wake flow behind hills.In LES, the effect of the larger eddies is explicitly solved while that of smaller scales is modeled using an eddy-viscosity approach, similar to that used in RANS models [19,20]. The major difference with RANS is that LES models the smallest scales that are below a certain filter width (Δ), and thus is a low-pass filter. The grid itself is commonly used as a filter, in which case explicit filtering operations are not necessary. The simplest sub-grid scale stress model (SGS) is that of Smagorinsky [19], which is first developed for meteorological applications. This model is similar to a mixing length model where the length scale is replaced by a new dimension calculated from cell volume (V=dxdydz).(5)lm=CsΔ;Δ=V3Smagorinsky’s coefficientCSis determined experimentally to be usually between 0.1 and 0.2. The length scale at walls should be zero but the formula gives non-zero values. This problem led to use of damping functions to reduce the length scale at walls to zero. This can be achieved, for instance, by integrating Prandtl’s mixing length as follows(6)lm=min(CsΔ,κy)LES with near-wall resolution is very costly for high Reynolds number flows. The number of cells required is estimated to be aboutRe1.76[19]. Instead of resolving all near-wall flow, wall models can be used to reduce the associated cost significantly. Unlike wall damping functions, which are applied to all control volumes, wall functions are applied only to the cells nearest to the wall. With the use of wall models, the length scale becomes in order of the flow length scale. As a result, the number of cells required becomes independent of the Reynolds number, just like the cases of high Reynolds number RANS models.High Reynolds number flows have thin viscous layers that necessitate use of very fine grids to resolve all near-wall flow behavior. Universal wall models, such as the log-law equation, are commonly used near walls to reduce cost of computation. In the standard wall function approach [24], the first cell close to the wall is placed in the logarithmic region (y+⩾30). Then, the friction velocityu∗is calculated iteratively from the log law equation usingUpandypof the first cell. Then, the wall shear stressτw=ρu∗2can be directly specified as a source term in the momentum equation, or equivalently in the form of modified effective viscosity.(7)Uu∗=1κlnEu∗ypν⇒τw=ρu∗uw=ρu∗Upκln(Ey+)The turbulence kinetic energy and dissipation are also fixed at the first cell closest to the wall.(8)k=u∗2Cμ;∊=u∗3κyThe above approach has problems in recirculating flows where the friction velocity is zero, by definition, at separation and re-attachment points. To solve this problem Launder and Spalding [25] proposed to calculate the friction velocity from k instead of using the log-law.(9)u∗=Cμ1/4kThe transport equation for k is solved with a modified production term that incorporates velocity gradient term that satisfies the log law. Then,∊is fixed at the first cell close to wall. While this method can only be used with models that have equation for turbulent kinetic energy k, the standard wall function method can be used also in LES models with no k equation.The Fractional Speed Up Ratio (FSUR) quantifies the effect of orography on the horizontal component of velocity. FSUR is defined as a ratio of wind speed at a given height to its value on a flat terrain at the same height, as shown in Eq. (10). In the absence of topographic features, FSUR should be 1 at every location. At the crest and upstream side of hills and ridges, FSUR is greater than 1 indicating a speed-up, while it is less than 1 on the leeward side. Maximum values of FSUR are usually reached at the crest of hills or a little upstream of it.(10)FSUR=U(z)Uo(z)The cases considered in this work come from previous work of the second author [15], which focused on analysis of wind flow over 2D orography using the standardk–∊turbulence model. This paper extends that work by conducting simulations over a more realistic 3D orography, in addition to 2D orography, using various turbulence models. After analysis of many idealized 2D and 3D terrain cases, simulation is conducted on a real complex terrain, namely the Askervein hill, for which field observation data is available to validate CFD results.First, simulations are conducted over a flat terrain, with no topographic features, for benchmarking purpose. While this may sound rather pointless, several authors [26–28] have demonstrated the difficulty of simulating wind flow over a featureless terrain. If the inlet wind speed and turbulence intensity profiles are incompatible with wall functions used at the ground, horizontal gradients may develop. Therefore, this benchmark case should result in an FSUR=1 throughout the domain when proper boundary conditions are applied. Any other value indicates artificial speed-up due to inconsistent boundary conditions.The second set of cases considered are shallow and steep isolated hills shown in Fig. 1a. Many equations are available to define shapes of hills that could have significantly different effects on the FSUR obtained [15]. This study uses cosine hills with curves defined by Eq. (11). Both shallow and steep hills have the same height (H) but a different length. The half length (L) of the hills are set to4Hand2Hfor the shallow and steep hills respectively. Then, the maximum slope angles become 38° and 21° for the steep and shallow hills respectively. According to Finnigan [29], flow separation is expected in both cases, because both angles are above the critical angle ofθcr=16°.(11)z=HcosπxL2Some national codes provide recommendations for simple 3D hills as well; therefore, this work also investigates axi-symmetric 3D versions of most 2D topographic features (see Fig. 2). The third case is an escarpment with a constant slope (Fig. 1b). A 3D version of this case, a frustum, may be possible but only the 2D case is considered here. The fourth set of cases considered are double and triple hills (Fig. 1c), which are not covered well in most national codes. The last set of cases concerns wind flow over valleys (Fig. 1d), where the wind is expected to slow down unlike the previous cases.The first step in Atmospheric Boundary Layer (ABL) simulations over complex terrain is to prepare a model of the actual terrain as best as possible. While most of the cases considered here have simple geometry, the procedure followed is applicable to real complex topography as well. It is assumed that geometric information is available in point cloud format, from which surface of the terrain can be produced by triangulation methods. The data maybe collected by field surveying, LiDAR, or other techniques.Once a digital model of the surface is generated, usually in STL (Stereo Lithography) format, the computational domain is meshed with refinements applied towards orographic features. The grid is also stretched in the vertical direction in such a way that the first cell’s center height becomes roughly equal to the equivalent sand grain roughnessKs[27]. Many grid generation software are available to generate tetrahedral grids, which are more suitable for finite element methods. Hexahedral elements are preferred for finite volume calculations because they are more accurate and also result in fewer cells compared to tetrahedrals. However, it is very difficult to generate purely hexahedral grid for an arbitrary surface of a complex topography. The meshing component of OpenFOAM CFD software, known as snappyHexMesh, is used in this study. The process of grid generation involves four stages. First, a background mesh is generated with refinement regions around hills. Then, the grid that lies outside the computational domain is removed. After this stage, the surface boundary is roughly established, but it is not yet smooth enough for final use. Therefore, a third stage of snapping near wall cells to match the surface is done by moving vertices to surface planes. As a result of this process, some of the cells near the surface may become deformed. To alleviate this problem and ensure convergence of solution in these problematic zones, a final stage that adds layers of hexahedral cells parallel to the ground surface is conducted.Even though generating a good mesh for an arbitrary 3D terrain is a difficult task, high quality mesh for the 2D cases can be generated by solving a differential equation, as discussed in Bitsuamlak et al. [15]. The method of meshing used in the present study is a simpler version that does not require solution of differential equations. Using transfinite interpolation body-fitted but non-orthogonal grids can be generated with relative ease. Then, a correction for non-orthogonality of cells is added, via a solution method known as deferred correction.The computational domains are setup following guidelines for the use of CFD in wind engineering [30]. A computational domain can be viewed as consisting of three distinct regions: upstream, central, and downstream regions [27]. The length of the upstream region is fixed at 5H from the center of the first orography. It is recommended to keep this distance short so as to avoid development of horizontal gradients due to inconsistency of surface roughness with inlet profiles [30]. No other obstacles are placed in the upstream and downstream regions; thus, the effect of roughness is taken care of solely via wall roughness modifications. The outlet of the domain is placed downstream at a distance of 12H from the last orography; hence, a zero gradient boundary condition∂ϕ/∂x=0can be assumed for all flow quantities there. The distance between hills is fixed at 8H–4L, which is 0 for the shallow hill case and 4L for the steep hill case. The sides and top of the computational domain are placed 6H from the center of the hill, so that the blockage ratio is kept below the limit of 3% [30] to avoid artificial acceleration of flow. At the inlet, Richards and Hoxey [26] equations for an open terrain roughness ofz0=0.024are used as boundary conditions. At the top the value ofU,kand∊are fixed. At the sides a symmetry boundary condition is assumed.Grid sensitivity study is carried out on one of the idealized terrain cases, namely shallow isolated 2D hill. The number of cells in the vertical and longitudinal directions are changed to estimate their effect on the maximum speed-up at the crest. The values obtained for the different cases are more or less the same as shown in Fig. 3. A close-up view of velocity plot reveals that coarser meshes tend to slightly underestimate wind speed-up. The results also indicate that dedicating more cells in the vertical direction, where flow quantities exhibit high gradients, gives better results than using them in the longitudinal direction. For example, a relatively coarser 117×72 grid shows better performance than 294×36 grid merely because refinement is applied in the wrong direction for the latter. However, the grid cannot be refined in the vertical direction indefinitely, because of limits imposed by the wall function treatment, compatibility of wall roughness with inlet profiles, aspect ratio of cells close to ground, and other factors. After this preliminary study, the grid sizes for the other cases are derived in such a way that the density of grids per-unit length remains the same.A summary of simulation results of wind speed and turbulence intensity profiles of each idealized complex terrain is given in this section. Due to space limitations, only few results are displayed in plots, but common characteristics of the FSUR curves are described.First the benchmark case of an empty fetch of 17H×7H=3400m×1400m is analyzed using the Richards and Hoxey [26] boundary conditions. The result obtained shows that the velocity profile is more or less sustained throughout the domain; thus, FSUR=1. Small deviations are observed towards the ground, where FSUR∼0.97. The difficulty of maintaining horizontal homogeneity in an empty domain is well documented [26,28,31,32], and the same problem is encountered in the current study as well.For the case of isolated hills, a gradual increase of wind speed on the upstream side is followed by a slow down and recirculation on the leeward side. Plots of FSUR along the center line of hills at 30m from the ground are shown inFig. 5. A difference of about 20% is observed between the 2D and 3D models at the crest of hills. FSUR color plots in Fig. 4 also show that it reaches peak values on the sides of the hill, besides the crests. Also the 3D hills simulation show a much smaller recirculation zone than their 2D counterparts. The maximum FSUR above the crest are about 1.6 and 1.8 for the shallow and steep 2D hills respectively. These values are close to those calculated using NBCC national code, which are about 1.7 and 1.9 respectively. ASCE-7 formulas also give similar values; however, EUROCODE-1 and AS/NZ codes predicted about 20% smaller values. The reason for this discrepancy among national codes is not clear, but it may be due to the underlying difference in the methods used to develop the guidelines. Some codes may have used wind tunnel based methods while others used analytical or numerical approaches.In case of multiple hills, the 2D simulation results show a drop in FSUR of about 20% on the second hill compared to the first, which is in accordance with the result of Bitsuamlak et al. [15]. However, the 3D simulations showed a much smaller decrease of about 4%, which can be explained by the fact that 3D hills offer less sheltering than 2D hills in the lateral direction. FSUR more or less remained the same from the third hill onwards. These results suggest that design of structures on sheltered hills should incorporate wind load reduction factors. Many national codes do not have provisions for sheltered hills; therefore, a conservative approach of considering all hills as isolated is followed. It is to be noted that a reduction in wind speed of 20% translates to a load reduction of 40%; thus; the savings can be significant.For the case of an escarpment with a slope of 1:2, flow separation and recirculation are observed at the top and foot of the escarpment. speed-up factors of 2 and 1.8 are observed at 10m and 30m above the crest of the escarpment respectively. These values are more or less in agreement with published literature such as CFD solutions of Carpenter and Locke [16], and analytical solutions of Weng et al. [33]. On the other hand, NBCC predicts significantly smaller FSUR values of 1.6 and 1.57 at 10m and 30m height respectively.The last set of cases analyzed are isolated valleys, which have large recirculation zones. Therefore, the requirement of a good turbulence model is more severe here than in the previous cases. Inside the valley, the wind speed first decreases reaching negative values, and then the flow accelerates up the second slope reaching or exceeding FSUR values of 1 at the ridge. The 3D valleys show less recirculation than their 2D counterparts, similar to the case of hills.The selection of turbulence model is important for the prediction of turbulence structure in the wake region. Comparisons between the mixing length, standardk–∊, RNGk–∊, Realizablek–∊and LES turbulence models are shown in Fig. 6. The RNGk–∊and Realizablek–∊models give virtually identical results; hence, we consider only RNGk–∊from here on. The RNGk–∊and standardk–∊models give close results in most part of the hill, except in the wake where the former predicts more recirculation and longer re-attachment length. On the other hand, the mixing length model, and in some cases LES as well, under-predict the presence of recirculation zone behind hills. The reason for this discrepancy is that Prandtl’s mixing length formula is used in all regions of flow, but the formula is not appropriate in wake zones. Nonetheless, this apparent deficiency did not seem to affect prediction of wind speed at the crest significantly.The LES carried out so far are not true to what one may expect from a typical LES, which usually convey the idea that most flow scales are resolved. The wall models used seem to dominate all other flow behavior, and the larger eddies in the outer region does not have much influence on the recirculation zone. Resolving the flow down to the viscous layer, as in a typical LES, requires a lot of computational cells. For the current simulation that has Reynolds number ofReh∼O(108)for H=200m, the number of cells required isO(1014). The usual remedy for this problem is to simulate at model scale, e.g at 1:1000, thereby violating Reynolds number by orders of magnitude, similar to the case in wind tunnel testing. Several researchers [7–11] have used LES at a Reynolds number of about O(104) without using wall models. The purpose of those studies was mainly to validate wind tunnel test results on a scaled model, with which LES showed good agreement. Typically, larger recirculation zones are observed for LES conducted at small Reynolds number compared to the previous LES conducted at full scale dimensions.To investigate Reynolds number effects, LES simulations are conducted without using wall functions at a model scale of about 1:10,000 with H=40mm. The Reynolds number is about 12,000, similar to the case studied in Tamura et al. [8]. A longer computational domain is used so that the inflow turbulence at the inlet can be specified by recycling results from some location downstream unaffected by the presence of the hill. Inflow turbulence is usually generated using ‘precursor’ simulations for as many time steps as the actual simulation requires. Recycling avoids the need to store results in the precursor method, while still giving good results. Another alternative is to artificially synthesize turbulence that has the required spatial and temporal correlations. Simply applying random and uncorrelated fluctuations is not appropriate for wind engineering applications.The LES results, shown in Fig. 7, display large recirculation zones with long re-attachment length of about 6H. This is in agreement with the result of Tamura et al. who found it to be about 5.8H using numerical LES simulations and about 5.4H experimentally in wind tunnels. The RNGk–∊model show much shorter re-attachment length of about 4H but it is still significantly larger than the recirculation zones observed at high Reynolds number flow with full scale dimensions. Another important parameter of turbulence structure is root mean square (r.m.s) fluctuations. The r.m.s fluctuations from LES are directly obtained; however, RANS simulations keep only mean values. One can assume isotropic turbulence (u′=v′=w′), and calculate r.m.s fluctuation from turbulent kinetic energy (TKE) usingu′=2/3k. A better method is to extract it from normal Reynolds stress components (u′u′). Using the latter method and RNGk–∊turbulence model results, r.m.s fluctuations are calculated for the case of triple steep hills as shown in Fig. 8. We can observe that TKE at the crest increases significantly from the first hill to the second. However, the increase in TKE from the second to the third hill is not significant, similar to the observation made for FSUR in previous sections.So far, only idealized cases of complex terrains are considered. In this section, a real complex terrain, namely the well known case of Askervein hill, is investigated using TU03-B dataset [34] to validate the CFD result. The dataset was acquired while the wind was blowing over the hill at an angle of 210° clockwise for more than three hours. The wind direction is almost perpendicular to the hill for this particular direction. The hill is 116m high and has a somewhat elliptical shape as shown in Fig. 9. It is located in an area where major buildings and other obstacles are absent. The value of the roughness lengthz0was also measured during the field investigation and found to range from 0.01m to 0.05m. To simplify the analysis concerning roughness changes, a constant roughness length ofz0=0.028mis assumed. The surrounding is flat on the upwind side of the hill and hilly on the downwind side. A reference site, where velocity and turbulence intensity measurements are conducted, is located about 3km south-west of the hill. At this location, the wind flow is relatively unperturbed by the surrounding, hence the inlet of the computational domain is placed there. The instrument towers for the field observations are located along a line passing through HT and inclined at 220° as shown in Fig. 9.The dimension of the computational domain is set at 10km×10km×2km around the hill center, similar to that used in Stangroom [18]. The 2km height covers the entire boundary layer, but a smaller height of 1km is also tested and found to be satisfactory. Askervein hill is about 116m high; hence, a 1km computational domain would leave a gap of about 9H between the hill top and the top of the domain. This is more than enough to satisfy the recommendations of Franke and Hirsch [30] about blockage effect. The blockage ratio is about 2% for a 1km boundary layer. The terrain data for the hill was available in triangulated STL file format, based on which the computational domain is meshed. Grid generation for such complex terrain poses a challenge, thus the automatic grid generation tool SnappyHexMesh is used as shown in Fig. 10. About 8 layers of cells are added close to the ground surface to capture near wall boundary flow better. The main difficulty with snappyHexMesh is that it requires a background mesh with an aspect ratio of 1. This requirement leads to excessively high number of cells, where most of them are located in less important regions of the flow. Refinements should be applied in regions where flow variables change rapidly, i.e. have the highest gradient.Simulations are carried out for different grid sizes to check the sensitivity of results to grid size. The grids are generated in a two-step manner. First, relatively coarse background meshes of 30×30×8, 50×50×13, 100×100×24, and 120×120×32 are generated; then, refinements are applied close to the hills and the ground surface to capture the boundary layer flow better. The number of cells that snappyHexMesh produced after refinements are 150k, 520k, 2.5million and 4million cells respectively. These numbers are significantly larger than that of the corresponding background meshes, thereby highlighting the need for mesh refinement in important regions of the flow for efficient simulation. The result of this grid sensitivity study is shown in Fig. 11a. The wind speed-up along the upwind side of the hill is more or less the same for all grids; however, significant differences are observed from the crest downwards. The coarsest grid considered, namely 30×30, performs very poorly in the wake re65gion. For the purpose of determining wind speed-up at the crest, the 50×50 grid is sufficient. However, it still shows some differences with the 100×100 grid for the flow on the leeward side of the hill. The 100×100 grid gives close results to that of the 120×120 grid over the whole length of the hill; therefore, we can conclude that the 100×100 case gives an acceptably grid-independent result.The result of simulation for three turbulence models, namely mixing length, standardk–∊, and RNGk–∊are shown in Fig. 11b. The standardk–∊and RNGk–∊model do not show significant differences in most parts of the hill, except towards the recirculation zone on the leeward side. The mixing length model underestimates the speed-up at the crest and also the recirculation at the lee, but it is not so far off that it becomes completely useless. The fact that Askervein hill has a relatively gentle slope can obscure the performance gap between advanced and simple turbulence models to a certain extent.The field measurement data along line-A of the TU03-B is compared with RNGk–∊simulation results. As can be seen from Fig. 11c, there is a good agreement on the upwind side of the hill, but significant differences are observed on the leeward side of the hill. This is mainly due to flow separation and unsteady flow characteristics that are not captured well with time-averaged turbulence models [3]. This suggest that large eddy simulations has the potential to give better results; however, this is not tested in the current study primarily due to large cost of LES for flows with high Reynolds number. The other alternative of using wall models to reduce the associated cost is shown to give poor results as discussed previously. Some researchers [3,35] have used LES for complex terrain and concluded its superiority if enough small scales are resolved and appropriate boundary conditions are used. In any case, our simulation results using RANS models were able to predict presence of recirculation zones to a certain extent, with the best result coming from the RNGk–∊turbulence model.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A numerical procedure for computing FSUR over various idealized and real topography have been described, starting from model preparation to post-processing results. In general, the results obtained using CFD are found to be in good agreement with those found in literature as well as provisions in national codes. Some conclusions, regarding wind speed-up and turbulence over complex topography, are given below.•Wind speed-upIn general, 3D orography showed lower FSUR at crest of hills and smaller recirculation zones at lee of hills compared to their 2D counterparts. This is attributed to the fact that the flow has more freedom in the lateral direction in a 3D environment. Either a 2D or 3D model may be appropriate depending on the actual shape of the orography; however, the simplicity and conservative FSUR estimate of 2D models makes them more attractive. Steep hills and escarpments showed larger FSUR and recirculation zones than shallow hills. The reduction in FSUR due to sheltering effects was also investigated. While a significant drop in FSUR is observed from the first hill to the second, FSUR almost remained constant from the third hill onwards.TurbulenceThe turbulence model used in CFD simulation plays a significant role in prediction of turbulence structure; however, economy of simulation with a given turbulence model should also be taken into consideration. The mixing length model under-predicted the size of the recirculation zone, but its prediction of wind speed-up on the upstream side of the hill was found to be acceptable. RNGk–∊and Realizablek–∊models are found to be virtually identical, both giving better estimates in the wake region compared to the standardk–∊model. The LES results showed small recirculation zones, but this is attributed to the use of wall functions, which is usually necessary for LES of high Reynolds number flows ofO(108). Separate model scale LES atRe=O(104), and without using wall functions, gave large recirculation zones that are in agreement with results from literature.The study also investigated wind flow over a real complex terrain, namely Askervein hill. The performance of different turbulence models relative to each other is similar to what is observed in the previous idealized terrain cases. The comparison with field observation data showed fairly good agreement on most parts of the hill; however, RANS models predicted much smaller recirculation zones on the lee side of the hill. Even though LES can give better results [3,35], the cost of computation prohibits its use for industrial applications, especially when used without wall models.