@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Design pattern modeling and extraction for CAD models

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Design pattern is introduced into the CAD field.The characteristics and conditions of a good design pattern are defined.A platform-independent design pattern model is constructed.A multi-phases design pattern extraction approach is proposed.The design pattern extraction approach is efficient and effective.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Design pattern,Design reuse,Design patterns modeling,Graph-oriented agglomerative hierarchical clustering,Design semantics,Reusable region,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Design pattern is widely used in the software engineering field, which enables designers to reuse existing mature designs from a high level perspective. Inspired by this idea, a novel approach is proposed to extract design patterns in the CAD field. First, the characteristics for a good design pattern are analyzed and the model for representing design patterns is elaborated. Then, given a set of 3D feature-based CAD models, the corresponding extraction approach is proposed, which includes three important phases: (1) extracting reusable regions with high cohesion, low coupling and moderate complexity so as to form a relative integrated function; (2) constructing candidate design patterns by clustering reusable regions using a graph-oriented agglomerative hierarchical clustering algorithm; (3) determining the final design patterns by choosing those candidate design patterns with high frequency and sufficient information. Finally, a design pattern extraction prototype system is developed, and the experimental results are presented to demonstrate the effectiveness of the approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the past two decades, the CAD industry has experienced some major technological innovations and paradigm shifts. One of the most important R&D problems is renovating CAD systems for efficient knowledge reuse so as to avoid time-consuming and expensive design from scratch. There is a broad consensus that in the mechanical design field, the tasks of design ideation and conceptual design are critical to the design process [1]. As a result, the designers must, in their early design stage, concentrate on the functional and structural design and avoid taking into account more detailed information. How to retrieve and reuse existing designs through some functional or structural information in early design stage is the key issue. One of the possible solutions may be defining, extracting, and reusing the design patterns of 3D CAD models.Design pattern was first proposed by Christopher Alexander in the field of architecture [2]. It describes reusable regions in architecture with a simple technical language so that architects are able to easily understand and reuse these regions. Currently, design pattern has been applied in various other disciplines, for example, software engineering [3]. Inspired by the ideas in these disciplines, we introduce design pattern into the mechanical CAD field so as to enable designers to reuse successfully developed design cases from a high perspective. Because most of the product information, such as materials, cost, analysis data and manufacturing process, is shape-related, in this work, the design pattern for CAD is defined as a reusable region of a set of given CAD models with a special function that designers are able to understand and reuse. Here, the subpart is a subpart of a 3D CAD model that consists of a set of simple features. When the subpart is too large as a whole 3D CAD model, we define it as a standard part; and when the subpart is too small to split, we define it as a feature.With the continuous development of 3D modeling technology, more and more advanced modeling technologies, such as “SpaceClaim”, make it easy to add a relative independent subpart into another existing design. Consequently, substantial work are proposed on how to find the relative independent subparts so as to support the design reuse [4–8]. We have also done some work on design reuse [9,10]. However, in the preliminary stage, the design patterns are just defined as those representative structures appearing with a high frequency found in the past design results, and thus it does not truly capture the connotation of design patterns of the reusable field. This paper, inspired by design patterns in software engineering, focuses on modeling and extracting design patterns for 3D CAD models. The innovative contributions are: (1) introducing design pattern into the CAD field so as to facilitate design reuse from a high level perspective, (2) presenting five specific characteristics and corresponding six conditions of a good design pattern, and constructing a platform-independent design pattern model based on Core Product Model (CPM), (3) proposing a multi-phases design pattern extraction approach. It should be stated that, in this work, we also extract reusable regions based on complexity, which is similar to the idea of the work in Ref. [9], but the algorithm for calculating complexity of a given region has been reasonably improved.The remaining sections of the paper is organized as follows. First, a brief review of the related literature is given in Section 2 and the definition and modeling of design patterns are presented in Section 3. Then, Section 4 describes the three important phases of our approach for extracting design patterns: the extraction of the reusable regions based on design semantics, the construction of the candidate design patterns based on graph-oriented agglomerative hierarchical clustering (G-AHC), and the determination of the final design patterns based on information entropy theory. Following this, in Section 5, the implementation and some results are presented. Finally, we conclude the paper and present several further work directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
