@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An evolutionary geometric primitive for automatic design synthesis of functional shapes: The case of airfoils

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper presents a new 2D auto-adaptive geometric primitive.This primitive encloses the knowledge concerning the engineering problem.It is based on a specifically designed neural network whose output is Bézier curves.In airfoils design it shows higher generative capability then typical used methods.It is applicable in fields where functional constraints qualify the geometric shape.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Geometric primitive,Automatic design synthesis,Artificial neural networks,Airfoils design,Self-adaptive geometric primitive,Functional shape synthesis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A novel self-adaptive geometric primitive for functional geometric shape synthesis is presented. This novel geometric primitive, for CAD use, is specifically designed to reproduce geometric shapes with functional requirements, such as the aerodynamic and hydrodynamic ones, once the functional parameters are furnished. It produces a typical CAD representation of a functional profile: a set of Bézier curves. The proposed primitive follows a generate-and-test approach and takes advantage of the use of a properly designed artificial neural network (BNN). It combines the properties of a geometric primitive and the capability to manage the engineering knowledge in a specific field of application. The proposed evolutionary primitive is applied to a real engineering application: the automatic synthesis of airfoils. Some examples are simulated in order to test the effectiveness of the proposed method. The results obtained by an original prototypal software are presented and critically discussed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The synthesis of new functional shapes is the scope of many design activities. Typical domains are all those where functional constraints qualify the geometric shape, such as the aerodynamics and the hydrodynamics fields. The design task is to obtain a geometric shape that satisfies some predefined functional requirements.Generally, for this kind of engineering problem, the geometric shape, which satisfies functional requirements, might allow arbitrary alternatives; in other words, there does not exist a unique association between functional requirements and geometric shape. Furthermore, the typical geometric primitives, used to design the geometric shape, require input geometric coefficients (the control points of the shape), which, in many practical cases, are not directly associable with the characteristic functional parameters; such is the case of airfoil design. For these reasons, the design synthesis of a functional geometric shape is a complex task for the designer to accomplish; he can easily define a geometric shape that satisfies geometric requirements, but he cannot design as easily a geometric shape that satisfies some specific functional requirements (for example, aerodynamic requirements).With a view to proposing a solution to this design problem, a new geometric primitive is suggested in this paper. This geometric primitive is a computational artefact, which autonomously performs the synthesis of a functional geometric shape from the input of its functional parameters. For this purpose the new type of geometric primitive needs to incorporate the knowledge concerning the specific design problem, so that a solution between the many alternatives can be synthesized. The geometric shape that can be generated must be rigorously compatible with the available knowledge, which is integrated into the geometric primitive. Generally, for this kind of engineering problem there is not a known and well-defined mathematical map between functional requirements and geometric data that represent any geometric shape, not even when the required knowledge concerns a specific design domain. The geometric primitive here proposed is therefore conceived as an evolutionary artefact, which can not only use the old knowledge but also produce and reuse the new knowledge which concerns the specific design problem and which has been obtained while generating new geometric shapes.The proposed geometric primitive benefits from the evolutionary strategies so that, for each generation item, its capability to synthesize a functional geometric shape is improved and may offer a wider set of engineering solutions. The generative capability comes from prior similar designs and is improved thanks to the knowledge acquired during designing.The automatic synthesis of a geometric shape cannot be performed without the capability of using the previous knowledge concerning the design problem. There is an initial knowledge that represents the imprinting of the automatic process. The starting knowledge must be based on some well-defined patches of valid knowledge which covers all the essential aspects of the design problem. The functionality of the proposed primitive evolves during its lifetime, based on the experience acquired, and cannot be known in advance. The design solutions generated in the life cycle and their generation history affect the behaviour of the primitive. In order to reuse the knowledge acquired during the design process, it is essential to define efficient and dynamic ways to store and validate it. During the generative process it is crucial to monitor new solutions which may be generated so as to accept or refuse them. The generation of unexpected results may lead to new design solutions if they can be analysed and understood. That is why an important role is played not only by the monitoring of the generative process, but also by its capability both to evaluate the performance of the generated solution and to recognise new cases. Typically, the automatic design process is monitored by a mathematical model that simulates the physical principle that governs the technical solution. This knowledge is valid if the analysis returns correct inferences about the design solution.This paper actually analyses the possibility of using a new kind of self-adaptive geometric primitive; this primitive excels the traditional approaches to functional geometry design by performing an automatic synthesis of the geometric shape directly from the functional parameters that characterise it. This primitive is designed to autonomously perform the generate-and-test process, which typically characterises the geometric shape synthesis, and to reuse the knowledge acquired in that process.The proposed method has found its generative capability both in the knowledge that is transferred to the geometric primitive and in that knowledge which the primitive generates while testing the attempted solutions. Thus, the method extends its generative capability by generalising from the available knowledge. The present approach benefits from a dedicated artificial neural network that directly performs the synthesis of the geometric shape in the form of Bézier curves.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
