@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new constraint-based virtual environment for haptic assembly training

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Propose the method of setting basic constraints to solve the shortcomings when physics engine and haptic feedback are both integrated in assembly tasks. The basic constraints make the assembly training easy and realistic through the usage of haptics and visual fidelity.Assembly sequence generation based on disassembly process. Moreover, each part's assembly constraint can be identified during the disassembly process.Except the display and physics engine modules, the whole training system is made up of closeable widgets.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Virtual assembly training,Haptic feedback,Constraints,Physics engine,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a virtual training system with the aim to make the assembly training easy and realistic through the usage of haptics and visual fidelity. The paper gives a detailed description on setting basic constraints to solve the shortcomings when physics engine and haptic feedback are both integrated in the training system. The basic constraints not only simplify the assembly operation and shorten the assembly time, but also increase the visual realism when physics engine is integrated in assembly training. Assembly sequence generation based on the disassembly process is also provided. Moreover, except the display and physics engine modules, the whole system is made up of widgets, which can be activated only when its function is needed. The experiment of the Slider Mechanism is presented. 24 participants were distributed into three groups (haptic-based group, mouse-based group and traditional training group). The results show that the haptic-based training system received good evaluations on the ease of operation and assembly cues. No significant differences in training time were found between the haptic group and the traditional training group. But the training of the mouse-based group was significantly slower. Moreover, no significant differences in learning of the task were found among the three groups.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the development of the manufacturing industry, virtual assembly training has received much attention in the past few years because it has many advantages compared to traditional assembly training:(1)All assembly parts from CAD (Computer Aided Design) software are imported into virtual environment, which saves time of making physical parts. Assembly workers can perform the assembly training many times without loss of parts.Assembly workers can complete the assembly training task by himself under the guidance of assembly cues. Moreover, fewer mistakes will be made.Avoid the risk of danger in the real parts training task as assembly workers are unfamiliar with the assembly process [1].Virtual assembly training inside the room will not be affected by the bad weather or other factors.However, when integrating physics engine and haptics in the training system, there are several problems needed to be solved. Ritchie et al. [2] did a research on factors affecting users' performance in a haptic-based assembly. One of its results showed that when conducting the chamfered peg-in-hole assembly task, the completion time of SCD (stereo with collision detection) was almost four times longer than the real parts assembly. The SNCD (stereo without collision detection) was seven times longer than the real parts assembly. In the assembly training experiment conducted by Vélaz et al. [3], the assembly training time using the haptic device was longer than the mouse-based training. When using the haptic device in assembly tasks, participants needed to deal with depth and collision of objects in 3D scene. This increased great complexity when performing the insertion type assembly. The above studies have suggested that some of the assembly tasks (precise position, peg-in-hole, screw) are still time-consuming compared to real parts assembly even with the help of haptic feedback. The previous studies have proposed several methods to solve this problem. One way is using geometry constraints to make virtual objects move along the desired path during the assembly process. However, topological information from CAD software is needed to set objects' constraints.This paper describes the development of setting basic constraints to solve the shortcomings when physics engine and haptic feedback are both integrated in the training system. The basic constraints make the assembly training easy and realistic through the usage of haptics and visual fidelity. The system doesn't need topological information from CAD software to set objects' constraints as basic constraints have already been supported in this system. The assembly training planner just needs to choose the part's constraint if needed. This saves much of the preparation time. Moreover, the basic constraints can be used in virtual motion simulation.The contribution is mainly in three aspects:(1)Propose the method of setting basic constraints to solve the shortcomings when physics engine and haptic feedback are both integrated in the training system.Assembly sequence generation based on the disassembly process. Moreover, each part's assembly constraint can be identified during the disassembly process.Except the display and physics engine modules, the whole training system is made up of widgets, which can be activated when it is needed.The rest of the paper is organized as follows, the former studies on virtual assembly is presented in Section 2. Section 3 introduces the system architecture. In Section 4, a detailed description on key technologies of the constraint-based training system is presented. Section 5 presents the function of widgets. In Section 6, an experiment study is presented to evaluate the training system. Finally, the paper ends with conclusion and future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
