@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An effective reliability-based improved constrained differential evolution for reliability-based design optimization of truss structures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
ICDE is extended to the RBDO problem of truss structures by combining ICDE with SORA which gives a so-called the SORA-ICDE.In SORA-ICDE, the optimization loop and reliability assessment loop are decoupled, and hence the efficiency in solving RBDO problems is ensured and improved significantly.Numerical results for five benchmark problems illustrate the effectiveness of the SORA-ICDE in solving the RBDO problem of truss structures.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Decouple double-loop strategy,Reliability-based design optimization (RBDO),Differential evolution,Improved (μ + λ) constrained differential evolution (ICDE),Sequential optimization and reliability assessment (SORA),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Recently, a Sequential Optimization and Reliability Assessment (SORA) method was proposed and proven to be effective for solving reliability-based design optimization (RBDO) problems. In the SORA, the optimization loop and the reliability assessment loop are decoupled from each other. This helps improve the efficiency of the SORA significantly. However, the SORA still exists two main drawbacks: (1) the optimal solutions are easily trapped within local extremes and (2) the optimal results depend on the initial trial points. To overcome these drawbacks, this paper integrates the SORA with the Improved Constrained Differential Evolution algorithm (ICDE) to give a so-called SORA-ICDE for solving RBDO problems. Due to the global search mechanism, the SORA-ICDE can easily obtain global solutions regardless of initial points. The numerical results obtained in the paper are compared with available results in the literature to illustrate the efficiency, applicability and precision of the SORA-ICDE in solving the RBDO problems for truss structures.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Truss is one of important structures in civil engineering and have a wide range of applications such as roofs, transmission towers, bridge supporters, etc. Because of its significant role, the optimization of truss structures has drawn a lot of attention from scientists. For example, Coello and Rudnick [1] first used the genetic algorithm (GA) to find the optimal design of truss structure. Then Lee and Geem [2] applied the Harmony Search Heuristic algorithm (HSH) to solve the truss optimization problem with continuous variables. Kaveh et al. also applied many different algorithms such as the Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) [3], the Hybrid Particle Swarm-Ant Colony Optimization (HPSACO) [4], the Big Bang-Big Crunch algorithm (BBBC) [5], the Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution strategy (CMA-ES) [6], etc. to solve the truss optimization problems. Kazemzadeh and Azad [7] employed the Mutation-Based Real-Coded Genetic Algorithm (MBRCGA) in 2012 to solve sizing and layout optimization of planar and spatial truss structures. Recently, the Improved (μ + λ) Constrained Differential Evolution (ICDE) was proposed [8,9] and proven to be one of the most effective and robust algorithms in solving constrained optimization problems. By using various mutation strategies, the diversity of the population in the ICDE is enhanced considerably. Furthermore, an archiving-based adaptive tradeoff model was employed in ICDE to improve its convergence ability. So far, this algorithm has not been applied to truss structures yet.In practice, the optimal configuration of truss structures is highly sensitive to the design random variables (i.e. members’ cross sectional areas) or random parameters (i.e. applied loads, material modules of elasticity). Any change of these random factors may significantly affect the performance and safety of the structures. Therefore, uncertainties of the inputs should be taken into account when solving truss structure optimization problems. As a result, reliability-based design optimization (RBDO) becomes very important in the field of truss design. So far, some researches were conducted for solving the RBDO problem of truss structures. For example, Lee et al. [10] used a reliability-index and target-performance-based method to solve RBDO problems for simple 3-bar and 10-bar truss structures. Lou et al. [11] employed a reliability-based multidisciplinary optimization method to handle some benchmark problems in the RBDO field. Recently, Kaveh et al. [12,13] proposed design procedures with failure probability based on the metaheuristic optimization algorithms. However, the reliability methodologies used in these researches are still somewhat complicated and costly. Hence, the Sequential Optimization and Reliability Assessment (SORA) was proposed by Du et al. [14] to reduce computational cost in solving the RBDO problem. The SORA is a Decoupled Double-Loop algorithm and proven to be effective in handling reliability constraint for some simple benchmark problems. Unlike the Nested Double-Loop strategies in which the reliability analysis tool serves as an inner loop for the optimization scheme, the SORA conducts a series of optimization and reliability assessment sequentially. This means that the optimization loop and reliability assessment loop are decoupled from each other. This helps enhance the efficiency and significantly reduces the computational cost in solving RBDO problems. Nonetheless, so far, the optimization algorithms employed in the SORA were still confined to local algorithms. As a result, the optimal solutions are easily trapped in local optimums. In addition, these local methods also depend too much on initial points. This results in ineffectiveness and complexity when solving RBDO problem of truss structures.This paper hence attempts to contribute a new methodology for finding the optimal configuration of truss structures subjected to probabilistic constraints. By combining the Improved (μ + λ) Constrained Differential Evolution (ICDE) with the Sequential Optimization and Reliability Assessment (SORA), a so-called SORA-ICDE was formed to solve RBDO problems. Due to the advantages of the ICDE as a global search mechanism, the SORA-ICDE can easily obtain the global optimum solution regardless of initial points. In addition, the decoupling strategy in the SORA helps the SORA-ICDE reduce the computational cost significantly. The proposed method is applied to some RBDO truss problems and compare to works done by previous studies to illustrate its effectiveness and robustness.The paper is then organized as follows. Section 2 generally introduces Differential Evolution (DE) method and its improved version ICDE. The Sequential Optimization and Reliability Assessment (SORA) is presented in Section 3. The SORA-ICDE is described in Section 4. In Section 5, two simple problems are demonstrated to test the accuracy and three truss optimization problems are conducted to investigate the efficiency, applicability and precision of the proposed approach. Finally, some conclusions are withdrawn in Section 6.The differential evolution (DE) algorithm was first proposed by Storn and Price (1997) [8]. The DE is a population-based approach which is widely used to solve continuous optimization problems. A scheme of this algorithm consists of four main phases as follows.In the initial phase, an initial population, containing NP individuals, is created by means of randomly sampling from the search space. Secondly, in the mutation phase, the target individuals are used to generate mutant vectors by mutation operations. There have four popular mutation operations as:(1)−Rand/1:vi=xr1+F×(xr2−xr3)(2)−Rand/2:vi=xr1+F×(xr2−xr3)+F×(xr4−xr5)(3)−Current−to−rand/1:vi=xi+F×(xr1−xi)+F×(xr2−xr3)(4)−Current−to−best/1:vi=xi+F×(xbest−xi)+F×(xr1−xr2)where r1, r2, r3, r4, r5 are randomly selected from {1, 2, ..., NP} and satisfy r1 ≠ r2 ≠ r3 ≠ r4 ≠ r5 ≠ i; F is the scale factor, randomly chosen between 0 and 1; xiis the current individual of the population; xbestis the best individual of the population; and viis the mutant vector. After mutation, all mutant vectors are checked to make sure that no mutant vector violates the boundary constraints.The third phase is crossover operation. In this phase, some elements of the mutant vector replace some elements of the target vector to create a trial vector ui. The most common crossover operation is binomial crossover, stated by:(5)uij={vijifrand≤CRorj=jrandxijotherwisewhere i ∈ {1, 2, ..., NP}; j ∈ {1, 2, ..., D}; rand[0,1] is a uniformly distributed random number between 0 and 1; jrandis an integer selected from 1 to D; CR is the crossover control parameter; and uijis the component of the trial vector.Finally, based on the value of the objective function, the trial vector uiis compared to the target vector xi. The better one, which has lower objective function value, will survive in the next generation:(6)xi={uiiff(ui)≤f(xi)xiotherwiseThe ICDE proposed by Jia et al. [9] in 2013 is an improved version of the DE. In general, it is similar to the DE and also contain four main phases. However, the ICDE possesses two novel advances: an improved (μ + λ) – differential evolution (IDE) and an archiving-based adaptive tradeoff modal (ArATM).In comparison with the DE, the IDE also contains the mutation and crossover operations. However, in the IDE, from the parent population Ptwith μ individuals, a new offspring population Qt, with λ individuals is generated by the “rand/1”, the “rand/2” and the “current-to-rand/best/1” mutation strategy.The ‘‘current-to-rand/best/1’’ strategy is a combination of the “current-to-rand/1” strategy and “current-to-best/1” strategy. The ‘‘current-to-rand/best/1’’ strategy is executed as follows. Firstly, the current number of generation (denoted as current_gen) is compared with a threshold generation number (threshold_gen). If current_gen > threshold_gen, then the ‘‘current-to-best/1’’ strategy is used to generate the mutant vector vi. On the other hand, if current_gen ≤ threshold_gen, then the ‘‘current-to-rand/1’’ strategy is used. This procedure is described in Fig. 1in order to clearly explain the improvement of the IDE. As shown in the figure, the optimization process is divided into two phases. In addition, the whole evolutionary process is divided into three stages (i.e., the early stage, the middle stage, and the later stage). The motivation to generate ‘‘current-to-rand/best/1’’ strategy is to ensure that the first phase (using ‘‘current-to-rand/1’’ strategy) covers the early stage and some part of the middle stage of the evolution, while the second phase (using ‘‘current-to-best/1’’ strategy) covers the remaining part of the second phase and the later stage of the evolution.In constrained optimization, the combined population inevitably experience three situations: the infeasible situation, the semi-feasible situation, and the feasible situation. As a result, three different constraint-handling mechanisms are designed in the ArATM to adapt the algorithm to be fit with the three situations respectively.In the infeasible situation, because all individuals are infeasible (all individual violate the constraints), the population should be firstly adapted to enter the feasible region quickly. On the other hand, the diversity of the population should be maintained. In this situation, the objective function f(x) and the degree of constraint violation G(x) are treated as two independent objects. And these two objects are simultaneously handled using hierarchical nondominated individual selection scheme. This scheme employs Pareto-Optimality criterion [15] which is used widely in multi-objective optimization. By doing so, the population is guided toward the feasible region while the diversity of the population is still maintained.In the semi-feasible situation, some individuals violate the constraints while others do not violate any constraint. Since some certain infeasible individuals may contain crucial information to find the optimal solution, it is not reasonable to get rid of all infeasible individuals in this situation. The adaptive fitness transformation scheme is designed to select not only some feasible individuals with small objective function values but also some suitable infeasible individuals.In the feasible situation, because all individuals are feasible (no individual violates any constraint), the constrained optimization problems become unconstrained optimization problems. Then, μ individuals with the least objective function values are selected for the next generation Pt+1.With the help of ArATM, a suitable tradeoff between the objective function and the degree of constraint violation is obtained. Hence, not only constraints are satisfied effectively, but also the objective function of the problem is successfully optimized.A typical model of a probabilistic design is given by:(7)Minimize:f(d,X,P)DesignVariables:DV={d,μx}Subjectto:Prob{gi(d,X,P)≤0}≥Ri,i=1,2,...,m.where f(d,X,P) is the objective function; d is the vector of deterministic design variables; X is the vector of random design variables; P is the vector of random parameters; gi(d,X,P) (I = 1,2, … , m) are constraint functions; Ri(I = 1,2, … , m) = Φ(βi) are desired probabilities of constraint satisfaction; m is the number of probabilistic constraints; Φ(.) is the standard cumulative function of the normal distribution; βiis the target reliability index of the ith probabilistic constraint; µxis the mean of the random design variables X.The key of the SORA method is to shift the boundaries of violated probabilistic constraints to the feasible direction based on the reliability information obtained in the previous cycle. Then, the equivalent deterministic constraints can be established from the probabilistic constraints. Consequently, the solution is quickly improved after some cycles and the computational cost is reduced effectively.Three measures are employed to improve the efficiency of the SORA method. These include: (1) evaluating the reliability only at the desired level; (2) using an efficient and robust inverse most probable points (MPP) search algorithm; and (3) employing sequential cycles of optimization and reliability assessment. A brief of these principles is presented in following sections. More details are available in reference [14] for interested readers.In probabilistic optimization with multiple constraints, some constraints may never be active and their reliabilities approach to 1. In other words, these constraints are always satisfied without any adjustment in the optimum solution. So, these constraints are the least critical compared to other constraints. However, in Nested Double-Loop strategies, a huge amount of computational cost is spent to unnecessarily evaluate the reliability of these constraints. In order to overcome this waste, the SORA method performs the reliability assessment only at a necessary level. Based on the distances s between the design variable value and the MPPs value obtained from previous cycle, the boundaries of violated constraints are shifted to the feasible direction, as shown in Fig. 2. In the next cycle, shifted constraintsg(d,μx−si,pMMPi)≤0will be used in optimization scheme as deterministic constraints. As a result, unnecessary evaluation of high-reliability constraints is reduced considerably.In SORA, the inverse MPP search algorithm is used to find the most probable point (MPP) that satisfies the desired probability Ri. This new inverse MPP search algorithm combines the technique of steepest decent direction as the search direction, and the adaptive step size for numerical derivative evaluation. This search algorithm is considered robust since it is suitable for any continuous constraint functions including non-concave, non-convex functions and continuous distributions of uncertainty.Because most of computational cost in the RBDO problem is paid for the reliability assessment, reducing the number of reliability assessment is necessary to improve the overall efficiency of probabilistic optimization. For this purpose, the SORA method decouples the optimization and reliability assessment in each cycle. Firstly, equivalent deterministic optimization is solved to acquire design optimal solution. Then, reliability assessment is performed to identify the new MPPs. The key point here is to move the design solution as quickly as possible to its optimum so that the need for locating MPPs is reduced. As a result, the reliability requirements are improved progressively and the solution to probabilistic design can be found within a few cycles.This section proposes a hybrid approach from the ICDE and the SORA which is called the SORA-ICDE for convenience. The hybrid method is illustrated as the flowchart in Fig. 3.As seen in the flow chart, in the first cycle, there is no information about the most probable points (MPPs). Thus, the value of xMPPand pMPPare set as the means of random design variables and random parameters respectively. This indicates that s0 = 0 and deterministic optimization is solved without probabilistic constraints. After solving deterministic optimization, some of constraints become active. The optimal pointμx(1)=(μx1(1),μx2(1),...,μxn(1))is now located right on the boundary of deterministic constraint functions and the actual reliability is only around 0.5. Then, the inverse MPP search algorithm is used to locate the MPPs corresponding to the desired reliability Ri. The shifting vector si of ith constraint is calculated from the MPP as:(8)si=(s1,s2,...,sn)=μx(1)−xMPPi,i=1,2,..,mThe new constraint for the deterministic optimization in the next cycle is formulated as:(9)gi(μx−si)≤0Eq. (9) indicates that the location of the design variables µxfound in the next cycle has to be moved further to satisfy the probabilistic constraints. This also implies that the new constraints create a narrower feasible region compared to that of the previous cycle. Consequently, the optimum solution gained in the next deterministic optimization has higher reliability level. This procedure is repeated through cycles until all probabilistic constraints are satisfied and the objective function converges.From the procedure of the SORA-ICDE, it is seen that the reliability analysis loop is completely decoupled from the optimization loop. Equivalent deterministic constraints are formed using the reliability analysis information from the previous cycle. As a result, it is easy to code and apply the SORA-ICDE to RBDO problems. Moreover, since the SORA-ICDE requires much fewer optimization iterations and reliability assessment, the overall efficiency is increased significantly.In this section, firstly, the efficiency and applicability of the ICDE-SORA will be illustrated through solving two benchmark numerical examples. The results from this analysis will be compared with those by previous studies for verification purpose. Then, in the last three examples, the ICDE-SORA is applied to planar and space frame truss structures. This aims to investigate the performance of the ICDE-SORA in solving the RBDO for truss structures. Because the RBDO solutions for these three truss structures are not available in the literature, the results by the SORA-ICDE are compared and discussed with deterministic solutions by previous studies. Note that in the last three truss optimization examples, the objective function is to minimize the weight of the whole structures. The sectional area Aiof the ith element is treated as a random design variable. Young's modulus E and the external force P are also considered as random parameters. All random variables (random design variables and random parameters) are statistically independent and follow normal distribution. The covariant of all random design variables (Ai) and random parameters is 5% of variables’ mean values. The structural analysis is performed by Finite Element Method (FEM) with linear truss elements. The ICDE employed in the paper has population size μ = 20, crossover control parameter CR = 0.9, scale factor F = 0.9 and factor k = 0.6.The first example considered is the welded beam problem as shown in Fig. 4. This work was studied by various authors such as Lee et al. [16], Ju et al. [17] and Tae et al. [18]. The problem has four random variables and five probabilistic constraints. The objective function is the welding cost. The probabilistic constraints are related to limitation of shear stress, bending stress, buckling, and displacement. All random variables are statistically independent and follow normal distribution. The mathematical RBDO model of the welded beam problem is formulated as:(10)findd=[d1,d2,d3,d4]Tminimizef(d,z)=c1d12d2+c2d3d4(z1+d2)subjecttoProb.{gj(x,z)<0}≥Φ(βjt),j=1,...,5whereg1(x,z)=τ(x,z)/z6−1;g1(x,z)=σ(x,z)/z7−1g3(x,z)=x1/x4−1;g4(x,z)=δ(x,z)/z5−1g5(x,z)=1−Pc(x,z)/z1;.τ(x,z)={t(x,z)2+2t(x,z)tt(x,z)X2/2R(x)+tt(x,z)2}1/2t(x,z)=z12x1x2;tt(x,z)=M(x,z)R(x)/J(x)M(x,z)=z1(z2+x22);R(x)=x12+(x1+x1)22J(x)=2x1x2{x22/12+(x1+x3)/4}σ(x,z)=6z1z2x32x4;δ(x,z)=4z1z23z3x33x4xi∼N(di,0.16932)fori=1,2xi∼N(di,0.01072)fori=3,4β1t=β2t=β3t=β4t=β5t=3;3.175≤d1≤50.8;0≤d2≤254;0≤d3≤254;0≤d4≤50.8z1=2.6688×104(N);z2=3.556×102(mm);z3=2.0685×105(MPa);z4=8.274×104(MPa);z5=6.35(mm);z6=9.377×101(MPa)z7=2.0685×102(MPa);c1=6.74135×10−5($/mm3);c2=2.93585×10−6($/mm3)The RBDO results of this problem are summarized in Table 1 in comparison with those by previous studies. It is seen that the optimum results obtained by the SORA-ICDE agree relatively well with those of other publications. However, the objective function values obtained by reference studies are slightly better than those of the SORA-ICDE. This is because the previous references used local optimization tools which usually obtain more accurate solution compared to global optimization methods. However, these local search methods depend too much on the initial trial point provided by users. As a result, if the initial point is not chosen well, it is very difficult or even impossible for these local search methods to find the optimum solution. In addition, since local search methods use gradient information for searching solution, the solution obtained by these methods is easily trapped in local extremes. Thus, using the local optimization tools for truss structures is generally unsuitable. It is reasonable to employ the SORA-ICDE for solving reliability-based design optimization problems of truss structures.The probabilistic constraints at the optimum solution are evaluated by the Monte-Carlo simulation (MCS) with ten million samples and presented in Table 2in comparison with those by previous publications. It can be seen from the table that four of five probabilistic constraints are active and agree well with other methods.This example considers the ten-bar truss structure as shown in Fig. 5. This work was previously studied by Lee et al. [10] and Lou et al. [11]. In this problem, the objective function is to minimize the weight of the whole truss. The sectional area Aiof the ith element is treated as a normal random design variable and its mean value is the design variable. Young's modulus E and the external force P are also considered as random parameters with mean value of 107 (psi) and 105 (lb) respectively. All random variables (random design variables and random parameters) are statistically independent and follow normal distribution with covariant value ν = 0.05. The material density is ρ = 0.1 (lb/in3). The lower bound and upper bound of design variables are 0.1 (in2) and 100 (in2) respectively. The probabilistic requirement, subjected to the deflection limitation at node 2, must be larger or equal to 99.865% (β = 3).The optimization results are presented in Table 3in comparison with those by previous studies. It is observed that the results by the SORA-ICDE and the target-performance-based method α–based (TPB–α) are the best ones. The results by the SORA-ICDE agree well with those of reference results. This hence illustrates the effectiveness and robustness of the SORA-ICDE for solving the RBDO of truss structures.This example considers the RBDO problem of the 25-bar transmission tower space truss as shown in Fig. 6. Interms of optimization, this work was previously studied by many authors such as Togan et al. [20], Dede et al. [21], Kaveh et al. [22], etc. The truss system has 25 elements and 18 degrees of freedom. The modulus of elasticity is 104 ksi, the material density is 0.1 lb/in3 and the yield stress of steel is taken as 40 ksi. The discrete design variables are taken from [21]. Displacement limitations of ±0.35 in are imposed on nodes 1, and 2 in both x and y directions. The loading conditions of the truss structure is given in Table 4. Members of this structure are categorized into 8 groups, and the sectional area Aiof each group is treated as a random design variable. Young's modulus E and the external force P are also considered as random parameters. All random variables (random design variables and random parameters) are statistically independent and follow normal distribution. The covariant of all random design variables (Ai) and random parameters is 5% of variable values. The probabilistic constraint of displacement limitation for all nodes must not be less than 99.865% (β = 3).The optimization results of the deterministic optimization and RBDO problem are presented in Table 5, in comparison with those by previous publications. For the deterministic optimization, it is seen that the result by the ICDE is the smallest. This hence illustrates the effectiveness of the ICDE in solving truss optimization problem. For the RBDO, it is observed that the results by the Nested Double-Loop (NDL) method and the SORA-ICDE have bigger values compared to those by the deterministic optimization methods as expected. This is obvious because the safety level of the structure now is 99.865% which is much larger than 50.501% of the deterministic optimization problems. In addition, the number of structural analysis (f-count) by the SORA-ICDE is 25 times less than that of the NLD-ICDE. This hence confirms the effectiveness and robustness of the SORA-ICDE for solving the RBDO of truss structures.This example considers the optimization problem of a 120-bar dome truss as shown in Fig. 7. This dome system has 120 elements and 111 degrees of freedom. Members of this structure are categorized into 7 groups. The modulus of elasticity is 30,450 ksi (210,000 MPa) and the material density is 0.288 lb/in3 (7971.813 kg/m3). The yield stress of steel is taken as 58.0 ksi (400 MPa). The dome is subjected to vertical loading at all the unsupported joints. These load are taken as −13.49 kips (60 kN) at node 1, −6.744 kips (30 kN) at nodes 2 through 13, and −2.248 kips (10 kN) at the rest of the nodes. The range of cross-sectional areas varies from 0.775 to 20.0 in2 (5–129.032 cm2). Displacement limitations of ±0.1969 in (±5 mm) are imposed on all nodes in x, y and z directions. The deterministic stress buckling constraints are assumed according to AISC – ASD code [23] as presented in Appendix. The objective function and variables information are the same as mentioned above. The probabilistic constraint, subjected to the nodal displacement limitation in z-direction, is not less than 99.865% (β = 3).The optimization results for both deterministic optimization and RBDO are presented in Table 6, in comparision with those by previous publications. For the deterministic optimization, it is seen that the result by the ICDE is the smallest. It is also observed that the number of structural analysis by the ICDE is smaller than those of other studies. This hence again verifies the effectiveness of the ICDE for solving optimization problems of truss structures. For the RBDO, as expected, it is observed that the results by the NDL-ICDE and SORA-ICDE are bigger than those by the deterministic optimization methods. The probabilistic constraint is satisfied so that there is no constraint tolerance. Another remark on the results is that the number of structural analysis by the SORA-ICDE is 17 times less than the NDL-ICDE but the two results are almost the same. This hence confirms again the effectiveness and robustness of the SORA-ICDE in solving the RBDO of truss structures.This example considers a 72-bar four level skeletal tower as shown in Fig. 8. This work was previously studied by many authors in terms of deterministic optimization such as Degertekin et al. [25,26], Li et al. [27], Lee et al. [2], Lamberti [28], and so on. The system has 72 members grouped into 16 groups. Loads is applied at node 1 with value 5 kips in x-direction, 5 kips in y-direction and –5 kips in z-direction. The minimum cross-sectional area of each member is set to 0.1 in2. The displacement limits at node 1, 2, 3, 4 in x-direction and y-direction is ±0.25 in. The allowable stresses for all members are ±25 ksi. The probabilistic constraint, subjected to displacement limitations at node 1 in both x and y directions, is not less than 99.865%.The optimization results for both deterministic optimization and RBDO are presented in Table 7, compared with those by previous publications. For the deterministic optimization, it is seen that the result by the ICDE is much better than those by other heuristic algorithms. This hence verifies again the effectiveness of the ICDE, especially when the number of design variables is large. For the RBDO, it is again observed that the results by the NDL-ICDE and SORA-ICDE have bigger values than those by the deterministic optimization methods. Before probabilistic constraints are applied to the optimization problems, the probability of safety is very low (only 49.95%). But for RBDO problem, this probability is improved significantly (up to 99.865%). This illustrates that the safety of the whole truss is enhanced effectively and become more applicable in reality. In addition, although the number of structural analysis of the SORA-ICDE is 23 times less than that of the NDL-ICDE (170,280 compared with 3,954,525), the values of objective function is even better than that by the NDL-ICDE. This hence verifies the effectiveness and robustness of the SORA-ICDE for solving the RBDO of truss structures.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
