@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
CAD based model of ultrasonic shot peening for complex industrial parts

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A model of the shot dynamics in ultrasonic shot peening is presented.Complex geometries and process parameters of industrial interest are supported.The computational performances of the model are studied.A comparison with results from the scientific literature is conducted.A case study on a spur gear is presented with numerical and experimental results.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Ultrasonic shot peening,Simulation,Shot dynamics,Complex geometries,Spur gear,CAD,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a numerical model developed specifically for ultrasonic shot peening (USP). It allows simulating the shot dynamics (trajectories in the chamber and impacts on the peened sample) in industrial configurations. The model supports complex 3D geometries, rotating parts and employs efficient collision detection algorithms for short computation times. The aim is to improve peening chamber designs and the choice of process parameters. The algorithm and main assumptions are presented. Numerical studies are then conducted to determine the performances of the model, in terms of computation time. Finally, a case study on a spur gear tests the model in an industrial configuration and shows a high correlation between the numerical results and experimental data.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Ultrasonic shot peening (USP) is a mechanical surface treatment process, developed by SONATS (Stressonic® technology) [1], that enhances the mechanical strength [2,3], the fatigue life span [4,5] and the resistance to stress corrosion cracking [6] of the high-added value metallic components, such as bladed disks, compressors, gears and nuclear power plants pressure vessels. This is achieved by projecting spherical shot onto the surface of a component (part), at high velocities (up to 20m/s), with the help of a sonotrode. The latter is part of an acoustic system that vibrates at ultrasonic frequencies (generally 20kHz). In an industrial context, customized peening chambers are usually designed for each type of components. It allows holding the part in place and contains the bouncing shot, thus influencing its flow and dynamics. The parts that are shot peened with an ultrasonic process are usually high added value components, like components of airplane engines, with very complex geometries. The measurements of shot velocities are difficult, although it is necessary that it should be well distributed to ensure an adequate residual stress field. The peening chambers are thus designed with trial and error processes to verify the impact density with, for example a coverage analysis. It is thus of interest to construct a predictive model of the shot dynamics for ultrasonic shot peening in any chamber geometry. It is important to specify that the induced residual stresses highly depend on the shot diameter [7] and total mass, the amplitude of the sonotrode [8], the peening time [9], as well as the shot impact velocities [7] and angles [10]. Although the commonly expected outcome of shot peening is subsurface compressive residual stresses, it might be just as important to optimize surface characteristics: hardening or grain size like in the SMAT process [8,11]. In other words, the main expected outcome of pre-stressing processes is an increase in fatigue life.In conventional shot peening (CSP), a continuous flow of shot (many kilograms per minute) is projected onto the peened part, making the measurements of shot velocities and angles relatively straight forward [12]. However, in ultrasonic shot peening the few grams of spheres, propelled by the sonotrode, bounce around in the peening chamber. This results in complex and repetitive interactions between the spheres and the rest of the peening setup, i.e. sonotrode, chamber and part. This particular feature of USP makes it difficult to measure experimentally the shot velocities and angles. As a result, the design of USP chambers and the choice of process parameters remain empirical, making it time consuming and partially optimized especially for complex parts.Modeling such processes, from peening parameters to fatigue optimization, can be reached with two types of approaches. The first type consists on chaining models (usually simple ones) and optimizing each step to reach the expected fatigue life. The second type of approaches is dedicated to one specific aspect of the chain, usually more evolved models that allow an improved understanding of the process and the optimization of the models aforementioned. The model proposed in the manuscript is of the second kind and enables to answer industrial concerns on the treatment homogeneity, when designing the shot peening chambers. This is the first step toward a good surface treatment. The second objective is to offer the possibility to optimize all the material parameters. Indeed, a given residual stress profile may be obtained with different sets of process parameters, leading to different surface states, different grain sizes, etc. These last parameters have also a strong influence on fatigue strength. It is thus our objective to propose an accurate model to predict the impact fields (velocities, angles, energies). The model can then eventually be used as a boundary condition to model the state of the material after shot peening, itself being an initial condition for fatigue strength models.Therefore, a dedicated model of USP, capable of simulating the process for complex parts in industrial conditions, is developed while keeping the computation times to a minimum. The objective of the model is to facilitate the design of shot peening chambers, as well as the choice of the process parameters. Existing models capable of modeling partially or completely the USP process are analyzed in Section ‘Background’. The research objectives are presented in Section ‘Research objectives’. The developed USP model is detailed in Section ‘USP model’ and then tested for its performances, in terms of computation times in Section ‘Performances study’. Section ‘Case study on a spur gear’ provides a case study of a spur gear, submitted to ultrasonic shot peening in industrial conditions, which enables to compare the model predictions with experimental data.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presents a CAD based model of the shot dynamics in ultrasonic shot peening. The ever increasing industrial need for reliable information on the shot dynamics, in industrial configurations, makes it crucial to simulate long enough peening treatments in reasonable computation times.The main contribution of the model is providing a fast and reliable simulation tool for the shot dynamics, with realistic process parameters and parts with complex geometries. Short computation times are achieved with the use of OPCODE, for fast and efficient collision detections. OpenGL is used to provide real-time visualization of the peening setup, sphere trajectories and impacts. In contrast with event-driven molecular dynamics and discrete element models, the proposed model manages to combine the best of both worlds, in the case of ultrasonic shot peening, while keeping the computation costs to a minimum. In addition, the predictions strongly correlate with experimental observations, made on an ultrasonically shot peened gear, which makes it a viable tool for the industry.The main contribution of the CAD-based model is providing consistent data for optimizing the peening chamber designs and better tuning the process parameters. As a matter of fact, the model has been implemented in SONATS and has already helped optimizing peening parameters and/or chamber design for few industrial applications. More extensive testing on other applications is ongoing and will be the subject of future publications. Another contribution comes from the information that the model can provide, as input data, to the residual stresses prediction models. As for ways to couple our model to residual stress prediction models, ongoing research is being conducted on this particular issue [28], providing a first set of promising results.