@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Intermediate model based efficient and integrated multidisciplinary simulation data visualization for simulation information reuse

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An intermediate model is designed for multidisciplinary simulation data integration.The hybrid mesh size field controls the generation of intermediate mesh model.Several strategies are proposed to improve the data transmission efficiency.A content-based retrieval method is developed to find simulation models rapidly.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Intermediate model,Hybrid mesh size field,Data filtering and compression,Simulation model descriptor,Mapping and interpolation algorithm,Similarity assessment,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The efficient and integrated visualization and reuse of multidisciplinary simulation data are imperative for the development of complex products. However, it is not a trivial task for designers to efficiently acquire, view and then reuse simulation data to improve the product design process. The challenge is that simulation data are always too huge to be transferred and retrieved quickly and they tend to be heterogeneous and tool-specific due to the lack of a uniform representation. In this study, an approach of intermediate model based efficient and integrated visualization of multidisciplinary simulation data for simulation information reuse is proposed to address the above issues. Firstly, the intermediate model based integrated model framework is designed to support the uniform modeling and integrated visualization of multidisciplinary simulation data. Then, the intermediate mesh model is constructed based on the hybrid mesh size (HMS) field to achieve the uniform representation of multidisciplinary simulation data with high-fidelity. Thirdly, a series of strategies such as coarse filtering, fine filtering for incremental transmission and data compression are proposed to improve data transmission efficiency. Moreover, a simulation model descriptor (SMD) based similarity assessment method is developed to support the efficient retrieval of simulation models for reuse. Finally, several experiments are conducted to demonstrate the feasibility and effectiveness of the proposed model and methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Simulation-based design has become the mainstream product development process to reduce the development costs, shorten the time to market and improve the quality and performance of products, which are the key factors for achieving competitive advantages [1–3]. Generally, the simulation activities are conducted in multiple domains such as structural field analysis, flow field analysis, thermal field analysis and so on. Thus various systems are involved including Ansys, Abaqus and MSC Nastran, etc. [4]. This leads to a growing number of simulation data and thus raises the issue of effective and efficient management of massive simulation data.To the authors' knowledge, it is still difficult for engineering designers to efficiently acquire, view and then reuse simulation data to improve the product design process. The reason is three-fold. (1) Firstly, it is very useful to reuse historical simulation data to guide current product simulation task. However, it is difficult for the analyzer to efficiently find similar simulation cases from the huge model sets as they are distributed and independent and there is a lack of unified organization and management. (2) Secondly, the simulation models and data obtained using different simulation systems tend to be heterogeneous and tool-specific, which still cannot be visualized and reused by designers since the related simulation systems may not be available in the design department with the consideration of cost. In most cases, they should be visualized in a common platform-independent environment or even the design environment without loss of accuracy to facilitate simulation results viewing and decision making. As a result, the effective sharing and integrated visualization of heterogeneous simulation results remain relatively inefficient due to the lack of a uniform and accurate representation of multidisciplinary simulation data. (3) Thirdly, product design and simulation are quite often undertaken in different departments, even off-site in most companies. Moreover, the simulation data files of complex products are very huge. The magnitude is usually GB or even TB. Therefore, it is difficult to acquire them rapidly due to the large data file sizes and low data transmission efficiency.Based on the above analysis, an intermediate model based integrated visualization method is proposed in this study to enable the efficient and effective acquisition, visualization and reuse of multidisciplinary heterogeneous simulation data to support product development. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the related work. The specific integrated model framework based on the intermediate model is given in Section 3 as well as a method overview. Section 4 mainly describes how to construct the intermediate mesh model based on the hybrid mesh size (HMS) field to support the uniform representation of multidisciplinary simulation data and thus to enable the integrated visualization. A series of efficient data transmission methods such as coarse filtering, fine filtering for incremental transmission and data compression based on fast Fourier transform (FFT) and an efficient simulation model retrieval method based on the simulation model descriptor (SMD) are described in Sections 5 and 6 respectively. Section 7 presents several experiments and relevant discussions. Finally, the main conclusions and future work are given in Section 8.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In order to support designers to efficiently acquire and accurately view the simulation data to improve the product development process, an intermediate model based efficient and integrated visualization of multidisciplinary simulation data method is proposed for simulation information reuse. The novelty of the research is summarized as follows:(1)An intermediate model, which is generated based on the HMS field control, is proposed to support the uniform and accurate representation of multidisciplinary simulation data. Its main advantage is that it can eliminate the dependencies of simulation result visualization on specific simulation tools and achieve both platform-independent and integrated visualization with high-fidelity.The mapping and interpolation algorithm between the intermediate mesh model and heterogeneous simulation mesh models of multiple disciplines is proposed and implemented to achieve the simulation results on the intermediate model for platform-independent and integrated visualization. Additionally, to accelerate the computational efficiency, two strategies, i.e., indexing and parallel computing are deliberately devised.A series of strategies including coarse filtering, fine filtering for incremental transmission and data compression based on FFT are developed to improve the data transmission efficiency, so as to enable designers to rapidly acquire and then accurately view the simulation results based on the intermediate model to make their decisions to refine the product design solutions.A content-based retrieval method is introduced in this study, i.e., SMD based similarity assessment method is proposed to achieve the rapid retrieval of simulation models and thus to help the analyzer conduct simulation task by reusing historical simulation data.However, there are still some deficiencies in the proposed approach. The mesh size function in this study is relatively simple and rough. More precise mesh size functions need to be defined. Further research about the compression of simulation process data should also be considered. Moreover, more commercial systems and simulation types should be involved in the future. And the dimensional reduction for the simulation models will be also considered in the future. In addition, more semantic information should be considered in the computation of the SMD. Currently, the simulation data reuse is manually implemented and more intelligent reuse methods will be also studied and developed in the future.