@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Finite element analysis of spiral strands with different shapes subjected to axial loads

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new mathematical geometric model of spiral oval wire strands is proposed.Concrete forms of derived parametric geometric equations are presented.Results of FE analyses of four spiral strands with different shapes are presented.Responses of round, triangular and oval strands under axial loads are compared.Result ant stress and/or deformation behaviours are discussed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Oval strand,Geometric parametric equations,Round strand,Triangular strand,Computer modelling,Finite element behaviour analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper a new mathematical geometric model of spiral one or two-layered oval wire strands are proposed and an accurate computational two-layered oval strand 3D solid model, which is used for a finite element analysis, is presented. The three dimensional curve geometry of wires axes in the individual layers of the oval strand consists of straight linear and helical segments. The present geometric model fully considers the spatial configuration of individual wires in the right and left hand lay strand. Derived geometric equations were used for the generation of accurate 3D geometric and computational models for different types of strands. This study develops 3D finite element models of two-layer spiral round, triangular and oval strands subjected to axial loads using ABAQUS/Explicit software. Accurate modelling and understanding of their mechanical behaviour is complicated due to the complex contact interactions and conditions that exist between individual spirally wound wires. Comparisons of predicted responses for the strands with different shapes and constructions are presented. Resultant stress and/or deformation behaviours are discussed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Spiral strands and ropes are widely used in engineering applications. In recent years a broad range of specialty cables that meet the exacting specifications for original equipment manufacturers, military, transit offshore, and marine shipboard, nuclear and mining applications have been developed. Cables are usually subjected to large tension loads which are associated with torsion and bending effects. Mining and tunnelling applications expose cables to an abusive environment. Extensive abrasion, impact, vibration, tension, cut-through, and sometimes damage from local wildlife are common causes for cable failure. All mining cables can be tailored to specific needs.Oval strand steel wire ropes generated from oval strands are applied in vertical mine hoisting and vertical mine excavation (shaft buildings). Cables are manufactured to withstand the kind of extreme conditions common in mining applications such as excessive material strain, extraordinary climatic conditions and risk of explosion. The oval cables with defined physical and mechanical characteristics are resistant to extreme temperatures, sunlight, water, chemicals, oil and abrasion. Oval cables are also suitable for other similar applications such as tunnelling and underground industry, loading trains and ships, and have been performing consistently in these areas since their introduction. New types of oval mining and tunnelling cables provide great lifecycle performance and reliability.Spiral oval strands have a basically oval cross-section consisting of one or two layers of wires laid helically around parallel core wires. They have a high strength-to-mass ratio and good efficiency of construction, and due to their increased outer-wire surface area, they have good wear properties. The use of such ropes is especially efficient when there is a heavy end load and severe abrasive wear. Oval strand ropes are characterised by high structural stability, high fill factors and large bearing surfaces. The oval strand shape not only provides better resistance to crushing, but also offers a greater exposed surface area for contact with sheaves and drums. This feature distributes the abrasive wear over a greater number and length of wires.Numerous works have been devoted to the development of mathematical geometric models of round spiral wire strands and ropes as well as the modelling of their behaviour under static and dynamic loads [1–9]. The round wire strands and ropes are treated either as a discrete set of concentric orthotropic cylinders, where individual layers of wires are replaced by equivalent cylindrical orthotropic sheets [1,2] or as a configuration of helically curved rods, with different assumptions regarding the cable geometry and inter-wire contacts [3–9].Lee [10] presented a geometrical analysis applicable to any rope with axisymmetric strands. The Cartesian coordinate equations, which describe the helix geometry of wire within a rope, were derived. Elata et al. [11] presented a new model for simulating the mechanical response of a wire rope with an independent wire rope core. In contrast with previous models, the present model fully considers the double-helix configuration of individual wires within the wound strand. Ghoreishi et al. [12,13] analysed synthetic fibre ropes subjected to axial loads. Usabiaga and Pagalday [14] derived parametric equations of double helical wires for the undeformed configuration of the rope. Nawrocki and Labrosse [15] presented a finite element model for simple straight wire rope strands, which allows the study of all possible interwire motions. Labrosse et al. [16] investigated the quantity of energy dissipated through friction due to motions between wires when a cable is loaded.Evans et al. [17] investigated wire strain variations in tension–tension fatigue for two six-strand rope constructions under normal and overloaded conditions. Bradon et al. [18] presented a theoretical model of the torsional characteristics of parallel multi-part rope systems. Erdonmez and Imrak [19] proposed a computational model of a wire strand for its numerical analysis. Paczelt and Beleznai [20] developed the p-extension concept in the finite element method for a simple straight two-layered wire rope strand which considers all possible inter-wire motions, contact and dry friction amongst the wires. Argatov [21] developed a refined discrete mathematical model of a simple helical wire rope strand, which takes into account both the Poisson’s ratio effect and the effect of contact deformation. Erdonmez and Imrak [22] proposed new methodology of defining and modelling the nested helical structure of wire ropes, and presented accurate wire rope 3D solid modelling, which can be used for finite element analysis. Both single and nested helical wire parametric equations are presented. Prawoto and Mazlan [23] presented computational, mechanical, and metallurgical properties of wire ropes under tension loading. Wang et al. [24] presented the finite element analysis of a hoisting rope and three-layered strand to explore fretting fatigue parameters and stress distributions of the cross-section. Frikha et al. [25] presented an asymptotic expansion method which has been applied to helical structures subjected to axial loads (traction and torsion) at its end sections. Stanova et al. [26,27] presented parametric equations to generate arbitrary multi-layered strand ropes with circular wires and their finite element-based applications.Jiang [28] presented a concise finite element model for a simple wire strand subjected to pure bending. An accurate bending symmetric boundary condition was developed and applied to the periodic artificial cross-sectional end boundaries of the wire strand finite element model. To achieve better analysis accuracy, full three-dimensional solid elements were used for structural discretization. For the global behaviour of the wire strand, i.e. bending moment versus bending curvature, the finite element results showed a good agreement with the analytical elastic strand model of Costello [6] in an elastic loading regime. Furthermore, the finite element model can predict the detailed progressive nonlinear plastic behaviour of the wire strand. Noyan et al. [29] presented the neutron diffraction method to measure elastic strains induced in the constituent wires of parallel wire strands under tensile loading. The elastic strains carried by the individual wires depended very strongly on the boundary conditions at the grips and on radial clamping forces. The friction forces between the wires were quite significant and should not be neglected in analytical or numerical formulations of strain partitioning in parallel wire cables. Zhou and Tian [30] investigated a new finite element model for single-layered strands for an accurate and efficient mechanical behaviour analysis. A mathematical model was created by sectional path-nodes sweeping and dynamic node-beam mapping. Geometric relations between nodes in centre core wire and helical wires were deduced in tension and bending incorporating material elasticity theory and deformation geometrical compatibility. Based on Timoshenko beam theory, a strand of a pitch length was modelled with specific material and geometric parameters, and predetermined load cases were performed. The results obtained showed that discrepancies between the suggested method and Costello theory [6] do not exceed 1.51% in tension and 6.21% in bending.Although triangular and other types of cable cross-sections were mentioned in some previous theoretical works [31,32], little investigation of these types of steel wire ropes has been conducted. This paper aims to contribute to the development of an oval strand computational model that will be able to theoretically analyse and predict the behaviour of spiral oval strands subjected to various load effects. Studies of oval cables, as presented in this paper, are rare.In contrast with earlier references in which geometric models for round spiral strands were built, the contribution of this paper is to propose a 3D mathematical geometric model for oval spiral strands and confirm its applicability. Derived geometric equations are used for the generation of accurate 3D geometric and computational models for different types of strands. Results of finite element analyses of four spiral strands with different shapes are presented in this paper. Responses of two types of round spiral strands, triangular and oval strands subjected to axial loads are compared and discussed.The cables considered in this section are spiral oval strands made of one or two layers of circular wires helically laid over central circular straight core wires arranged in parallel (Fig. 1). The right (left) hand lay strand is a strand in which the cover wires are laid in a helix having a right (left) hand pitch.A spiral oval strand that is created from n0 parallel-lay straight wires in the core of the strand and njwires in the layer j (that is n1 wires in the first layer and n2 wires in the second layer) is considered in this study. An approach is based on the assumption that points of wires axes in the core of the cross section of the strand lie in one line. Denotations of the wires diameters in the corresponding layer are δj(where j=0 for the core, j=1 for the first layer and j=2 for the second layer) and the gaps between the wires in the corresponding layer j are Δj. The gaps between the wires in the core are Δ0. Gaps between wires of the adjacent layers are not considered. The lay angle of wires in the layer j of the strand is αj. We assume that the wires of both layers are laid in the right hand direction. The structure of a cross-section of the oval strand which consists of for example 4 straight core wires, 10 wires in the first layer and 14 wires in the second layer is shown in Fig. 1.A derivation of the mathematical expressions for the individual wires axes is based on the described geometric configuration of structural members of the strand and is similar to that published in [32] for triangular strands.One of the options, when creating a geometric model of oval strands made of one or two layers of circular wires laid helically over a central circular straight core wires is presented in the following section of this paper. Subsequently, a proposed geometric model will be transformed into a finite element computational model and a behaviour simulation of an oval strand subjected to axial loads will be performed.For spiral strands and ropes, many analytical and numerical models based on different theories and hypotheses were developed (fibre hypotheses, Love’s curved beam theory, orthotropic sheet theory, thin rod theory, and discrete finite element models, etc.) [33]. Unlike the method used in [34] where the helical geometry of each wire was generated by linear z-axis extrusion of a circular surface along a helical curve, the approach developed in [35] uses a continuous element morphing process which is applied along the length of the cable.The proposed mathematical model of the strand enables direct use in its finite element analysis in which individual wires can be approximated by means of various types of finite elements (3D solid or beam elements).The surface generated by the wire can be expressed geometrically as a cyclical surface which is formed from the translation of the circle over the wire centreline. The centre of the circle is on the wire centreline and the diameter of the circle is equal to the wire diameter δj. The plane of the circle is in any position the normal plane of the wire centreline. Therefore, it is sufficient to derive an analytical mathematical expression of the wires axes curves. Using a derivation procedure analogous to the approach in [32] we obtain analytical mathematical expressions of the wire axes for the first and second layer of the oval strand.Let the right hand Cartesian coordinate system (O;x,y,z) be placed so that the z axis is identical with the oSaxis of the strand, and the starting points of the centrelines of the core wires are on the y axis as is shown in Fig. 2. The centreline of the core wire i is defined by the parametric equations(1)x(t)=0y(t)=-a2+(i-1)(δ0+Δ0)z(t)=mtwheret∈〈0,1〉,i=1,2,…,n0, m is the length of the strand model and a=(n0−1)(δ0+Δ0) is the parameter dependents on the geometrical properties of the strand, where n0 is the number of the straight wires in the core of the strand, δ0 is the diameter of the core wires and Δ0 is the gap between the core wires.A wire in the 1st layer of the strand is helically laid around the core consisting of n0 wires under the lay angle α1. The curve of the wire axis consists of straight line and helix segments. The same characteristics have wires of other layers j laid helically around the wires of the previous layer j−1 under the lay angle αj.The first line segment can be expressed by the following parametric equations(2)xl(ψ)=bj2yl(ψ)=bj2tan(ψ-γj)zl(ψ)=a+bjtan(ψ-γj)2tanαjwhere bj=δ0+2δ1+⋯+2δj−1+δj; γj=arctan(a/bj) and ψ is the angle of rotation around the axis z,ψ∈〈0;2γj〉.For the helix part we obtain equations(3)xh(ω)=bj2cos(ω)yh(ω)=a+bjsin(ω)2zh(ω)=2a+bjω2tanαjwhereω∈〈0;π〉is the angle of rotation around the axis oh.These two segments are repeated in the wire axis in a position rotated by the angle κ=kπ around the z axis and translated by the lengthhΔj(Fig. 3). The size of translation for the wire segment in the layer j is(4)hΔj=bjπ+2a2tanαjAll wires of one layer create identical surfaces. Consequently the wire centrelines in the layer are identical curves where each curve is shifted from the previous one in the axial direction by a lengthhwj, where(5)hwj=2hΔjnjSubsequently the parametric equations for the axis of the wire i in the layer j of the strand can be written in the form(6)x(ψ)=xs(ψ)cosκ-ys(ψ)sinκy(ψ)=q[xs(ψ)sinκ+ys(ψ)cosκ]z(ψ)=zs(ψ)+khΔj-(i-1)hwjin which we use Eq. (2), withψ∈〈0;2γj〉for the line segment (s=l) and Eq. (3), with ψ=ω andω∈〈0;π〉for the helical segment (s=h). The parameter q=1 for the right hand laid wire and q=−1 for the left hand laid wire in the strand.The parametric equations above (6) enable the geometry of an arbitrary wire in the oval strand with n0 wires of the core to be defined. Consequently, it is sufficient to design the mathematical 3D model of the oval strand. For illustration purposes, the first wires in three layers of the oval strand, obtained by derived parametric equations are shown in Fig. 4.The example is presented to demonstrate the features of the geometric modelling of oval strands based on proposed parametric equations and their computer implementation. To validate the above mathematical techniques, a two-layered oval strand with a construction of (3+9+15) wires (1×27 wires), was modelled. Pro/Engineer Wildfire V 5.0 software was used for the implementation of the derived geometric equations and for strand modelling [36].The definition of basic characteristics and input parameters of oval strands include wire diameters, gaps between individual wires in the layers and lay angles which are depicted in Table 1. Symbols of individual quantities, their denotations in the Pro/Engineer Wildfire V 5.0 software and their concrete values are shown in Table 1.The generation of a computer geometric model of the oval strand with defined input parameters consists of several steps. The procedure is similar to that published in [32] for triangular strands. The 3D complete model of the oval strand is shown in Fig. 5. The figure and visualizations make it clear that the mathematical model developed is able to generate oval strands’ geometries. The results obtained confirm the correctness of the derived parametric equations and their mathematical importance.Results of finite element analyses of four spiral strands with different shapes are presented in this section. Responses of two types of round spiral strands, triangular and oval strands subjected to axial loads will be compared and discussed.The strands with the following properties were analysed: A spiral strand rope consisting of two layers of round wires laid helically over three wound core round wires with a construction of 3+9+15 (spiral strand 1), a spiral strand rope consisting of two layers of round wires laid helically over a central round wire with a construction of 1+8+14 (spiral strand 2), a spiral triangular strand consisting of three parallel-lay straight wires in the core, 9 wires in the first layer and 15 wires in the second layer and the previously analysed two-layer oval strand with a construction of (3+9+15) were considered in this study. A basic requirement was that cross-sectional areas of the individual strands stay the same. Various types of the investigated strands are shown in Fig. 6and their input parameters are introduced in Tables 1–4.The geometric models of the strands created in the Pro/Engineer Wildfire V 5.0 software were further imported into the finite element ABAQUS/Explicit software [37], which was used for their finite element numerical analyses. The finite element analysis is applied to simulate the behaviour of the investigated strands subjected to tension loads.The material model of each strand is characterised by a linear relation between stresses and strains. Displacements and strains are supposed to be small, therefore the geometrically linear behaviour of the strand is assumed. This assumption is not restrictive in pure axial loading: Velinsky [38] showed that the results from linear and non-linear theories are very close in the usual practical axial load range.A nominal breaking strength of fn,w=1960Nmm−2 for a steel wire and a nominal ultimate tensile strength of Nn,s=40430.07N for each strand with a nominal metallic cross-sectional area of An,s=20.627586mm2 were considered in this study. In order to fulfil the mentioned basic requirement sizes of the cross-sectional areas of wires in the individual strands were accommodated. The assumed modulus of elasticity of the wire material is E=190,000Nmm−2, the density is ρ=7850kgm−3, the Poisson’s ratio is ν=0.3 and the coefficient of friction between wires is μ=0.2. The wires are made of homogeneous, isotropic and linearly elastic material.An eight-node linear brick element with three degrees of freedom per node (three translations in the directions of x, y and z coordinate axes) designated as C3D8R in ABAQUS/Explicit element library, with reduced integration and hourglass control was used for the mesh generation. This is a general purpose element, with one integration point located in the middle of the element. The element tends to not be stiff enough in bending. Stresses and strains are most accurate at the integration points. This element has been shown to perform well in similar applications involving the modelling of steel tension cables [27,35].Eight-node linear brick C3D8R elements were applied for structural discretization. Circular wires of each strand were discretized using these elements. Convergence studies were conducted to select an appropriate mesh density, with the aim of achieving suitably accurate results whilst minimising computational time. Meshes with dimensions of 0.2×0.2mm were used for the finite element analysis. The meshed model of the oval strand can be seen in Fig. 7. The meshes for each wire were generated independently.Choosing the proper element and mesh density creates a very important stage in the analysis process. Models with varying initial grid spacing within the wires using eight-node linear brick C3D8R elements were investigated and all the results were analysed. The mesh size should be sufficiently fine, especially in regions where high solution variable gradients exist. Such regions with maximum stresses usually occur at contact interactions (contact areas) between wires in the layers and between layer boundaries, as well as in the core of the strand (peaks of local stresses with possible circulation zones). However, the number of elements is also limited by the capacity of the computer in terms of storage and speed. 20 node quadratic elements are smoothly distributed along the wire and across its contour. These elements are very accurate and provide soft modelling of wire geometries and consequently also contact interactions between wires because they can properly align themselves on the curves of the wire contours. 20 node elements are supported only by the Abaqus/Standard, but not by the Abaqus/Explicit approach which is suitable for large contact tasks. This was a main reason why the 8 node elements with reasonable mesh sizes were successfully applied in these analyses. The element sizes should be fine enough to capture the stress gradients and to properly approximate the wire geometries and contact areas. Therefore, based on the results obtained by parametrical studies, mesh sizes with dimensions of 0.2×0.2mm were used in the discretization of the computational domain. A local convergence criterion such as the maximum of the Von Mises stress was used in the parametrical studies where mesh sizes with dimensions of 1.0×1.0mm; 0.8×0.8mm; 0.6×0.6mm; 0.4×0.4mm; 0.3×0.3mm; 0.2×0.2mm; and 0.1×0.1mm were applied and tested. The maximum of the Von Mises stress as a function of the mesh density to demonstrate its convergence is shown in Fig. 8. The mesh size is important because the mesh used with linear elements leads to geometrical approximations of the wire contour, thus of the contact interactions between wires [39].The surface-to-surface contact type was defined between surfaces of the individual adjacent wires of the strand. Surface-to-surface contact interactions describe contacts between wires in the individual layers and between wire layers caused by the tensile load acting on the strand. This approach gives more accurate results but is time-consuming. Because it is a demanding contact task, individual contact pairs have not been given in a solution, but the Global contact method was used. The analyses incorporated contact elements between all the possible contact surfaces, which simulate general surface-to-surface contact with Coulomb friction sliding. The principle of a global contact method for the contacts between the wires in the individual layers and contacts between the wire layers of the strand is shown in Fig. 9. A global search determines the globally nearest master surface facet for each slave node in a given contact pair [37]. A bucket sorting algorithm is used to minimise the computational expense of these searches. A two-dimensional example, excluding the consideration of “buckets”, is shown in Fig. 9. The global search computes the distance from node N to all of the master surface facets in the same bucket as node N. It determines that the nearest facet on the master surface to node N is the facet of element E. Node M is the node on this facet that is nearest to node N, and it is designated as the tracked master surface node. This search is conducted for each slave node, comparing each node against all of the facets on the master surface that are in the same bucket.The gaps between wires in the layers and between wire layers of the strands are important input parameters because they obviously have a strong influence on contact stresses. Input gaps between two neighbouring round wires in the corresponding layer for the individual strands resulted from concrete conditions defined by the geometric equations and from the initial structural configurations of the strands which are given by the following parameters: diameters of wires δi, winding radii rwiand lay angles αifor relevant layers. The following two basic conditions for the size of the gap between the wires of a wire layer were applied: the clearance should not be too large, but on the other hand there should be no overlapping (or negative clearance) between adjacent wires [9]. The input gaps between individual wires in the corresponding layer for the oval strand, two round and triangular strands are introduced in Tables 1–4.All the numerical analyses of the strand behaviour under axial tension forces were performed with one end clamped and the second free end submitted to a loading force. The fixed-end condition constrains all degrees of freedom. The free-end condition permits all nodal translations and rotations, allowing the wires to rotate and straighten out. The contraction of the wire cross-section and the strand cross-section was considered. The degrees of freedom of the nodes on the ends of the strand finite element model were defined according to the prescribed boundary conditions.The numerical analyses of the stresses and force–displacement properties of the strands were carried out on the models with an initial length of L0=192.503mm. For example, the model of the oval strand was composed of 1,174,858 elements and 1,464,343 nodes. The choice of the proper initial length of the numerically modelled cable creates an important task and a size of the cable specimen is usually limited by the capacity of the computer. The length of the strand should be assumed sufficiently long for the clamping conditions and their influences on the stress and deformation behaviour of the cable to be negligible. The length of the numerical finite element models was chosen as a compromise between the need to eliminate any boundary effect related to both the clamped and free loaded end and the computational heaviness due to the computational time of the solution procedure.The models of the individual strands are loaded by an axial tension force acting in the direction of their longitudinal z-axis. For the model six different axial loading forces: F1=4000; F2=8000N; F3=12,000N; F4=16,000N; F5=20,000N and F6=24,000N were considered. A global tension load (a global axial force Fk) of the strand was proportionally divided into element areas of individual wires of the strand.Resultant stress distributions in the cross-section of the individual strand models acting under individual load axial forces are shown in Figs. 10–13.Resultant Von-Mises stresses for the oval strand are shown in Fig. 13. The sizes of the stresses correspond to the level of individual axial forces. All wires in the first and second layers have nearly the same tension stress, because the strand has the same lay angle for both wire layers. The central wires in the core of the strand reach a higher stress than other wires in the layers. When strand tension force increases, the stress increases in the wires of the strand from the outside to the inside. The stress field obtained numerically is not totally homogeneous because some local stress redistributions due to contact pressures can occur in the outer wires. In addition to the tensile stresses, the wires in the oval strand subjected to axial forces are strained by bending and torsion stresses (because of the helical form of the wires in the layers) and by radial pressures. The friction between the wires induces additional tensile stress in the wires. Consequently, the stresses in all the individual wires are different as is shown in Fig. 14. A straight spiral oval strand becomes longer and thinner under a tensile force. The wires elongate and contract. Resultant longitudinal displacements (elongations) at the ends of the strand in the direction of z coordinate axis for an axial force of F6=24,000N are shown in Fig. 15.Longitudinal elongations (in the direction of z coordinate axis) of the investigated strands as are two round strands, triangular and oval strand subjected to the individual levels of axial forces are shown in Fig. 16. This figure demonstrates good deformation properties of the oval strand. From the comparisons shown in Fig. 16 it can be seen that there are only small differences between elongations of the spiral strand 2 and oval strand. Significant differences are visible between longitudinal elongations of the oval strand and strand 1 due to the different constructions of individual strands (parallel-lay and spiral form of wires in the core of the strand). Due to the construction of the strands, elongations are less in the case of strands with parallel-lay wires in the core than those in the case of helically laid wires.Fig. 16 shows the differences between the sizes of the axial longitudinal elongations of the investigated strands and between the forces versus elongation curves of the strands. The wire helixes of the strands are deformed and apart from the induced tensile stresses, bending stresses, torsion stresses and radial pressures from the small length-related radial force of the wires also exist. In addition to the above mentioned stresses, wires within the strands are subjected to different local stresses resulting from local bending and contact pressures. Stiffness and behaviour of strands subjected to the axial load as well as their local bending and contact pressure evolution depend on the construction of the strand. The more complicated the strand construction the smaller the stiffness and greater the nonlinearity in its behaviour (see Fig. 16). In this case, a round strand with a construction of (3+9+15) wires (spiral strand 1) creates a relatively complex structure, since the core is in the form of a strand made of three spiral wires. The greater the number of spiral wires a strand has, the smaller the stiffness and larger the nonlinearity in its behaviour, because contact pressure evolution between wires and/or wire layers grow slower compared with strands composed of simpler constructions as is in the case of the round strand with a construction of (1+8+14) wires (spiral strand 2) and the oval strand. The core of spiral strand 2 is in the form of the single wire and the helical effects in the case of the oval strand are reduced compared with the triangular strand.The form of the non-linear behaviour is closely connected to the construction of the strand and to the strengthening at the elongation of the strand subjected to a gradually increased axial load. This strengthening in the cross-sections of the strand occurs because of dislocation movements of wires between the core and the layers or within the core and individual layers. Fig. 16 shows, that the rate of the strengthening increases intensively in the case of spiral strand 2 and the oval strand; becoming smaller in the case of the triangular strand and is smallest in the case of spiral strand 1 which exhibits the most complicated construction.Maximum Von Mises stresses of the investigated strands as the functions of the longitudinal elongations are shown in Fig. 17. The sizes of the stresses correspond to the elongations of the individual strands (Fig. 16).Stress distribution in the cross-sections of the investigated strands subjected to an axial force of F5=20,000N is shown in Fig. 18. Fig. 18 shows the differences between the maximum Von-Mises stresses of the investigated strands. The sizes of the maximum stresses in the core wires correspond to the maximum axial longitudinal elongations of the investigated strands. The maximum stresses occur in the case of spiral strand 1 with a construction of (3+9+15) wires and in the case of the triangular strand. The stresses become smaller in the case of the oval strand and are smallest in the case of spiral strand 2 with a construction of (1+8+14) wires (with a relatively simple construction of the cross-section).The stress distributions along the cross-sections of the investigated strands are non-uniform due to local bending effects. Local stresses of wires vary along the cross-sections of the individual strands. Analyses showed that the local stresses are much higher at the area of the core wires than in the remaining parts of the strand cross-section. The size of these local pressures depends on the construction of the strand.Fig. 18a shows the local stress distribution which reflects the construction of the strand with the core in the form of the three spiral wires. It can be seen that significant local stresses exist in the contact zones (contact interactions) of the individual cross-sections of the core wires. In these areas the maximum Von-Mises stresses occur. From Fig. 18a, it can be seen that the stresses are non-uniformly distributed across the wires. There are local maximum values in all of the three central core wires. As the axial strain is increased the gradient of these stresses is also increased, such that the stresses in the inner contact parts of the middle wires become much bigger than at the outer edges. These indicate that local bending and shear stresses caused by twisting play noticeable roles in addition to the axial stresses. These contact interactions occur as a result of straightening effects of the spiral wire subjected to axial loads. Away from these areas, the effects of contact interactions decrease and stresses are characterised by a relatively uniform distribution. The stresses in the outer parts of the middle core wires as well as in the wires of the first and second layer are significantly attenuated, than those at the inner edges.The behaviour of spiral strand 2 (Fig. 18b) with the middle core wire is markedly different from that shown in Fig. 18a for the case of spiral strand 1 with a construction of (3+9+15) wires, since the influence of the central contact stress region is not apparent and almost the entire cross-section of the strand is characterised by a uniform stress distribution.Fig. 18c shows that the stresses in the individual wires of the triangular strand vary in a more complex manner. The maximum Von-Mises stresses with a relatively uniform distribution occur in the central parallel wires.Results showed that strand construction has an important influence on the location of the maximum Von-Mises stresses in the cross-section. Diverse constructions of strands with various contact interactions of wires can modify the location of maximum stresses and their overall distribution.The computational demand of the models is large due to the numerical treatment of the contact between wires in the individual layers and between wire layers. The motivation for the application of the finite element code ABAQUS/Explicit was to reduce the computational time of the solution procedure. The computational time can be significantly shortened using a super computer.The application of a finite element analysis for the prediction of stresses and displacements of the investigated strands subjected to axial tension forces has been demonstrated. The results obtained confirm the correctness of the derived parametric equations and the mathematical and physical importance of the finite element model developed. The suggested finite element models can be successfully used in predicting mechanical behaviour of spiral wire strands.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In comparison with the theoretical analysis of wire strands reported in the literature where obviously spiral round strands were modelled and analysed, this paper was focused on single- and two-layered oval strands with a construction of (n0+n1) and (n0+n1+n2) wires, respectively.In order to precisely model the complex geometry of spiral oval wire strands necessary for their finite element analysis, geometric parametric equations have been developed and further implemented in the Pro/Engineer Wildfire V 5.0 software code for geometric modelling. The application of the derived geometric parametric equations and analytical model was illustrated by numerical examples. The results obtained confirm the correctness of the derived parametric equations and the mathematical and physical importance of the finite element model developed.Results of finite element analyses of four spiral strands with different shapes were presented. To predict the behaviour of two types of round spiral strands, triangular and oval strands under tensile loads, mathematical geometric models have been implemented in a finite element program. For this purpose ABAQUS/Explicit software was used. Responses of the strands subjected to axial loads were compared and resultant stresses and deformations were discussed. Accurate modelling and understanding of the mechanical behaviour of strands and ropes are complicated due to the complex contact interactions and conditions that exist between individual spirally wound wires.There is a growing need for numerical methods devoted to computer modelling and analysis of strands and ropes. The proposed approach can be used for this purpose since it provides the designer with an effective tool for the behaviour prediction of cables and for an appropriate and rational choice of their initial structural parameters. Computer modelling and analysis of wire strands and ropes have many applications: basic rope design (e.g. parametric studies to improve properties of strands and ropes), quality assurance (e.g. assessing the effects of deviations from design parameters), numerical testing (e.g. predicting strand and rope static and fatigue properties), investigating experimental variables to plan tests, and extrapolating test results to other conditions.The approach holds promise in solving more complex analyses of oval strand and rope behaviour. Future work will consider the application of derived parametric equations implemented in the finite element approach to more complex problems, including post-elastic and bending effects as well as the fatigue analysis of strands and ropes with complex geometries.