@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An investigation of ultrasonic nanocrystal surface modification machining process by numerical simulation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A simplified model of UNSM was developed by equivalent static loading method.A 3-D model was built to investigate the machining process of UNSM.Small and stable energy dissipation of UNSM process can be found.Lower machining linear velocity can produce severe surface work hardening.Static loading has a greater impact to UNSM result comparing others.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
UNSM,S2PD,Physical model,Finite element analysis,Residual stress,Work hardening,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
As a method for surface severe plastic deformation (S2PD), ultrasonic nanocrystal surface modification (UNSM) enhances metal surface properties through striker peening, a metal dimpling process driven by ultrasonic vibration energy. UNSM treatment introduces residual stress, surface hardening, and nano-crystalline structures into metal surfaces which are beneficial for reducing wear, fatigue, and corrosion properties. In this paper, the process of UNSM is described and a simplified physical model created using the equivalent static loading method is presented. Along with the simplified physical model, a finite elements simulation model was developed. Effective plastic strain was considered as a parameter for evaluating the level of work hardening produced in the simulation. The dynamic processes and energy dissipation were also examined, and it was found that different kinds of energy dissipation occur during UNSM treatment. Comparisons between the processing parameters (processing velocity, static load, and feed rate) were performed using a simulated example of UNSM linear processing. The results show that the linear processing produces a uniform region containing identical distributions of residual stress and effective plastic strain. The effects of the parameters on the processing results (residual stress, plastic deformation and work hardening) were likewise studied using UNSM linear processing. Compared to processing velocity, a high static load produced more work hardening and higher compressive residual stress. Surface deformation and residual stress results were also more sensitive to static load than processing velocity. Feed rate was found to be an important parameter as well, greatly influencing both surface deformation and work hardening.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Surface deterioration is one of the most common causes of metal failure, which includes loosening of metal parts due to wear, surface breakage induced by corrosion, and fatigue fractures. Because the occurrence of all of these faults is closely connected to metal surface properties, surface enhancement is often performed to improve the surface properties of metal products. Increasing surface roughness, strength [1,2], abrasion resistance, corrosion resistance [3–5], residual stress [6–12], and fatigue properties [8,9,13] are all types of surface enhancement that can be achieved using various technological means. Compared to other methods for improving the longevity of metal materials, surface treatment is a promisingly low-cost and particularly effective process that enhances the overall quality of metal materials. New surface treatment techniques continue to be developed in order to save energy and shorten processing time, and the discovery of highly efficient and quick techniques will remain an important area for future study.The S2PD process was initially proposed by Lu [14] as an effective surface treatment for generating nano-crystalline structures on a material’s surface using the method of surface mechanical attrition treatment (SMAT). In Lu’s study, spherical balls composed of different materials (such as steel, glass, or ceramic) were vibrated over the surface of a target material using a vibration generator, forcing the balls to impact the target material. A subsequent method for S2PD was carried out where a large number of balls were fired at the specimen surface from random directions and at high strain rates, introducing severe plastic deformation and grain refinement to the surface layer [15]. In both cases, enhancement of surface layer was produced without a chemical reaction on the material’s surface or changing the material’s chemical structure.A great number of alternative S2PD methods have been invented and implemented to improve the surface properties of bulk materials: ultrasonic peening (UP) [4], laser shock peening (LSP) [16,17], improved methods of SMAT [18,19], ultrasonic shot peening (USSP) [20], ultrasonic surface rolling processing (USRP) [6], surface mechanical grinding treatment (SMGT) [21], and ultrasonic nanocrystal surface modification (UNSM) [22,23]. With work process principles varying, different levels grain refinement, depth of the processing layer, and size of refined grains differ across methods.One method of S2PD, UNSM [8,24–28], has been used to enhance surface properties by producing gradient changes in the grain refinement of a material’s surface. In terms of equipment, UNSM requires an ultrasonic generator, an air compressor, a control card, and a guide unit (Fig. 1). UNSM is powered by the ultrasound transducer, which produces tens of thousands, even up to millions, of mechanical ultrasonic waves per second. However, because the ultrasound transducer can generate only a few micrometers of amplitude directly, an acoustic horn is frequently employed to magnify the amplitude. The amplified mechanical ultrasonic wave then used to drive a tip ball so that it strikes the surface of a target material, inducing severe surface plastic deformation on the specimen. Compared to the ultrasonic impact treatment (UIT), UNSM has several advantages. One is its low energy consumption; UNSM has an output power of approximately 1kW. However, the most notable advantage of UNSM is that the use of static loading during surface treatment ensures uniformity of processing. These advantages have led to the increasingly wide application of UNSM and, for this reason, the processing characteristics of UNSM and the working process employed by UNSM to machine materials must be presented.In recent years, many numerical studies [10–12,29–50] of S2PD have been published on simulations designed to examine the process parameters of a developed S2PD model. Dai and Shaw [51] studied effect of ball diameter and velocity on impact peening and explained how process results varied using different levels of kinetic energy. Achintha [30,46] developed a hybrid explicit finite element-eigenstrain model to investigate the parameters of LSP and found that the study’s simulated results corresponded well with its experimental results. Other process parameters and results such as shot peening coverage [42], surface roughness [37], residual stress [30,34,38,39,52], and process angle [49] have been successfully simulated and studied. The simulation of S2PD to produce surface nano-crystallization was investigated by Bagherifard et al. [53], while other studies found that element size is sensitive parameter in the simulation results [35]. Liu et al. [39] developed a dynamic finite element model for the simulation of USRP using the governing equations ABAQUS/Explicit. USRPed parameters were evaluated according to the study conditions, which stipulated that an effective plastic strain equal or greater than 8 had to be used to form a nanostructured layer. Liu found the parameters required producing a nanostructured surface layer, and also that effective plastic strain is a reliable means of predicting the generation of nano-sized grains.Taking into account the unique features of UNSM and its similarities with SP and SMAT, in this study, a simplified physical model of the UNSM process was created using the equivalent static loading method. A finite elements simulation model was then developed to investigate the dynamic processes of and energy dissipation during the processing process. Comparisons of different processing parameters—namely, processing velocity, static load and feed rate—were performed using the simulated results of UNSM linear processing. The effects of different parameters on the processing results (residual stress, plastic deformation and work hardening) were then studied using the UNSM linear processing model.The process UNSM is driven by an ultrasound transducer that produces tens of thousands mechanical ultrasonic waves per second. However, because only a few micrometers of amplitude can be generated by the ultrasound transducer directly, an acoustic horn is frequently is used to magnify the amplitude by dozens, or even several hundred, microns. The amplified mechanical ultrasonic wave is then used to propel a strike pin, so that it strikes the surface thousands of times per second with constant pressure, inducing severe surface plastic deformation. In this study the tungsten carbide (TC) was chosen as the strike pin as the properties of high hardness and high friction resisting. Small mechanical wear can ensure the working accuracy and system stability. A static load produced by air pressure is used to control the level of pressure with which the tip ball contacts the specimen surface. After UNSM treatment, the original grains of the specimen’s surface layer have been refined into nanometer-sized grains by severe plastic deformation (SPD). In our study, this entire process was carried out using an ultrasonic generator (30μm amplitude and 20kHz), and air compressor devices producing the static force and amplitude of the dynamic load. The TC ball strikes the material surface of a rotating specimen traveling across its length, s, in a horizontal direction (Fig. 2).Using the linear velocity of the rotating specimen and the feed rate of the strike device shaft, the number of strikes to the specimen surface per mm2 can be calculated with Eq. (1):(1)N=fν∗swhere N is the processing density (mm−2), f is the frequency of the ultrasound transducer, ν (mm/s) is the speed to specimen surface as it rotates, and s (mm/rev) is feed rate.In Fig. 3a, the UNSM-processed specimen is shown with processing marks produced by axial movement with a constant feed rate of 70μm and a static load of 60N. Notably, it can be seen that in the end of processing, a large groove approximately 500μm, much larger than the feed rate of 70μm was formed. During the UNSM process, the strike pin was moved along the axial direction by a guide unit so that uniform processing could be achieved on the metal surface as the specimen rotated. The UNSM process results along the axial direction are shown in Fig. 3b. With the completion of each round, a new process groove was formed. The plastic extrusion visible in Fig. 3b was caused by the depth, h, of the processed surface being less than the depth, H, of the UNSM groove. Therefore, to obtain a smooth processing surface, it is important to use the proper UNSM parameters so that extrusion is limited during the surface treatment.Based the description of the UNSM process, it is clear that the static load is a key parameter in UNSM treatment. A higher static load can produce deeper deformations and a stronger work hardened layer. However, the surface roughness becomes more sensitive to the static load as larger deformations are produced. The nature of the force load between the strike pin and target material has been studied by several researchers [23,39], who found that the dynamic impact force can be expressed as a typical wave. This wave can be described with the following equation:(2)Fm=Fs+Fasin(ωt)Fsis the static load produced by the air compressor, Fais the load produced by the ultrasonic generator, which changes with processing time (ω is 2πf, where f is processing frequency), and Fmis the sum of Fsand Fasin(ωt). Fig. 4shows the results of Eq. (2) with an amplitude of 30μm and considering the separation between the strike pin and the target material, the force load between strike pin and metal surface, and the active period, which is represented by the shaded area. From Fig. 4, it can be seen that in regards to static loading, the force load Fmis higher than the static load and that Fa, induced by the ultrasound transducer, is approximately 2–5 times Fs[23].In the course of carrying out the UNSM process, it was found that it is difficult to set the load of the strike pin as the variable determining the type of contact interface resulting from surface deformation. To simplify this process, the equivalent static loading method was employed in this study’s model [54,55]. With the physical model of UNSM and the equivalent static loading method, the force load between the strike pin and target material was converted for use with thousands of strike pins operating at a certain initial velocity. Owing to the nature of the resulting strike process, a plastic zone was produced on target surface (as shown in Fig. 5) during surface plastic deformation treatment. Though the strike pin was impacting a semi-infinite target, only the target material was deformed during the UNSM process due to the extreme hardness of the strike pin (made of tungsten-carbide).According to Newton’s second law, the equation of motion during contact between strike pin and target material is(3)Mdνdt=-PmAwhere M is the mass of strike pin (which can be obtained fromρ5π3R3where ρ is the density of the strike pin and5π3R3is volume of the strike pin), v is the speed of strike pin at time t, Pmis the mean normal pressure on the surface of target, and A (approximately πa2) is the contact area between the strike pin and the target at t. As only elastic–plastic deformation was produced during the surface treatment, the stress wave was mainly composed of elastic–plastic waves. Following the Eqs. (4) and (5)[24–27], the speed of elastic stress wave and plastic stress wave can be calculated within different materials. Ceis the speed of elastic stress wave; Cpis the speed of plastic stress wave; υ is the Poisson’s ratio of the S45C steel; E is the elasticity modulus and ρ is the density of S45C steel.(4)Ce=(1-υ)E(1+υ)(1-2υ)·1ρ=4912m/s(5)Cp=E3(1-2υ)·1ρ=3864m/sWith a specimen of S45C steel, the elastic stress wave was 4912m/s, which was higher than the plastic stress wave, 3864m/s. The size of the plastic stress wave was primarily hindered by the plastic deformation that occurred during processing. Therefore, Pmwas considered 3 times the yield stress σ0, or approximately 3σ0[56].With the relationships:dνdt=dZdtdνdZ=νdνdZ(the differential relations between depth Z and speed v of strike pin),a (A=πa2) as at(atis the radius of the projected contact area at time t),M=ρ5π3R3(M, the mass of strike pin, is calculated from the volume and density of strike pin).Eq. (3) can be converted into5π3ρR3νdνdZ=-3σ0πat. Because R≫Z,at=2ZRwas substituted into the above equation and integrated on each side over indent depths from 0 to Z, Z and a can be obtained as follows:(6)Z=5ρR2ν218σ0(7)a=R10ρν29σ01/4FromF=3σ0πat2, the contact force can be obtained as follows:(8)F=σ0πR210ρν2σ01/2The speed, v, of the strike pin can be obtained from the results of Eq. (8) using the equation(9)ν=F(10ρσ0)1/2πR2Based on the above analysis of the impact process, the action time of plastic deformation at each time t is less than that of an entire UNSM cycle. The parameter F in the Eq. (9) can be set as the maximum value for Fm. Using the equivalent static loading method, the equivalent velocities of different static loads under these controlled conditions can be determined, as shown in Table 1. With this physical model, the velocities of strike pins can be obtained and would be used in the following finite element model.To investigate the process of UNSM, a three-dimensional finite element analysis model was developed with Ls_dyna software. A 6mm∗6mm∗1.5mm S45C steel block (Fig. 6) was built as the target body and studied with results from a simulated linear processing UNSM treatment. Plastic-kinematic material parameters for the target material were used and set as following: yield stress (σy): 800Mpa; Tangent modulus: 100Mpa; Young’s modulus (E): 210Gpa; Poisson’s ratio (υ) 0.3; and density (ρ): 7830kg/m3. Tangent modulus is the slope between the yield limit and ultimate strength and is taken as a modulus in the range of inelasticity limit. Strain rate hardening was neglected in this model. As contact friction occurred during the interaction between the strike peening and target materials, the friction coefficient μ was set as 0.2. To avoid the influence of stress reflection between the tip ball and the specimen, a non-reflection face was used as a boundary. Using the Ls_dyna software, all surfaces, excepting the top surface, were set as non-reflection boundaries. This model was then used to simulate linear processing in the UNSM process (Fig. 7) and thousands of strike pins were set to strike the target S45C steel model.Eight-node brick elements with reduced integration and hourglass control, which can alleviate the “mesh-locking” problem caused by plastic incompressibility over-constraint, were chosen for the target. Also, to simplify the model, the strike pin was set as a rigid body, while the shell elements were used for meshing. The size of the smallest element of the target and shot peening are most sensitive to simulation results, so using “zero element size” was proposed to obtain the maximum value of effective plastic strain [35]. However, in explicit simulations, the smallest element size determines the solution time, with small elements requiring more time. Therefore, an appropriate element size should balance calculation accuracy and calculation time. In this study, the smallest element size, approximately 1/20th of dimple diameter, was set at 25μm in the main impact zones, a 3mm∗1mm∗0.25mm area on the top surface of target and a 1mm diameter circle on the tip surface of strike pin. To control the processing linear velocity, the distance d between adjacent strike pins was calculated using Eq. (10). Here, ν is the linear velocity between the target and strike pin (Fig. 2) and f is the working frequency of the UNSM equipment. With the distance d and different fixed heights, strike pins impacted the target surface in a specific order with the specific initial velocity calculated from Eq. (9), and simulation of the UNSM process was successfully achieved:(10)d=νf=ν20,000Following S2PD, a surface-hardening layer can be produced on the top surface of the target material. Many studies have focused on the development of the work hardening layer and found that severe plastic deformation can be produced within this layer. Additionally, even within the top surface layer, grains can be refined into nano-size and hardness can be enhanced. In a series of studies by Umemoto [57–59], it was found that the key condition for obtaining nano-sized grains is an effective plastic strain is close to 8. Using simulation models, many studies have estimated grain refinement level and found that the effective plastic strain is a practical method for predicting grain refinement results [35,39].In Ls_dyna, effective plastic strain is defined as(11)εeffP=εeffP|0+∫0tε¯̇PdtAt each time step, the increment inε¯̇Pis given by(12)ε¯̇P=23ε̇ijPε̇ijP1/2(13)ε̇ijP=ε̇ij-ε̇ijewhereε̇P,ε̇ij, andε̇ijeare the plastic strain, strain, and elastic rates respectively. It was found that the effective plastic strain corresponded with the generated level of plastic deformation within grains.Various S2PD surface treatments can induce plastic deformation behavior and dislocation activity in metals and alloys, but this ability strongly depends on lattice structure and stacking fault energy (SFE). The mechanisms of grain refinement in several metals and alloys, including iron (SFE about 200mJ/m2) [5,60,19], copper (SFE, 78mJ/m2) [61], aluminum (166mJ/m2) [62], and others [6,63–67], have been investigated, demonstrating that the grain refinement mechanism varies by target material. With iron, the grain refinement mechanisms are the formation and transformation of dense dislocation walls (DDWs) and dislocation tangles (DTs) in original grains [19]. In contrast, for copper, dislocation manipulation and rearrangement, deformation twinning to form nano-scale twin/matrix lamella bundles, and shear banding in the twin/matrix lamellae are the mechanisms of grain refinement [61]. In the refinement of AISI 304 stainless steel planar dislocation arrays and twins, the grain refinement mechanisms are the intersection of multidirectional twins leading to grain subdivision and a martensite transformation [67]. With double phase materials, it has been found that the softer phase refines first, while dissolution occurs in the second phase [63–65]. Regardless of the mechanism, dislocation and nano-grains effectively enhance a processed surface. However, the density of dislocation and size of refined grains are closely related to and improved by the amount of effective plastic strain. Though there are no reports on the relationship between work hardening and effective plastic strain, the amount of effective plastic strain is an effective assessment parameter for predicting the level of work hardening.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, the process of ultrasonic nanocrystal surface modification was studied and an analytical model based on fully plastic contact theory was developed. With a finite element model, the effect of processing parameters, including processing velocity, static load, and feed rate, were investigated by performing a simulation of UNSM linear processing. The effects of the parameters on the processing results residual stress, plastic deformation, and work hardening were analyzed. The following conclusions drawn from the study results:(1)The process of UNSM treatment was analyzed and studied. With the analysis results of the contact force and interaction process between strike pinning and metal surface, a simplified physical model was built by the equivalent static loading method and the static load can be transform into velocities. With this model the UNSM process can be simplified as thousands of strike pins with initial velocities.A finite element model was built following the physical model. The dynamic process and the energy dissipation during the process of UNSM was investigated and found that: During UNSM treatment, plastic dissipation and strain energy play important roles in energy dissipation, and low energy dissipation occurs during continuous impacting.A uniform region is produced during linear processing, and identical distribution of effective plastic strain and residual stress are found in this region. The processing linear velocity has little effect on residual stress distribution and surface deformation and lower processing linear velocity produces severe work hardening in the top surface region. A higher static load produces a deeper work hardening zone, higher compressive residual stress, and larger surface deformation. With a larger feed rate, work hardening and enhancement of the compressive residual stress zone is achieved. However, a larger feed rate can also produce a larger plastic extrusion and worsen surface roughness.