@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A combined DEM–FEM numerical method for Shot Peening parameter optimisation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel combined DEM–FEM method for Shot Peening optimisation is presented.The model provides a rapid method to investigate the effect of the peening parameters.A new algorithm was implemented accounting for impact dependent coefficients of restitution.The minimum area required in the analyses to obtain true residual stresses was determined.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Shot Peening,Residual stresses,Discrete Element Method,Finite Element Method,Optimisation,Numerical simulation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A numerical modelling approach capable of simulating Shot Peening (SP) processes of industrial interest was developed by combining the Discrete Element Method (DEM) with the Finite Element Method (FEM).In this approach, shot–shot and shot–target interactions as well as the overall shot flow were simulated efficiently using rigid body dynamics. A new algorithm to dynamically adapt the coefficient of restitution (CoR) for repeated impacts of shots on the same spot was implemented in the DEM code to take into account the effect of material hardening. Then, a parametric study was conducted using the Finite Element Method (FEM) to investigate the influence of the SP parameters on the development of residual stresses.Finally, a two-step coupling method is presented to combine the output of DEM simulation with FEM analyses to retrieve the Compressive Residual Stresses (CRS) after multiple impacts with the aim to evaluate the minimum area required to be modelled to realistically capture the field of residual stresses. A series of such coupled analyses were performed to determine the effect of peening angle and the combination of initial velocity and mass flow rate on CRS.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Shot Peening (SP) is common industrial cold working process that is applied to induce a field of Compressive Residual Stresses (CRS) on the surface of a metallic component [1]. Compressive stresses are beneficial in increasing resistance to fatigue failures, corrosion fatigue, fretting, wear, etc. In the process, a huge number of tiny spherical particles impact the treated surface. The overall process is ruled by multiple parameters, which need to be controlled and monitored in order to induce an appropriate CRS distribution providing additional resistance to the treated component [2]. The treatment surface is impacted by a large amount of round metallic particles, the so called ‘shots’, at high velocities. Each shot acts as a tiny peen hammer, causing the surface to yield in plastic deformation and leaving a concave depression, termed dimple, on the surface of the target component. The stress field of the depression is similar to the field of a flat bar being bent. The concave side of the bar is in compression and the convex side is in tension. The normal stress along the cross section of the bar varies from a maximum compressive stress on the concave surface, to zero stress at the neutral axis up to a maximum tensile stress on the convex surface.Several parameters have a direct influence on the CRS. The most important ones are: shot density, shot shape and material, impact angle, air pressure (shot velocity), nozzle geometry (diameter, peening angle and distance to the treated surface), and exposure time. Fig. 1provides a succinct conceptual visualisation of how the peening parameters affect the peening quality.Currently section of the optimal SP parameters is carried out empirically by performing several peening tests. The current empirical procedures are time – consuming and very expensive. An efficient numerical method for the simulation of SP processes is needed to provide a faster procedure for the selection of the optimal parameters for SP requiring the use of far less experimental tests which would be employed as validation of the numerical method rather than as a tool to search for the optimal values of the parameters. Moreover, an efficient numerical model can also help improve quality control and increase confidence in the SP process.In this paper a novel combined DEM–FEM numerical approach was developed to simulate the SP process. Modelling SP processes is very complex since it involves the interaction of a metallic surface with an enormous number of shots. Experimental studies are normally extremely costly, especially when aiming to optimise the set of peening parameters. Numerical simulations allow for the understanding of the influence of the individual peening parameters on the field of residual stresses to be improved and for a prescribed peening target to be achieved. SP parameters are customarily chosen on the basis of either empirical laws or past practice. The relationship between the desired peening effect, particularly the residual stress distribution of the treated surface, and the peening parameters is still unknown and needs to be investigated. In fact, different values of peening parameters may give rise to very different fields of residual stress distribution.Single and multiple shot impacts have been analysed by Al-Hassani [3], Deslaef et al. [4], Majzoobi et al. [5], Meguid et al. [6], Han et al. [7], Hong et al. [8], and Bhuvaraghan et al. [9]. Al-Hassani et al. [3] investigated the single shot impacts at various angles. Deslaef et al. [4] examined the effect of rigid and deformable shots. Majzoobi et al. [5] conducted a three dimensional numerical study where multiple shots impact on a target surface at different velocities. They concluded that the obtained residual stress distribution highly depends on impact velocity and number of impacts and that the maximum CRS rises as the velocity increases only up to a point and thereafter it begins to decline. Meguid et al. [6] performed dynamic finite element analyses of single shot impacts investigating the effects of shot velocity, size and shape and target characteristics on CRS concluding that the effects of shot parameters were more significant than the strain-hardening rate of the target material.Most of the SP studies performed in the literature do not model the shot–shot interaction occurring during the travel from the nozzle to the target surface and the shot rebounds from the target surface. Discrete element models were proposed by Han et al. [7], Hong et al. [8] and Bhuvaraghan et al. [9] to analyse the shot–shot and shot–target interaction in more detail, assuming both shot and target surface being rigid bodies. Later on, Bhuvaraghan et al. [9] coupled the DEM with FEM. However, the relationship between the peening parameters employed as input data in the DEM and the resulting CRS in FEM has not been established.Cao et al. [10] proposed an approximate model able to relate Almen intensity to shot velocity, however the relationship with the residual stresses in the shot peened object was not investigated. Many approaches recorded in published research deal with the prediction of residual stresses due to SP but do not relate them with Almen intensity and are therefore of limited practical interest. In contrast, Guagliano [11] employed the FEM to predict the residual stresses induced by SP on a metal target surface and related these stresses to Almen intensity simulating the impact of a few shots on a flat plate.An explicit dynamic algorithm for modelling up to 1000 impacts was described by Wang et al. [12] who showed that the FEM is able to investigate macroscopic effects (e.g. curvature) of SP as well as microscopic effects (e.g. local plasticity and residual stresses). The study, however, did not include any shot–shot interaction.On the other hand, this paper focuses on the development of an appropriate numerical model that can be used to optimise the peening process and the in turn the material response. In the following section, first the peening process is expounded. The proposed SP numerical model for the analysis of the shot stream in DEM and single shot impact analysis run by FEM are discussed next. A section describing the obtained results is followed by conclusions.The Discrete Element Method (DEM) records the motion of each single particle and its interaction with other particles and surfaces using Newton’s laws of motion. The state of the system is updated incrementally, at short time intervals using explicit time integration based on a leap-frog central difference scheme. At every time step, particle accelerations, velocities and positions are calculated. Contact mechanics laws relate the inter-particle elastic force with the particle deformation through the physical and geometrical properties of the particles. Damping is employed at contacts in order to account for the loss of kinetic energy during shot interaction.Shots are modelled as elastic isotropic bodies. The Hertz–Mindlin non-slip contact law was employed to model the shot–shot interaction and the shot–target surface interaction. The model is based on the work of Mindlin [13].In the normal direction, the exact analytical solution for the pressure and therefore the force upon the contact is given by the Hertz law. According to this law, the normal force–displacement (N–δ) relationship is non-linear. Considering a collision between 2 particles with elastic modulus E, Poisson’s ratio ν and radii R1 and R2(1)Fn=43E∗R∗δn32where the equivalent Young’s Modulus E∗, the equivalent radius R∗ are defined as(2)1E∗=(1-vi2)Ei+(1-vj2)Ej(3)1R∗=1Ri+1Rjwith Ei, vi, Riand Ej, vj, Rjbeing the Young’s Modulus, Poisson ratio and radius of each sphere in contact. Additionally there is a damping force,Fnd, given by:(4)Fnd=-256βSnm∗vnwherem∗=1mi+1mj-1is the equivalent mass, vnis the normal component of the relative velocity, the parameter β and Sn(the normal stiffness) are given by:(5)β=lneln2e+π2(6)Sn=2E∗R∗δnwhere e is the CoR.The tangential force, Ft, depends on the tangential overlap δtand the tangential stiffness St.(7)Ft=-Stδtwith(8)St=8G∗R∗δnwith G∗ being the equivalent shear modulus.(9)1G∗=(1-vi2)Gi+(1-vj2)GjAdditionally, tangential damping is given by:(10)Ftd=-256βStm∗vtwhere vtis the relative tangential velocity.As in the normal direction, we assume that the plastic dissipation can be expressed by a CoR. However, it is important to note that dissipation can also occur due to friction. Therefore, unlike the normal case, the contact law is made by a linear spring, a dashpot and a slider. The CoR will be assumed equal to the normal case: et=en. In the same way the tangential damping force will be calculated according to Eqs. (3) and (4).Metal spheres do not behave elastically but undergo permanent deformations during collisions at high speed, when the contact tractions exceed their elastic limits. This means that the particle kinetic energy is dissipated by the occurrence of plastic strains, heat transfer and elastic wave propagation. According to the study by Wu et al. [14], the latter phenomenon is negligible in comparison with the energy dissipated via plastic deformations and heat transfer. To use a contact law characterised by an elasto-visco-plastic model such as those typical of continuum mechanics would be overly complex and unaffordable from a computational point of view. As a result, the adopted model simulates the shots interaction by approximating the energy and momentum lost by the colliding shot by means of the so-called coefficient of restitution.Hertz–Mindlin law applies to purely elastic bodies whereas CoR was derived from experiments on elasto-plastic. The approximation introduced by our law is to separate out the elastic and plastic deformations. The relationships among the CoR, the incoming velocity, the collision time and the contact force/displacement, were discussed in [15] and the FE analysis agreed closely with the results produced by applying the Hertz theory. The coefficient expresses the total amount of energy dissipated and momentum loss during an impact without calculating the permanent local deformations undergone by the interacting surfaces. It is defined as:(11)e=vrviwith vrand vithe rebound and impact velocities respectively.The CoR is likely to affect significantly the final CRS, therefore it should be determined as accurately as possible for the various types of interactions. The CoR depends on both the impact velocity, and the impact angle θi. Therefore, ideally values of enand etshould be experimentally determined for a set of values of Viinitial velocity and θithe angle of impingement. The CoR for the shot–surface interaction will substantially vary depending on the history of previous collisions on the shot and plastic deformation occurred by the component. In Table 1, experimental data about the values of the CoR for shot–surface interaction for successive hits are reported. Keeping track of the location of each impact on the target surface over time, it is possible to implement values of CoR in the DEM code which change over time as a function of the number of previous impacts at the same location. In this way, it is possible to assess the effect of an impact dependent CoR on the obtained CRS and whether a value of the CoR averaged out of the number of collisions per spot could be applied instead.The CoR for sphere–sphere interaction, es–sis different from the sphere–flat plate interaction es–p. In the absence of experimental data, es–p=0.4 was assumed for both normal and tangential direction independent of the angle of impact and of the relative velocity between colliding shots.To assign a prescribed a viscous damping force, Fd, was applied to the two shots involved in the collision:(12)Fd=-ηvwith η being the damping coefficient and v the relative velocity between the two colliding particles. The relationship here employed to work out the damping coefficient corresponding to the desired CoR is from Tsuji et al. [16]. They numerically integrated the differential equation of motion (single degree of freedom system) for various values of the viscous coefficients, then evaluated the CoR as ratio between initial and final velocity to obtain the relationship of CoR vs. viscous coefficient.(13)η=αmKHδ14withα=542ln(e)((ln(e))2+π2)3D DEM analyses were performed using the commercial discrete element code EDEM [17]. The input data for the simulations consists of: the nozzle inner diameter dnand the distance d, between nozzle and target surface, the angle between nozzle and treated surface, the so-called angle of attack θ. Spherical shots of equal size were randomly generated at the nozzle cross section using the Particle Factory function in EDEM. The number of shots delivered from the nozzle in a given time period is a function of the presented mass flow rate used in the peening process. The initial velocity of the shots, Vi, is a function of the air pressure of the peening system. In this simulation a variation of 5% around the initial velocity was applied. SP quality is determined by the generated CRS pattern within the target component derived by the energy transfer and plastic deformation. The impact energy can be easily extracted from the DE simulation. One way to evaluate the impact energy is to determine the velocity of the shot just before impact. In the DEM simulation, the shots impacting on the target were continuously monitored and recorded along with time of impact, impact position and the components of this velocity along three coordinates are Vox, Voyand Vozrespectively.An algorithm to change the CoR for repeated impacts for the same location was implemented using the User Defined Library (UDL) in EDEM. The EDEM application triggers the UDL module for every shot–shot and shot–target collision. Once a shot–target collision is detected, the contact location of the target surface is retrieved and for every new contact the facets falling within the predefined impact diameter is recorded. The corresponding CoR data for the impact number is then retrieved from Table 1 and applied to compute the contact forces. Fig. 2shows the process flow diagram. The results depend on the mesh size, the number of impacts per geometry face and the values of the CoR data. The shot–shot, shot–target interaction including the resulting CRS were compared and analysed for the constant CoR case and for the case of variable CoR which progressively increases with number of impacts.The DEM is unable to model the plastic deformations and residual stresses induced on the treated surface. Hence, a FE analysis is needed to determine the compressive residual stresses of the surfaces. In our system a User Defined Library (UDL) is created within the EDEM application to log locations and impact velocities. This information is then used to create the Abaqus input files. Depending on the target geometry size and number of impacts, the input file can become very large. Since running a set of programs to generate a computable FE input from the DEM output can be very time consuming, we implemented an algorithm to generate the Abaqus input files within the DEM code.In the simulation, the DEM application uses a coarse mesh while the FEM analyses require a finer mesh to capture the CRS. This would require the coupling algorithm to match the meshes in DEM and FEM according to the impact location. Previously, Bhuvaraghan et al. [9] coupled DEM and FEM by recording the forces, location and indentation information to apply the equivalent pressure to retrieve the CRS. They retrieved the indentation information from simulations of single shot impacts. The circular pressure zone was modelled as an octagonal zone to follow the mesh pattern. However, in this study shots were assumed to impact the target surface in the normal direction only. Hence, this method is unable to replicate the different indentations produced by shots impacting the treated surface at different angles. Moreover, the subsequent shots impacting the intended area will rebound differently.In our approach instead, the shots are modelled in FEM as rigid particles and placed right above the location recorded in DEM. A new step is created with initial conditions using the shot impact velocity from DEM. In the next step, the impact is performed and excluded in future steps. In this way, we retrieve the exact indentation for different shots sizes impacting at various angles and velocities. The advantage of the proposed method lies in the fact that there is no need to employ the same mesh for the DEM and FEM analyses. Fig. 3illustrates the algorithm via a flow diagram detailing the coupling between the DEM code EDEM and the FEM code Abaqus [16,17]. The coupling can be outlined in the following steps:1.The ∗.stl geometry file is loaded into Abaqus and the material properties are selected. The input file is created and separated into dynamic and static parts. These are parts of the main input file that need to be populated and parts of the file that will remain unchanged regardless of the number of impacts, location, etc. The main input file is divided into four separate files. The dynamic parts are discarded and the static parts are saved to be used later in step 6.The same ∗.stl file is loaded into the commercial EDEM program along with a file containing the geometry surface data from FEM.The SP model is set up with the individual peening parameters.The DEM SP simulation is run, applying the CoR for repeated impacts. For each new shot–target contact the impact location and velocity are recorded.When the simulation ends, two separate files are created containing the ∗Nset, ∗Step and ∗Loads parts of the Abaqus file. Impacts that are further away from each other are grouped together and are computed simultaneously in the same time step. This reduces the computation time and the output size of the file.The two output files created from the EDEM simulations are then merged together with the two files from step one to generate the main Abaqus input file.The input file is then loaded into Abaqus to obtain the residual compressive stresses.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A new computational framework for SP processes based on both the discrete element and the Finite Element Methods has been presented. The introduced framework allowed to run an extensive parametric analysis of the influence of the several mechanical parameters involved in the SP process. Visualising the shot impact locations in DEM can help to investigate the coverage build-up when peening a mechanical component of complex geometry with very little computational effort: for instance a simulation with 10,000 impacts can be simulated in only a few minutes on a single computer with an Intel i7 870 processor (4 cores) with 8MB cache and 16GB of memory running Linux CentOS.The current model can be used to analyse the shot flow and assist in improving current nozzle designs and develop new ones. In the DEM simulations, the shot flow reached steady state after 4000 impacts with the parameters used in this study. From the parametric analyses it emerged that the air pressure in the nozzle (vo) is the most important factor, followed by the mass flow rate rmand the duration of the peening process.The new DEM–FEM coupling proposed in this paper provides a convenient way to couple the commercial DEM and FEM applications. A routine manages the interface between EDEM and Abaqus. The EDEM application generates an Abaqus input file, which is then used to analyse the treatment surface and resulting CRS. Analyses were performed to evaluate the minimum size of the area required to be modelled to retrieve the true residual stresses, which was found to be 3×R where R is the radius of the shot.Investigating the angle of attack and the normal impact velocity, it emerged that the normal impact velocity can be quite large and in some cases up to 60% of the initial velocity. For the cases considered in this study, the optimal angle of attack in DEM was found to be θ=62.5°. However analysing the peening angle in the combined analysis showed that the depth of the CRS zone is largest when θ=70° followed by θ=90°.A novel algorithm was implemented to change the CoR for repeated impacts accounting for work hardening and the impact area. Results showed that changing the CoR decreases the number of shot–shot collisions and increases shot–target collisions. The average impact velocity increases compared to the case where the CoR of first impact or the average of the CoRs of successive impacts is employed. Instead only a very small variation in CRS was encountered in the different cases. A higher number of impacts resulted in a deeper CRS zone.Energy transfer per unit time is a significant factor that has to be evaluated. Similar amounts of energy can be transferred onto the target surface using different peening parameters in short time. It was found that for a higher mass flow rate and lower initial velocity fewer shots retain their initial velocity at impact but the number of impacts is larger. Results from the coupled analysis showed that the initial velocity is more important than the mass flow rate and that when the initial velocity is high (100m/s) the CRS depth zone is deeper than in the cases where a lower velocity was used. However, a relation between CRS and mass flow rate could not be established.The existing computational SP model can be adopted such that Almen strips can be virtually placed onto the peening component. Future work will investigate the peening of more complex geometries with curved surfaces and edges, where Almen strips cannot be used during the peening process. Using the proposed computational model it will be then possible to predict the percentage of coverage and Almen intensity reducing the need for expensive experimental testing.