@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimum layout design of onshore wind farms considering stochastic loading

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Wind load simulation using stochastic fields.Two formulations for the problem of optimum layout design of onshore wind farms.Consideration of the wake effect along various wind directions.Discrete variant the harmony search algorithm.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wind farm design optimization,Layout design problem,Wake effect,Stochastic wind loads,Harmony search,Real world test case,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Renewable energy technologies are developing rapidly, while in the last decade great interest is encountered in the use of wind energy, especially due to the energy crisis and serious environmental problems appeared from the use of fossil fuels and therefore a large number of wind farms have been installed around the world. On the other hand the ability of nature inspired algorithms to efficiently handle combinatorial optimization problems was proved by their successful implementation in many fields of engineering sciences. In this study, a new problem formulation for the optimum layout design of onshore wind farms is presented, where the wind load is implemented using stochastic fields. For this purpose, a metaheuristic search algorithm based on a discrete variant of the harmony search method is used for solving the problem at hand. The farm layout problem is by nature a constrained optimization problem, and the contribution of the wake effects is significant; therefore, in two formulations presented in this study the influence of wind direction is also taken into account and compared with the scenario that the wake effect is ignored. The results of this study proved the applicability of the proposed formulations and the efficiency of combining metaheuristic optimization with stochastic wind loading for dealing with the problem of optimal layout design of wind farms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Wind power stands for the conversion of wind energy into a useful form of energy. In order to exploit this type of energy, wind turbines are used to produce electricity, windmills are used to produce mechanical power or wind pumps are used for water pumping. So far, several hundred wind turbines have been installed into large offshore or onshore wind farms which are connected to the electric power transmission network. In particular, the original Alta-Oak Creek Mojave Project plan consisted of up to 320 wind turbines occupying an area of 36km2 while producing 800MW of power. Today, Alta Wind Energy Center located in Tehachapi Pass of the Tehachapi Mountains (in Kern County, California), is the largest wind farm in the world with a combined installed capacity of 1550MW consisted of 600 wind towers [1]. Although, offshore wind farms can take advantage of more frequent and powerful winds than those available to land-based installations and they have less visual impact on the landscape, their construction cost is considerably higher. On the other hand, onshore wind facilities take advantage of the winds at higher altitudes, which are stronger and more consistent, through appropriate tower heights, while small wind farms can be used to provide electricity to isolated areas.Recent advances in engineering optimization have enabled the transition from traditional trial-and-error design procedures to fully automated ones. This is mostly attributed to the rapid development of metaheuristic search algorithms that were found efficient and robust for dealing with real world problems. In the past many researchers have studied the problem of optimum layout design of wind farms. In particular, Mosetti et al. [2] presented an approach for the optimization of large windfarms aiming to extract the maximum energy for minimum installation cost. Grady et al. [3] applied a genetic algorithm approach in order to obtain optimal placement of wind turbines for maximum production capacity while limiting the number of turbines installed and the acreage of land occupied. Marmidis et al. [4] introduced a procedure based on the Monte Carlo simulation method for the optimal placement and arrangement of wind turbines into a wind farm. Sood et al. [5] determined via a Monte Carlo-like random search methodology the optimal positioning of multiple wind turbines into a small footprint wind farm under multiple wake effects. Rahmani et al. [6] used the particle swarm optimization (PSO) method in order to optimize placing of wind turbines in a wind farm. Ituarte-Villarreal and Espiritu [7] proposed a viral based optimization algorithm and was used in order to find the optimal wind turbine placement considering constant and unidirectional uniform wind velocity. Chowdhury et al. [8] used constrained PSO for dealing with a wind farm layout optimization problem that simultaneously determines the optimum farm layout and the appropriate selection of turbines that maximizes the net power generation, while in the work by Zhang et al. [9] used a wind farm power generation model to evaluate downtime energy losses during preventive maintenance for a given group of wind turbines in the entire array. Chen and MacDonald [10] adopted genetic algorithms to solve the nonlinear constrained optimization problem, minimizing cost and maximizing power output; while the optimization results showed that, given a projected participation rate, the most crucial plots prior to the negotiation process with landowners can be identified. DuPont et al. [11] and DuPont and Cagan [12] presented a multi-level extended pattern search algorithm aiming to optimize both the local positioning and geometry of wind turbines on a wind farm. The objective of the study by Wan et al. [13] was to maximize using Gaussian PSO algorithm the electrical power extracted from a wind farm while satisfying the required distance between turbines for operation safety. Eroĝlu and Seçkiner [14] used an ant colony algorithm for maximizing the expected energy output in a layout design wind farm problem taking into account wake losses and wind direction. On the other hand in two works by Chowdhury et al. [15] and Tong et al. [16] the applicability of metaheuristic search algorithm was explored to a large scale engineering design problem such as wind farm layout optimization. In the work by Khan and Rehman [17] the design issues and constraints involved in the layout design of a wind farm are briefly outlined while the computational complexity, along with single and multi-objective approaches of the problem, are also examined. Salcedo-Sanz et al. [18] presented the layout optimization problem of a real offshore wind farm in northern Europe; in this direction different strategies for the wind farm design were tested, like regular turbines layout or free turbines allocation with fixed number of turbines, while evolutionary computation techniques were used for solving the optimization problem. Eroĝlu and Seçkiner [19] used a particle filtering approach in order to define an optimized layout of a wind farm that has the minimum wake effects and maximum power generation. Karakostas and Economou [20] proposed the controlled non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm-II for treating multi-objective spatial optimization problems, aiming at deriving the optimal spatial allocation of wind farms on the Greek island of Lesvos. While, Salcedo-Sanz et al. [21] presented the Coral Reefs optimization algorithm, that is based on the simulation of reef formation and coral reproduction, for wind farm design and layout optimization of a real offshore wind farm in northern Europe. Furthermore, Chen and Macdonald [22] applied a levelized wind farm cost model, including landowner remittance fees, to determine optimal turbine placements under three landowner participation scenarios and two land-plot shapes. Turner et al. [23] developed a new mathematical programming approach for wind farm layout optimization resulting into layouts that tend to be more symmetric and that generate slightly more power. Kwong et al. [24] presented continuous-location models for layout optimization that take noise and energy as objective functions, in order to characterize the design and performance spaces of the wind farm layout optimization problem. While Dupont and Cagan [25] validated models used in wind farm optimization studies performed in the past. In addition, Prabhu et al. [26] proposed an improved harmony search algorithm approach for the optimal placement of offshore wind farms based on three scenarios; while in this work, the harmony search algorithm in conjunction with stochastic modeling of the wind load that is based on actual wind data is applied on an existing wind park located in Cyprus. Furthermore, apart from maximizing energy production, a formulation aiming to minimize the required number of wind turbines is also presented herein.Various technical issues arise due to the close spacing of multiple wind turbines into a wind farm, particularly one with a severely limited spatial footprint. One of the most important factors under consideration is the wake effect. Since energy losses due to wakes can significantly decrease energy production and lead to fluctuations in the output power of a wind farm it is desired to determine optimized positions for installing multiple wind turbines. In this direction, a new optimum layout design framework for onshore wind farms where the wind load is considered stochastically is presented herein, while the well-known harmony search algorithm is used for solving the problem at hand. Specifically, the optimization problem is formulated by means of the maximum energy production and minimum cost installation criteria while for the test case considered the site is subdivided into 289 square cells that represent possible turbine locations and as a result optimized arrangements of the wind turbines in the wind farm are obtained. The location of each wind turbine could be freely adjusted within the predefined square cells in order to maximize the generated energy. The farm layout model used herein incorporates traditional restrictions imposed on the location of turbines based on a standard analytical wake model that has been used to account for the velocity deficits in the wakes created by individual turbines. Furthermore, the wind speed is considered stochastically over the landscape of the wind farm location, for this reason a number stochastic fields are generated, corresponding to the wind velocity for different wind directions. This representation denotes a step forward compared to the work of others where in addition to orography, shape of the wind farm, simulation of the wind speed and direction (for example the work by Saavedra-Moreno et al. [27]) a stochastic simulation of the wind load is presented herein. The farm layout problem is by nature a constrained optimization problem, in which the coupling of wake effects is strong and the number of position constraints between turbines is large while the wind direction is also taken into account. The reason for selecting the harmony search algorithm for solving the problem at hand is due to its ability to handle complex discrete optimization problems, as it was proved in two recent studies by the authors where HS was found very efficient in order to handle districting problems regardless the size of the problem [28,29], while a discrete variant of the harmony search method is used for solving the problem at hand.In this section the objective function and design variables of the optimization problem dealt with in this study, are described. In this study two problem formulations are presented, in the first one the objective is to maximize the profit obtained from the wind farm by defining optimized locations of N wind towers. Therefore, the objective function to be maximized is defined as follows:(1)max∑i=1NCiwhere Ciis the profit obtained from each wind tower.While in the second problem, the objective is to minimize the number of the required wind towers for a specific energy production E0 by optimizing the position of the wind towers. Therefore, the objective function to be minimized is defined as follows:(2)min∑i=1N|Etot-E0|where Etotis the total wind energy produced annually.According to the wake effect, in case of multiple wind towers wind flow and speed are affected significantly when wind towers are placed next to one another. Therefore, one of the most important factors that should be taken into account is the wake effect. Due to this effect, the energy losses can significantly decrease the energy production and lead to fluctuations in the output power of a wind farm; therefore it is anticipated to define optimal positions for installing multiple wind turbines. In order to calculate the power generation of the wind farm, wind speed and direction distributions at hub height are required. Downstream turbines have lower wind speeds and less energy production if they are located behind a wind turbine. This effect is called wake effect that is presented schematically in Fig. 1. According to Jensen’s model [30], velocity taking into account the wake flow influences is defined as follows:(3)u=uo1-2a1+bxr12where u0 is the free (undisturbed) mean wind speed, x is the distance to turbine center in the downstream direction, r1 is a parameter related to the radius of turbine rotor, a is the axial induction factor and b is the entrainment constant that can be empirically calculated as [31]:(4)b=12lnzzowhere z is the wind turbine’s hub height and z0 is the surface roughness; while the axial induction factor a is calculated from the following expression:(5)CT=4α(1-α)where CTis the thrust coefficient of the turbine. Assuming a linear expansion of the wake effect, the path taken by the wind that has passed through the turbine blades is represented by a cone. The downstream radius of this cone r1, can be calculated using the following expression:(6)r1=r0+b·xwhere r0 is the radius of turbine rotor. Based on Eqs. (3)–(6) and assuming that kinetic energy deficit of a mixed wake is equal to the sum of energy deficits, the resulting wind speed downstream of N turbines can be calculated as follows:(7)u=u01-∑i=1N1-uiu02while the multiple wake effect is shown in Fig. 2, where the direction of free wind is shown for the undisturbed wind speed u0.The calculation of the wind speed at the top of the wind tower is required in order to define the wind load at the top of the pillar. The wind velocity at the desirable height is calculated through the following formula:(8)u(h)=uglnhz0lnhrefz0whereu(h)is the wind speed at height h,ugis the average wind speed at the reference height (href), the reference height is usually taken equal to 10.0m while z0 is the roughness length. For the wind farm at hand, the construction region is a countryside area, without tall buildings and dense vegetation; thus, the roughness length z0 was taken to be equal to 0.01 [32]. The wind load is based on actual collected data and is generated probabilistically as it will be described in the following section. In particular, the stochastic fields for the wind velocities are generated at the reference height of 10.0m and they provide the wind velocity at the reference height for twelve different directions of the wind (per 30°) and three different hazard levels, while the wind velocity at the top of each wind tower is derived using Eq. (8).The density of the atmospheric air affects the wind load developed at the top of each wind tower. Air density is a function of the atmospheric pressure and temperature that decreases in relation to height increase. Air density d0 at the sea surface is equal to 1.225kg/m3, when the temperature is equal to 20°C while the corresponding pressure is equal to 101.3kPa [33]. The relation of air pressure with respect to height is defined by [33]:(9)p=p0·1-L·hT0g·MR·Lwhere p is the air pressure (Pa), p0 is the sea level standard atmospheric pressure (101,325Pa), L is the temperature lapse (0.0065K/m), h is the height from the sea surface, T0 is the sea level standard temperature (288.15K), g is the earth-surface gravitational acceleration (9.80665m/s2), M is the molar mass of dry air (0.0289644kg/mol) and R is the universal gas constant (8.31447J/(molK)), while the air density d is defined according to the following expression [33]:(10)d=p·MR·Twhere T is the absolute temperature in Kelvin (K=273+°C). Having calculated the wind speed at the height of the wind turbine’s rotor, the operating wind load can be defined according to the following formula:(11)Fw=12·Cd·d·A·u2(h)where Cdis drag coefficient (Cd=0.9) [34], d is the air density at the wind tower’s height and A is the surface of the wind generator (rotor area).Wind energy stands for the kinetic energy generated by blowing air streams. The wind energy produced by a wind turbine is calculated through the following relationship:(12)E=12m·u2=12(A·u·t·ρ)u2=12A·t·ρ·u3where A is the surface of the wind generator (swept rotor area) perpendicular to the wind direction, t is the time duration, ρ is the air density in kilograms per cubic metre (kg/m3) and u is the wind velocity. The product(A·u·t)is the volume of air passing while the product(A·u·t·ρ)is the mass m passing through the rotor area per unit time. The wind power (P) in watts (W) is the quotient of energy per unit time:(13)P=Et=12(A·ρ)u3The wind characteristics like velocity, direction etc., vary in time and location, making difficult to predict the amount of wind energy that a wind turbine could exploit. A considerably high volume of statistical data should be taken into account in order to determine these magnitudes, which in many cases is difficult to obtain. In these cases, probability distribution functions are often fit to the observed data in order to predict the wind characteristics for the installation area of the wind farm. The Weibull distribution is considered to be the proper one that best fits to the distribution of hourly wind velocities [35].It can been proved theoretically that any windmill can only possibly extract a maximum of 59.3% of the power from the wind (this is known as the Betz limit). Thus, the formula of Eq. (13) is modified as follows:(14)Pt=12(A·ρ·Cp)u3that denotes the power extracted by the wind turbine relative to the energy available in the wind stream while Cpis the coefficient of performance of the wind machine. Therefore, the produced energy by one wind tower per year is given by the following expression:(15)E=hyear·∑ucut-inucut-out[Pt(u)·H(u)]where E is the wind energy produced annually (kWh), Ptis the electric power produced (kW), hyearis the number of hours that wind blows per year (usually it is taken equal to the 25–30% of the total hours of the year), H(u) is the distribution of the wind velocity (Weibull distribution), while ucut-inand ucut-outare the lower and upper operational limits for the wind turbine. Therefore, the total wind energy produced annually from a wind farm is equal to:(16)Etot=∑i=1NEiwhere N is the number of wind towers constituting the farm, while the total profit obtained from the wind farm is defined as follows:(17)C=Pt·cm·T·h-N·cgen-ce(18)ce=0.25∗N·cgenwhere C is the total profit obtained from the wind farm, Ptis the electric power generated by the wind turbine (W), N is the total number of wind towers, cmis the unit cost for electric energy generation (MU/Wh) given in monetary units (MU, corresponding to Dollars or Euros), T is the operational time of the wind farm (usually taken equal to 20–25years for the wind towers, for example Southern California Edison has agreed to a 25-year power purchase agreement for the power produced as part of the power purchase agreements for up to 1500MW [1]), h is the potential (capacity) of the wind farm (h/year), cgenis the cost of the wind tower, ceis the cost of the wind park (mechanical equipment, roads, design cost, rent of the land cost etc.) calculated according to Eq. (16)[36].The implementation of the layout design optimization framework of a wind farm requires determining the wind load for the case of frequent wind hazard level in order to define the wind potential of the farm in every optimization step of the search algorithm. For this purpose, the distribution of the wind speed over the landscape of the wind park is taken into account in order to estimate its effect on the wind turbines of the wind farm considered. The statistical quantities of the frequent hazard level are determined based on statistical data that are available for the specific region and in particular for the Paphos airport.Two approaches are basically used for modeling of uncertain parameters: random variables or random fields [37,38]. In the case of random variables, an uncertain property has constant value across a specific domain; this constant value is then assumed to follow some probability distribution, which describes the random characteristics of the property. In the case of random fields, the value of the property varies across the domain according to a correlation pattern. In order to take into account the random distribution of the wind speed for the frequent hazard level over the landscape of the wind farm location, 12 stochastic fields are generated, representing the wind velocity for twelve different wind directions varying by 30°.The basic assumption in stochastic formulations is that the variation of an uncertain parameter P across a two-dimensional domain can be represented at each location of the field x, y according to the following expression:(19)P(x,y)=P0[1+f(x,y)]where P0 is the mean value of parameter P and f(x,y) is a zero-mean 2D Gaussian homogeneous stochastic field, which describes the variation of P about P0. In the present work, stochastically modeled wind load properties are utilized; in this respect, the spectral representation method is used to generate the required Gaussian stochastic field samples representing the wind velocity along different directions.Based on the spectral representation method, the sample required for the ith simulation two-dimensional univariate homogeneous Gaussian stochastic field describing the uncertain wind velocity along different directions, is generated with the following series of cosines formula as N→∞ [39]:(20)f(i)(x)=2∑n=0N-1Ancos(κnx+ϕn(i))whereϕn(i)(n=0, 1,…,N−1) denotes the ith realization of the random phase angleϕn, which is uniformly distributed over the range [0,2π], while Anis defined by:(21)An=2Sff(κn)Δκwith:(22)κn=nΔκ(23)Δκ=κuNIn the expressions given above, the power spectrum Sffof the stochastic field is a real non-negative function of the wave number κ, while Δκ is the wave number increment. The upper cut-off wave number κudefines the active region of the power spectrum, since Sff(κ) is assumed to be zero beyond the value of κu. The power spectral density function used in the present work is expressed as:(24)Sff(κ)=14σ2b3κ2e-b|κ|where σ represents the coefficient of variation of the stochastic field, while b is the correlation length parameter. The correlation length measures the distance of two different stochastic field locations, over which the correlation between the respective random variables approaches zero. Therefore, b→∞ implies a perfectly correlated stochastic field with linearly dependent random variables, while b→0 corresponds to white noise generated by an uncorrelated random field. It should be stated that in this study a correlation length b equal to 5000m was considered according to the work by Tompson et al. [40]. The twelve stochastic fields generated are shown in Fig. 3corresponding to the stochastic fields for the different wind directions considered.During the decades there has been a growing interest in problem solving systems based on algorithms, which rely on analogies to natural processes and a class of derivative-free search algorithms called metaheuristics was born. On the other hand, gradient-based algorithms, such as mathematical programming methods, make use of local curvature information derived from linearization of the original functions by using their derivatives with respect to the design variables at points obtained in the process of optimization to construct an approximate model of the initial problem. These methods present an excellent local rate of convergence, but they cannot assure that the global optimum can be found. On the other hand, based on tests performed by the authors [41,42] metaheuristics were found to be in general more robust and present a better global behavior than the mathematical programming methods. Without loss of generality on the results obtained herein and for the reasons described previously such an algorithm was selected for the problem at hand.The harmony search algorithm was inspired by the improvisation procedure of musicians in Jazz bands [43]. Musicians correspond to decision variables while the pitch range of every instrument corresponds to the decision variables value range. Musical harmony produced by the band corresponds to a specific solution vector, while acceptance and likeness by audience is equivalent to objective function value. HS algorithm consists of the following steps: harmony memory initialization, new harmony improvisation and harmony memory update.In this step, harmony memory (HM) is initialized with HMS randomly generated solution vectors defining where each wind tower is located:(25)HM=s11s21s31⋯sn1s12s22s32⋯sn2⋯⋯⋯⋯s1HMSs2HMSs3HMS⋯snHMSwhere HMS is the harmony memory size that corresponds to the number of solution vectors that are stored in the memory; while HMCR defines the harmony memory considering rate, and PAR is the pitch adjusting rate. New harmony improvisation: In this step, a new harmony vector is generated by means of three procedures: memory consideration, random selection and pitch adjustment. According to random selection procedure, the ith design variable (location of the ith wind tower) is selected randomly with probability 1-HMCR (0⩽HMCR⩽1); according to memory consideration it is randomly chosen from HM memory with probability HMCR×(1-PAR); while according to pitch adjustment, it can be further adjusted into neighboring values by adding a random value. The first two procedures used for generating a new harmony vector can be implemented both to continuous and discrete optimization problems, while the third one in order to be implemented into discrete problems with discrete random changes with probability of HMCR×PAR (0⩽PAR⩽1) should be performed. In this study a discrete random change based on the Poisson distribution is implemented first. For this purpose, the area under investigation is discretized into cells. Thus, for discrete optimization problems the new harmony vector generation is implemented as follows:(26)siNew=si∈{xi(1),…,xi(k),…,xi(Ki)}si∈xiLower,xiUpperwith probability1-HMCRsi∈HM=si1,si2,…,siHMSwith probabilityHMCR×(1-PAR)si(k+m)ifsi(k)∈HMsi+κifsi∈HMwith probabilityHMCR×PARwhere xi(k) is an integer denoting the cell where the ith wind turbine is positioned while κ is a Poisson distributed integer random number with the following distribution:(27)P(κ)=(γ)κκ!e-γwhere γ is the deviation and the expectation of the random number κ. For a very small γ (say 0.001), number κ takes value zero with probability greater than 99%, and for γ=0.05 number κ can take value zero with probability of 95% and value one with probability of 5%. This means that random changes are controlled by parameter γ (see Fig. 4). Harmony memory update: If the new generated harmony vector is better than the worst harmony vector of HM, with reference to the objective function value, it is replaced by the new harmony vector. The basic steps of HS algorithm are depicted in Fig. 5. In order to make clearer the use of the algorithmic parameters, an example is presented herein: assume the following set of parameters HMS is equal to 20, HMCR is equal to 0.20 and PAR is equal to 0.15. The number of solution vectors stored is equal to HMS=20, the probability for the algorithm to generate a random solution is equal to 1 – HMCR=0.80 (i.e. 80%), the probability of choosing a solution from the memory is equal to HMCR×(1-PAR)=0.20×(1–0.15)=0.17 (i.e. 17%); while the probability of choosing a solution from the ones stored in memory and tweaking it is equal to HMCR×PAR=0.20×0.15=0.03 (i.e. 3%). The generation of a solution vector represents one iteration of the algorithm.Based on the procedure described above, a cell is chosen for each wind tower and each one is positioned to the center of the corresponding cell. As soon as, the ith wind tower was placed in one cell and the solution obtained becomes member of HM then the wind towers are randomly placed into the corresponding cell by means of LHS with 5 samples and along with the position at the center of the cell all positions are assessed with reference to the produced energy.An onshore wind farm located in Paphos [44], Cyprus was chosen in order to implement the layout design optimization procedure presented in this study. The wind farm examined in this study was installed in 2010 and occupies an area of 36 square kilometers while it consists of 41 Vestas wind turbines with a nominal power of 2MW each. Fig. 6depicts the landscape of the location. For the specific problem, the area of 36 square kilometers was divided into 289 squares (see Fig. 7), each having an area of 16×D2, where D represents the wind turbine rotor diameter; therefore, the size of the solution space for the layout problem is equal to 2289 since for each square it is decided to either locate or not a wind tower; while the detailed topography data used in the current study can be found in [45].The wind farm is composed by one type of towers equipped with the Vestas V90 wind turbine. This type of towers has tower height equal to 80m and rotor diameter equal to 90m, while the tower is a conical tube with gradually decreasing diameter in relation to the height increase. The bottom diameter is equal to 4.3m and the top diameter is equal to 2.95m, while the thickness of the hollow circular cross section is equal to 0.07m. The wind turbine has a rotor diameter of 90m with swept area of 6362m2, whereas it has three rotor blades, each of which has length equal to 44m. Furthermore, the operational limits for the rotor are ucut-in=4m/s and ucut-out=25m/s, nominal wind speed equal to 12m/s while the coefficient of performance Cpis taken equal to 0.41. For the needs of our study, the construction cost for each wind tower was considered to be equal to 1.8×106MU and the selling price of the wind energy generated by the wind farm was taken equal to 16.6×10−2MU per kWh. Furthermore, the operation life-span of the wind farm was considered to be equal to 25years while the exploitable time was considered to be equal to 2400h per year.Since it was not possible to have access to the wind measurements for the specific place of the wind farm, measurements obtained for Paphos airport were used instead, since the airport is located relatively close to the wind farm. The wind data (intensity and variance) were obtained from the measurements of the Meteorological Service of Cyprus for the years 2000 to 2005 at airport of Paphos at a height of 10 meters above sea level. The polar diagram (or rosette, wind rose) gives the main wind directions necessary for calculating the generated energy. The corresponding rosette diagram for the airport of Paphos is shown in Fig. 8a, where it can be seen that the two main wind directions are southeast and west, while Fig. 8b depicts the probability density function of the wind velocity. Table 1depicts the statistical data used for the wind which are: A=frequent value of wind (m/s) and k which both are parameters of the Weibull distribution, U=average speed per direction (m/s), E=the generated energy (W/m2), f=frequency as a percentage (%). Table 2shows the distribution of the wind velocity over one thousand measurements obtained for each wind direction. As can be seen the most frequent values of the wind speed at the height of 10m above the sea level is between 3m/s and 4m/s which is not so high speed. Gaussian stochastic wind flow fields were generated as described in previous section of the study for each wind direction where the mean values and standard deviations used are those given in Table 2 for each wind direction.In this study the HS optimization algorithm is used in order to perform layout design optimization of wind farms, while a real world test case is considered for this purpose. In particular, the Orites [44] wind farm located in Cyprus that was described previously is studied. The performance of metaheuristics is highly dependent on the selection of algorithmic parameters. In order to define the proper combination of the algorithmic parameters, a sampling method named Latin hypercube sampling (LHS) was used [46]. LHS ensures that all regions of the sample space of the parameters will be tested. The parameters of HS algorithm used in both formulations of the layout design optimization problem are chosen based on a previously studied districting optimization problem [28], where specific algorithmic parameters values were identified that provide the best result among several combinations generated with the use of LHS method. The parameters that were identified in [28] for HS were HMS, HMCR and PAR. HMS defines the size of the memory used by HS for storing solution vectors. HMCR (0⩽HMCR⩽1) is the probability for the algorithm to create a new solution randomly and PAR (0⩽PAR⩽1) is the probability that defines if the algorithm will chose a solution already stored in memory that will be used as it is or it will be modified [47]. Harmony memory size (HMS) was taken equal to 10, harmony memory considering rate (HMCR) was considered equal to 0.1726 and pitch adjusting rate (PAR) equal to 0.658. The maximum number of iterations performed was set equal to 50,000.For the purposes of the current study the following two problem formulations were proposed: (i) Profit maximization for specific number of wind turbines (in this case 41 wind turbines have been selected, corresponding to the number of wind turbines that are installed at the Orites wind farm) and (ii) profit maximization for a given energy per year (in this case the energy produced per year was chosen to be equal to 5MWh). It should be noted that in order to maximize profit, the efficiency of the wind farm should be maximized. The performance of the park depends on the wind potential in the region and the influence between the wind turbines (wake effect); therefore, it is taken into account in both formulations of the problem.The first problem examined in this study is formulated as a maximum profit problem based on known specifications like the number of wind towers (41 turbine for the case of the Orites wind farm), terrain location and meteorological data. In particular, the solution of the problem aims to define optimized locations of the wind towers that lead to maximum performance for the wind farm. Since, for modeling of the problem the terrain of the wind farm tested is divided into 289 square cells (Ncells) and each cell can accommodate a single wind tower, the problem is dealt with as a discrete optimization problem. The best solution is defined by the locations of the wind towers that correspond to increased performance for the farm as a whole. The problem can be formulated as a nonlinear programming optimization problem as follows:(28)max(Ctot-1.25·N·cgen)whereCtot=∑i=1N[Pt,i(u(x))·Hi(u(x))]·cmthand∑i=1Ncellsxi=N,xi∈{0,1}∀i=1,…,Ncellswhere Ctotis the total profit achieved by the wind farm, N is the number of wind towers, cgenis the cost of each wind tower, Pt,iis the power generated by the ith wind turbine, Hiis the distribution of the wind velocity, cmis the unit cost for electric energy generation (MU/Wh) given in monetary units (MU, corresponding to Dollars or Euros) and this the operational time (in years).Solving the optimization problem formulated in Eq. (28) the maximum profit obtained is equal to 37.56×106MU corresponding to the total energy produced over the 25years of the farm life-span, the total produced energy is equal to 326MWh (approximately 13MWh per year). The optimized layout of the wind farm is shown in Fig. 9, while Fig. 10depicts the optimized layout of the wind farm along with the altitude of the towers’ locations. The total produced energy over the 25years of the farm life-span that corresponds to the ideal case where no wake effect is present is equal to 418MWh (approximately 16.72MWh per year), which is increased by 28% compared to the case where the wake effect is taken into account. The low energy developed for the specific location is due to the fact that low wind speeds are observed, this is also denoted by the recorded data provided in Tables 1 and 2.The second problem examined in this study is formulated as a minimum cost problem with reference to the total energy that the specific wind park is able to generate. In particular, the problem is defined as to find the minimum number of wind towers and their layout design for generating at least 5MWh per year for the specific location (Orites wind farm). The problem can be formulated as a nonlinear programming optimization problem as follows:(29)min∑i=1N[Pt,i(u(x))·Hi(u(x))]·cmth-E0where∑i=1Ncellsxi=N,xi∈{0,1}∀i=1,…,Ncellswhere N denotes the number of wind towers, Pt,irepresents the power generated by the ith wind turbine, Hiis the distribution of the wind velocity, cmis the unit cost for electric energy generation (MU/Wh) given in monetary units (MU, corresponding to Dollars or Euros) and this the product of the operational time (in years), E0 is the targeted total energy that we desire to produce with the wind farm.Solving the optimization problem formulated in Eq. (29) the minimum number of wind towers is equal to 13 and the generated energy is equal to 132.50MWh (approximately 5.3MWh per year) while the profit obtained is equal to 24×106MU corresponding to the total energy produced over the 25years of the farm life-span. The optimized layout of the wind farm is shown in Fig. 11, while Fig. 12depicts the optimized layout of the wind farm along with the altitude of the towers’ locations. The total produced energy over the 25years of the farm life-span that corresponds to the ideal case where no wake effect is present is equal to 156MWh (approximately 6.6MWh per year), which is increased by 18% compared to the case where the wake effect is taken into account.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Wind energy constitutes a clean and economical energy source and is considered to be suitable for countries with moderate to high wind potential. Apart from the wind potential of a specific area and its topography, electric power generated by wind turbines depends on the wake effect that accounts for the influence of each turbine to the others. In this study we examine the issue of layout design optimization of wind turbines into a farm, aiming to maximize power output, while taking into account the wake effect between the wind towers. Furthermore, a second problem is considered in this study which is related to the definition of the minimum number of wind towers along with the optimum layout design for obtaining specific power output. In both formulations the wind velocity along different directions was taken into account stochastically.In addition, the efficiency of nature inspired algorithms in dealing with the specific difficult combinatorial optimization problems was examined. The algorithm that was used for solving the above mentioned combinatorial optimizations problems is the harmony search optimization while the two formulations were applied to an existing wind farm located in Cyprus. Harmony search algorithm was proved to be capable for sufficiently dealing with the layout design optimization problem of wind farms. Moreover, the consideration of a stochastic field approach for representing the wind load offers a more accurate simulation of the expected wind data on site. Therefore combining an efficient metaheuristic optimization solver and stochastic representation of the wind load, a more accurate model for defining optimized positioning of wind towers is formulated.