@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Computational modeling of multipurpose amphibious aircraft Be-200

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The paper is dedicated to 3D computational modeling of amphibious aircraft Be-200.Hereby the process of amphibious aircraft components phased modeling is presented.Variants of shading and rendering of model under development are presented as well.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Computational 3D modeling,Amphibious aircraft,Method of polygonal extrude,Shading,Rendering,Indirect illumination,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The paper is dedicated to 3D computational modeling of amphibious aircraft Be-200. Hereby the process of amphibious aircraft components phased modeling is presented. Variants of shading and rendering of model under development are presented as well.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Day by day the necessity for visual image of projected industrial products in different spheres of human activity increases. From economical point of view it is justified. State-of-the-art technologies of computational modeling and design enable to achieve results which engineers even could not dream of just 20years ago [1].Application of modeling state-of-the-art technologies for aircraft designing is of interest at this time. Let is scrutinize certain current articles dedicated to the computer modeling of airplanes. In the paper [2] the issue regarding high-precision software tools implementation for design process optimization is considered. Capabilities of new software when aircraft structure designing are described.The paper [3] is dedicated to aerodynamic configuration of hypersonic transport conceptual design based on multipurpose optimization of structure. In papers [4,5] the issues regarding cost effective subsonic passenger aircraft development are considered. The paper [6] is dedicated to conceptual design of aircraft where bird wings aerodynamic quality is taken into account.In paper [7] the development of wing geometry design based on its flexibility and effective aerodynamic load is carried out. Hereof, described the effect of different materials on the wing structure stiffness. The issues of airplane designing based on the conic lofting-based software are investigated in the article [8]. Herewith performed the design of the wing geometry and examined its aerodynamic properties.Software for parameter designing of the airplane aerodynamic surfaces is introduced in article [9]. The streamlined and curved structural members are generated on the basis of surfaces NURBS. The feasibilities of special software for designing of different airplane configuration are set forth in article [10]. The proposed configuration design tool could be especially efficient when automation, flexibility and rapid changes of geometry are required in a short time and with low computational resources.It is to be noted that in the past decades the necessity for emergency-rescue aviation appeared. In conditions of natural disaster, technogenic catastrophes it is impossible to manage without aviation emergency support. Along with land-based aviation amphibious aircraft are used with increasing frequency. As an example we can provide fire sea planes [11], which are unexpendable during fire extinguishing of huge forest areas.This paper is dedicated to computer-based 3D modeling of amphibious aircraft Be-200 developed by Beriev Aircraft Company (Fig. 1). The Be-200 aircraft design process was started in 1990 on the basis of amphibious aircraft А-40 “Albatros”. Be-200 differs from it with less size. For the first time the project was introduced in 1991 during Paris aerospace exhibition.Amphibious aircraft Be-200 configurations are as follows: firefighting, passenger and cargo transportation. Fire aircraft is equipped with water tanks with total capacity of 12m3, filling of which is carried out in gliding mode over water surface by means of water scoops located behind boat step [12].Tanks lower portions are provided with automatically opening doors to drop water. With takeoff weight 37200kg (or 37.2t) the aircraft is capable to carry up to 12000kg (or 12t) of water to seat of fire located at a distance of 100km from airdrome and 10km from basin. Amphibious aircraft Be-200 wing span is 32.78m, length 32.05m, height 8.9m, fuselage maximum diameter 2.86m, air crew 2 persons. Maximum cruise speed at altitude 8000m is 710km/h, distance of takeoff from water – 1000m.Currently there is a fair number of 3D modeling graphic systems and CAD system. For amphibious aircraft modeling we will use 3D modeling graphic system 3ds Max. Along with many 3D modeling graphic systems 3ds Max practically enables to develop designs of any complexity. Graphic system 3ds Max is a versatile software product. It cooperates with many engineering applications providing a wide work scope for designer [13].In order to start the work initial data like drawings, figures, layout projections of the object under modeling are required (Fig. 2). Further, three mutually perpendicular planes are created in graphic system 3ds Max with projection images on them (Fig. 3) [14].To develop 3D model there are some methods one of which is a polygonal extrude. In 3ds Max graphic system polygonal modeling has a number of special features. For more precise modeling of fuselage (boat) lines we mentally split fuselage along fore-and-aft axis. Sections received are placed in scene according to drawing (Fig. 4).Graphics-oriented system 3ds Max contains various types of editable objects, among these is Editable Poly. This object includes the following sub-objects: vertex; segment; border; polygon; element. Polygon sub-object level is chosen for application of Extrude method. The content of the method is in a consequential extruding of the selected polygons longwise of their own standard part. Besides, to make work easier the one can be carried out with one half along fore-and-aft axis of the future object (in our case it is the right half, and the left one will be automatically built at final stage) [15].Number of polygons should remain constant over the whole model thus the work starts from cylindrical work with definite number of segments. Fuselage extruding on the basis of supporting sections is shown in Fig. 5. Upon application of the command Extrude the obtained increment of basic object should edit manually taking into account the orthography contours. Hand finishing is to be carried out at the level of vertex sub-object, because this is a time-taking process and requires constant coordination of all planes simultaneously. Gradual wing surface extrusion is shown in Fig. 6.All model components are created similarly: engine body, tail unit, stabilizer’s float (Fig. 7). Further the mirror image reproduction of the constructed model half is performed with use of command Symmetry taken from list of accessible modifiers. The detailed final working out of airplane structure is carried out at the final stage [16,17], the result of simulation is given in Fig. 8.Objects surrounding us have the essential properties, identifying their appearance. To get the actual photographic images in graphics-oriented system 3ds Max the choice of material and customization of its main properties are to be the defining ones. Hereafter, for the sake of rendering the V-RAY rendering unit will be used. It is stipulated with use of materials VRayMtl type.Window of Editor Materials VRayMtl differs from standard one. Let is scrutinize the possibilities of this edit program in terms of creation the fuselage surface material. One of the significant material parameters is its main color (diffusive color), here the body color is white. Under the icon Diffuse there is a window Reflect, which is responsible for the reflection properties of the material chosen. Black means that material is nonreflective whereas white means the full reflection. In this case to create the effect of the painted glossy finish it is required that the degree of surface reflection would depend on the review angle (Fresnel effect). The Falloff procedural is used to receive the same (Fig. 9).Reflection glossiness parameter affects the material accurateness as well. During change of reflection glossiness parameter value from 1.0 to 0.9 and reflections become fuzzy (Fig. 10). Same effect permits to create on the surface very small noise of finish in the form of inequality, scratches.The important detail of any scene is lighting. In general, almost in all scenes one of two types of lighting is used – natural and artificial. The best way to create natural lighting is to use lights radiating one-way parallel rays of light. This type of lighting can be created through directional light. Generally artificial lighting is created by means of few lights with low intensity.Scene objects can be rendered with different degree of precision. In graphic system 3ds Max several layout engines are used: for objects view in viewport, for materials sketches view and for finite picture getting. These engines enable to find trading time for quality. Graphic system 3ds Max has module for rendering but capabilities of standard visualizer do not provide real picture. Module V-RAY was used for rendering of this work. Its high possibilities enable to receive more precision picture.The principle of V-RAY work is in the indirect illumination, it is related to the algorithm of modern rendering modules. The indirect illumination is an objects lighting only by diffusely-reflected light from other objects without direct one from the direct light source. For receiving of further actual photographic image the scene along with airplane model was created and set in a certain manner. On renderings the illusion is created that airplane is in the dark hangar with spotlight lighting on the ceiling (Fig. 11(a)–(c)). This result was received due to installation of several light sources V-RAY Light above the model. Daylight is missing in the scene, but the indirect illumination algorithm permits to avoid the dark areas of the image without usage of additional illumination of the model underneath.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
