@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A CAD/CAE incorporate software framework using a unified representation architecture

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An incorporate CAD/CAE software framework for structural design is proposed.A unified representation architecture is presented.Design and analysis information use the same data structure.CAD model display and CAE post-processor shares the unified mesh data.The comparison of two case studies from simple to complex is presented.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Incorporate framework,Design and analysis,Unified representation architecture,CAD/CAE integration,Software environment,Boundary element method,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Currently, there are still some big gaps between the CAD system and CAE system, e.g. the different data structure for model representation, which costs lots of time and effort of engineers in the interaction between these two kinds of systems. In order to bridge these gaps, an incorporate software framework is proposed in this paper. In this framework, the unified representation architecture (URA) is presented that makes CAD and CAE to be an organic entity. The URA contains three components: (1) unified data model (UDD) including unified B-rep, unified feature and unified mesh; (2) unified data management (UDM) consisting of unified interaction, unified data structure, unified Constructive Solid Geometry (CSG) history and unified interface; (3) unified display and post-processor (UDP) for both design and performance analysis. The URA facilitates the incorporation by explicitly representing design and analysis information as design features, which maintains their associations through the history chain. Besides the URA, a unified mesh data (UMD) is proposed to unify the mesh of CAD model display and CAE analysis with the purpose of reducing the redundancy of mesh data. The unified mesh data (UMD) is proposed to unify the mesh of CAD model display and CAE analysis, which greatly reduces the redundancy of mesh generation data. Finally, the high efficiency of the proposed framework is demonstrated by engineering examples.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the past decades, the integration of structural design and performance analysis has become more and more important in both CAD and CAE. The goal of this integration is to obtain better performance, wider interoperability, higher reliability, and shorter development cycles. Modern commercial CAD and CAE software are generally treated as separate modules requiring different methods and representations, which makes the geometric models need a large number of tedious repetitive interactions, e.g. small feature removal, model crack treatment, mesh, etc. [1,2]. These tedious interactions usually occupy 40–50% of the entire design time. Commercial CAD environments (Solid Works, Pro/Engineer, etc.) and CAE analysis environments (ANSYS, NX Nastran, etc.) primarily focus on integrating CAD and CAE module in the same software with the finite-element method (FEM). To generate an FEM model, the CAD geometry commonly needs to be modified and simplified to meet the analysis requirements. Hence a more efficient CAD/CAE integrated framework is necessary for the structural design.CAD/CAE integration aims to reduce human interactions in the design process of geometric modeling and structure performance analysis to improve the efficiency of product design [3]. Nowadays, most of these tools could be broken down into two types. One is interface based on data exchange, which is widely used to integrate heterogeneous platforms. The other is integrated environment of CAD/CAE software implemented through the integration of the third-party finite-element analysis component, which is adopted by the major CAD companies [4–6]. To achieve CAD/CAE integration, model conversion is needed in the first type of methods which adopt standard neutral file (such as IGES and STEP). However, the converted model data often requires a lot of time to fix it manually due to the differences between mathematical representation in distinct systems, which greatly reduces the design efficiency [7]. The second type integrated technology is limited to the integrated environment, where CAD model is still very different from CAE model. In addition, the information might be lost. The data structures are not unified, and it might cost a long time for the design cycle.Unlike most CAD/CAE integrated approaches using domain-based FEM for analysis, we present a CAD/CAE integrated framework adopting the boundary-based boundary element method (BEM). A framework is a set of classes, interfaces and patterns to solve a group of problems, which is a popular method to improve the development efficiency and reduce the development cost. In the proposed framework, designers can complete part design and performance analysis simultaneously instead of using two different software or two interface environment. Moreover, Fast Multipole Method and GPU parallel computing are used to accelerate the computing process of the BEM. This paper attempts:•To provide an incorporate CAD/CAE software framework with a unified representation architecture which can further reduce the difference of data structure between the CAD geometry and CAE analysis feature.To present an algorithm to make the analysis feature information (boundary conditions) be kept and rebuilt automatically for geometry model changing, which can maintain the analysis intents for designers in the CAD environment.The rest of this paper is composed as follows: Section 2 surveys the related work on the corresponding technologies used in the proposed framework. In Section 3, we describe the data structure of Unified Representation Architecture (URA). The architecture of the integrated framework is illustrated in Section 4. Examples are presented in Section 5, and finally a brief summary and discussion are given in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
