@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Computer-aided modeling of wire ropes bent over a sheave

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Derive the coordinate equations (CE) of the wires’ centroidal axis in a bent rope.Build a CAD model of a wire rope bent over sheave based on the CE.Extend the two modeling methods presented to any kind of helical-strand wire rope.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wire rope,Helical wires,Serret–Frenet frame,Variable section sweep,Helically twisting surface,Proe,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In the paper, two methods for building a 3-dimensional geometry of a wire rope bent over a sheave in Proe™ are presented. In order to obtain the centroidal axes of the wires, the first method is associated with deriving their coordinate equations based on the Serret–Frenet frame and the second method is characterized by using the ‘Variable Section Sweep’ tool in Proe™ to generate a helically twisting surface around the centroidal axis of the king wire or a strand with the two boundary curves being the centroidal axes of two double or triple helical wires. Finally, both methods use the ‘Variable Section Sweep’ tool to generate the geometries of the wires. The two methods can be applied to any helical-strand wire rope.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
There are many actual cases of wire ropes bent over a sheave, such as in a wire rope-pulley system or in a multi-rope friction hoist system, which is composed of a large hoisting sheave, wire ropes, guide sheaves and containers, as shown in Fig. 1(a). It utilizes the friction between wire ropes and friction linings inserted onto the periphery of the hoisting sheave to lift coal, devices and personnel. Wire ropes are bent over the hoisting sheave in Fig. 1(b) and guide sheaves in Fig. 1(c).In the case of a wire rope being bent over a sheave, there are triple helices among the centroidal axes of the wires, which increase the difficulty and complexity in terms of analytical and geometrical modeling. So far, most of the related studies have been limited to straight wire ropes and their mechanical behavior has been the research interest. Experimental research is time-consuming and expensive, and in most time cannot be conducted because of limited resources, etc. Some scholars [1–9] have been engaged in theoretical studies on wire ropes’ mechanical behavior or response based on the Love's rod theory [10] and others [11–15] used finite element (FE) models. Most of these studies are related to analytical and geometrical modeling of straight wire ropes or straight strands, which are involved in deriving the coordinate equations of the wires’ centroidal axes which are single helices or double helices.Usabiaga et al. [8] derived the parametric equations of the double-helical wires under undeformed and deformed status based on the Serret–Frenet frame and used the recursive and wire-by-wire modeling approach to model straight helical-strand wire ropes subjected to tensile and torsional loads more precisely. Elata et al. [9] proposed a new model for simulating the mechanical response of a wire rope with an independent wire rope core (IWRC) and analytically obtained the theoretical mechanical response of the rope subjected to both an axial load and an axial torque, which is in agreement with experimental results. Jiang et al. [11] developed a concise FE model for a simple straight strand which takes full advantage of the helical symmetry features, further developed an accurate bending symmetric boundary condition to make finite element analysis (FEA) of a straight strand under pure bending [12], and also extended their study to three-layered straight helical wire ropes under axial loads [13]. Nawrocki et al. [14] and Páczelt et al. [15] respectively proposed a reliable FE model of a simple straight strand which allows for all the possible internal motions among the wires. In Ref [14], the role of the contact conditions in pure axial loading and in axial loading combined with bending was investigated and in Ref [15], the contact and friction of the wires were taken into account and the contact stress and deformation were calculated based on the Hertz theory and the developed nonlinear spring element.Actually, it is difficult to conduct an analytical investigation on mechanical behavior of stranded wire ropes because the kinematics of double-helical wires is very complex [9]. In recent years, scholars would make use of FE packages to simulate the mechanical behavior of wire ropes in the actual applications. It consists of building a 3-dimensional (3-D) geometry of a wire rope. Many scholars made FEA on mechanical behavior of wire ropes by virtue of Ansys™ and Abaqus™. Stanova et al. [16] used the method of geometric transformations to have derived the coordinate equations of the centroidal axes of the wires in a simple helical-strand wire rope and built its 3-D geometry in CATIA V5 software; and further imported a geometry of a multi-layered strand generated in this way into Abaqus™ and then made FEA on its mechanical behavior under axis load [17]. Erdönmez et al. [18,19] derived the parametric equations of the centerlines of the single and double-helical wires in a 7*7-typed IWRC, used a developed code of Matlab™ to generate the control nodes of these centerlines, then constructed each wire with the meshed form in HyperMesh™ and finally in Abaqus™ assembled them into the IWRC and made FEA. Ma et al. [20] directly created the centroidal axes of all the wires in a basic 6×19 wire rope and subsequently built a geometric model for the 6×19 wire rope in ANSYS™ by virtue of the ‘B-Spline’ and ‘Extrude’ functions, and then made FEA to obtain the distribution of axial stress and axial strain along the length direction of the wire rope.There are few studies on analytically modeling of a wire rope wound around a drum or bent over a sheave. In such cases, there are triple helices among the wires’ centroidal axes, which increase the difficulty in modeling bent wire ropes precisely. Lee et al. [21,22] carried out a more comprehensive study into wire rope geometry. They gave the coordinate equations of the centroidal axis of an outer wire of a helical strand in a rope wound around a drum. The centroidal axis is in triple-helix from. The geometrical analysis presented in this paper applies to any rope with axisymmetric strands. Hobbs and Nabijou [23] studied the changes in curvature of single and double helixes in a straight wire rope as it is bent over a sheave. The analysis was applied to examine bending strains of wire ropes.It can be seen that studies on mechanical behavior of bent wire ropes are limited to making use of geometrical analysis and prediction. In order to analyze mechanical behavior of bent wire ropes, it is better to turn to a FEA package, such as Ansys™ and Abaqus™. So it is necessary to build 3-D geometrical model in a CAD package or even in a FE package directly. Proe™ is one of the competent CAD software. It can generate a 3-D geometry and output a common-pattern file containing the geometry information, which can be imported into Ansys™ or Abaqus™.So, the paper is aimed at building the 3-D geometry of a helical-strand wire rope bent over a sheave in Proe™. Actually, the outer wires of the helical strands in a rope bent over a sheave take on the form of a degenerate triple helix, because it can be seen as a case of a wire rope being wound around a drum with a lay angle of 0° [22]. Although in Ref [22], the coordinate equations of a triple-helix wire in a wire rope wound around a drum were directly presented in the Appendix section, it is still not easy for an engineer to build a 3-D geometry of a bent wire rope.The present paper is organized as follows. Firstly, we present the basic assumptions and the definitions of some important geometrical parameters of a wire rope. Secondly, we derive the coordinate equations of the centroidal axes of all the wires in a 7*7–wire strand core (WSC) stranded wire rope, which is one of the most interesting study objects [8], based on the Serret–Frenet frame like many scholars’ work [8,14,21,22]. The derivation is recursive and does not involve any theoretical limitation for developing parametric equations of curves of higher twisting level. In the third part, we describe how to generate a 3-D geometry of the wire rope by the joint use of Matlab™ and Proe™. Finally, we will present another method for directly building the 3D geometry in Proe™, which does not involve analytical modeling and can be easily mastered by an engineer.The coordinate equations of the wires’ centroidal axes of the 7*7-WSC wire rope are obtained on the basis of the following assumptions:(a)Any section normal to the centroidal axis of a wire is circular both before and after being bent over a sheave, as stated in the Assumptions section of Ref [22].The shape of the centroidal axis of a wire is a helix, which may be in the form of single helix, double helix, or triple helix.In addition, it is assumed that some terms related to wire rope, which are not explained in the paper, are known by readers. If not, please refer to Ref [22].The geometrical nomenclature of the 7*7-WSC helical-strand wire rope used in this paper is provided in Fig. 2, to which reference should be made when reading the definitions of some terms, which, in accordance with those in [22], are specified as follows:(a)Wire helical radius RwIt is defined as the perpendicular distance from the centroidal axis of an outer wire to that of the parent strand.Double-helical radius (Rs, Rco)Rs, strand helical radius, is defined as the perpendicular distance from the centroidal axis of the king wire to that of the centroidal axis of the core wire of a helical strand.Similarly, the helical radius of the outer wires in the 1*7-typed WSC, Rco, is defined.Wire rotational coordinate θwIt is defined as the rotational angle from the starting point to the objective point of an outer wire's centroidal axis around the strand's centroidal axis.Rotational coordinate of double helix (θs,θco)θs, strand rotational coordinate, is defined as the rotational angle from the starting point to the objective point of the centroidal axis of a helical strand around the rope's centroidal axis.Similarly, the rotational coordinate of any outer wire in the 1*7-typed WSC, θco, is defined.Ring radius RrIf a strand or rope is bent over a sheave, then Rr is defined as the perpendicular distance from the centre line of the sheave to the centroidal axis of the rope.Ring rotational coordinate θrIt is defined as the rotational angle between the starting point and the objective point on the king wire's centroidal axis around the axis of the sheave.Helix angle (βw, βs, βco)The helix angle βw at any point along the centroidal axis of a wire is defined as the angle between the tangent vector to the axis and the plane normal to the axis [22]. The strand helix angle, βs and the helix angle of an outer wire in the WSC, βco are defined similarly.The wires’ centroidal axes of a helical-strand wire rope are helical. The shape of the helices can vary considerably, depending on the location of the wires, the combination of helix angle, and the lay direction of wires in a strand and that of strands within a wire rope.So, firstly we take a basic 7*7–WSC wire rope in a right-hand Lang's lay, which is bent over a sheave with the arc angle θre being 60° and an arc radius Rr being 450 mm, for example to derive the coordinate equations of the wires’ centroidal axes based on the Serret–Frenet frame. Next, extend these coordinate equations to the common ones for a bent wire rope which can be in right-hand (left-hand) Lang's (regular) lay. The main parameters for such a wire rope with a diameter of 28 mm are presented in Table 1. They are input into the parameter window of Proe™ firstly for parametric modeling. dsc and dso are the diameters of the central wires and outer wires of the six strands, respectively.For such a rope bent over a sheave, there are three kinds of helical wires,(a)The king wire, taking on the form of a circular ring which can be seen as a degenerate single helix,The outer wires of the 1*7-typed WSC and the center wires of the six strands, which take on the form of a double helix,The outer wires of the six strands, which take on the form of a triple helix.The centroidal axes of the wires of the second and third types can be referred to as ‘ring single’ and ‘ring double’ helices, respectively. These appellations are in accordance with those in the study of Lee [22]. Actually, ring single and ring double helices are degenerate cases of drum single and drum double helices where the rope helix angle on the drum is 0°.The engineering drawing development approach applied to generate a wire rope's helical geometry is based on the idea of projecting the centroidal axis onto a plane without stretching or shrink and it provides a method for evaluating the path length of the centroidal axis of the rope, a strand or an outer wire and the consequential relationships between the wire, strand and rope rotational coordinates [22].The developed paths of a single, double and triple wire are presented in Fig. 3. The expressions for the lengths of the paths are as follows:(a)The length of the path of the king wire (a single helix) is(1)Sr=RrθrThe path of a strand is double-helical. Its length is(2)Ss=Rsθs/cosβs=Sr/sinβsSo is the path of an outer wire in the WSC. Its length is(3)Sco=Rcoθco/cosβco=Sr/sinβcoThe length of the path of an outer wire in a strand (a triple helix) is(4)Sw=Rwθw/cosβw=Ss/sinβwThe wire rotational coordinate, θw, the strand rotational coordinate, θs and the rotational coordinate of outer wires in the WSC, θco of a rope bent over a sheave can be obtained in terms of the ring (rope) rotation coordinate, θr.By substituting Sr in Eq. (2) by that in Eq. (1), the relationship between θs and θr can be obtained as:(5)θs=RrRstanβsθr=ksrθrSimilarly, the relationship between θco and θr is(6)θco=RrRcotanβcoθr=kcorθrBy Eqs. (2 and3), the relationship between θw and θr can also be obtained as:(7)θw=RrRwtanβwsinβsθr=kwrθrSo, the coordinate equations of the double and triple helices can be written as a function of the ring rotation coordinate.The parametric equations of the centroidal axis of the king wire in a global Cartesian coordinate system (CS), in vector form, are written as:(8)lr=[0Rrcos(θr)Rrsin(θr)]where lr represents a degenerate single helix whose rotation axis and helix angle are the x–axis and 0°, respectively.The centroidal axes of the six outer wires in the WSC and the center wires of the six strands all take on forms of double helix. The numbering for the wires is illustrated in Fig. 2. Such a double helix can be seen as the generating trajectory of a point's motion, which is the composition of the translation with the Serret–Frenet local CS along the king wire's centroidal axis and the rotation around the tangential axis, that is, the relative motion of the point in the Serret–Frenet local CS. The rotation radius is the strand helical radius, Rs or the helical radius of the outer wires of the WSC, Rco.The tangential, normal and binormal unit vectors, denoted by tr, nrand brrespectively, of the Serret–Frenet frame [24,25] of lrare respectively obtained as:(9)tr=[0−sinθrcosθr]T(10)nr=[0−cosθr−sinθr]T(11)br=tr×nr=[100]TSo the coordinate-transformation matrix from the Serret–Frenet frame (tr, nr, br) to the global Cartisian CS, in the matrix form ofTr=[trnrbr], is then written as:(12)Tr=[001−sinθr−cosθr0cosθr−sinθr0](a)The center wires in the six outer strandsThe angle around the normal axis nr, denoting the intersection-point location of the centroidal trajectory of the jth strand on the normal plane (nr, br) of the king wire's centroidal axis lr, is the sum of the initial phrase angle αsj and the rotation coordinate θs.The initial phrase angle of the center wire of the jth strand is(13)αsj=π/2+(j−1)π/3So, the location of the intersection point in the Serret–Frenet frame, in vector form, is written as:(14)Qsj=[0Rscos(θs+αsj)Rssin(θs+αsj)]TThen, the vector representing the double helix can be obtained according to(15)lsj=lr+TrQsjas:(16)lsj=[Rssin(ksrθr+αsj)cosθr(Rr−Rscos(ksrθr+αsj))×sinθr(Rr−Rscos(ksrθr+αsj))]T(b)The six outer wires in the WSCThe derivation is identical to that for the centroidal axes of the center wires in the six strands. So the vector, representing the centroidal axis of the jth outer wire in the 1*7-typed WSC, can be obtained simply by replacing Rs in Eq. (16) with Rco as:(17)lcj=[Rcosin(kcorθr+αsj)cosθr(Rr−Rcocos(kcorθr+αsj))×sinθr(Rr−Rcocos(kcorθr+αsj))]TThe centroidal axes of the outer wires in the six strands are triple helices. Actually, it is a similar procedure to obtain the coordinate equations of a triple helix as that of a double helix. Here, the base double helix is the centroidal axis of any strand and the rotation radius of the relative motion is the helical radius, Rw. The index numbers for the six outer wires of each strand are denoted on the front view of the wire rope in Fig. 2.The tangential unit vector tsj in the Serret–Frenet frame (tsj, nsj, bsj) of the centroidal axis of the jth strand is obtained as:(18)tsj=dlsjdθr/|dlsjdθr|=1(ksrRs)2+(Rr−Rscos(ksrθr+αjs))2⋅[ksrRscos(ksrθr+αjs)−sinθr(Rr−Rscos(ksrθr+αjs)+ksrRscosθrsin(ksrθr+αjs)×cosθr(Rr−Rscos(ksrθr+αjs))+ksrRssinθrsin(ksrθr+αjs)]Because the expressions for the tangential unit vector nsj, and the binormal unit vector bsj of lsj are too long, they are presented in the Appendix section and here the final formulae are given:(19)nsj=dtsjdθr/|dtsjdθr|and(20)bsj=tsj×nsjActually, it is easy to obtain the expressions in Matlab™ by just using the programming statements:nsj=diff(tsj)/norm(tsj)andbsj=cross(tsj,nsj)The coordinate transformation matrix from the Serret–Frenet frame (tsj, nsj, bsj) to the global Cartesian CS is written as:(21)Tsj=[tsjnsjbsj]αwi, which is the initial phase angle of the ith wire relative to nsj on the normal plane, is(22)αwi=π+(i−1)π/3The rotation radius of the relative motion is the helical radius, Rw. So, the location of the intersection point of the centroidal axis of the ith wire in the jth strand and the normal plane of lsj, in vector form, is written as:(23)Qwi=[0Rwcos(θw+αwi)Rwsin(θw+αwi)]TBy replacing lsj, Tsj, and Qwi in the formula:(24)lwij=lsj+TsjQwiwith Eqs. (16), (21), and (23), lwij, the vector denoting the centroidal axis of the ith wire in the jth strand, can be obtained. The expression for lwij is presented in the Appendix section.The centerlines of all the wires, obtained by solving Eqs. (8), (16), (17), (24) and plotting them in Matlab™, are shown in Fig. 4. The blue curve denotes the centroidal axis of the king wire; the green and red ones represent the centroidal axes of the outer wires in the WSC and the centroidal axes of the center wires of the six strands, respectively; and the black ones denote the centroidal axes of the triple helical wires.It is convenient to extend those coordinates equations, Eqs. (16), (17) and (24), to ones in common form for a bent 7*7-WSC wire rope in right-hand (left-hand) Lang's (regular) lay.We just need to make use of two symbol variables, p and q to change Eqs. (5–7) into(25)θs=pksrθr(26)θco=pkcorθrand(27)θw=pqkwrθrwhere p = 1 strands for the right-hand lay while p = –1 for the left-hand lay; and q = 1 represents the Lang's lay while q = –1 the regular lay.By complying with the derivation procedures in Section 3.2, we can get the coordinate equations of the centroidal axes of the wires in common form as:(28)lsj=[Rssin(pksrθr+αsj)cosθr(Rr−Rscos(pksrθr+αsj))×sinθr(Rr−Rscos(pksrθr+αsj))]Tand(29)lcj=[Rcosin(pkcorθr+αsj)cosθr(Rr−Rcocos(pkcorθr+αsj))×sinθr(Rr−Rcocos(pkcorθr+αsj))]TWhile the expression for lwij in common form, which is very long, is presented in the Appendix section.The steps for building a 3-D geometry of the wire rope are presentedas follows.Take advantage of the powerful matrix operation capacity of Matlab™ to output 49 files with the suffix ‘.ibl’, any of which contains ASCII data of the 3-D coordinates of the points composing one wire's centroidal axis. But, at the beginning of each file, three lines of codes, which are ‘Closed arc length’, ‘Begin section’ and ‘Begin curve’, should be added in order to make the file identifiable by Proe™.Then import these ‘*. ibl’ files into Proe™ to generate the spatial curves representing the 49 centroidal axes. Then use the ‘Variable Section Sweep’ tool to generate the 3-D geometry of each wire by sweeping the circular cross section along the centroidal axis as a trajectory. Fig. 5 illustrates how an outer wire in the WSC is generated in this way.A strand is then formed by an assembly of the six outer wires, as shown in Fig. 6 and a center wire. And the wire rope geometry is generated by an assembly of the six generated strands (in Fig. 7), and the WSC which is an assembly of the king wire and six outer wires (in Fig. 8).Fig. 9 presents the four kinds of wire ropes generated by giving p, q a value of 1 or –1, which are in right-hand Lang's lay, in right-hand regular lay, in left-hand Lang's lay and in left-hand regular lay, respectively.These figuresshow that the developed mathematical model in Section 3 can generate the centroidal axes. The results also validate the derivation for the parametric equations of the centroidal axes of the wires.It is a graphical method, not involving in analytical modeling. Firstly, the parameters listed in Table 1 should be input into the Parameter window. Then, create the centroidal axis of the king wire which is a circular-arc curve with the arc angle being θre and the radius being Rr. Next, we need to make use of the ‘Variable Section Sweep’ tool to generate the double helices, the centroidal axes of the strands or of the outer wires in the WSC, and then the triple helices.The summary of the procedures is as follows:Select the centroidal axis of the king wire as the sweeping trajectory and then sketch a straight line with the half length being the wire's helical radius and with its midpoint coinciding with the origin of the reference frame of the sketch plane. Set the angle between the sketched line and one reference axis of the sketch plane as the control parameter which linearly changes its value along the sweeping trajectory so as to get the sketched line helically wound around the sweeping trajectory. As a result, a surface helically twisted around the trajectory is generated. The two boundary curves of the surface denote the centroidal axes of the two double-helical wires with a 180° phase difference relative to the centroidal axis of the king wire.Actually, the sketch plane automatically built by the software is the normal plane of the Serret–Frenet frame of the trajectory at the starting point and the reference axes are the normal and binormal axes, which show the powerful capacity of Proe™ for modeling surfaces.To make the angle of the sketched line relative to the reference axis a linear-change control parameter, trajpar, the built-in trajectory parameter in Proe™, should be used. The value of trajpar ranges linearly from 0 to 1 as the section is swept along the trajectory. The angle, as a control parameter, should be written as:(30)sd#=360*trajpar*(ksrθre/360)+αsjwhich isin accordance with the normalized form used by the software:(31)sd#=360*trajpar*n+θ0where θ0, in degrees, is the initial phase angle and n indicates that the sweeping object has wound around the trajectory n times at the end point; As for αsj, the subscript j takes the value of 1, 2 or 3; and consequently, the terminal value ofsd#equals toksrθre+αsj.Now, take the creation of the centroidal axes of the second and fifth helical wires in the WSC for example to give a guide on how trajpar works.Step 1:Go to Insert ≫ Variable Section Sweep ≫ Sweep as surface, and then select the circular arc representing the centroidal axis of the king wire as the sweeping trajectory.Sketch a straight line with a length of 2Rco and with the midpoint coinciding with the original of the reference frame of the sketch plane, as shown in Fig. 10(a).Click on Tools ≫ Relations, and then in Relations dialog box, write down the equation as below:(32)sd6=360*trajpar*(kcor*θre/360)+60Then, after clicking the ‘tick’ button, you could preview a surface, as shown in Fig. 10(b). Again click the ‘tick’ button, and the surface is generated.The two helical boundary curves of the surface are the centroidal axes of the second and the fifth outer wires in the WSC, respectively. In the same way, we can obtain the centroidal axes of the first and the fourth outer wires in the WSC simultaneously and then the third and the sixth ones as a pair. Similarly, the centroidal axis of the center wire of each strand can be generated.Similarly, use one of the newly created double-helical curves as a sweeping trajectory to create the centroidal axes of the triple helical wires. Here, the sketched line is in length and its midpoint coincides with the origin of the reference frame which is actually composed of the normal and binormal axes of the Serret–Frenet frame of the trajectory at the starting point, automatically built by the software.The angle of the line relative to one reference axis, as a control parameter, is in the following form:(33)sd#=360*trajpar*(kwrθre/360)+αwiConsequently, the boundary curves of the surfaces, which represent the centroidal axes of all the wires apart from the king wire, are obtained, as shown in Fig. 11(a).Finally, sweep a circular cross-section along each boundary curve of the surfaces to generate the corresponding wire geometry by virtue of the ‘Variable Section Sweep’ tool. The procedures are identical to those in Section 4, so here they are not repeated. The 3-D geometry of the whole wire rope in right-hand Lang's lay is presented in Fig. 11(b).It is easy to extend the method to one which can generate a common-form 7*7-WSC wire rope, just by changing Eqs. (25) and (28) into(34)sd#=360*trajpar*(pksrθre/360)+αsjand(35)sd#=360*trajpar*(pqkwrθre/360)+αwiThe four combinations ofp=±1andq=±1will generate the same four kinds of wire ropes as those presented in Fig. 9.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presents two methods to build a 3-D geometry of a bent 7*7-WSC wire rope in right-hand (left-hand) Lang's (regular) lay.The first method derives the coordinate equations of each wire's centroidal axis, which is a single, double or triple helix and then generating a data file of the coordinates of the control points, which form the axis, by virtue of Matlab™. It uses recursion to build a higher-level helix based on the obtained coordinate equations of a base helix. It is characterized by deriving the Serret–Frenet frame of the base helix, composed of the tangential, the normal and the binormal unit vectors. The higher-level helix is seen as the trajectory of a point's motion, which is the composition of the translation with the Serret–Frenet local CS along the base helix and the rotation around the tangential axis in the local CS.The second method does not require analytical modeling. It makes use of the ‘Variable Section Sweep’ tool in Proe™ to get the centroidal axes of the double and triple wires. It is characterized by generating a helically twisting surface. Its two boundary curves are the axes of two higher-level helical wires. They wind around a base helix by virtue of setting the rotation angle of the sketched line as a function of the trajectory parameter trajpar. trajpar ranges linearly from 0 to 1 along the sweeping trajectory.Both methods use the ‘Variable Section Sweep’ tool to generate the 3-D geometry by sweeping a circular section along each wire's centroidal axis. The workload for modeling the 3-D geometry of a wire rope which contains high-level helical wires using the first method is smaller. But the second method is easily mastered by an engineer. Actually, the two methods can be easily extended to model a 7*7-WSC wire rope with the strands consisting of multi-layer wires and even any kind of helical-strand wire rope.With the modeling of a wire rope bent over a sheave in Proe software being completed, the next step is to focus on the application of the CAD model, such as FE-based mechanical behavior under tensile loads and FE-based fretting wear evolution under cyclic bending of wire rope. Another focus is the validation of these FE models by comparing with some analytical or experimental studies. As an example, the contrastive analytical study is the influence of the ratio of the sheave's diameter and the wire rope's diameter on the contact pressure between the wire rope and the sheave discussed in Ref [26,27] and the contrastive experimental study is the wear evolution in a stranded rope under cyclic bending presented in Ref [26,28]. The results of this investigation are expected to be reported soon.