@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Nonlinear elasto–plastic performance prediction of materials stabilized with bitumen emulsion in rural road pavements

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
It was used a numerical code to study the response of Bitumen Stabilized MaterialsA nonlinear elasto–plastic Mohr-Coulomb model was used in BSMBoth the resilient and permanent behaviour of BSM were mode lledThe BSM material containing 1% cement is more resistantBSM fail first due to rutting before fatigue.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pavement analysis,3D finite difference model,FLAC3D,Nonlinear,Pavement recycling,Rehabilitation,Bitumen emulsion,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This article presents numerical modelling of rural road pavement sections recycled in situ with two materials stabilized with bitumen emulsion. The two materials stabilized with bitumen emulsion are base course materials comprising 25% reclaimed asphalt pavement and 75% natural aggregates with and without 1% cement. A 3D-finite difference model was used to determine the response of these pavement sections when subjected to two types of loads with four types of soil subgrades of varying resistances. A nonlinear elasto–plastic Mohr-Coulomb model was used in the two materials stabilized with bitumen emulsion, and a nonlinear model was adopted in the four soil subgrades. Both the resilient and permanent behaviours of these materials were modelled. An analysis was conducted on rutting and fatigue resistances of the base course materials. The base course material containing 1% cement is more resistant and is apt for use in lightly trafficked rural roads. Both base course materials stabilized with bitumen emulsion will first fail from rutting before fatigue.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
One of the primary goals of highway administrations is to maintain the road network in an optimal state of repair and operation. A large part of these networks is composed of lightly trafficked rural roads that use flexible pavements constructed with thin wearing courses comprising asphalt materials and base courses fabricated with unbound granular materials resting upon soil subgrades of relatively low resistance. One of the most effective actions for the maintenance of these pavements was found to be in situ treatment of recycled pavement with bitumen emulsion. In keeping with this convention, the process known as Full Depth Reclamation (FDR) is a rehabilitation technique in which the full thickness of an asphalt wearing course and a predetermined portion of an underlying unbound granular base course are uniformly milled, pulverized and blended to provide a new base course material stabilized with bitumen emulsion (BSM) [1].In recent years, research on BSM has focussed mainly on characterisation, formulation and implementation. Significant progress has been made in these fields. However, relatively little ground has been gained in the study of the mechanical behaviour of BSM for improving the structural design of the rehabilitation solutions. Most of the methods used to analyse structural designs do not consider the specific mechanical characteristics of BSM. A number of different researchers have reported that these materials play a structural role that varies between the application range of unbound granular materials and the asphalt mixes [2–4]. In this sense, BSM exhibits a nonlinear behaviour similar to that of unbound granular materials, which depends on the pavement stress states, with the most critical mechanical property being shear stress resistance [3–5]. In other words, the failure of these materials is mainly due to significant permanent deformation (rutting) that has an irreversible and negative effect on the structural and functional state of the pavement [2].The objective of this article is to determine the pavement responses at critical positions in two rural roads pavement sections with BSM base courses. For this purpose, a 3D-finite difference model will be used considering the BSM-specific mechanical characteristics. The permanent deformation (rutting) produced in the BSM will be attained. In addition, fatigue resistance will be analysed.Two three-layer system sections are modelled (Fig. 1). The first section was studied earlier in South Africa [3]. It consists of a Hot Mix Asphalt (HMA) wearing course 40 mm thick overlying a BSM base course 200 mm thick placed directly over the subgrade. South Africa typically rehabilitates roads with 40 mm HMA wearing courses and 200 mm BSM base courses. This type of rehabilitation specifically belongs to category C: rural roads that are lightly trafficked or strategic roads. These roads have an 80% design reliability and 0.3 to 1 million equivalent standard axle loads (0.3 to 1 MESA) [6]. The second section is similar but with an HMA wearing course 80 mm thick. This second section is not used in the South Africa roads and is analysed for comparison with the first section.On the other hand, the permissible axle load in South Africa of a single axle with dual wheels is 88 kN, whereas the permissible axle load of a single axle with single wheels used as steering axle is 77 kN, and that of a single axle with single wheels that is not a steering axle is 80 kN [7]. Therefore, two load configurations are used: an 80 kN single axle with two single tyres (ST) (Fig. 1a) and an 88 kN single axle with two dual tyres (DT) (Fig. 1b). A homogeneous circular load p = 0.70 MPa with a radius a = 134.87 mm is applied to the single tyre. For dual tyres, p is also 0.70 MPa but with a = 100.02 mm, and the distance between radial centres is equal to 343.00 mm.The numerical modelling of the stress state produced in the pavement, created by the application of a static load on its surface, was carried out with the commercial code FLAC3D- 3.10 (Fast Lagrangian Analysis of Continua in 3-Dimensions) [8]. This is a three-dimensional code that uses a specific scheme of finite differences that allows the elastic–plastic behaviour of the materials used in pavement layers to be simulated. The materials are represented by polyhedric elements forming a three-dimensional grid that fits the shape of the modelled object. Each element behaves according to an established law of stress–strain (linear or nonlinear) in response to the loads applied and the boundary conditions. Fig. 2shows the finite difference grid and the coordinate system used for dual tyres. The model comprises 2,500 elements and 2,900 nodes.Given the conditions of symmetry entailed in the problem (in terms of geometry and loads), only one-fourth of the real problem is studied. The following boundary conditions were applied (Fig. 2):•Movements prevented in direction ‘x’ on plane x = 0 (symmetry plane).Movements prevented in direction ‘y’ on plane y = 0 (symmetry plane).Movements prevented in directions ‘x’ and ‘y’ on the lateral (circular) edge of the grid. The lateral (circular) edge of the grid was located far from the load (1.4 m away from the tyre centre) so that it would have a minimal effect on the results.All movements prevented on the lower plane z = –1.24 m.Continuity conditions are satisfied at the layer interfaces. The process reproduced with the numerical model consists of two phases: the first provides the in situ state of stresses existing in the pavement before applying the load. Once the state of mechanical equilibrium has been reached for the specific weights and boundary conditions applied, all movements of the model start out at zero. The load is applied in the second phase.In this research, emphasis should be given to nonlinear elastic-plastic Mohr–Coulomb modelling of the BSM base course. In the HMA wearing course, a linear elastic behaviour is considered. This layer is characterised by the values of the following parameters: specific weight γ = 24 kN/m3, coefficient of earth pressure at rest K0 = 0.6, elastic modulus E = 5,000 MPa and Poisson's coefficient ν = 0.44 [3].It is assumed that FDR-type treatments are carried out on a pavement that originally consisted of a thin bituminous wearing course and a thick unbound granular base course. Hence, the resulting BSM comprises only 25% Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement (RAP). Moreover, two different cases are considered: (a) 25% RAP+75% natural aggregates (R0) and (b) 25% RAP+75% natural aggregates+1% cement (R1). These two BSM base courses are characterised by the values of the following parameters: γ = 22 kN/m3; K0 = 0.6 and ν = 0.35 [3].A nonlinear elastic behaviour is assumed [9]. In keeping with this, the well-known Mr-Θ model, initially developed for unbound granular materials, is used to obtain the resilient modulus (Mr) of these materials [3]:(1)Mr=k1θk2where Θ = σ1 + 2σ3, and σ1 and σ3 are the major and minor principal stresses, respectively. The main drawback of this model is that negative values of Θ yield incongruent values of Mr. Ebels [3] obtained the experimental coefficients k1 and k2 of R0 and R1 materials by means of dynamic triaxial tests (Table 1). In Table 1, it may be observed that in material R0, the value of parameter k1 is equal to 130 MPa, whereas in material R1 (stiffer) this parameter is equal to 150 MPa. Parameter k2 is very similar in the two materials.Moreover, Table 1 provides the cohesion (c) and angle of friction (ϕ), which allow for the modelling of the elastic–plastic behaviour. According to Jenkins et al. [2], c and ϕ determine the shear stress resistance and therefore the permanent deformation resistance. Compared to material R0, in material R1 with 1% cement, c increases and ϕ decreases.A fine-grained soil is studied with γ = 20 kN/m3; K0 = 0.6 y ν€= 0.45. In this case, a nonlinear elastic model is used in which Mrdecreases as σd increases [10–12]:(2)Mr=k1+k3(k2−σd)whenσd≤k2Mr=k1−k4(σd−k2)whenσd≥k2where σd= σ1–σ3 = deviator stress. Thompson and Elliot [12] obtained the experimental coefficients k1, k2, k3and k4of four types of subgrade soils by means of dynamic triaxial tests. In Table 2, the values of these coefficients are listed in the four types of subgrade soils with various degrees of resistance: S (Strong); M (Medium); W (Weak); VW (Very Weak). According to Thompson and Elliot [12] the value of Mrat the point where k1 is equal to σd(at the curve breakpoint) is a good indicator of the resilient behaviour of the subgrade material. In this sense, the strong subgrade (S) exhibits a characteristic Mrof 85.1 MPa, whereas the weakest subgrade (VW) has an Mrof only 6.9 MPa.The rutting resistance of the BSM base course is studied by using a double exponential model that predicts the three phases of the cumulative permanent strain (εp) versus the number of load cycles (N) [3]:(3)ɛp=A(N1000)B+C(expDN1000−1)A=a1(SR)a2;B=b1(SR)b2;C=c1(SR)c2;D=d1(SR)d2Ebels [3] obtained the experimental coefficients a1, a2, b1, b2, c1, c2, d1, and d2 of materials R0 and R1 by means of dynamic triaxial tests. In Table 3, the values of these eight parameters for materials R0 and R1 are listed:In Eq. 3, SR is the so-called Stress Ratio, which is expressed as the ratio between the acting deviator stress (σd) and the deviator stress at failure (σd, f) for the Mohr-Coulomb criterion [2,13,14]:(4)SR=σdσd,f=σ1−σ3σ3[tan2(45∘+ϕ2)−1]+2ctan(45∘+ϕ2)where σ1 and σ3 are the major and minor principal stresses in static triaxial tests,respectively.Jenkins et al [2] reported that SR is a critical parameter that defines the mechanical response of BSM materials to the permanent deformation (PD). As the value of SR increases, the εp value goes up as well. According to Jenkins et al [2], when the SR value is greater than 0.40, high PD (rutting) is produced. It is very important to locate the critical position of SR in the layer. To accomplish this, σ1 and σ3 are determined using the finite difference code at different locations in the BSM base course, which allows the calculation of SR by means of Eq. 4. The critical position was considered to be the point yielding the maximum SR (SRmax). This value is used in Eq. 3 to estimate εp.Moreover, to check the BSM fatigue resistance, the following expression is used [15]:(5)Nf=aμɛr−nwhere Nfis the number of load cycles applied until fatigue failure occurs, and µεr is the tensile strain in micrometres that occurs in the BSM base course lower fibre.Twagira et al [15] obtained the experimental coefficients a and n of materials R0 and R1 by means of fatigue tests. Table 4 shows these experimental coefficients for materials R0 and R1.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Based on the results of this research, the following conclusions can be drawn•The responses of the pavement are more satisfactory in cases with an 80 mm thick HMA wearing course, with the exception of HMA tensile strain in sections P2-R0 and P2-R1 with a single tyre and P2-R1 with dual tyres. Better structural behaviour was also obtained with dual tyres, except for the HMA wearing course tensile strain in section P1-R1.The responses of the pavement also decrease as the subgrade stiffness increases, except in the case of HMA wearing course tensile strain in sections P1-R0 and P1-R1 with dual tyres and in P1-R1 with a single tyre.In an HMA wearing course situated over a BSM base course, there is a “critical thickness” with a maximum tensile strain.The responses are more satisfactory with BSM base courses with material R1 containing 1% cement.The Mrof the subgrade increases with depth, whereas that of the BSM base course materials decreases. The Mrof the subgrade is higher with an 80 mm HMA wearing course, whereas the corresponding value of the BSM base course is greater with 40 mm HMA. The Mrof the BSM base course is higher in layers containing R1 materials and with a resistant subgrade (S).In an 88 kN single axle with dual tyres, the maximum SR values are found at the following critical points of the BSM base course•Section P1-R0 in the lower fibre to the left of the tyre centre.Section P1-R1 in the upper fibre to the right of the tyre centre.Section P2-R0 in the upper fibre underneath the tyre.Section P2-R1 in the upper fibre underneath the tyre.The smallest SR and the lowest permanent deformation occur jointly with an 80 mm thick HMA wearing course, BSM base course material R1 and resistant subgrade (S).In the section with BSM base course material R1, the subgrade stiffness does not significantly affect the resistance to the permanent deformation of the BSM material.With resistant subgrade (S), the BSM base course of section P1-R0 is the one with the poorest fatigue behaviour, and section P2-R1 exhibits the best behaviour.The BSM base course materials begin to fail from rutting before they fail from fatigue. The failure of pavement sections may be first attributed to rutting in the BSM and subsequently to HMA fatigue, except in section P2-R1. Therefore, it can be stated that in these types of BSM recycled in situ with asphalt emulsion, as a design parameter, resistance to PD is more critical than fatigue resistance.Pavement section P1-R1 containing BSM is apt for use in South African Category C roads.It is crucial to validate the numerical simulation obtained in this research by comparing the measurement results of in-field pavement responses to the results of the corresponding numerical simulation.