@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Numerical calibration of damage indices

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new numerical calibration procedure is proposed based on incremental dynamic analysis.Five well known damage indices are calibrated on the basis of cracks opening width.The procedure is generally applicable, robust and efficient.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Damage indices,Numerical calibration,Incremental dynamic analysis,Detailed finite element modelling,Performance based design,Earthquake engineering,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this study a numerical calibration procedure is proposed; while its application in some of the most widely accepted damage indices (DIs) used for quantifying the extent of damage in reinforced concrete structures is presented. In particular, without loss of generality of the applicability of the proposed procedure, the Park and Ang local damage index, its modified variant presented by Kunnath, Reinhorn and Lobo; the Chung, Meyer and Shinozuka local damage index; along with the maximum and final softening damage indices proposed by DiPasquale and Çakmak, are calibrated on the basis of the width of crack openings. The estimation of the crack width is performed by means of detailed modelling with hexahedral finite elements for the concrete and rod elements for the steel reinforcement; while due to the computing demands the databank of values for the damage indices under investigation is defined based on coarse models with beam–column elements. These two steps of the proposed procedure are based on the incremental dynamic analysis. Next, the statistical characteristics of the DIs are computed by means of horizontal statistics in conjunction with the maximum likelihood function method and an optimization algorithm.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Performance-Based Design (PBD) in earthquake engineering is the state-of-the-art framework for future developments in structural design. PBD in engineering practice requires the definition of clearly determined levels of damage achieved for different seismic intensity levels. In order to implement this design framework, appropriate models for assessing the structural damage, within the context of a random seismic environment, are required. The idea of describing the state of damage of the structure by one number on a defined scale in the form of a damage index (DI) is attractive because of its simplicity. So far, a number of researchers have studied various DIs for reinforced concrete or steel structures [1–4].Damage indices can be broadly divided into two classes [5]: (a) strength-based DIs and (b) response-based DIs. Strength-based DIs do not require finite element (FE) analysis [6,7]; however, they must be calibrated against observed damages using a large experimental database. Although the seismic performance of the structures is commonly related to their capacity to undergo inelastic deformations, experimental studies have shown that ductility as well as alternative measures of the structural performance in case of seismic loading, based on the theory of low-cycle fatigue, do not seem to provide a satisfactory index of the seismic damage [8]. These test results are consistent with the notion that failure of brittle systems is caused by excessive deformation, while the failure of ideal ductile systems is initiated by repeated inelastic deformations. The damage indices, used for structural systems that are neither ideal brittle nor ideal ductile, need to account for the damage effect of both excessive and repeated inelastic deformations [9]. Thus, there is a need for more general and reliable indices able to characterize the performance of the structures. The response-based DIs can be divided into three groups according to the quantity that the index accounts for [2]: (a) maximum deformation indices [10–14]; (b) cumulative damage indices [8,15]; and (c) combination of maximum deformation and cumulative damage indices. In this work some of the most widely accepted damage indices accounting for both maximum deformation and cumulative damage are considered. In particular, the Park and Ang [9] local damage index, its modified variant proposed by Kunnath et al. [16], the Chung et al. [17,18] local damage index, along with the maximum and final softening damage indices proposed by DiPasquale and Çakmak [19,20] are studied in this work.In this study a numerical calibration procedure is proposed and it is applied to the above mentioned damage indices that are used to quantify the extent of damage in reinforced concrete structures. Furthermore, the width of the crack openings is used as the basis for implementing the calibration procedure. The estimation of the crack width is performed using detailed numerical modelling with hexahedral finite elements for the concrete and rod elements for the steel reinforcement; while due to the computing demands the databank of values for the damage indices under investigation is defined based on coarse models with beam–column elements. Both steps of the proposed procedure are based on the incremental dynamic analysis (IDA) [21]. Next, the statistical characteristics of the DIs are computed by means of horizontal statistics in conjunction with the maximum likelihood function method and an optimization algorithm. The proposed numerical calibration procedure is not limited neither to the DIs considered, nor to the quantity used as a basis (crack width), or the material (reinforced concrete). For the purposes of the current study two test examples are considered, one plane frame test example and one 3D framed structure.In this section a short description of the five DIs considered in this study is provided.The Park and Ang [9] damage model accounts for the damage due to maximum inelastic deformation, as well as due to the cyclic history of the deformations. This damage index, which was modified later by Park et al. [22] and Kunnath et al. [16], is composed by two parts, namely the scaled values of the ductility and the dissipated energy of the structural element during the seismic shaking. Therefore, according to this damage index, the structural damage is expressed as a linear combination of the damage caused by excessive deformation and the damage attributed to the repeated cyclic loading effect:(1)DIPA=δMδu+βQyδu∫dEwhere δMis the maximum deformation obtained under the earthquake loading; δuis the ultimate deformation achieved under a monotonic loading; Qyis the calculated yield strength; E is the incremental absorbed hysteretic energy (all calculated at the element level); while β is a non-negative parameter calibrated from experiments (β=0.25, as suggested by Park [23]). In Eq. (1) the scaled ductility part is defined as the ratio of the maximum experienced deformation demand to the ultimate deformation, while the dissipated energy part is defined as the scaled ratio of the absorbed hysteretic energy with respect to β/(Qyδu). The Park and Ang damage index has been calibrated with observed structural damages on nine RC buildings [22], where it was noted that values in the range of 0.20–0.30 correspond to slight damage, 0.50–0.60 correspond to minor-severe damage, while values greater than 1.0 signify complete collapse. Although the value of DIPAmay exceed unity, the structural failure is assumed to occur when the value of DIPAranges from 0.8 to 1.0. Under elastic response the value of DIPAshould theoretically be zero; however, in practice the values of DIPAin the elastic range are usually close to zero and not necessarily equal to zero.This damage index as proposed by Kunnath et al. [16] is a modification of DIPA. For the case of damage of the structural element end-section, the following modification to the Park and Ang model was introduced:(2)DIKRL=θm-θrθu-θr+βMyθu∫dEwhere deformation was replaced by the rotation; while θmis the maximum rotation attained during the loading history; θuis the ultimate rotation capacity of the critical region; θris the recoverable rotation after unloading; Myis the yield moment; and E is the dissipated energy in the critical region. The element damage is selected as the largest damage index of the end critical region.Chung et al. [17,24] proposed a damage index that reflects the effect of the loading history, and considers the difference of the flexural response of the members to positive and negative moments. The effect of the loading history is taken into account via a parameter which includes the change in stiffness and sustained bending moment up to the calculation cycle. The damage index is evaluated at the section level and relates to the flexural response, therefore it is based on the evaluation of the curvature φ, while it takes into account the fact that reinforced concrete members typically respond differently to positive and negative loadings:(3)DICMS=∑i=1nstαi+ni+Ni++αi-ni-Ni-where Niis the number of cycles causing failure at curvature φi, niis the number of actually applied loading cycles at curvature φi, αiis the damage modifier while +/− depicts the loading direction. The damage modifiers αiare defined as a function of the number of loading cycles and the previous loading history. Calibration for DICMSwas performed by Chung et al. [17] comparing the visible damages of one-bay one-storey frames with the computed DICMSvalues at the corresponding loading steps. According to the study by Chung et al. [17], values in the range of 0.0–0.2 correspond to invisible cracking, 0.2–0.5 correspond to visible cracking, and 0.5–1.0 correspond to concrete spalling while values greater than 1.0 indicate concrete crushing. According to Chung et al. [17], from the engineering point of view, in order to prevent total collapse, DICMSshould be limited in all members to the maximum value of 0.5; while, for frequent seismic excitations DICMSshould be limited to 0.2 which is the maximum acceptable damage to maintain the structure’s serviceability with minor repair needs.According to Saiidi and Sozen [12] the seismic damage to reinforced concrete structures depends mostly on the maximum strain that is observed during the seismic event, while the particular sequence (or path) of the loading is not very important in determining the damage level. Thus, a rational notation is that the maximum softening damage index, which depends on the combined effects of the stiffness degradation and the local nonlinearities, can be used as a damage index for reinforced concrete structures. To this end, DiPasquale and Çakmak [20] developed two damage indices based on: (i) the evolution of the natural period of a time-varying linear system equivalent to the actual nonlinear system for a series of non-overlapping time windows (maximum softening) and (ii) the final (post-earthquake) state of the building (final softening). These two global damage indices depend on the combined effect of stiffness degradation and plastic deformation. DiPasquale and Çakmak [20] used the change in the fundamental period of the structure as a measure of the stiffness degradation caused by the seismic event. However, the instantaneous fundamental period depends also on the damping and inertia forces. The advantage of final softening damage index is that it can be evaluated from the initial natural period and the final natural period. A shortcoming of the damage measurements defined based on the final softening is that local element and storey damage, as well as the data related to the structural response during the seismic event, are not available; as a result the maximum softening was proposed. The two parameter-based global damage indices, proposed by DiPasquale and Çakmak [19], are defined as follows:(4)DIMS=1-(T0)initial(T0)max(5)DIFS=1-(T0)initial(T0)finalwhere (T0)initial, (T0)maxand (T0)finalcorrespond to the initial, maximum and final fundamental period computed for the total duration of the seismic event.The calculation procedure of the fundamental period for various states of damage is based on the idea that the modal parameters of any linear structural system can be determined through an identification procedure [25]. The modal parameters characterizing a linear system are the critical damping, the natural frequency and the effective participation factor for each natural mode. In the case of nonlinear structural behaviour, a system identification procedure based on linear models is implemented, yielding estimates of the equivalent linear parameters. In particular, linearization techniques seek equivalent linear models using analytical procedures such as the error-in-the-equation criterion method [26,27]; Beck and Jennings [28] introduced the error in the output criteria method into the structural analysis while DiPasquale and Çakmak [19] used the maximum likelihood criteria method. More details on the calculation procedure of the damage indices described in Eqs. (4) and (5) implemented in this study can be found in [29].For the needs of a calibration procedure a significant number of experimental tests are required that will provide snapshots of the structural behaviour corresponding to different damage levels for a number of structural systems. In order to replace the experimental tests, which are expensive and cannot be performed for any structural system, the proposed calibration procedure is based on numerical experiments. The idea behind the proposed numerical calibration procedure is to correlate levels of visible damages with engineering demand parameters (EDPs) values (i.e. the damage indices considered). The levels of the visible damages considered in this study are based on the crack width openings observed in experimental tests found in the literature [30].For this purpose, the proposed numerical calibration procedure of the damage indices is based on the incremental dynamic analysis [21] procedure where Nincrnonlinear dynamic analyses are performed, each for a specific earthquake hazard level of increased intensity. For demonstration purposes the five damage indices described above, belonging to the category of maximum deformation and cumulative damage, are considered; while in order to implement the proposed numerical calibration procedure the level of the structural damage is associated with the crack width.The main objective of the IDA-based study is to define a correlation of the intensity level and the maximum seismic response of the structural system and it is represented with a curve. The intensity level and the seismic response are described through an intensity measure (IM) and an engineering demand parameter, respectively; while IDA is implemented through the following five steps: (i) define a reliable nonlinear finite element model for performing the required nonlinear dynamic analyses; (ii) select a suit of natural records; (iii) select the proper intensity measure and engineering demand parameter; (iv) employ a suitable algorithm for selecting the record scaling factor in order to obtain the IDA curve with the least required nonlinear dynamic analyses and (v) employ a post-processing technique for exploiting the multiple records results.Fig. 1depicts the calibration procedure, where the seismic demand used for calibrating the damage indices DIi(i=1,2,…,m) is defined with reference to the characterization of the damage state associated with respect to the crack openings (0.05cm, 0.1cm, 0.3cm and 0.4cm), without loss of generality of the proposed procedure. The crack openings are monitored at the beam–column joints (at the end of the structural elements). Furthermore, it should be noted that there are cases where the width of diagonal cracks is much more of a concern than the width of flexural cracks, for this reason both diagonal and flexural cracks are monitored. Although this approach (correlation of DIs with crack openings) can be considered as a simplistic one, it is employed in this study since the relation between the maximum crack openings and the level of damage can be found in the literature [30]. However, the distribution of the cracks, or more accurately, the distribution of the plastic strains within the structure can also be used.According to a recent work by Mitropoulou et al. [31] there are cases where more than 80 natural records are required in order to obtain a good estimation of the probabilistic characteristics of a response quantity. For the purpose of this study 100 natural records have been used, which are randomly selected from the four lists of records given in Tables 1–4. These records have been selected from the PEER [32] strong-motion database with the following features: (i) Events occurred in specific area (longitude −124° to −115°, latitude 32° to 41°). (ii) Moment magnitude (M) is equal to or greater than 5. (iii) Epicentral distance (R) is smaller than 150km. These records, according to step (iv) of IDA, are scaled into multiple hazard levels and the 16%, 50% and 84% fractile curves for each damage index are developed. In order to compare the observed structural damage (quantified in this study through the crack openings) with the values of the damage indices, 3D detailed modelling with solid finite elements is used.Performing IDA over a pool of 100 natural records with detailed finite element models requires extensive computational effort which is substantially reduced with the procedure presented in Fig. 1.(i)For each seismic intensity level of IDA the mean response spectrum of the 100 natural records is obtained.One artificial accelerogram is generated for each intensity level to be consistent with the corresponding mean response spectrum. This artificial accelerogram is implemented in the framework of IDA for defining the dynamic capacity curve (correlation pairs “SA(T1,5%)-crack width”). For the test examples considered in this study, a constant incremental step size of 0.05g is applied up to failure, resulting into 100–120 increments, in order to obtain the database of the “SA(T1,5%)-crack width” pairs uniformly distributed over the range of crack openings. Following this procedure the damage levels are correlated with the hazard levels.The correlation of the crack width with the values of the DIs for the 100 natural records is achieved with the IDA studies, performed for each DI implementing beam–column FE simulation of the structure.The statistical characteristics of the DIs are computed by means of horizontal statistics in conjunction with the maximum likelihood function method and an optimization algorithm. The statistical information necessary to understand and quantify the behaviour of structural systems can be presented in different formats depending upon the objective. For instance, if the issue is loss assessment, where it is important to evaluate the distribution, mean value and/or dispersion of a DI (or EDP) for a given IM, the “horizontal” statistics format is applied as the most appropriate one (Fig. 2). However, if the issue is conceptual design or fragility analysis, where the designer’s main objective is to find the global strength required to limit the value of a DI (or EDP) to a certain quality, then “vertical” statistics are the most suitable (Fig. 2). “Vertical” statistics are also used to quantify the ground motion intensity at which a system approaches a certain limit state. The terms “horizontal” and “vertical” presuppose that DIs (or EDPs) are plotted on the horizontal axis and IMs on the vertical axis. Since this study is concerned with the correlation of damage levels with response quantities, the most appropriate format is the “horizontal” statistics for the hazard levels in order to calculate the statistical parameters of the response quantities i.e. the DIs via the maximum likelihood function method and an optimization algorithm.The likelihood function in our implementation is expressed as follows:(6)L(μDI,σDI)=∏i=1NrecfSA,j(DIi,μDI,σDI)where the DIs are assumed to follow the lognormal distribution,fSA,jis the lognormal density function of the DI corresponding to the jth hazard level characterized with the first mode spectral acceleration value SA,jand Nrecis the total number of records considered. The two parameters μDIand σDIof Eq. (6) are computed as the values that maximize ln(L) by implementing a metaheuristic optimization algorithm [33].For verification purposes the experimental results of two simply supported beams named OA1 and A1 obtained from the study by Bresler and Scordelis [34] are used. The loading and instrumentation model are depicted in Fig. 3. The dimensions for both test beams are: b=30.5cm, h=55.2cm, d=45.7cm, L=410.0cm and span equal to 366.0cm. The bottom reinforcement for both beams is 2 M30 and 2 M25 bars. Additionally 3 M10 top reinforcing bars and D5/21.0cm stirrups are used for the A1 beam (see Fig. 4(a) and (b), respectively). The properties for the above mentioned reinforcing bars are provided in Table 5. The material properties for the concrete are: modulus of elasticity Ec=36.5GPa, compressive strength at 28days fc=22.6MPa. To prevent bond failure due to insufficient anchorage, the longitudinal reinforcement at the bottom was extended through the ends of the beam and anchored to steel end plates with anchor nuts.Both beams were subjected to monotonic centre-point loading, through a force-controlled loading procedure. Additional details regarding the test specimens and test results are provided by Bresler and Scordelis [34]. The Bresler–Scordelis beams were characterized by three different modes of damage: flexure–compression, shear–compression and diagonal–tension. The failures of diagonal tension were observed in the OA1 beam containing no shear reinforcement (see Fig. 5). For simulation purposes three-dimensional nonlinear finite elements were used for each of the two test beams (Fig. 6). The analyses were performed using the Atena3D software [35], where the embedded formulation is implemented. The original formulation presented by Phillips and Zienkiewicz [36] was modified to allow for a straight reinforcing bars segment to be placed at any angle with respect to the local axes of the isoparametric concrete finite elements. The observed load–deformation responses for the two test beams are provided in Fig. 7, where the behaviour obtained with the detailed models simulated with hexahedral finite elements is compared with the corresponding experimental results under the monotonic loading [34].For the purpose of this study two test examples are considered in order to implement the proposed procedure; one plane frame and one 3D RC framed structure. Both test examples are simulated with 3D solid finite elements (hexahedral finite elements) with embedded reinforcement for implementing step (ii) of the calibration procedure. For both test examples the following material properties are considered for the concrete: modulus of elasticity Ec=30.0GPa and characteristic compressive strength at 28days fcκ=25.0MPa (C25/30), while the material properties of the reinforcing steel are: nominal yield stress fyκ=500MPa (S500) and modulus of elasticity equal to 200GPa, while steel hardening was taken into account equal to 1.0%. The slab thickness for both test examples is equal to 18cm, the self-weight of the beams and the slab is taken equal to 24kN/m3, while a distributed dead load of 2kN/m2 due to floor finishing and partition walls is also considered. The live load is assumed to be equal to 1.5kN/m2 and for the load combination the dead and live loads are multiplied by 1.0 and 0.3, respectively.For the plane frame test example an effective area of 5×5m2 was considered in order to calculate the loads and masses on each floor, while the height of each storey is 3.5m and the bay length is 4.0m. The dimensions of the beams are 30×50cm2, with longitudinal reinforcement LR: 3Ø18 top and bottom, and transverse reinforcement TR: (2)Ø8/10cm. The dimensions of the columns are 50×50cm2 with longitudinal reinforcement LR: 8Ø22 and transverse reinforcement TR: (2)Ø8/20cm (see Fig. 8). Furthermore, Rayleigh damping is used for the first and the second mode (T1=0.448s, T2=0.313s and ξ1=ξ2=5.0%). For the numerical simulation of the concrete solid finite elements of size 10×10×10cm3 are used resulting into 4850 hexahedral finite elements with 7320 nodes and 21,960dof, while 4984 embedded strut elements with 4952 nodes and 29,712dof are used for modelling the steel reinforcement. The FE model for the concrete and the reinforcement is presented in Fig. 9along with the roof displacement–base shear nonlinear static curve.For the two storey 3D RC frame test example, the floor area is 5×5m2 and the height of each storey is 3.5m. The dimensions of the beams are 30×50cm2, with longitudinal reinforcement LR: 3Ø18 top and bottom, and transverse reinforcement TR: (2)Ø8/10cm. The dimensions of the columns are 50×50cm2 with longitudinal reinforcement LR: 12Ø22 and transverse reinforcement TR: (2)Ø8/20cm (see Fig. 10). Similar to the first test example, Rayleigh damping is used for the first and the second mode (T1=0.167s, T2=0.167s and ξ1=ξ2=5.0%). The numerical modelling is performed with solid finite elements of size 10×10×10cm3 for the concrete resulting into 12,400 hexahedral finite elements with 19,056 nodes and 57,168dof, while 13,280 embedded strut elements with 13,120 nodes and 78,720dof are used for modelling the steel reinforcement. The detailed FE mesh and the steel reinforcement of the two test example along with the roof displacement–base shear nonlinear static curves are shown in Fig. 11.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
