@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A surface charge simulation method based on advanced numerical integration

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An advanced method for computation of electric field intensity is presented.Subparametric spatial 2D finite elements are developed.Expressions for self and mutual coefficients of 2D finite element nodes are derived.The problem of singularity is solved using advanced double 2D numerical integration.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Surface charge simulation method,Advanced numerical integration,Gaussian quadrature,Subparametric spatial 2D finite element,Subparametric mapping,Electric field computation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Numerical models for computing low-frequency electromagnetic fields can contain spatial 2D finite elements, which are numerically most demanding due to problem of singularity. In this paper, an advanced time-harmonic quasistatic surface charge simulation method for computation of scalar electric potential and electric field intensity distribution is presented. Subparametric spatial 2D finite elements with an arbitrary number of nodes for description of surface charge density distribution are developed. The problem of singularity that occurs in the double 2D integration over these elements is solved using an originally developed advanced numerical integration based on 2D Gaussian quadrature. Self and mutual coefficients of spatial 2D finite element nodes are numerically computed and included in the system of linear equations for surface charge density distribution computation. The accuracy of the computer program, based on the presented model, is shown in the chosen numerical example with known analytical solution. Numerical model and advanced integration presented herein could be easily extended to non-homogeneous regions and multilayer problems using the image method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
High voltage air-insulated switchyards, substations and power lines feature complex three-dimensional (3D) layout of metallic conductors. Large time-harmonic currents and charges cause low-frequency (50/60Hz) electromagnetic fields, wherein electric field intensity in their vicinity can exceed reference values prescribed by ICNIRP guidelines [1].In numerical models for computing low-frequency electromagnetic fields, the problem can be considered as quasistatic [2–5]. Quasistatic fields vary slowly with time and therefore, attenuation and phase shift of these fields can be neglected. Numerical algorithms for computing electromagnetic fields in electric power substations are 3D algorithms [5–9]. Numerical algorithms for computing overhead power line electromagnetic fields are mostly two-dimensional (2D) [10,11], although in a certain number of real cases more sophisticated 3D algorithms can be taken into account [12,13].Applied methodologies for computing low-frequency electromagnetic fields range from the method of moments (MOM) [14], finite-difference time-domain method (FDTD) [15,16], finite element method (FEM) [17], boundary element method (BEM) [18], charge simulation method (CSM) [19,20], surface charge simulation method (SCSM) [21], to name a few. Theoretical basis of each method, its advantages and limitations in comparison with other solution techniques are well-known [22].In a wider time-harmonic quasistatic surface charge method for computing low-frequency electromagnetic fields of power lines and substations [23], thin-wire cylindrical segments of active and passive conductors, conductive metallic spheres and spatial 2D finite elements are included and all of these components are capacitively coupled. The foundation of the developed method is application of finite element technique to an integral equation formulation in the frequency domain. In this paper, time-harmonic quasistatic charge simulation method [23] is reduced to surface charge simulation method, i.e. to use of spatial 2D subparametric finite elements. Spatial 2D finite elements are numerically most demanding due to problem of singularity which occurs in the double 2D integration when they are taken into consideration [24,25]. Therefore, in this paper, discussion is limited only to these elements. Hence, subparametric spatial 2D finite elements, with an arbitrary number of nodes for a description of surface charge density distribution, are developed. Expressions for self and mutual coefficients of these spatial 2D finite element nodes are derived using the Galerkin–Bubnov method, which gives symmetric system of linear equations. The problem of singularity that occurs in the double 2D integration over spatial 2D finite elements is successfully solved using originally developed advanced algorithm for double 2D numerical integration based on Gaussian quadrature. In the numerical example, due to simplicity, existence of analytical solutions and comparability, equipotential circular metal plate in a homogeneous unbounded dielectric medium (air) is chosen. It is therefore a good example to verify the accuracy of the algorithm developed in this paper, focusing on the accuracy of the advanced double 2D numerical integration over spatial 2D finite elements. Presented algorithm is developed for AC fields, but can be easily reduced to DC fields if phasors of all input data have phase angles equal to zero.In the finite element terminology, some conductive passive parts of electrical substations and towers of overhead power lines can be described by spatial 2D finite elements. In Fig. 1, spatial 2D finite element with 9 nodes for geometry mapping and 25 nodes for numerical approximation of the surface charge density distribution is shown.In this model, for geometry mapping of spatial 2D finite element, a quadrilateral reference 2D finite element with four, eight or nine nodes can be used. There are no limitations for the geometrical shape, which can be arbitrary, and only suitable number of nodes has to be chosen. In the Fig. 2, quadrilateral reference 2D finite element with eight nodes for geometry mapping is shown. Furthermore, the surface charge density distribution over the quadrilateral reference 2D finite element is described by linear combination of shape functions joined to the element nodes. Number of nodes is arbitrary and coefficients of the linear combination are potentials of element nodes. In the developed model, there are more nodes for approximation of the surface charge density distribution than nodes for geometry mapping, thus the spatial 2D finite elements are subparametric.Mapping functions of the quadrilateral reference 2D finite element with four, eight or nine nodes are equal to product of 1D Lagrange polynomials or serendipity polynomials for each coordinate axis in the local coordinate system (u,v) [26,27]. Partial derivatives of these functions along local axes can be obtained easily. In the special case, quadrilateral reference 2D finite element can be mapped into a triangular finite element (Fig. 3).Numerical approximation of the surface charge density distribution over a reference 2D finite element can be written as:(1)σ¯=∑q=1NCNq·σ¯qwhere NC is a total number of the reference 2D finite element local nodes, Nqis the shape function joined to the q-th local node of the reference 2D finite element andσ¯qis the phasor of the surface charge density of the q-th local node.Shape function joined to the q-th local node can be written as:(2)Nq=∏k=1k≠cuNUu-ukucu-uk·∏k=1k≠cvNVv-vkvcv-vk;q=1,2,…,NCq=(cv-1)·NU+cu;cu=1,…,NU;cv=1,…,NVwhere NU is a total number of nodes along the local u-axis, NV is a total number of nodes along the local v-axis, u∊[−1,1] and v∊[−1,1] are local coordinates of the reference 2D finite element, whereas ukand vkdenote local coordinates of the k-th node along u- and v-axes, respectively.Hence, the total number of nodes of a reference 2D finite element for numerical approximation of the surface charge density distribution is given by:(3)NC=NU·NVQuadrilateral reference 2D finite element with 5 nodes along local axes u and v, i.e. with total 25 local nodes for numerical approximation of the surface charge density distribution is shown in Fig. 4.Using the Galerkin–Bubnov method, which is a special case of weighted residual method, symmetric system of linear equations for computation of surface charge density of global nodes can be obtained from the following expression:(4)∬Si(φ¯-Φ¯i)·Npi·dSi=0;i=1,...,NP;p=1,...,NCiwhereφ¯is a phasor of the computed value of the scalar electric potential, Siis a surface of the i-th spatial 2D finite element,Φ¯iis a phasor of the prescribed potential on i-th spatial 2D finite element which is assumed to be constant,Npiis a shape function joined to the p-th local node of the i-th spatial 2D finite element, NP is a total number of the spatial 2D finite elements and NCiis a total number of local nodes of the i-th spatial 2D finite element.Continuity of the surface charge density at the spatial 2D finite element boundaries is not required. Consequently, local nodes of different spatial 2D finite elements cannot be joined to the same global node. For each subparametric spatial 2D finite element, global coordinates of local nodes for geometry mapping are input data. In such a way spatial 2D finite element mesh is defined. According to usual procedure, using nodal connectivity matrix each spatial 2D finite element local node is shown to correspond to some global node number.A two-layer medium is observed in which the first layer (half-space) is air and the second layer is homogeneous earth. Air is characterized by vacuum permittivity ɛ0 and permeability μ0, whereas earth is characterized by relative permittivity ɛr, permeability μ0 and electrical conductivity κ.By adopting limitation that the surface charge is placed on the surfaces of NP spatial 2D finite elements (i.e. surfaces), scalar electric potential distribution at the arbitrary field point T (x, y, z) in the air of the observed two-layer medium can be written as:(5)φ¯=∑j=1NP14·π·ε0·∬Sjσ¯j·1Rj+k¯rRjs·dSjwhere Sjis a surface of the j-th spatial 2D finite element, Rjis the distance between the field point and a source point,Rjsis the distance between the field point and a source image point, whereask¯ris the reflection coefficient. Boundary conditions are potentials of spatial 2D finite elements, zero potential of earth surface and zero potential at infinity.In order to compute scalar electric potential and consequently electric field intensity, effect of the earth’s surface is taken into account using the reflection coefficientk¯rderived for a point current source [28,29]. This effect can be expressed as follows:(6)k¯r=j·2·π·f·ε0-(κ+j·2·π·f·ε0·εr)j·2·π·f·ε0+(κ+j·2·π·f·ε0·εr)For power line frequencies, as a consequence of assumption that the earth conductivity is infinite, this factor can be approximated to high accuracy by:(7)k¯r≈-1Using the image method, both the spatial 2D finite element and its image contribute to the scalar electric potential in the air.In the numerical implementation of Eq. (5), scalar electric potential caused by j-th spatial 2D finite element surface charge density (Fig. 5) can be computed from:(8)φ¯j=∑q=1NCjσ¯qj4·π·ε0·∬Sj1Rj+k¯rRjs·Nqj·dSjwhere NCjis a total number of j-th spatial 2D finite element local nodes,σ¯qjis the phasor of the surface charge density joined to the q-th local node of the j-th spatial 2D finite element,Nqjis a shape function joined to the q-th local node of the j-th spatial 2D finite element.In Eq. (8), integration over the surface image of the j-th spatial 2D finite element is transformed to integration over the surface of the j-th spatial 2D finite element. Double 2D integral over the j-th spatial 2D finite element described by Eq. (8) is solved using an advanced double 2D Gaussian quadrature algorithm, which is a special case of numerical procedure explained in Appendix A.Self and mutual coefficients of the p-th local node of the i-th spatial 2D finite element and q-th local node of the j-th spatial 2D finite element (Fig. 6) can be obtained from the following expression:(9)PCC‾pqij=14·π·ε0∬Si∬Sj1Rij+k¯rRijs·Npi·Nqj·dSi·dSj≡PCC‾qpjiwhere Rijis the distance between points of the i-th and j-th spatial 2D finite element, whereasRijsis the distance between point that belongs to the i-th spatial 2D finite element and point that belong to the image of the j-th spatial 2D finite element.Symmetric system of linear equations for computation of the surface charge density of global nodes obtained using Eq. (4), in matrix form can be written as:(10)[PCC‾]·{σ¯}={Ψ¯}where[PCC‾]is a matrix of the self and mutual coefficients joined to the nodes of the spatial 2D finite elements,{σ¯}is a global surface charge density vector, whereasright-hand side vector{Ψ¯}is described by the following expression:(11)Ψ¯=Φ¯1∬S1N1·dS1⋮Φ¯NP·∬SNPNNP·dSNPTwo local nodes may belong to different spatial 2D finite elements or to the same spatial 2D finite element. Their self and mutual coefficients can be numerically computed by solving double 2D integrals from Eq. (9). In this paper, these integrals are solved using an advanced double 2D Gaussian quadrature algorithm, described in detail in Appendices. Procedure explained in Appendix A refers to the case when local nodes belong to different spatial 2D finite elements, whereas procedure from Appendix B refers to the case when local nodes belong to the same spatial 2D finite element.Numerical approximation of the electric field complex vector at the arbitrary field point T (x, y, z) in the air of the observed two-layer medium can be written as:(12)E→̲={E‾x,E‾y,E‾z}=-∇φ¯whereE¯x,E¯yandE¯zare x-, y- and z-axis phasor components of the electric field intensity.According to Eqs. (8) and (12), electric field intensity distribution of the NP spatial 2D finite elements at the arbitrary field point T(x, y, z) in the air of two-layer medium can be computed using the following expression:(13)E→̲=∑j=1NP∑q=1NCjσ¯qj4·π·ε0·∬SjR→jRj3+k¯r·R→jsRjs3·Nqj·dSjwhereR→jis the distance vector directed from the j-th spatial 2D finite element to the field point, whereasR→jsis the distance vector directed from the image of the j-th spatial 2D finite element to the field point.Using an advanced double 2D Gaussian quadrature algorithm, described in Appendix A, double 2D integral in Eq. (13) over the j-th spatial 2D finite element can be written as:(14)∬SjR→jRj3+k¯r·R→jsRjs3·Nqj·dSj=∫-11∫-11R→jRj3+k¯r·R→jsRjs3·Nqj·Gj·du·dv=∑id=1ND∑gu=1NGT∑gv=1NGTR→jRj3+k¯r·R→jsRjs3·Nqj·Gju=iduguv=idvgv·idHgu·idHgvFinally, the total effective (rms) value (phasor magnitude) of the electric field intensity at the field point T (x, y, z) can be computed using the following expression:(15)E=|E‾x|2+|E‾y|2+|E‾z|2On the basis of the presented theory, a FORTRAN program for computation of the rms values of the scalar electric potential and electric field intensity distribution was developed.In this numerical example, a thin equipotential circular metal plate of radius a=2.5m, at the potential of 1kV in homogeneous unbounded dielectric medium is observed (Fig. 7).If the metal plate is observed in the two-layer medium, the image method has to be applied, but then analytical solution does not exist. Therefore, this example is convenient to verify the accuracy of the computer program based on proposed algorithm for approximation of equipotential surfaces using subparametric spatial 2D finite elements, i.e. to verify accuracy of the advanced double 2D numerical integration over spatial 2D finite elements.The entire model is presented in thesis [23], where two-layer medium is observed, and also, elements of the more complicated geometry are taken in consideration. In [23], e.g. towers of the overhead power lines are approximated using thin-wire cylindrical segments of passive conductors and also using subparametric spatial 2D finite elements.Observed metal plate will be approximated by different number of subparametric spatial 2D finite elements and by different number of local nodes for numerical approximation of the surface charge density distribution. Scalar electric potential and electric field intensity distribution of the circular metal plate will be computed in the arbitrary number of points along a straight line in the vicinity of the metal plate. Moreover, normalized surface charge density distribution on both sides of metal plate will be presented and compared to known analytical solution.For this case, it is convenient to use cylindrical coordinate system (r, z) due to the fact that the scalar electric potential is cylindrically symmetrical with respect to the z-axis. Scalar electric potential distribution caused by a surface chargeQ¯of a circular equipotential metal plate can be written as [30–32]:(16)φ¯=Q¯j·8·π·a·ε0·ℓnr2+(|z|+j·a)2+|z|+j·ar2+(|z|-j·a)2+|z|-j·awhere the potential of a circular metal plate is given by:(17)Φ¯pl=Q‾8·a·ε0By substituting Eqs. (17) into (16), according to [31], one can express the scalar electric potential distribution with:(18)φ¯=2·Φ¯plπ·tan-1aαwhere(19)α=A+A2+4·a2·z22(20)A=r2+z2-a2Finally, a phasor of the total surface charge density on both sides of the metal plate is described by the following expression:(21)σ¯=4·Φ¯pl·ε0π·a2-r2Phasors of the electric field intensity r- and z-components in the cylindrical coordinate system can be written as:(22)E‾r=-∂φ¯∂r=Φ¯plπ·aa2+α2·rα·1+AA2+4·a2·z2(23)E‾z=-∂φ¯∂z=Φ¯plπ·aa2+α2·zα·1+A+2·a2A2+4·a2·z2The observed circular metal plate is approximated by four subparametric spatial 2D finite elements (Fig. 8left). For geometry mapping of each finite element, eight nodes were chosen and total number of local nodes for numerical approximation of the surface charge density distribution along local axes is NU=NV=5.Circular metal plate can also be approximated by a single subparametric spatial 2D finite element (Fig. 8 right) with eight nodes for geometry mapping.Surface charge density distribution tends to infinity on the edge of a circular metal plate, which significantly complicates their high accurate numerical approximation and, consequently, the electric field intensity distribution. Normalized surface charge density distribution on both sides of the metal plate, according to Eq. (21), with regard to analytical solution is presented in Fig. 9. Metal plate is approximated, according to Fig. 8, by a single and by four subparametric spatial 2D finite elements with 5 nodes along local axes u and v, i.e. with total 25 local nodes for numerical approximation of the surface charge density distribution.Fig. 10presents the comparison of numerical and analytical rms values of the scalar electric potential distribution along the observation profile r parallel to the metal plate, approximated, according to Fig. 8, by a single and by four subparametric spatial 2D finite elements, starting from the center of the plate up to a distance r=5m from the center.Fig. 11presents the comparison of numerical and analytical rms values of the scalar electric potential distribution along the observation profile r parallel to the metal plate, approximated by four subparametric spatial 2D finite elements (Fig. 8 left), starting from the center of the plate up to a distance r=10m from the center. Results of the scalar electric potential distribution are shown for three cases, on the surface of the plate (z=0m) and at the distances z=0.5m and z=1m from the surface of the plate along the observation profile r.By comparing obtained results of the scalar electric potential distribution shown in Figs. 10 and 11, very good agreement can be seen between the proposed model and the exact analytical results, even on the surface of the plate and in the case of the plate discretization by only a single subparametric spatial 2D finite element.Figs. 12–14present comparisons of numerical and analytical rms values of r- and z-components and total electric field intensity distribution along the observation profile r parallel to the metal plate, at the distances z=0.5m and z=1m from the surface of the plate.In the numerical approximation of the surface charge density distribution, infinite value is not possible, and, therefore, in Figs. 12–14, it can be seen a deviation between numerical and analytical results of the electric field intensity distribution in the close vicinity of the plate surface. It should be emphasized here that in practical problems results of the electric field intensity distribution are commonly observed at the distances of at least 0.5m from the surface of the plate (or surface of any passive conductive component in the substation). At these distances, error is negligible.Normalized surface charge density distribution on both sides of the metal plate, with different number of local nodes for numerical approximation of the surface charge density distribution along local axes, according to Eq. (21), with regard to analytical solution is presented in Fig. 15.In the Table 1, percent errors (p.e.) of r- and z-components and percent errors of total electric field intensity distributions along the observation profile with respect to analytical solutions were shown. These errors are obtained with regard to different number of local nodes for numerical approximation of the surface charge density distribution.As can be clearly seen from Fig. 15 and Table 1, the lowest percent error (i.e. the highest accuracy of the numerical approximation) occurs in the case with 5 nodes along local axes u and v, i.e. with total 25 local nodes for numerical approximation of the surface charge density distribution. The largest error of electric field intensity is at r=2.2m, where computed value is 389.50V/m, whereas the analytical solution is 361.12V/m, so percent error is 7.86%. Further increasing the number of nodes has no influence to computational cost but generates greater error, which was also confirmed in the examples of the overhead power line towers approximation, shown in [23]. Therefore, the optimal total number of nodes for numerical approximation of the surface charge density distribution is 25.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
