@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Defect identification in friction stir welding using discrete wavelet analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Detection of fault occurred during friction stir welding.Analyzed using discrete wavelet transform on force and torque signals.Provides plot of frequency spectra vs. time with varying resolution.Variance and square of errors of detail coefficients of transformed signal are obtained to localize the defected zone.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Discrete wavelet transform,Friction stir welding,Weld defect,Force signal,Torque signal,Variance,Square of errors,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This article discusses on the detection of fault occurred during friction stir welding using discrete wavelet transform on force and torque signals. The work pieces used were AA1100 aluminum alloys of thickness 2.5mm. The plates were 200mm in length and 80mm in width. Presence of defect in welding causes sudden change in force signals (Z-load), thus it is easier to detect such abrupt changes in a signal using discrete wavelet transform. Statistical features like variance and square of errors of detail coefficients are implemented to localize the defective zone properly as it shows better variations (in defective area) than the detail coefficient itself.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The friction stir welding (FSW) is comparatively new welding technology. It is a solid state welding process, invented by The Welding Institute (TWI) in 1991 [1]. This process is simple, environment friendly, energy efficient and has become most prominent area for automobile, aircraft, and aerospace industries. The FSW joints have high strength as near as to the base metal. It helps in considerable weight savings compared to other joining processes. In contrast to other welding process, there is no liquid state for the weld pool during FSW; the temperature rise in the FSW is nearly 0.5–0.6 times the melting temperature of the metal. Thus, most of the problems related to the solidification of a fused material are avoided [2]. Due to stirring action of the FSW tool, the material at the nearby edges gets transformed into plastic stage. The material flows plastically to fuse and a friction stirred weld is formed after solidification.Several researchers have worked on measurement of forces in FSW process. Mandal et al. [3] measured the axial force while attempting welding of AA2024. They observed that there is a high rise in axial force when plunges into work piece. This further increases when the shoulder makes contact with the work piece. Thereafter, when the tool advances, the axial force comes down and becomes stagnant. Several systems have been reported to measure the tool torque, traverse force and axial force during FSW process. The traditional load cells were used to measure the tangential load and tool torque while welding on the aluminum alloy sheets [4]. Cui et al. [5] used a specially designed low stir device to measure the tool torque, and developed a model correlating the tool torque with the tool rotation speed and welding speed. Kumar et al. [6] used load cells to measure the axial force and traverse force, and the tool power was measured by measuring the spindle motor current. Trimble et al. [7] used the rotating component dynamometer to measure the torque and the forces along the X, Y and Z directions. Pew et al. [8] measured the tool torque by monitoring the motor torque output. The methodology proposed by Mehta et al. [9] could also be employed to measure the torque and axial force from the electrical power and current usage by the FSW machine. It looks more compact and cheap in terms of indirect monitoring of tool torque and forces during FSW process. Su et al. [10] also measured tool torque, traverse force and axial force during FSW process as they were very important to understand process mechanism and the optimization of the process parameters. They concluded that higher is the tool rotation speed, lower is the tool torque, while the impudence of the welding speed on the tool torque is negligible. The higher is the tool rotation speed, larger is the traverse force. The axial force is significantly larger than the traverse force. Rose et al. [11] performed the FSW of AZ61A magnesium alloy. They determined the effect of the welding force (varying from 3kN to 7kN) on the mechanical properties of the FS joints. They concluded that in comparison to others, the FS weld joint produced by 5kN axial force had good mechanical properties. The reason may be because of the grain refinement with finer size and higher hardness in the stirred zone. Kumar et al. [6] studied about process parameters in AA5083 friction stir welds. They proposed that axial thrust (Z-force) largely depends on tool diameter, rotational speed and welding speed. X-force is mostly influenced by the welding speed, pin diameter and interaction of tool diameter and rotational speed.Chen et al. [14] studied about formation of defects in FSW of 5456 aluminum alloy especially at weld nugget zone by varying the tool tilt angle. They demonstrated that tool tilt angle, an important parameter to obtain defect free weld. Tool tilt angle has an essential influence on the heat input into the material and the position of the defects in the weld. At low tilt angle flash formation occurs at retreating side. Further at large tool tilt angle a channel type defect is observed in the weld zone. Some other researchers also studied about the weld defect in FSW and proposed that geometric parameters had a wide role in formation of defect free welds [15,16].Ramulu et al. [17] studied on optimization of process parameters to obtain a defect free weld and they developed a criterion of variation of force and torque with process parameters to predict a defect free weld from a defected weld. Their work did not focus on signal processing techniques and thus they have to depend on human observation for defect detection for different process parameters. This tends to produce the errors as they are considering the weld as defected or defect free just by observation. Macias et al. [18] studied vibro-acoustic signals generated from FSW and implemented statistical tools on the original signal and detail coefficients of the wavelet transform of signal. They extracted these features from acoustic signal to train their neural model to predict process parameters. They applied these statistical features in their model and predicted tool rpm, tool profile, travel speed and tensile strength. This article focuses on wavelet analysis of force signals for localization of different kind of defects which arise due to various reasons. Chen et al. [13] studied the acoustic signals generated in friction stir welding to analyze the induced gap defects. They applied wavelet transform on acoustic signals and then found the energy bands over different regions. They showed sudden change in band energy when tool traverses over defected regions. The acoustic emissions are generated because of mechanical stresses caused due to deformation of materials but it is very difficult to identify irrelevant emissions which are caused due to internal or external stresses. The extraction of valuable features out of acoustic signals is very difficult which was also discussed in their article. Chen et al. [13] showed band energies of decomposed signals as one of the feature for defect analysis. They showed the presence of sudden changes in signal but those changes can also correspond to some other stresses as well as they have not shown the exact location of defects. Soundararajan et al. [19] showed that acoustic emissions produced are time variant only during plunge phase but is steady during welding. They have applied FFT, STFT, and wavelet transforms on signals but found difficult to correlate the frequency of the signal directly to various interactions that occur during the process. Only the frequency corresponding to loss of contact between the tool and work piece was observed. They showed the effect of variation of different parameters on acoustic signals. The exact positions of defects were not localized. Kleiner and Bird [12] studied about the usage of signal processing in FSW for weld quality determination. They proposed a mathematical model to compare the noise level in the weld. They inspected quality of weld to determine whether weld has been forged properly or not.Available literatures showed mostly the study of signals for defect localization on acoustic signals, and a very few works have been done on processing of force signals particularly to localize the defects during welding. The work presented in this article focuses the study of force signals using discrete wavelet transform and then implementation of statistical tools like square of errors to exactly localize those defects. This work has an advantage that all kind of defects can be found and the exact positions of even small defects are localized which is sometimes not visible by bare eyes. These defects affect the strength of weld.The work pieces used in this research work were AA1100 aluminum alloys of the thickness 2.5mm. The chemical composition of AA1100 is given in Table 1. The plates were 200mm in length and 80mm in width. Tool and fixture used are made of hardened steel and H13 Steel respectively. The tool shoulder was made flat having 16mm diameter. The pin used was of straight cylindrical shaped, with a diameter of 5mm and a height of 2.1mm. The welding parameters used in this research work are as follows: rotational speed 500rpm, 1000rpm and 3000rpm on a single weld for two halves, welding speed 50mm/min and 75mm/min and a 0° tool tilt angle. The plunge depth was kept constant of 0.05mm.The experiments were conducted on a 2.0ton FSW NC machine manufactured by ETA Technology Pvt. Ltd., India. The machine consists of load cell which is able to measure the forces along Z direction. Servo motor has been used to drive the worktable along X-axis. Z-axis vertical motion of the tool is controlled by servo hydraulic cylinder. A three-phase AC induction motor is installed to drive the main spindle and tool rotation. (During FS welding, the output parameters in terms of forces along Z direction is plotted on the computer screen attached to the machine by the internal correlations of the electrical parameters and recorded in real-time.) The machine is also equipped with industrial PLC based control system with industrial PC and LabView software for real time data acquisition.The concept of wavelet was given by geophysicist Jean Morlet in 1981. In 1984, Morlet and a physicist Alex Grossman invented the term wavelet. Wavelet transform is based on small wavelets with limited time duration. The concerned localization is done by translation of wavelets. The scaled version of wavelet allows the study of wavelets in different scales i.e. frequency ranges [21].The weld materials obtained after FSW process have some surface defects on it. The severity of the defects may vary due to which some may be visible by bare eyes or some may not be. So, processing of force signal comes into picture which detects the presence of defects and localizes those defects. The force signals generated are non-stationary signals. To extract better features from a signal, visualization of the signal in frequency domain is necessary. Fourier transforms cannot help to localize the different frequency components present in signal with time in case of non-stationary signal. Short Time Fourier Transform (STFT) localizes the frequency components with respect to time by windowing technique but the frequency–time resolution is fixed. Thus the application of wavelet transform is necessary to study the occurrence of defects during welding. Also due to the presence of defects, force signal undergoes a sudden change or discontinuity in a signal and it is quite easier to detect these changes using wavelet transform.Discrete wavelet transform (DWT) is a relatively new technique which represents any signal in time–frequency domain. Most of the practical signals which exist are non-stationary i.e. frequency components present in signal varies with time. So the existing techniques for analyzing signal in frequency domain such as Fourier Transform are inappropriate as they only tell about the frequency components present in signal and not about the localization of those frequency components. DWT serves this purpose [21].DWT is a transformation technique in which wavelets are discretely sampled. The computation of DWT is done by passing the signal through filter banks containing low pass filters with impulse response g(n) and high pass filters with impulse response h(n). The outputs from the high pass filters give the detail coefficients and those from low pass filters give the approximate coefficients as shown in Fig. 1. These coefficient values are the convolution of signal with the impulse response of filters [21].Here, after passing the signal through high pass filters and low pass filters, these are down sampled by 2 as to remove the redundancy. Now in order to increase the frequency resolution these filters are cascaded and the output from low pass filter is further decomposed with another high and low pass filters forming a filter bank tree, as shown in Fig. 2.Here, in this case the signal is decomposed to three levels of detail coefficients and lowest frequency approximate coefficient, as shown in Fig. 2. Also in each level the frequency is halved thus increasing its resolution. Discrete wavelet transform detects sudden changes well, because it transforms an original time series data into two types of wavelet coefficients i.e. approximate and detail coefficient as discussed above. Approximate coefficients capture rough features that estimate original data, while detail wavelet coefficient capture the detail features that describe frequent movement of data. Investigation of detail coefficient is done to detect sudden changes, peaks or spikes in signal.The computation of wavelet coefficients of discrete set of child wavelets for a given mother wavelet is done by shifting and scaling the mother wavelet by a powers of 2 as shown in Eq. (1)[20],(1)Ψ(t)=12jΨt-k·2j2jwhere Ψ(t) is the mother wavelet, j is the scale parameter and k is the shift parameter.Now the wavelet coefficient is given by formula shown in Eq. (2)[20],(2)ϒ=∫-∞∞x(t)12jΨt-k·2j2jdtwhere Ψ(t) is the mother wavelet, x(t) is the input signal, j is the scale parameter and k is the shift parameter.Here, the wavelet coefficient can be interpreted as the convolution of original signal with dilated, reflected and normalized mother wavelet, sampled at points 1, 2j, 22j,…,2Nj(signal having length N). Hence the detail coefficients of a filter bank correspond to a wavelet coefficients of a discrete set of child wavelets for a given mother wavelet.•Mean: It is the average of data sets. Let x1,x2,x3,…,xnbe a set of data, the mean (xm) is then defined asxm=x1+x2+x3+⋯+xnn.Square of error: It is the square of the difference of each value from its mean which is generally called as error. Let x1,x2,x3,…,xnbe a set of data with mean value (xm), then square of error is given by (x1−xm)2, (x2−xm)2, (x3−xm)2, etc.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
