@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-objective optimization of double suction centrifugal pump using Kriging metamodels

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
New multi-objective optimization method for the design of centrifugal pumps.The proposed method provides an effective way to improve pump performance.A robust design method is developed to select the final pump design point.Not only focus on the investigation of new optimisation methodologies.But also the development and application to some practical engineering problems.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi-objective optimization,Double suction,Centrifugal pumps,Kriging,Metamodel,Robust design,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper proposes a new multi-objective optimization method for a family of double suction centrifugal pumps with various blade shapes, using a Simulation-Kriging model-Experiment (SKE) approach. The Kriging metamodel is established to approximate the characteristic performance functions of a pump, namely, the efficiency and required net positive suction head (NPSHr). Hence, the two objectives are to maximize the efficiency and simultaneously to minimize NPSHr. The Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II (NSGA II) and Multi-Objective Evolutionary Algorithm based on Decomposition (MOEA/D) have been applied to the multi-objective optimization problem, respectively. The Pareto solution set is obtained by a more effective and efficient manner of the two multi-objective optimization algorithms. A tradeoff optimal design point is selected from the Pareto solution set by means of a robust design based on Monte Carlo simulations, and the optimal solution is further compared with the value of the physical prototype test. The results show that the solution of the proposed multi-objective optimization method is in line with the experiment test.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Centrifugal pumps are turbomachines used for transporting liquids by raising a specified volume flow to a specified pressure level [1]. Among all kinds of them, the double suction centrifugal pumps are widely used in industry for various applications due to large flux and high lift. Centrifugal pumps with high efficiency and good cavitation behavior can produce considerable economic benefit. Most current design and optimization methods for centrifugal pumps adopt trial-and-error methods to construct and test physical prototypes, which are usually high cost and time-consuming [2]. Since the majority of the market and the medium flowing through centrifugal pumps is water or oil but not air, the increment of one percent of the efficiency is of utmost significance [3]. Hence, many researchers focus on improving pump efficiency by optimizing shapes of impeller blades.Anagnostopoulos [4] investigated the characteristic curves of centrifugal pumps using CFD software. The objective was to find the impeller geometry that can maximize the pump efficiency among a set of blade angles. Derakhshan et al. [5] used incomplete sensitivities and genetic algorithms to obtain a higher efficiency by re-designing the shape of impeller blades. These studies only dealt with the design of centrifugal pump as a single objective optimization problem that has been considered so far in the literature [6]. As a matter of fact, the optimization of double suction centrifugal pumps is indeed a multi-objective optimization problem with multiple design requirements.Multi-objective optimization is a numerical process of optimizing a collection of individual objective functions simultaneously [7]. Marler and Arora [8] reviewed different categories of multi-objective optimization methods and discussed their diverse applications in engineering. Shan and Wang [9] developed the Pareto Set Pursuing (PSP) method, which was especially suitable for multi-objective optimization problems involving computation-intensive black-box functions. Liu et al. [10] proposed a multi-objective optimization method based on an approximation model, and used the trust region move limits updating strategy to guarantee the accuracy of the approximation. Lin et al. [11] proposed an improved physical programming method, which was more effective and efficient to achieve multi-objective optimization design of structures. Kaveh and Laknejadi [12] presented a multi-objective optimization method and its application in structural optimization problems.As aforementioned, the efficiency (η) and NPSHr are two important characteristic parameters that are required to be optimized for double suction centrifugal pumps, simultaneously. In practical design, the objective η needs to be maximized while the other objective NPSHr is required to be minimized. However, there is a conflict between the two different objectives, because it is practically impossible for these two objectives to be optimized at the same time. There are often two methods to obtain these two characteristic parameters: experiment tests and CFD simulations. However, the obtained results neither by experiments nor by CFD simulations can be used to optimize the performance of pumps iteratively, unless appropriate metamodels are built between the design parameters and the concerned objective functions.Metamodel is an approximation of the Input/Output (I/O) function that is implied by the underlying simulation model [13]. Compared to other optimization approaches, the metamodel-based optimization can investigate the behavior of the response function more efficiently since the advantage of cheap computational cost. A review of metamodels in the optimization applications of structures can be found in the literature [14]. Furthermore, metamodeling techniques have been extensively applied in multi-objective optimization of turbo machines and other fields, such as response surface methodology [15–17], artificial neural network [18–20] and radial basis function [21–23]. Safikhani et al. [24] presented a multi-objective optimization method for centrifugal pumps, in which the Pareto optimal solutions were obtained using the genetic algorithm based on neural network metamodels. Nourbakhsh et al. [6] used a particle swarm optimization method and NSGA II algorithm with a neural network metamodel to find the Pareto front of two conflict objectives of centrifugal pumps: efficiency and NPSHr. In contrast to these applications mentioned above, the Kriging metamodels rarely appeared in the literatures in the design of centrifugal pumps.Kriging metamodel [13], also called the spatial correlation metamodel, was originally developed in geostatistics by the South African mining engineer name Daniel Gerhardus Krige. A Kriging model may give an optimal unbiased prediction for the unknown response points [25], which is a remarkable trait different from other metamodels. Simpson et al. [26] presented a real application of Kriging models in aerospace engineering. Wang et al. [27] used Kriging metamodels for solving the engineering optimization problem with higher nonlinear. Li et al. [28] proposed an interval uncertain multi-objective optimization method based on an adaptive Kriging metamodel. Compared to traditionally RSMs, Kriging metamodels show advantages in high dimensional nonlinear problems and prediction accuracy since its stochastic assumption [29]. Zakerifar et al. [30] showed the superiority of Kriging metamodels over RSMs especially for multiple-objective optimization problems, and concluded that Kriging method gave a more accurate prediction.This study will optimize the efficiency and cavitation performances of centrifugal pumps, which are two key performance targets that are two conflicting objective functions in the optimization. Therefore, a powerful multi-objective optimization algorithm is needed in order to obtain an appropriate non-inferior design point and the whole set of Pareto solutions. The most successful and widely used approaches to find the Pareto solution set seem to be evolutionary algorithms [9]. Hence, NSGA II and MOEA/D have been employed to solve the proposed multi-objective optimization problem, respectively. NSGA II is one of the most popular evolutionary multi-objective optimization algorithms for the design of mechanical and structural problems. It is characterized by fast non-dominated sorting approach and simple crowded comparison operator [31]. MOEA/D is a recently developed multi-objective optimization algorithm [32]. It decomposes a multi-objective optimization problem into a number of scalar sub-optimization problems to optimize them at the same time. The main characteristic feature of MOEA/D is that the scalarizing functions with uniformly-distributed weight vectors are used in the algorithm. More details of MOEA/D can be found in the literature [33].In this paper, the first attempt is to develop the SKE method to establish the multi-objective optimization problem of centrifugal pumps, to reasonably take advantages of the CFD numerical simulation, Kriging metamodel and experimental tests, with a view to overcoming their shortcomings in many real-world optimization problems and design of centrifugal pumps. Most previous works for centrifugal pumps design can be divided into two categories: The first of which is to couple CFD simulation with experiment but the design optimization process is highly expensive and time-consuming, and the second of which is to combine metamodels with CFD simulations to solve the optimization problem of pumps, but it cannot guarantee the accuracy of the results without the verification of experiment tests. The second study of this research is to respectively employ NSGA II and MOEA/D to solve the multi-objective optimization problem, and to select the trade-off optimal design point in a more effective manner.As shown in Fig. 1, the whole process mainly contains the following steps:Step1: Latin Hypercube Designs (LHD) is applied to obtain the space-filling sample points in the design domains. The sample points are used as the input variables for Kriging models.Step2: According to the sample points, a set of double suction centrifugal pumps with various blade shapes are simulated using the CFD software. Then η and NPSHr are evaluated through these numerical simulations, which are the output variables for Kriging models.Step3: Kriging metamodels are constructed by determining the types of regression and correlation models together with their parameters. Shape parameters of the blade provided by Step1 are the input variables, while η and NPSHr obtained in Step2 are the outputs.Step4: The Kriging metamodels constructed by Step3 are tested and validated. Then the predicted values and the simulation values are compared: if they well coincide with each other, go to Step 5; otherwise, go back to Step3 to renew the Kriging models.Step5: NSGA II and MOEA/D are respectively used to solve the multi-objective optimization problem of double suction centrifugal pumps based on the Kriging metamodels, and then the front of the Pareto solutions are obtained by a more effective and efficient manner of the two evolutionary algorithms.Step6: The final selection is chosen from the Pareto front as the optimal solution, using a robust design method based on Monte Carlo simulations.Step7: A physical prototype is produced according to design variables provided by the tradeoff point. Then the results of CFD simulation, Kriging model and experiment based on the physical prototype are verified with each other.Head represents the total useful energy transferred from the pump to the fluid per unit mass. In fact, head equals to the pressure difference between pump inlet and outlet in terms of meters as follows:(1)H=E2-E1=P2ρg+z2+u222g-P1ρg+z1+u122gwhere E1 and E2 are total energy of per unit mass of fluid at inlet and outlet, respectively, P1 and P2 are inlet pressure and outlet pressure, respectively, ρ denotes the fluid density and g denotes the standard acceleration of gravity, z1 and z2 are inlet and outlet position head, respectively, u1 and u2 are used to denote the fluid velocity at inlet and outlet.The efficiency of centrifugal pumps is the ratio of useful power to input power, defined as follows:(2)η=PuPin=ρgHQPinwhere Puis the useful power, Pinis the input power which is also called shaft power, and Q is the volume flow rate. Generally, Pinis larger than Pubecause of various losses of the pump.NPSHr, which is a significant cavitation parameter for pumps, relates to the minimum pressure required at the suction port of the pump to keep the pump from cavitation. The smaller value of NPSHr produces larger cavitation resistance for the pump. NPSHr can be depicted with the following equation(3)NPSHr=P1-Pminρg+u122gwhere Pmin is the minimum pressure of the impeller blade.Impeller is the heart of a centrifugal pump, and it transfers mechanical energy to hydraulic energy by means of rapid rotations. The working process of centrifugal pumps is actually accompanied with energy conversion and loss. The inlet geometry parameters of an impeller have significant influence on cavitation performance, while outlet geometry parameters have large influence on Q–H-curve. Both of them have influence on the pump efficiency. The main dimensions of impellers of double suction centrifugal pumps in this paper are shown in Fig. 2, which mainly consists of shroud, hub and blade (Fig. 3). The blade number is usually recommended between 5 and 7 for high head pumps. Six blades are chosen here. Too many blades which are related to higher friction losses may cause low blade loading, while fewer blades may result in higher blade loading. The turbulent dissipation losses will rise due to the increased secondary flow and stronger deviation between blade and flow direction.Meridional section of the impeller is shown in Fig. 4. Considered symmetry and the dimensions which have already been decided in Fig. 2, the shape for the impeller of double suction centrifugal pumps is actually determined by the solid line shown in Fig. 4. The solid line is parameterized by using quartic Bezier curve with five control points. There are four design variables for the Bezier curve: α1, r1, α2 and r2, and their range of variations are shown in Table 1. r is the relative position in the line segment. Taking line segment AC for example, r1 is the ratio of the line length AB to AC.LHD is the space-filling design method, which is employed to homogeneously cover the entire design domains. Using the LHD method, 50 sample points will be obtained as the input data of Kriging metamodels. Besides the 50 sample points, another set of 30 test points are also produced by LHD, in order to validate the accuracy of the Kriging metamodels. Then the CFD models of pumps will be built based on these sample data. η and NPSHr are calculated as the output data of the metamodels through the results of CFD numerical simulations.The fluid flowing through the centrifugal pump is assumed to be incompressible, and the governing equations for the conservation of mass and momentum are given as(4)∂Ui∂xi=0(5)∂Ui∂t=-1ρ∂P∂xi-Uj∂Ui∂xi+1ρ∂∂xj(2μSji+τji)where Uidenotes the velocity in tensor notation, xiis the position vector in tensor notation, t denotes the time, ρ is the fluid density, P is the pressure, μ is molecular viscosity, Sjiis the strain-rate tensor, and τjiis Reynolds-stress tensor. Eq. (5) is usually referred to the Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes (RANS) equations.The standard k−ɛ turbulence models are adopted and their equations mainly consist of turbulence kinetic energy and dissipation rate equations, expressed as(6)∂k∂t=1ρτij∂Ui∂xi-Uj∂k∂xi-ε+1ρ∂∂xi(μ+μt/σk)∂k∂xj(7)∂ε∂t=1ρCε1εkτij∂Ui∂xj-Uj∂ε∂xj-Cε2ε2k+1ρ∂∂xj(μ+μt/σε)∂ε∂xjwhere k is the kinetic energy of turbulent fluctuations per unit mass, μtis the eddy viscosity and μt=ρCμk2/ɛ, ɛ is the dissipation per unit mass. The empirical constants are shown in Table 2.In this paper, the boundary of the volute flow domain is set as static boundary condition; while the boundary of the impeller flow domain is set to rotate boundary condition. The interaction between these two boundaries is taken into account via the Multiple Reference Frame (MRF) model. The RANS equations with standard (k−ɛ) turbulence models are solved by the finite volume method (FVM) using software Fluent. The pressure–velocity coupling equation is solved using SIMPLCE algorithm. The convective and diffusive terms of the turbulence model equations are discretized with the second order upwind scheme. The residual error is set as 1e-5 to judge whether the calculation has converged.The basic parameters used in the CFD numerical simulations are shown in Table 3. Fig. 5shows the 3D mesh of the double suction centrifugal pump, including a detail view of the tongue region. Table 4shows the simulation results of the sample points, which are used to build the Kriging metamodels.Through the simulation in the CFD software Fluent, the results of 50 sample points and 30 test points are obtained. The pressure and velocity distributions provide an intuitive reflection in the characteristic of the pump’s internal flow field.Fig. 6shows the static pressure distribution contour of a double suction centrifugal pump in the CFD simulation. Corresponding to Fig. 6, the static pressure profile of the impeller is shown in Fig. 7. After water flowing into the impeller, the pressure of each flow passage mainly indicates a uniform distribution along the flow direction. Initially, the pressure drops to the minimum from the impeller inlet to outlet, and then it rises gradually until the maximum is reached at the outlet. The lowest pressure appears in the inlet, closing to the blade inlet side. In fact, this area is usually related to cavitation. The pressure distribution is not symmetric because of the volute. The maximum pressure appears in the flow passage near the volute outlet, and the pressure distribution in this flow passage is different from others. With the rotation of the impeller, the pressure distribution of each flow passage changes periodically.Impeller velocity distribution contour in the CFD simulation is shown in Fig. 8, corresponding to the pressure profiles in Figs. 6 and 7. The velocity rises gradually from the impeller inlet to outlet. The velocity distribution is not symmetric due to the volute. Upon the continuous rotation of the impeller, the kinetic energy is continuously supplied to the fluid in the flow passage, while the velocity distribution of each flow passage changes periodically. Therefore, the velocity increases in the areas closing to blades.A Kriging model is described by a combination of a known polynomial and departures of the form as(8)y(x)=f(x)Tβ+z(x)where y(x) denotes the response function,f(x)Tβis the regression model which is similar to the polynomial mode in RSM,f(x) is the regression basis function, andβis the regression coefficient. z(x) is assumed as an independent Gaussian random process which has zero mean and covariance(9)Cov[z(ω),z(x)]=σ2R(θ,ω,x)where σ2 is the process variance, θ is the unknown correlation parameter, and R(θ,ω,x) is the correlation function between the points ω and x. The correlation function used in this paper is(10)R(θ,ω,x)=exp-∑j=1nθj(ωj-xj)2where the quantities ωjand xjdenote the jth components of sample points ω and x, respectively, n is the dimension of the design variables. Eq. (10) is called Gauss correlation model in general. There are several different correlation models, such as linear correlation model and exponential correlation model. However, the Gauss correlation model is more popular in Kriging metamodels.The estimated value at point x and the prediction error are respectively given as follows:(11)yˆ(x)=CT(x)Y(12)yˆ(x)-y(x)=CTY-y(x)=CTZ-z+(FTC-f(x))Tβwhere C is the unknown weight vector which is selected to minimize the mean square error (MSE),Yis the response of the sample points,Z=[z1,…,zm]T, m is the number of the sample points andFis a vector which consists of the value off(x) at each sample point.Kriging interpolator is the best linear unbiased predictor (BLUP) compared to others [34]. According to the unbiased condition, (FTC−f(x))T=0 orFTC(x)=f(x) is demanded. Without loss of generality, the MSE of the predictor’s values under this condition is given by(13)s(x)=E[(yˆ(x)-y(x))2]=σ2(1+CTRC-2CTr)whererT(x)=[R(θ,x,x1)…R(θ,x,xm)], which is a vector representing the correlation between an unknown point and all known sample points,Ris an m×m symmetric correlation matrix given by(14)R=R(x1,x1)⋯R(x1,xm)⋮⋱⋮R(xm,x1)⋯R(xm,xm)Under the unbiased condition, the Lagrangian function is introduced to minimize the value of MSE with respect to C. The unknown parametersβand σ2 can be estimated by(15)βˆ=(FTR-1F)-1FTR-1Y(16)σˆ2=1m(Y-Fβˆ)TR-1(Y-Fβˆ)The Kriging model and Eq. (13) can be given further as(17)yˆ(x)=fT(x)βˆ+rT(x)R-1(Y-Fβˆ)(18)s(x)=σ2(1+uT(FTR-1F)-1u-r(x)TR-1r(x))whereu=FTR−1r(x)−f(x).After the forms of regression model and correlation model are selected, the correlation matrixR, the unknown parametersβand σ2 are depend on the correlation parameter θ. However, a Kriging metamodel is completely built only if the value of θ is determined. Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) is the commonly used method to calculate the value of correlation parameters. The problem can be translated into an unconstrained global optimization problem as follows [25]:(19)Minimize{ψ(θ)=σ(θ)2|Rθ|1m}Subject toθ>0The Kriging metamodels are built using the set of 50 sample points obtained by LHD and the corresponding CFD simulations results (Table 4) as the input and output, respectively. In detail, the impeller geometric parameters α1, r1, α2 and r2 are the input variables, the corresponding set of efficiency η and NPSHr are the output variables. Tables 5 and 6show the corresponding parameters in the Kriging metamodels of input η and NPSHr, respectively. The model parameters consist ofβ, σ2 andθ, whereβrepresents the parameter of regression model and the others are the parameters of the correlation model.Metamodels, especially global metamodels, are to be validated before being used as a “surrogate” of the computation-intensive processes [35]. In order to validate the predictor’s ability of the Kriging metamodels, an additional set of 30 points obtained by LHD are used as test points. The root mean square error (RMSE) between the estimated values (Kriging metamodels) and the actual values obtained by the CFD simulation is defined by the following equation. The RSME is used as an indication to validate that whether the meta-models satisfy the requirement or not.(20)RMSE=∑iNdi2Nwhere N is the total number of the test points, and di=Yi(Kriging)−Yi(CFD). RMSE is used to measure the average error between values predicted by a model and the actual values. Table 7shows the results of RMSE value calculated by Eq. (20). The values of the RMSE indicate that the prediction accuracy of the Kriging meta-models is pretty reliable.Figs. 9 and 10show the comparison of calculation results between the Kriging predication values and the CFD simulation results. It can be found that the estimated values of Kriging metamodels align with the CFD simulation values. The metamodels can be applied to multi-objective optimization only if the prediction accuracy of the Kriging models is higher enough. Otherwise, the metamodels should be re-built. Both η and NPSHr are considered as objective functions in the multi-objective optimization.As mentioned above, the optimization of centrifugal pumps is a multi-objective optimization problem, rather than a single objective optimization problem. This problem can be described as follows:(21)FindX=[α1,r1,α2,r2]TMaximizeη=f1(α1,r1,α2,r2)MinimizeNPSHr=f2(α1,r1,α2,r2)Subjectto0∘⩽α1⩽30∘0.02⩽r1⩽0.9870∘⩽α2⩽90∘0.02⩽r2⩽0.98where f1 and f2 is the objective functions that have been built as Kriging metamodels in Section 5.2. This multi-objective optimization problem can be solved using NSGA II and MOEA/D, independently. The experiments are performed in a Desktop PC with Intel Core 2 quad CPU and 3.25GB RAM.Both NSGA II and MOEA/D have been implemented in Java. In both algorithms, SBX and polynomial mutation have been used as operators for crossover and mutation, respectively. The control parameters in these two operators are the same in both Algorithms. The distribution indexes for both operators are ηc=20 and ηm=20. The crossover probability is set as 0.9 and the mutation probability is 1/n, where n is the number of decision variables. Both algorithms use a population size of 100 and a maximum generation number of 200. In MOEA/D, the weight vectors consist of 100 uniformly distributed vectors. T is set as 25, which is the number of the weight vectors in the neighborhood of each weight vector. Since both NSGA II and MOEA/D are stochastic algorithms, each algorithm runs 30 times independently for the problem, in order to provide the results with statistical confidence.Mathematically, the HA indicator is defined as(22)HA=⋃iAreaivi∈Qwhere Q is a non-dominated set of solutions, viis a non-dominated vector in Q and Areaidenotes the area between the origin and vi. HA calculates the area covered by members of Q with respect to the objective space for the minimization of a two-objective optimization problem. In addition, it measures the convergence and diversity properties of a Pareto front. The true Pareto front is unknown in the above problem. For this reason, HA indicator is employed as a performance metric to compare the performances of NSGA II and MOEA/D. The Algorithm with a higher HA indicator value will be preferable.In order to provide the results with statistical confidence, each algorithm has been made 30 independent runs of the experiment, and the following statistical tests have been executed [36]. First, a Kolmogorov–Smirnov test is performed to check if the values of the results obey a normal distribution. If the distribution is not normal, the non-parametric Kruskal–Wallis test is performed to compare the medians of the algorithms. For normal distribution, a Levene test is used to check for the homogeneity of the variances. If samples do not have the equal variance, the Welch test is performed, otherwise (positive Levene test), an ANOVA test is done. A confidence level of 95% in the statistical tests is always considered here, which means the differences are unlikely to have occurred with a probability of 95%. All tests in this work are successful in achieving the statistical confidence.Table 8presents the mean and standard deviation of HA values of the non-dominated solutions obtained by each algorithm. According to Table 8, MOEA/D is more accurate than NSGA II. Moreover, the average CPU times used by NSGA II and MOEA/D are 2.63 and 1.18h, respectively, which shows that MOEA/D is faster than NSGA II in searching the solutions of the problem defined in Section 6.1. The best result of Pareto front obtained by 30 independent runs for each algorithm is shown in Fig. 11. It’s obvious that the Pareto front obtained by NSGA II is dominated by the Pareto front of MOEA/D. So the following discussion is based on the result of MOEA/D given in Fig. 11.For real-world design of centrifugal pumps, the efficiency η is maximized to enhance the economic benefits, and so the ordinate 1/Efficiency should be minimized. At the same time, NPSHr is required to be minimized to strengthen the cavitation resistance. As shown in Fig. 11, the two objectives in the multi-objective optimization problem are conflicting, and only Pareto solutions are expected.Figs. 12 and 13show the objective 1/Efficiency and the objective NPSHr with respect to design variables in the Pareto solution set, respectively. In order to exhibit the relationship between the objective function and design variables in a more intuitionistic and comprehensive view, all of the design variables share the same figure. Therefore, both Figs. 12 and 13 employ the form of double abscissas since the different dimensions between the design variables α and r. α1 and α2 corresponding to the abscissa at the top of the figure, while r1 and r2 corresponding to the abscissa at the bottom of the figure. Both figures are divided into four regions by using five dashed lines: l1, l2, l3, l4, and l5. The four regions are, respectively, l1l2, l2l3, l3l4, and l4l5 as shown in Fig. 12. On the contrary, the order of these regions in Fig. 13 is opposite to that in Fig. 12, due to the conflict between 1/Efficiency and NPSHr (shown in Fig. 11). There are some particular phenomena in Figs. 12 and 13. For both figures, each region from l1l2 to l4l5, the design variables α1, r1, α2 and r2 changes in turn while the other three design variables approximately keep constant in the corresponding regions. In addition, there are two design variables (α1 and r1) that change in region l2l3, which is different from the other regions in which only one design variable varies. Moreover, in region l2l3, the ranges of objectives efficiency and NPSHr are 82–91% and 3.51–4.25m, respectively. Compared to other regions (e.g. l1l2, l3l4 and l4l5), it is an ideal region for a centrifugal pump, since the objectives are both at a competitive level. Hence, the final tradeoff design point is most likely obtained from this region. Actually, it has been confirmed in the following section.For the multi-objective optimization of centrifugal pumps, a tradeoff point should be chosen among the Pareto solutions as the final pump design point. In order to guide the tradeoff selection, a robust design method based on the Monte Carlo simulation is developed to determine the best point.Monte Carlo simulation can obtain the stochastic characteristics containing mean value and variance of an objective variable by evaluating a set of random design alternatives. Robust design is the method that improves quality and reliability by reducing the functional variation of a system without removing the causes of variation [37]. More details about the robust design and its application can be found in the literature, e.g. [38,39]. 1/Efficiency and NPSHr are given as the objective functions f1 and f2 in Fig. 11 only for convenience. The index function is(23)F=w1[w2(μ1-f1)2+w3σ12]+w4[w5(μ2-f2)2+w6σ22]where w1, w2, w3, w4, w5 and w6 are the weight coefficients, μ1 and μ2 are the mean values of f1 and f2 in each point of the Pareto-optimal solutions, respectively,σ12andσ22are the variance of f1 and f2 in each point of the Pareto-optimal solutions, respectively. The design variables α1, r1, α2 and r2 are assumed to obey the normal distribution. In order to obtain the stochastic characteristics μ1, μ2, as well asσ12andσ22of each points in the Pareto front, the Monte Carlo method is implemented with 1000 simulations. The tradeoff optimal point is the one that minimize the value of index function F, which indicates the lowest functional variation. The values of design variables in the optimal point are shown in Table 9.The physical prototype with respect to the tradeoff point is shown in Fig. 14. Fig. 14(a) shows the impeller with corresponding design parameters of the selected point. Fig. 14(b) shows the experiment of the double suction centrifugal pump. The basic test parameters are given in Table 3. The pump is fitted on the test bench, and the electric machinery drives the impeller. The water is transmitted circularly in the test pool. Table 10shows the design values of the tradeoff point and the test values. The result denotes the values of the tradeoff point predicted by the Kriging metamodels well agree with the experimental results.Furthermore, in order to validate the CFD simulations, five cases with different flow rates: 400, 800, 1200, 1600 and 2000 m3/h, have been studied. The other experiment conditions keep the same (Table 3). The results of the CFD simulations and the experiment of the physical prototype are shown in Fig. 15. The figure shows that the results of the CFD simulations are in good agreement with the experimental results.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper has proposed a new multi-objective optimization method for the design of centrifugal pumps. A SKE method is established to fully take advantages of the CFD simulation, Kriging metamodel and experiments. LHD method is used to achieve the sample points for space-filling. The CFD simulation results are used to validate the accuracy of the Kriging approximation models. The design is formulated as a multi-objective optimization problem to improve the efficiency and cavitation performance, in which design variables relate to geometry shapes of the impeller meridional section. The NSGA II and MOEA/D algorithms have been employed to solve the proposed multi-objective optimization problem, respectively. The design shows MOEA/D is more effective and efficient in obtaining the Pareto set of optimal solutions. The CFD simulation results denote that the design variables have a significant influence on the centrifugal pump performance, e.g., efficiency and NPSHr. A tradeoff design point has been selected using a robust design method based on Monte Carlo simulations, and the physical prototype is produced according to a set of design variables provided by the tradeoff point. The results of CFD simulation, Kriging metamodel and experiment based on the physical prototype have been verified.