@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
MO-PSE: Adaptive multi-objective particle swarm optimization based design space exploration in architectural synthesis for application specific processor design

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Novel DSE methodology employing PSO for multi-objective trade-off was proposed.A novel fitness function for solution assessment based on power parameter was introduced.A novel mutation algorithm for improving DSE convergence and exploration time was presented.Novel perturbation algorithm to handle boundary outreach problem during DSE was presented.Average improvement in QoR ∼ 9% and reduction in time > 90% was obtained compared to recent GA DSE.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Particle swarm optimization,Design space exploration,Power,Execution time,Mutation,High level synthesis,Application specific processor,Adaptive perturbation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Architectural synthesis has gained rapid dominance in the design flows of application specific computing. Exploring an optimal design point during architectural synthesis is a tedious task owing to the orthogonal issues of reducing exploration time and enhancing design quality as well as resolving the conflicting parameters of power and performance. This paper presents a novel design space exploration (DSE) methodology multi-objective particle swarm exploration MO-PSE, based on the particle swarm optimization (PSO) for designing application specific processor (ASP). To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this is the first work that directly maps a complete PSO process for multi-objective DSE for power-performance trade-off of application specific processors. Therefore, the major contributions of the paper are: (i) Novel DSE methodology employing a particle swarm optimization process for multi-objective tradeoff, (ii) Introduction of a novel model for power parameter used during evaluation of design points in MO-PSE, (iii) A novel fitness function used for design quality assessment, (iv) A novel mutation algorithm for improving DSE convergence and exploration time, (v) Novel perturbation algorithm to handle boundary outreach problem during exploration and (vi) Results of comparison performed during multiple experiments that indicates average improvement in the quality of results (QoR) achieved is around 9% and average reduction in exploration time of greater than 90% compared to recent genetic algorithm (GA) based DSE approaches. The paper also reports results based on the variation and impact of different PSO parameters such as swarm size, inertia weight, acceleration coefficient, and termination condition on multi-objective DSE.multi-objective particle swarm explorationdesign space explorationhigh level synthesisparticle swarm optimizationsystem on chiplower boundary of design spaceupper boundary of design spaceresource configurationresource configuration (position) of ith particle dth dimensionresource configuration (position) of ith particlenew resource configuration (position) of ith particle dth dimensionlocal best resource configuration of ith particleglobal best resource configurationlocal best resource configurationvelocityvelocity of ith particle dth dimensionnew velocity of ith particle dth dimensionfitness functionlocal best fitness of ith particleglobal best fitness among all particlenumber of Iterationcurrent iterationnumber of particle (in Figs. 1 and 2n=Ns)number of dimensioncurrent dimensionminimum power consumed by resource configurationpower consumption constrained specified by usermaximum power consumed by resource c configurationtotal power consumed by resource configurationminimum execution time taken by a resource configurationexecution time constrained specified by usermaximum execution time taken by a resource configurationexecution time taken by a resource configurationstopping criterion

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
High level synthesis (HLS)/architectural synthesis is a process of accepting a set of specifications for the required behavior of a system, together with a set of constraints to be met for finding a register transfer level (RTL) structure that implements the behavior while simultaneously meeting the user constraints [1]. A major advantage of HLS compared to RTL synthesis is its design space exploration capabilities. HLS allows evaluation of a number of architectures at the very beginning of the design process (at a very high abstraction level) to choose the best solution with respect to the given design specifications. The design space exploration is the most crucial segment in the development process. Exploring the design space generally involves optimization of multiple conflicting issues. This DSE process requires accurate tradeoffs between conflicting objectives. DSE in HLS has now become an industry defacto standard for designing of ASP (or application specific integrated circuits). Therefore, the general aim of a DSE process in HLS during custom processor design (such as application specific integrated circuits (ASIC)) is to find an optimal architecture among its competitor variances that fulfils the multiple conflicting objectives as well as some other orthogonal issues as discussed in the upcoming paragraph [2,30].It is well known that for very large scale integration (VLSI) designs of custom application, the design process is characterized by combined use of heterogeneous techniques, methodologies in which an architectural model is gradually produced step by step on the basis of the application specification. The designing of such custom ASP has been relatively dissimilar from the general purpose processor counterparts. Further, the developments of ASP in recent years have only been possible due to drastic advancements in the field of DSE. DSE is a process of exploring optimal system architecture for a design based on user provided multiple constraints of power, circuit area, performance, etc. The focus of the research community currently still has mostly been towards optimizing data intensive applications (i.e. applications requiring heavy computation) used in the areas of signal processing, multimedia, etc.). This is because despite of some descent advancements in this area, the techniques falls short in comprehensively proposing a universal and concurrent solution to two fold orthogonal problem encountered during DSE viz. (a) striking an efficient balance between conflicting parameters (say power and performance); as well as (b) maintaining a fast exploration process that maximizes the QoR to a large extent. In order to dwell deep into the problem, the researchers have not sufficiently investigated the effect of hybridizing modern techniques such as swarm intelligence with HLS design problems to search for a superior outcome. Motivating from this fact, this paper investigates and proposes a first of its kind direct full mapping driven PSO based DSE methodology for ASP’s that efficiently concurrently solves the two fold orthogonal issues discussed formerly [2,5,16,19,20].For the sake of clarity, the abbreviation and symbols used in the rest of the paper given below.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses the related works in the area of DSE in HLS. Section 3 presents basic background of PSO. The proposed MO-PSE based DSE has been introduced in Section 4. Section 5 presents and analyzes the experimental results for various benchmarks. Section 6 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
