@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
3D macro-element modelling approach for seismic assessment of historical masonry churches

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A macro-element to simulate the in- and out-of-plane response of masonry structures is proposed.The approach is based on a three-dimensional discrete element and requires a low computational cost.The performance is assessed by means of nonlinear static analyses on a historical masonry church.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Macro-element,Discrete element,Monumental structures,Computational method,Push-over analysis,HiStrA software,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Recent earthquakes have demonstrated the high vulnerability of cultural heritage buildings, whose seismic assessment and rehabilitation constitute an important issue in seismic regions around the world. The high nonlinear behaviour of masonry material requires ad hoc refined finite element numerical models, whose complexity and computational cost are generally unsuitable for practical applications. For these reasons many authors proposed simplified numerical strategies to be used in engineering practice. However, most of these alternative methods are oversimplified since based on the assumption of in plane behaviour of masonry walls.In this paper a discrete-modelling approach for the simulation of both the in plane and out of-plane response of masonry structures is proposed. The method is applied to a basilica plan church, which has been partially investigated in the literature. The results show the capability of the proposed discrete element approach to simulate the nonlinear response of monumental structures also in those cases in which the ‘in’ and the ‘out’ of plane response cannot be decoupled, as it happens for many structural layouts typical of churches, ancient palaces and several other monumental structures.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Historical monumental structures (HMS) are present in many seismically prone areas around the world and belong to our cultural heritage. Seismic retrofitting assessment of HMS represents a challenging problem that has to be faced according to the ‘minimum intervention criterion’ to safeguard the loss of cultural value [1]. Nevertheless, in most cases seismic retrofitting projects of historical buildings are performed without a prior reliable assessment of the actual structural conditions. This apparent paradox is mainly due to difficulties related to the numerical assessment of the seismic behaviour of monumental structures [2]. As a matter of fact, the nonlinear dynamic behaviour of a masonry monumental structure subjected to earthquake loadings is generally governed by a complex interaction between in plane and out-of plane response of masonry walls and is often further complicated by the presence of structural element with curved geometry such as arches, domes and vaults. Additionally, the high nonlinear behaviour of masonry material requires ad hoc numerical models capable of reproducing the degrading nonlinear cyclic behaviour of masonry [1,2].In the scientific literature there are many significant examples of applications of the nonlinear FEM (finite element method) to historical masonry churches. Betti and Vignoli provided numerical assessments of the static and seismic behaviour of basilica-type churches (Italy) [3,4], showing how the application of nonlinear FEM can offer significant information for the study of ancient structures with respect both to the understanding of existing damage and to the minimum and adequate design of strengthening. Lourenço et al. analysed the seismic safety of the remainings of one church in Famagusta (Cyprus) [5]. Firstly they used limit analysis of collapse mechanisms as preliminary safety assessment, then, a nonlinear FEM was prepared and updated using dynamic identification results for a comparison between the two approaches. More recently, Milani and Valente performed the analyses of seven masonry churches damaged by the Emilia Romagna (2012) seismic event [6,7]. They adopted Global FE (finite element) pushover and limit analyses, combined with a plate and shell discretisation, to have an insight into active failure mechanisms and accelerations associated with the formation of partial collapses. Many other examples of nonlinear FEM applications are reported in the scientific literature as valuable academic case studies [8-10], however refined FE approaches require sophisticated constitutive laws, a huge computational cost and advanced abilities in the model implementation as well as in the interpretations of the results. On the other hand, structural engineers need simple and efficient numerical tools, whose complexity and computational demand should be appropriate for practical engineering purposes. For these reasons, in the last decades, many authors proposed simplified or alternative methodologies for predicting the nonlinear seismic behaviour of unreinforced masonry structures, particularly for buildings, as reported in reference [11] where a comparison between different approaches is performed. However most of the simplified methods, currently used in practical engineering, by assuming in plane behaviour of masonry walls make these approaches unsuitable for those masonry structures whose seismic response is dominated by the out-of plane response, as in the case of churches.An alternative approach to the nonlinear FEM is represented by the rigid-body spring models (RBSM), specifically formulated with the aim of approximating the macroscopic behaviour of masonry walls with reduced degrees of freedom. Some valuable applications of this approach are relative to historical masonry buildings [12,13]. A comprehensive review in the current development on numerical issues on masonry mechanics is reported in [1,2]. In the latter works it is also highlighted that a complex analysis tool does not necessarily provide better results than simple tools.In this paper, an original modelling approach for the simulation of the nonlinear behaviour of masonry historical structures, under static and seismic loadings, capable of accounting for the out-of plane behaviour of masonry walls is devised. The proposed approach is based on the concept of macro-element discretisation [14] and has been conceived with the aim of capturing the nonlinear behaviour of an entire building by means of an assemblage of several discrete-elements which are characterised by different level of complexity according to the role played by the element in the global model.The basic element has been initially developed for the simulation of the in plane response of masonry walls [14,15] and has received many scientific validations based both on numerical and experimental [11,14–17] results. This plane element has a simple mechanical representation and its kinematics is dependent on four Lagrangian parameters only. It can be regarded as an articulated quadrilateral with four rigid edges and four hinged vertices connected by two diagonal nonlinear springs. Each of the rigid edges can be connected to other elements by means of discrete distributions of nonlinear springs with limited tensile strength. The plane discrete-element has been implemented in the computer code 3DMacro [18], that simplifies the application of the method by means of input and output graphical user interfaces. This novel approach has been also recently successfully applied and validated for mixed reinforced concrete-masonry structures and for confined masonry buildings [19-23]. However, the basic plane-element is intended only for the simulation of the nonlinear response of masonry walls in their own plane since the out-of plane response is not taken into account. In order to overcome this significant restriction, common to almost all the macro-element simplified approaches proposed in the literature [13,16], an upgrade of the plane macro-element, obtained by introducing a third dimension and the needed additional degrees-of-freedom for the simulation of the out-of plane response, has been provisionally investigated in [24,25,28]. The enriched spatial element, that can be still represented by means of an equivalent simple mechanical scheme, is characterised by seven Lagrangian parameters only and its kinematics should allow an efficient simulation of both the in and out-of plane response of masonry walls. The computational cost of the proposed discrete element approach is greatly reduced, if compared to a traditional nonlinear finite element modelling, and the calibration of the model and the interpretation of the numerical results are simple and unambiguous, since based on a straightforward fibre discretisation.In this paper the spatial macro-element is described and applied to a historical basilica plan church, the S. Ippolisto Martire Church, located in Atripalda (Avellino, Italy), built between 1584 and 1612 on a previous basilica of the IV century AD. This church has been firstly investigated by Mele et al. [26] and more recently by the same authors of the present paper [27].Mele et al. [26] investigated the seismic behaviour of the basilica type church which can be regarded as the combination of some structural elements, typical of this building category: nave and aisles connected by nave arcades, façade, transept, crossing and chancel. Mele et al. [26] had shown that detailed uncoupled nonlinear analyses of sub-structural systems can provide fundamental information on the local and global seismic behaviour of the structure and, at the same time, allows an identification of the more vulnerable resistant mechanisms which contribute to the seismic performance of a specific monumental structure. In their study Mele et al. [26] identified the main sub-structural systems which characterise the considered basilica plan church then, for each of them, they performed nonlinear push-over analyses, based on smeared crack nonlinear finite element models, to provide a seismic resistance assessment.The present authors in [27] analysed only the in plane behaviour of the sub-structural elements, previously identified by Mele et al. [26], by means of the proposed discrete element approach under the simplified hypothesis of unlimited ductility. In this paper, besides a re-analysis of the same sub-structural elements to assess the influence of a reduced ductility, a three-dimensional model of the entire church is performed. The analyses on the whole church allow to compare the results obtained on the single sub-structural elements to those obtained by means of the global three-dimensional model.The results, expressed in terms of collapse mechanisms and push-over curves, seem to confirm the potentiality of the proposed approach to be considered, and further developed, as numerical tool devoted to the seismic assessment of historical masonry structures whose simplicity favourites its use, particularly for practical applications.The three dimensional discrete element (Fig. 1b) represents a nontrivial extension of a plane macro-element introduced by Caliò et al. [15] conceived for the simulation of the in plane nonlinear response of masonry walls (Fig. 1a). The plane macro-element consists of a pinned quadrilateral made with four rigid edges, in which a nonlinear diagonal link is connected to the corners to simulate the shear response. Each side of the panel can interact with other panels, elements or supports by means of a discrete distribution of nonlinear springs, denoted as interface. Each interface is constituted by a single row of n nonlinear springs, orthogonal to the panel side, and an additional longitudinal spring, which rules the relative motion in the direction of the panel edge.Each plane macro-element exhibits three degrees-of-freedom, associated to the in plane rigid-body motion, plus a further degree-of-freedom needed to describe the in plane shear deformability. The deformations of the interfaces are associated to the relative motion between corresponding panels, therefore no further Lagrangian parameters are needed in order to describe their kinematics.In spite of its simplicity, such a basic mechanical scheme is able to simulate the main in plane failure mechanisms of a portion of masonry wall subjected to horizontal and vertical loads. The assemblage of these elements allows the simulation of nonlinear response of entire masonry buildings for which the out-of plane response of the masonry wall can be ignored [26] or considered separately as local failure mechanism.The three-dimensional macro-element (Fig. 1b) represents the spatial upgrade of the plane macro-element. In particular, the main upgrades can be summarised as follows:–three additional degrees-of-freedom have been considered for the description of the out-of plane kinematics;the geometry of the articulated quadrilateral can be irregular for a better description of complex geometry layouts;further nonlinear links have been introduced in order to account for the three-dimensional mechanical behaviour of the element according to a discrete fibre discretisation strategy.The kinematics of the spatial macro-element is governed by 7 degrees-of-freedom only, able to describe both the in and out-of plane rigid body motions of the quadrilateral and the in plane shear deformability. This latter is ruled by a single nonlinear spring placed along one of the diagonals of the articulated quadrilateral (Fig. 2b).The interaction of the spatial macro-element with the adjacent elements or the external supports is ruled by 3D-interfaces. Each 3D-interface possesses m rows of n longitudinal (i.e. perpendicular to the planes of the interface) NLinks. Consequently, each interface is discretised, similarly to what is done in classical fibre models, in m × n sub-areas (Fig. 2a).Besides the interface orthogonal springs, the 3D interfaces are endowed with additional transversal sliding springs (Fig. 2b). The latter are required to control the in plane and out-of plane sliding mechanisms and the torsion around the axis perpendicular to the plane of the interface.The number of NLinks adopted in the 3D-interfaces is selected according to the desired level of accuracy of the nonlinear response.Each macro-element must be representative of the corresponding finite portion of masonry wall, cut out by plane sections located at the edges of the quadrilateral. This equivalence relies on a straightforward fibre calibration procedure, and is based only on the main mechanical parameters which characterise the masonry according to an orthotropic homogeneous medium. In the following sub-sections the mechanical characterisation of the model, that relies on the definition of the constitutive laws of the nonlinear links, is described more in detail with reference to a rectangular masonry panel.Since the masonry is considered as a homogeneous medium its global behaviour should be ascribed to the flexural, shearing and torsional characteristics of a finite portion of an orthotropic inelastic continua. As mentioned before, the flexural behaviour is simulated by the interface orthogonal springs connecting the panel to adjacent elements. Each spring is calibrated by adopting a specific constitutive law for the masonry material, according to a simplified fibre model approach.In the description of the calibration procedure a perfectly elasto-plastic behaviour with limited deformability is assumed. The orthotropic nature of the masonry can be simply considered by calibrating separately the interfaces according to the mechanical properties of the corresponding directions.The case regarding a horizontal interface connecting two generic panels, k and l, characterised by different mechanical and geometrical properties, is considered. Since the deformations of the panels are concentrated in zero thickness interfaces, the vertical orthogonal springs have the role of simulating the deformability of the two connected panels in the vertical direction. The stiffness calibration of each panel is simply obtained by assigning to each link the axial rigidity of the corresponding masonry strips, identified by the influence area of each spring and the half-dimension of the panel along the direction perpendicular to the interface. This procedure provides couples of springs in series. Each couple of springs is then replaced by a single resulting nonlinear elasto-plastic spring as described in reference [15].Focusing on a link corresponding to a single panel the initial stiffness Kp, the compressive and tensile yielding strengths Fcy, Ftyand the corresponding ultimate displacements ucu, utuare derived by the knowledge of the mechanical material properties of the masonry panel as follows:(1)Kp=2EAsL(2a)Fcy=Asσc(2b)Fty=Asσt(3a)ucu=L2ɛcu(3b)utu=L2ɛtuwhere E is the Young's modulus in the direction orthogonal to the interface; σcand σtare the compressive and tensile yielding stresses,εcuand εtuare the ultimate compressive and tensile strains; As is the influence area of the nonlinear link, and L/2 is the length corresponding to half fibre [15].The nonlinear links, lying along the interface, have been denoted as transversal springs. In the discretisation here adopted only three nonlinear links have been considered, which is the minimum required for ruling the possible masonry failure modes. A single in plane transversal spring governs the in plane sliding of the element along the interface. The out-of plane shear deformability is ruled by two parallel springs, which take care of the out-of plane sliding behaviour and the torsional elastic and inelastic response of the connected adjacent panels.The in plane shear response of the masonry is ruled by the diagonal and shear-sliding in plane links. Although each type of NLink rules the shear diagonal and sliding collapse behaviour, the overall elastic shear deformation of the masonry panel can be partly associated to a diagonal deformation and partly attributed to concentrated deformability along the mortar joints, better described as a relative sliding motion between interfaces. In the applications reported in the following, it is assumed that the overall in plane shear elastic deformability is concentrated in the diagonal links and the shear-sliding in plane links have been calibrated according to a rigid-plastic behaviour whose inelasticity has been calibrated according to a Mohr–Coulomb law.The two out-of plane transversal nonlinear links are required to control the out-of plane sliding mechanisms as well as the torsion around the axis perpendicular to the plane of the interface. In the applications reported in the following, each link simulates the out-of plane shear deformability of two adjacent panels according to their influence volume.The case of two identical adjacent panels is considered, as an example. In this case the out-of plane elastic shear stiffness ksis obtained by assigning to each link, the shear stiffness of the corresponding masonry strip, identified by its influence area A/2 multiplied by twice the half dimension of the panel in the direction perpendicular to the interface L, and characterised by the shear modulus G.(4)ks=GA2LThe torsional elastic behaviour associated to the two links is related to their distance d (Fig. 3). With the aim to obtain a suitable torsional elastic calibration, the distance d between the two springs has been calculated by enforcing a torsional stiffness equivalence between the discrete model and the reference elastic continuous beam model identified by the two portion of the panels whose torsional deformability is attributed to the links of the zero-thickness interface (Fig. 3).Shear failure is the most common type of failure of a masonry wall, when subjected to seismic action in its own plane. The diagonal springs have the fundamental role to preside over the diagonal shear failure collapse. This is associated to the loss of the bearing capacity of masonry panel due to excessive shear and the consequent formation of diagonal cracks along the direction of the principal compressive stress. Many different yielding criteria can be adopted all accounting for a shear resistance strongly dependent on vertical compression stresses in the wall. As highlighted in reference [29], two basically different hypotheses, which lead virtually to the same results, have been developed in order to model the shear failure mechanism. In the first case, which has been accepted by Eurocode 6 (Design of masonry structures) [30] the shear strength is defined according to a Mohr–Coulomb law(5)fv=fv0+μcσnwhere fv0 is the shear strength under zero compression strength, µcis a friction coefficient defining the contribution of compressive stresses, σnis the value of the compressive stress. Values of fv0 and µcshould be determined by experimental tests [31,32]. This criterion is the same suggested for the description of the sliding-shear failure, although characterised by appropriate values of fv0 and µcthat in general do not coincide with the corresponding values that govern the sliding-shear failure. In the proposed macro-modelling approach the two mechanisms, although both associated to the in plane shear deformability, are controlled separately.Alternative theories associate the diagonal shear failure to the principle tensile stress that develops in the wall when subjected to vertical loads and increasing horizontal forces. The most adopted criterion based on this assumption is the well known Turnsek and Cacovic criterion [33] that takes into account the influence of the geometry of the wall and the distribution of action at maximum resistance. The latter criterion can be expressed as(6)fv=ftbσ0ft+1where fvis the average shear stress in the wall attained at the maximum resistance, ftis the tensile strength of masonry, b is the shear stress distribution factor (depending on the geometry of the wall), σ0 is the average compression stress on the panel.The calibration of the diagonal springs in the initial linear elastic range is simply obtained by enforcing an elastic equivalence between the panel and the corresponding masonry wall, considered as a pure shear deformable homogeneous plate with tangential modulus G, transversal area Atand height h. Further details on the calibration procedure are reported in [15,24,25].The assessment of the seismic behaviour of historical monumental structure still represents a challenging problem which involves the contribution of many research groups around the world. Due to the difficulties to define three dimensional global nonlinear finite element models many researchers proposed alternative and simplified procedures for the assessment of the seismic vulnerability of monumental structures. An interesting approach proposed by Mele et al. [26,34] is based on a two steps analysis method. In the first step the overall structure is analysed in the linear range through a complete and refined 3D model, with the aim of characterising the linear static and dynamic behaviour, defining the corresponding internal force distribution among the single elementary parts and identifying the weak points of potential failures in the building. Secondly single structural elements are extracted from the 3D context and analysed both in the linear and nonlinear range through refined 2D finite element models, with the aim of identifying the major structural properties that can be used for a simplified assessment of the seismic behaviour of the whole building. Consistently to this approach Mele et al. [26] investigated the seismic behaviour of a typical basilica type church. They considered the S. Ippolisto Martire Church, located in Atripalda (Avellino, Italy), built between 1584 and 1612 on a previous basilica foundations of the IV century AD. As highlighted by the authors [26], this church features the presence of very definite structural typologies formed by the assemblage of quite repetitive structural schemes, that in the referenced paper [26] have been denoted as ‘macro-elements’. In this paper these structural schemes will be identified as ‘sub-structural systems’ since the term macro-element has been used at a different scale and with a different meaning.The basilica church consists of some structural elements, typical in this building category: nave and aisles connected by nave arcades, façade, transept, crossing and chancel (Fig. 4). The detailed nonlinear analysis of each sub-structural system can provide fundamental information on the global seismic behaviour of the structure allowing an identification of the more vulnerable resistant mechanisms which contribute to the seismic performance of the structure. In their study [26] Mele et al. performed the nonlinear push-over analyses of all the identified plane sub-structural systems with the aim to provide a seismic assessment of the entire church.Recently, the present authors in [27] analysed the in plane behaviour of some sub-structural systems by means of the proposed discrete element approach and under the simplified hypothesis of unlimited ductility.In this paper, besides a re-analysis of all the sub-structural systems to assess the influence of a reduced available ductility, a three-dimensional sub-structural model involving the façade as well as the three-dimensional model of the entire church are investigated.The nonlinear flexural behaviour has been assumed according to a perfectly elasto-plastic constitutive law with limited and unlimited ductility. Namely, in the ductile constitutive model neither crashing in compression nor cracking in tension is admitted. On the other hand the brittle model is characterised by cracking at a certain value of the tensile strain while no crashing in compression is still maintained. The shear sliding and the shear diagonal behaviour have been calibrated according to a Mohr–Coulomb criterion, with unlimited ductility, according to the values reported in Table 1. In the following sub-sections firstly the nonlinear responses of the sub-structural systems are investigated secondly the obtained results are compared with those related to the entire three-dimensional discrete element model. The results are expressed in terms of collapse mechanisms, push-over curves and damage scenarios.The detailed description of the case study, both from a mechanical and geometrical point of views, is reported in the referenced paper [26].The plan positions of the considered sub-structural systems are represented in the schematic plan view of Fig. 4, while in Figs. 5and 6the geometrical layouts and the corresponding adopted macro-element discretisations in the transversal and longitudinal directions are reported.The results reported in the following are relative to push-over analyses associated to the application of constant vertical loads, due to the gravity loads, and an increasing distribution of horizontal mass-proportional loadings. It has been assumed that each single structural-element is independent from the remaining part of the structure.In order to investigate the role of the ductility, in the flexural response, the plane sub-structural systems have been analysed, by assuming the masonry mechanical parameters reported in Table 1 for different values of the available ductility µ associated to the tensile strength of the orthogonal NLinks. Namely, the case corresponding to µ=1, 10, 20, ∞ are considered, being µ=1, representative of a pure fragile tensile response and µ=∞, corresponding to unlimited ductility. In the following the in plane nonlinear response of the sub-structural elements oriented along the transversal and the longitudinal directions are considered separately.With the aim to investigate the influence of the adopted discretisation, in the last subsection, relative to the sub-structural system T2, the influence of the mesh size and the fibre discretisation are investigated.The results of the push-over analyses of the sub-structural system T5 subjected to a mass proportional distribution of in plane loads are reported in Fig. 7.It can be observed how the reduction of the available ductility in the tensile constitutive law of the orthogonal nonlinear links leads to lower values of global resistance although the sub-system preserves a significant global ductility capacity.Fig. 8reports the failure mechanisms of the plane sub-structural element T5 for the limit cases of fragile and unlimited ductility. In the same figures the relative distribution of normal stresses in the interfaces are represented by means of a chromatic scale in which the red and the blue colours correspond to tensile and compressive forces respectively. It can be observed how the in plane collapse of the façade is dominated by the rocking response of four slender piers, as a consequence of the damage of the spandrels.Fig. 9shows the push-over curves analyses for different values of the available ductility of the material while the failure mechanisms associated of the triumphal arch (element T2) are reported in Fig. 10.The failure mechanisms, shown in Fig. 10, is characterised by the failure of the arch and the rocking motion of the lateral piers.The capacity curves for the internal walls, T3 and T4, are reported in Fig. 11. In this case, it can be observed that a reduction of the material ductility leads to a reduction of both the global resistance and global ductility of the system.In Fig. 12the collapse mechanisms relative to the case of unlimited ductility are reported, for both the sub-structural systems the collapse mechanisms are dominated by the failure of the lateral arches due to the rocking of the slim and unconfined piers.In this sub-section the sub-structural systems L1 and L2, placed along the longitudinal direction, Fig. 6, are considered. L1 identifies the walls of the lateral prospects of the church and is characterised by the presence of two adjacent arches, placed in an eccentric position, close to the attachment of the main façade. The sub-structural system L2, corresponding to the section of the church along the nave arcade, represents a typical solution obtained as the assemblage of several columns supporting arches and vaults and a larger arch corresponding to the transept.Fig. 13reports the results of the push-over analysis for the L1 sub-structural system, for different values of the available ductility.The different model points considered, P1, P2 and P3, whose location is reported in Fig. 6, show similar responses and displacement capacities as reported in Fig. 13. A different behaviour can be recognised in Fig. 14reporting the results of the push-over analysis for the L2 sub-structural system, for different values of the available ductility, in this case the target point P1 shows different displacement capacity of the target point P2 and P3 that are instead characterised by a similar response. This trend is due to a partial separation in the weaker part of the wall, due to the presence of the first arch. This behaviour can be better recognised in Fig. 14d in which the curves, for the value of ductility µ = 10, are compared and in Fig. 15a that reports the failure mechanism corresponding to the case of µ=10.Fig. 15 reports the collapse mechanisms of the sub-structural system L1 and L2, corresponding to the value of the available ductility µ=10. It can be observed that the system L1 exhibits a global behaviour while the system L2 shows a separation between the end wall on the left side and the sequence of arches on the right. This behaviour is due to the different lateral resistance of the two parts and to the law tensile resistance typical of the masonry material. In the same figure the relative distribution of normal stresses in the interfaces are represented according to the already adopted chromatic scale.The reported collapse mechanisms are in very good agreement with the damage scenarios often observed during seismic events in many basilica churches [19-21] and are close to the collapse mode already obtained by Mele et al. [26] through a smeared crack nonlinear finite element modelling approach. All the performed analyses have shown that if the available ductility decreases, the zero tensile zones at the element interfaces increase. Low available ductility favourites collapse scenarios characterised by heavy damage distribution and failure mechanisms dominated by several local collapses due to the separation of the structure in several parts with limited interaction during the dynamic response.A comparison between the push-over curves of both the transversal and longitudinal sub-structural elements are reported in Fig. 16. Two values of ductilities have been considered, corresponding to µ = 10 (identified as brittle in the figures) and µ=∞. The internal sub-structural systems, T2 and T3 along the transversal direction and L2 along the longitudinal direction, are characterised by the lower values of strength and stiffness. Furthermore the systems T3 and T4 show a low ductile behaviour for the value of available ductility µ = 10.In this section a sensitivity analysis to assess the influence of the macro-element mesh-size in the structural response is briefly reported. The sub-structural system T2 is considered in the two cases of a low ductility behaviour µ=5 (brittle) and unlimited ductility.Two different mesh refinements are considered, as reported in Fig. 17a, mesh A characterised by 462 macro-elements and a total of 3212 degrees of freedom, mesh B is relative to 190 macro-elements and 1326 degrees of freedom. The comparison in terms of push-over curves are shown in Fig. 17b as can be observed the results provided by the two different mesh are in good agreement both for the brittle and the unlimited ductile cases.In Fig. 18the failure mechanisms predicted by the two different discretisations are shown; it can be observed how both the simulations provide a good representation of the collapse behaviour of the investigated structure.Several earthquakes have shown the high vulnerability of the façades of churches which can either detach from the orthogonal retaining walls or partially involve the orthogonal walls in the out-of plane mechanism. The spatial sub-structural element reported in Fig. 19has been investigated with the aim to obtain both qualitative and quantitative results relative to the out-of plane behaviour of the main façade of the church without performing a nonlinear three-dimensional analysis of the entire church, which has been however reported in the next section. In order to take into account the influence due to the connection with the orthogonal walls these latter have been considered for a length equal to about the width of the façade.If the connection between the longitudinal walls and the façade are weak the collapse mechanism generally involves the entire façade which, out of plane, behaves as a rigid body slender block that overturns around a base cylindrical hinge. If the longitudinal walls and the façade are well linked the out of plane behaviour of the façade is difficult to evaluate by simple rigid body motion analyses. In this latter case both the in-plane response of the longitudinal walls and the out-of plane response of the façade have to be taken into account.The intersection between walls is managed according to a modelling strategy consistent to the proposed discrete element approach. Namely connections between perpendicular walls are dealt with by inserting suitable joint elements capable of modelling perfect, imperfect or absence of interlocking. This behaviour has been obtained by introducing three-dimensional prismatic discrete elements endowed with six interfaces, one for each side of the prism. The interfaces are calibrated according to the connection properties and rule both the flexural and the sliding behaviour, the internal shear deformability at the joint elements have been neglected hence each joint element is characterised by six degree of freedom only. A qualitative representation of the modelling strategy adopted for the connections between orthogonal walls is reported in Fig. 20.With the aim to show the capability of the model to follow the post-peak behaviour, instead of a perfectly plastic behaviour with assigned ductility, as in the applications reported in the previous sections, a fracture energy has been associated to the tensile and compressive behaviour of masonry, according to a degrading constitutive law consistent to the model reported in Fig. 21. In particular a softening branch after the elastic phase is considered, Gtand Gcbeing the tensile and compressive fracture energy respectively. The unloading stiffness can be set as intermediate between the elastic one and that oriented to the origin (Eotand Eocin the figure). In the applications reported in the following the unloading stiffness have been assumed oriented to the origin for tensile force and equal to the initial elastic value for compressive force.The applications here reported are relative to displacement controlled nonlinear analyses making use of the well known arc length procedure. First the application of constant vertical loads deriving from the weight is considered, than a horizontal mass-proportional loadings, in the direction orthogonal to the façade is applied.In Fig. 22the pushover curves of the five monitored displacements are reported for the case of unlimited compressive fracture energy Gc→ ∞ and tensile fracture energyGt=0.1N/mm. The results are expressed in terms of base shear, normalised with respect to the total weight (22,701kN) of the sub-structural element, as a function of the displacements of five different target points, whose positions are specified in Fig. 19. It can be observed the different level of the displacement corresponding to each target point, as expected the maximum displacement correspond to the top of the façade.The collapse mechanism is characterised by a progressive detachment of the façade from the orthogonal walls, mainly the inner ones, with a horizontal cylindrical plastic hinge and a vertical one in the tympanum, as reported in Fig. 23a.In order to better assess the influence of the tensile fracture energy, five more analyses have been performed in which the fracture energy has been varied. In particular, besides the previously considered case (Gt=0.1N/mm), the other values adopted for the tensile fracture energy areGt=0.02,0.2,0.5,1,∞N/mm. As the fracture energy increases, the collapse mechanism moves from the brittle detachment of the façade to a more enhanced implication of the orthogonal walls, especially the first order of windows and the second order of arches of the orthogonal walls, as better showed in Fig. 23b and Fig. 23c in which the collapse mechanism associated to two value of fracture energy are reported. Also the pushover curves are strongly influenced by this parameter, as highlighted in Fig. 24where the pushover curves for the considered models are compared, reporting the horizontal displacement of the top of the tympanum vs the normalised base shear.Finally, a further investigation, taking into account the influence of the mesh size, is reported in the following. Namely, the case previously considered, characterised by fracture energies Gc→ ∞ andGt=0.1N/mm, whose results, reported in Fig. 22, have been obtained through a model with 8848 degrees of freedom according to the mesh reported in Fig. 19 has been re-analysed by considering a less refined discretisation. In particular the new model, reported in Fig. 25, has about an half computational cost being characterised by 4720 degrees of freedom only.As can be observed from Fig. 26also the less refined mesh is able to describe the collapse mechanism that is substantially coincident to those previously obtained and reported in Fig. 23a.The comparison between the pushover curves obtained with the two different mesh sizes is reported in Fig. 27, where the horizontal displacement of the point at the of the tympanum vs the base shear normalised by the self-weight is reported. It can be observed a very good agreement in the initial quasi-elastic phase and a slightly greater rigidity in the less refined model in the nonlinear range. However both the models correctly predict the limit of the quasi-elastic range in terms of displacement and limit load.In this sub-section, the capability of the proposed macro-element approach to predict the main peculiarities of the nonlinear behaviour of the whole church is investigated. In particular the results of a three-dimensional model of the entire church are analysed and compared to those already obtained for each sub-structural system.Two views of the three-dimensional representation of the adopted model are reported in Fig. 28. The overall model is characterised by 2208 quadrilateral elements, 170 triangular elements and 358 rigid corner elements needed to connect orthogonal walls. The total amount of degrees of freedom is 18,624.The numerical results reported in the following are relative to force controlled push-over analyses associated first to the application of the gravity loads and then to an increasing horizontal mass-proportional distribution of loadings. According to the symmetry of the structure two analyses in the longitudinal (X) direction and a single analysis in the transversal (Y) direction are considered.Since the nonlinear behaviour of the church is dominated by the interaction between in plane and the out-of plane responses the results of the static nonlinear analyses are expressed with reference to different target points. The plan positions of the target points, chosen for the representation of the push-over curves, are displayed in Fig. 29, all the points are placed at the top of the corresponding walls.In the applications reported in the following two models, that differ for the adopted tensile ductility only, have been investigated. In the ductile model an unlimited ductility under compressive and tensile load is assumed while for the brittle model, unlimited ductility in compression and a limited ductility in traction (μ=10) have been assumed. The other material properties have been set according to a perfectly elasto-plastic law identified by the values, already adopted and summarised in Table 1. In Fig. 30some images of the failure mechanisms of the brittle model for the positive and negative longitudinal directions are reported, in the same figures a qualitative representation of the damage distribution is reported by adopting a grey scale. It can be observed how the damage tends to concentrate in the connections between orthogonal walls close to the openings and in the wall sections where inelastic cylindrical hinges occur.The positive longitudinal analysis (+X) is dominated by the out-of plane response of the main façade, it can also be observed the concentration of damage in the weaker sections of the orthogonal walls and in the section of the columns of the nave subjected to tensile loads. The negative longitudinal analysis (−X) corresponds to that for which the façade is pushed towards the interior of the church, this mechanism is also characterised by the in plane response of the sub-structural elements L1 and L2 and the out-of plane response of the internal sub-structural elements T2 and T3.In Fig. 31the normalised base-shear vs the monitored displacements are reported. It can be observed the different level of the displacement corresponding to each target displacement. This behaviour is confirmed by the collapse mechanisms (Fig. 32) in which the irregular distribution of damage and displacements are apparent. This collapse behaviour has been often observed during earthquakes and cannot be numerically simulated without considering a three-dimensional model able to simulate both the in and out-of plane behaviour of masonry walls. In all the considered analyses the two monitored displacements ptT5a and ptT5b, located in the central part of the façade, show the largest displacements, highlighting that the collapse mechanism is mainly localised on the main façade of the church.The ideal ductile model, exhibits larger strength and ductility of the brittle model particularly for the analyses in the positive direction. Both the models confirm that the weakest failure mechanism in the longitudinal direction is associated to the out-of plane behaviour of the façade with a partial involvement of the orthogonal walls.This behaviour has been already investigated in Section 4.2 with reference to a three-dimensional sub-structural system although considering the presence of softening in the constitutive law of the orthogonal springs. By comparing the results obtained in the sub-structural system and those relative to the whole church it can be observed a very good agreement in the behaviour of the façade. This can be recognised by comparing the collapse mechanisms (Figs. 23 and 30) and the push-over curves (Figs. 24 and 31), in the latter comparison the case characterised by unlimited fracture energy and that corresponding to unlimited ductility have to be considered.In Fig. 32 some views of the collapse mechanism relative to the analysis of the brittle model subjected to a mass proportional distribution of transversal loads are reported. In this case the main façade is mainly subjected to in plane loads and the collapse mechanism is dominated by the out-of plane response of the sub-systems L1 and L2 which are transversally linked by arches.In Fig. 33the capacity curves, for both the considered models, are reported. Again the monitored displacements show very different levels in the achieved displacements. The largest displacements are those associated to the target points ptL2 and ptL1T4 located to the sub-structural elements L1 and L2. It is interesting to observe the collapse mechanism of the L1 wall which is mainly characterised by two horizontal cylindrical hinges: one at the base of the wall and one at mid-height, as well as partial vertical cylindrical hinge at the upper part.The ductile model is characterised by a base shear coefficient of about 0.37 while the brittle model reaches the ultimate state for a value of 0.23.In this subsection the contributions of each sub-structural system to the total responses in the longitudinal and transversal direction are reported. The results are expressed in terms of shear normalised with respect to the total weight of the church (W = 56,582kN) (Fig. 34).The results are reported for each of the three performed analyses. The results relative to the brittle model are reported on the left, while those relative to the ductile model are reported on the right. For each picture the contribution of each sub-system located along the load direction is considered separately, while the out-of plane contributions of all the structural elements are considered together.In the longitudinal direction, the L1 sub-system is always stiffer and stronger than the L2 sub-system. This leads to differential longitudinal displacements that cause a high structural irregularity.In the transversal direction the strongest and stiffest among the walls is the T2 sub-system, while the sub-system which provides the lowest contribution is T1, probably because of its peripheral position in the plan.A further investigation of the contribution of each sub-system to the global response can be found in Fig. 35, where the pushover curves of the each single free sub-system, investigated in the previous section, have been superimposed with the corresponding contribution to the three dimensional model. The results relative to the brittle model are reported in Fig. 35a while those relative to the ductile model are summarised in Fig. 35b.It can be observed that, although the damage distributions of the sub-systems in the global model are consistent to those obtained in the local models, there are some differences in terms of available resistance and ductility. For example the L2 and T2 sub-systems in the local models are mainly characterised by in plane rocking mechanism, while in the global model the presence of the orthogonal walls orients their collapse mechanism towards a shear failure. The interaction between orthogonal walls can justify the over-strength that some of sub-systems show in the global model.It is worth noticing that in the considered discrete element model the crack distribution follows paths along the interfaces, in which both cracking and sliding can occur. This is a phenomenological representation of failure, consistent with the considered simplified approach. Diagonal cracks cannot be exactly replicated by the 3D macro-model however the capability of the element to exhibits nonlinear shear deformation allows to spread the shear diagonal behaviour along the element and to identify the presence of the damage. This peculiarity represents a strong advantage of the present approach with respect to the strategies based on the rigid spring models [12,13].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper an original modelling approach for the simulation of the nonlinear behaviour of monumental masonry buildings under static and seismic loadings is considered. The proposed approach is based on the concept of discrete-element discretisation and has been conceived with the aim of capturing the nonlinear behaviour of an entire structure, by means of an assemblage of several discrete-elements. Each discrete-element can be characterised by different levels of complexity according to the role of the element in the global model. With the aim to provide a first numerical validation, the method has been applied to a benchmark historical masonry building for which some results are available in the scientific literature. Firstly, some sub-structural systems of a typical basilica plan church have been analysed by means of nonlinear static analyses. Secondly a three-dimensional investigation of the entire church has been performed. The obtained results demonstrated the capability of the proposed discrete element method to consider the complex interaction between the in and out-of plane response of masonry walls also in complex structural layouts typical of basilica type churches.It is worth noticing that the proposed approach lies in between the more complex, computationally cumbersome and more detailed nonlinear FE method and the classical limit approach. In the latter sense it is expected that the proposed simplified approach provides detailed enough information on the response of complex masonry structures without cumbersome numerical procedures. However, if more detailed information regarding reproduction of diagonal yield lines are desired either more refined meshes or more detailed irregular geometry could be chosen.