@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Pareto process optimization of product development project using bi-objective hybrid genetic algorithm

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We develop four types of time model for computing project duration.We embed Pareto genetic algorithm with variable neighborhood search strategy.We propose three VNSs combing of process optimization specific knowledge.The results show that PGVNS can obtain a better Pareto solution than NSGA-II.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Product development process,Process optimization,Hybrid genetic algorithm,Variable neighborhood search,CD-DSM,Pareto solutions,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Overlapping and iteration between development activities are the main reasons to cause complexity in product development (PD) process. Overlapping may not only reduce duration of a project but also create rework risk, while iteration increases the project duration and cost. In order to balance the duration and cost, this article presents four types of time models from the angle of time overlapping and activities dependent relationships based on Collaboration Degree Design Structure Matrix (CD-DSM) and builds the cost model considering the negation cost. On basis of the formulated model, a hybridization of the Pareto genetic algorithm (PGA) and variable neighborhood search (VNS) algorithm is proposed to solve the bi-objective process optimization problem of PD project for reducing the project duration and cost. The VNS strategy is implemented after the genetic operation of crossover and mutation to improve the exploitation ability of the algorithm. And then, an industrial example, a LED module PD project in an optoelectronic enterprise, is provided to illustrate the utility of the proposed approach. The optimization model minimizes the project duration and cost associated with overlapping and iteration and yields a Pareto optimal solution of project activity sequence for project managers to make decision following different business purposes. The simulation results of two different problems show that the proposed approach has a good convergence and robustness.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As competitive pressure increases and time to market compresses, companies are outsourcing some design activities to more professional organizations and paying more attentions to core design activities for shortening the cycle time of PD process. At the same time, development activities of complex products are increasingly undertaken by multidisciplinary team members from geographically distributed departments in a virtual and collaborative environment [1]. And modern product structure is increasingly complex and PD process presents the trend of integrating, networking and distribution [2]. Thus, PD process will be more strongly time-oriented and collaborative, while still focusing on cost and quality. As a result, how to better manage and enhance PD processes to cater for various customer requirements becomes a core issue for each single manufacturing enterprise.The PD process can be regarded as an organized group of related design activities involving project initiation, task assignment, product design, process design, etc. Traditionally centralized and sequential product design, planning and scheduling activities are inadequate to respond to the dynamic variations in new PD cycles [3]. Iteration and overlapping of design activities are the fundamental characteristics of complex PD process [4]. Iteration usually leads to rework risk [5], while overlapping activities usually impact project duration. Iteration implies redoing or revising the related design results, which makes the PD process more complex due to the coupled and intermixed activities. Overlapping involves the concurrent execution of two successive activities and allows the second activity to begin before the first one is finished. Overlapping activities also increase communication and excessive information exchange [6]. It is well known that good collaborative and concurrent performance can help to achieve shortened project duration and reduced costs. However, the downstream activity has to iterate to accommodate changes throughout the iteration process, which will lead to additional time at a small amount of rework cost. In this way, the activity sequence of PD determines the development cycle time and cost to certain extent. In addition, overlapping between activities is a good strategy to reduce total project duration. However, the development cost is added because of reworks of downstream activity caused by overlapping with dependent upstream one. Therefore, how to optimize the PD process to reduce the rework delay time and added cost of development activities and improve its concurrent and collaborative capability amongst distributed cooperative members is an important issue. Consequently, an analytical and optimal model of the trade-off between the total project duration impacted by iteration and overlapping and the total development cost is needed in PD.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The next section reviews the relevant literature related to process optimization of PD. The problem description and mathematic model of process optimization of PD are developed in Section 3. Section 4 details the proposed hybridization of PGA with VNS to approximate the Pareto optimal solutions. An application case of a LED module development process in an optoelectronic enterprise is demonstrated in Section 5 and conclusions are given in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Overlapping and iteration between activities are basic properties in the complex PD process. It is highly desired to obtain the optimal sequencing of the activities for shortening PD project duration and cost. To enhance the performance and efficiency of development process, this article proposes a process optimization model to capture the time characteristics and cost risks due to overlapping and complex interaction in PD processes. In terms of the fact that minimization of time is not synonymous with minimization of cost, we apply Pareto approach to obtain the optimal solution set. So a novel PGVNS method is proposed to approximate the Pareto optimal solutions of the bi-objective process optimization problems. The method is demonstrated with an example from a LED module PD process in optoelectronic enterprise. Simulation results of two different problems indicate that the performances of the proposed approach are better than that of NSGA-II. Moreover, the proposed process model considers overlapping and iterations, which can help project managers to plan and improve the PD process.In consideration of collaboration performance of PD process, there still exists many challenges and research work to do. Therefore, as further research, the following can be considered. First, how to construct collaboration performance measures of PD process, and the tradeoff among project duration, cost and risk. Second, we will consider integrating optimization and simulation algorithm into a decision support system to optimize the activity sequence that uses the variance of collaboration, duration and cost as an objective and evaluate the performance of process from a systematic viewpoint.