@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Expert system applied for classifying self-compacting concrete surface finish

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel method for classifying concrete surface is proposed.An image analysis tool is developed to allow an objective analysis of the surface.Three input parameters were designed to properly describe concrete surface finish.The performance of the expert system is verified in a case study.The method is suitable for evaluating mixture proportions effect on surface quality.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Image analysis,Fuzzy logic,Concrete surface,Self-compacting concrete,Bugholes,Quality control,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents an expert system that was developed with the goal of classifying the surface finish of self-compacting concrete (SCC) precast elements. The classification concerns the presence of bugholes, which are imperfections that appear on a concrete surface after demoulding. The surface evaluation is based on digital images that are processed by an image analysis tool. This tool defines the parameters that will be evaluated by a fuzzy logic-based classification tool. The classification is based on a novel scale that considers the degree of treatment necessary to achieve proper surface finish. The proposed system was applied to evaluate SCC precast elements. The results from the case study highlight the success of the proposed expert system in evaluating SCC finish. In addition, the system proved to be of great help when used for systematic analyses of the effect of mixture proportions on surface quality.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Self-compacting concrete (SCC) is a high-performance concrete that can flow under its own weight so as to completely fill the formwork and self-consolidate without any mechanical vibration [1,2]. This type of concrete is specifically designed to achieve excellent deformability, low risk of blockage, and good stability, ensuring a high formwork filling capacity. SCC is considered a suitable material for the construction of structural members with high volumes of steel reinforcement because of its ability to easily flow in highly congested areas [3,4].The use of SCC in precasting is rapidly developing in the construction industry, most likely due to the production process costs and the advantageous organizational nature of this material [4]. Nonetheless, it is important to consider that the production of SCC is more difficult than that of conventional concrete, and many parameters have to be considered to obtain a final product with acceptable quality for the intended purpose.One of the primary problems associated with precast concrete plants relates to the presence of bugholes on the concrete surface. Bugholes are imperfections or voids that appear on the concrete surface after demoulding. Even with the advanced construction methods and chemical admixtures of today, surface voids still persist [5]. The European guidelines for SCC [6] indicate that the appearance of bugholes is related to the presence of entrapped air, entrapped form oil, and/or entrapped water in the contact surface with the formwork. Also, the occurrence of bugholes is more pronounced in SCC mixtures with poor filling ability, poor passing ability, high viscosity or high yield stress, low slump-flow, and rapid slump-flow reduction.Although bugholes do not affect the structural integrity of concrete, their presence causes delays in the production schedule. These delays are due to the need for proper surface treatment before the structure is considered finished. As a result, the production cost is directly affected because the time to produce each concrete element is increased when cosmetic treatments are necessary.The first methods used to classify concrete surface quality were based on the manual counting and measuring of the diameter of bugholes, followed by the calculation of the percentage of holed areas on the surface [7,8]. This technique, however, was extremely laborious and incapable of representing the surface quality [9]. Therefore, this classification method was replaced with the one suggested by Thomson [7], who proposed that the analysis of concrete surface quality had to be based on the comparison of the actual surface to photographs of reference samples with different degrees of bughole coverage.An example of reference photos that are recommended by the Concrete International Board (CIB) [10] is illustrated in Fig. 1. This method, which uses the idea that was introduced by Thomson [7], is considered acceptable by the industry today. While simple in principle, the comparison with photographs of reference samples can be problematic due to the variability between different printed scales of the reference samples and the subjectivity of the human eye. Moreover, one surface can group together several types of bugholes such that the use of the reference becomes rather difficult and subjective [5,11].In order to obtain a better evaluation of the concrete surface, an image processing and analysis tool is proposed in this work. According to Chermant [12] and Coster and Chermant [13], the use of image analysis is advantageous because it rapidly gives an objective result and in a way entirely automatically. Image analysis methods have been used successfully in several civil engineering areas of study, e.g., concrete surface crack monitoring and quantification [14], concrete bridge inspection [15], and classification of radar images [16], among others.An automated image analysis method for evaluating concrete surface finish was presented by Lemaire et al. [11]; however, this method takes into account the same parameter that was proved to be incapable of representing the essence of surface quality, i.e., percentage of holed areas on the surface. Also, Ozkul and Kucuk [5] designed an instrument for measuring bughole rating of concrete surfaces based on pressure differential method. Besides using a different technique, the surface classification still relied on the percentage of holed areas on the surface only. Therefore, it is noticeable that improvements are still necessary concerning the parameters to be used to numerically represent surface quality. In view of that, the use of two additional parameters for surface classification is proposed in this work.In addition, to simulate the subjectivity that is present in human reasoning while classifying concrete surfaces, a classification system was developed. In particular, the system is based on fuzzy logic. This represents an interesting solution because it allows dealing with verbally expressed phenomena to obtain a numerical solution [17]. The use of fuzzy logic in expert systems is a relatively new approach for solving problems where it is necessary to input expert opinions into a controlling or simulation system.Within the research field of fuzzy systems, emphasis is given to Mamdani’s publication [18], which was the first to demonstrate that fuzzy systems could be used in a profitable manner in controlling systems. After that, several applications, not limited to control, followed, e.g., commercial systems [19] and improvement of car performance [20]. The application of fuzzy logic has also presented successful results in concrete technology, e.g., prediction of bond strength of concrete [21], diagnosis of concrete bridge deterioration, [22], and simulation of cement hydration and cracking propagation in concrete [23], to mention a few.The expert system proposed in this work consists of a combination of the developed image analysis method and the fuzzy logic-based classification system. In contrast to current classification methods, the proposed expert system classifies the final aspect of concrete surfaces according to the degree of intervention necessary to achieve a proper surface finish. The system was applied in a case study focused on the classification of the surface appearance of precast elements produced with SCC.The proposed expert system intends to classify the surface appearance of concrete. The classification is based on a novel scale that takes into account the degree of intervention required to achieve a proper surface finish. Besides the percentage of bugholes area on the concrete surface, two additional parameters were taken into account to describe the surface quality of concrete in regard to the presence of bugholes. The expert system is divided in two parts: (i) image analysis tool and (ii) fuzzy logic-based classification tool. Its complete configuration is illustrated in Fig. 4.The concrete surface is prone to the appearance of bugholes. The higher the bugholes coverage on concrete surface, the higher the degree of intervention necessary to correct the surface before the structure is considered to be finished. Based on the CIB bughole scale (Fig. 1), it is likely that the ratio between the total area of bugholes (Ab), see Eq. (1), and the total area of the concrete surface (AS) is the most suitable parameter to classify the surface aspect. This parameter corresponds to the percentage of bugholes area on the concrete surface (AB) and it is presented in Eq. (2).(1)Ab=∑i=1nArn,(2)AB=AbAS,where n is the total number of bugholes on the concrete surface and Aris the area of each bughole. Surfaces with different values of ABare illustrated in Fig. 2. Notice that for all these surfaces the bugholes are considered as circles with constant diameter (∅bh) and the total surface area (AS) is equal to (50×100)mm2.The surfaces that are illustrated in Fig. 2 indicate, however, that ABcannot be used as a standalone parameter for surface classification. Although all the surfaces from Fig. 2 have similar ABvalues, it is clear that their surface aspect is not the same. While surfaces 1 and 2 would be considered of good quality with no further need for surface treatment, surfaces 3–6 would have to be treated before being ready for delivery. Since these surfaces differ from each other in the bugholes diameter (∅bh), it is then necessary to take such parameter into account for surface classification.For this reason, it was decided to consider the maximum bugholes diameter on the concrete surface (∅M) as an additional parameter. Examples of surfaces with different values of ∅Mare illustrated in Fig. 3a.  These surfaces have ABvalue similar to the one from Fig. 2; however, the bugholes on those from Fig. 3a have a diameter range varying from 0.13 to 1.50mm instead of a constant value.The comparison of the surfaces 7 and 8 (see Fig. 3a) indicates that an additional parameter is still needed. This is because, although different in aspect, both surfaces have similar values of ABand ∅M. In particular, surface 7 has few bugholes with large diameters and several bugholes with small diameters, whereas surface 8 has a higher number of bugholes with larger diameters, see Fig. 3a. Even with the same ABand ∅Mvalues, it is again evident that surfaces 7 and 8 cannot be classified as having the same need for intervention. Although treatment is necessary in both cases, the degree of intervention on surface 8 is clearly higher than on surface 7 due to the higher number of bugholes with large diameters, leading to a higher impact in the entire production chain.Once ABand ∅Mare not able to represent the distribution of bugholes with different diameters on the concrete surface, an additional information about the surface had to be considered. This information concerns the bughole size distribution curve (f(∅bh)), which corresponds to a cumulative frequency curve of all bugholes on the concrete surface. The bughole size distribution curves for surfaces 7 and 8 are indicated in Fig. 3b.Based on the presented analysis, the percentage of bughole area (AB), the maximum bughole diameter size (∅M), and the bughole size distribution curve (f(∅bh)) were selected as the parameters that fully describe the final aspect of the concrete surface with regard to the presence of bugholes.The pseudo-algorithm of the developed image analysis method is shown in Table 1and described along these lines.Initially, a Wiener’s filter is used to reduce the noise caused by the presence of blemishes on the concrete surface; for further details regarding this filter and its application refer to [24,25]. Next, the image contrast is enhanced by using a bottom-hat filtering, i.e., a morphological filter, and a contrast adjustment function, which provides optimized results when image segmentation is applied. These steps were necessary because the primary analyses that were performed during the implementation of the imaging algorithm have shown that the boundaries of bugholes with diameters of greater than 7.50mm could not be properly detected. Such effect is likely caused by the lack of contrast between the bughole boundary and its surrounding area. The use of filtering and segmentation for image analysis is recommended by Coster and Chermant [13], who presents a comprehensive review about image analysis techniques for civil engineering materials. Subsequently, the segmented image is remounted, and the input parameters that will be used to determine the surface aspect are computed.An example of a concrete surface and the detail of the output from the image analysis tool are depicted in Fig. 5. A variation of the presented method was successfully applied for the evaluation of concrete porosity based on backscattered and optical image analysis; for further details refer to Silva et al. [26].The percentage of bughole area (AB) is calculated by the sum of the area of individual bugholes (Ar) that were detected by the image analysis tool divided by the total area that is evaluated. To compute ∅bh, the proposed tool first determines the area of each bughole (Ar), and then the diameter of the circle with equivalent area (∅(Ar)). Finally, f(∅bh) is calculated based on the bughole diameter (∅bh) and the number of bugholes. Notice that the relation between pixel and area in mm2 has to be established to determine Ar, AB, ∅M, ∅bh, and f(∅bh). For that, a linear grid with known dimensions is marked on the concrete surface to be used as reference scale.The fuzzy logic-based classification tool aims to classify concrete surfaces in regard to the presence of bugholes. In particular, the system allows for the user to define a set of verbal rules (if-then rules) that will be used for the proposed classification. Because these rules are purely based on the user’s expertise, limited by production process tolerances, the system simulates the human subjectivity to classify the final aspect of the concrete surface. Each rule takes into account the input parameters that were discussed in Section 2.1, i.e., AB, ∅M, and f(∅bh).Since the system is based on fuzzy logic, each input parameter was divided in a group of fuzzy sets. These are then taken as reference to compute the degree of membership of each clause from the antecedent part of the established if-then rules. Next, the outputs from the rules are aggregated to compute the output of the system, which corresponds to a classification score of the concrete surface. The approaches that were taken into account to design the fuzzy sets related to each input parameter are discussed as follows. Further, the novel classification scale, rule base, guidelines to define the rule base, and inference engine of the system are also introduced.The fuzzy sets for the input parameter ABwere inspired by the CIB classification scale. Initially, the CIB scale was evaluated by the image analysis tool that was presented in Section 2.2. After that, the curve that relates the CIB surface zones (xC) and ABwas computed by regression method. For that, the exponential equation g(x)=a·eb·xwas used as reference since this led to the high correlation coefficient (R2=0.9803). The results from this analysis are illustrated in Fig. 6, and the classification curve is presented in the following equation:(3)AB=g(xC)=0.0879·e0.6020·xC.Next, the extension principle was applied to define the fuzzy setA∼Band its membership functionsμA∼B(AB). The application of the extension principle is explained along these lines. For a comprehensive review of the extension principle applied to fuzzy sets refer to [18,17]First, the CIB surface zones (xC) were considered as triangular fuzzy sets(X∼C); thus its membership functionμX∼C(xC)can be declared as:(4)μX∼C(xC)=kxC,1,xC⩽xC,1,xC-xC,1xC,2-xC,1,xC,1<xC⩽xC,2,xC,3-xCxC,3-xC,2,xC,2<xC<xC,3,kxC,2,xC⩾xC,3,where xC,N(N=1, 2, 3) andkxC,n(n=1,2)are the limits of the membership functionsμX∼C(xC)that are shown in Fig. 7. These limits are listed in Table 2.Next, the extension principle was applied to obtain the membership function of the fuzzy setA∼B=g(X∼C), yielding to:(5)μA∼B(AB)=supAB=g(xC)μX∼C(xC).Because AB=g(xC) is an invertible function, such that xC=g−1(AB), the Eq. (5) can be written as:(6)μA∼B(AB)=μX∼C(g-1(AB)).Based on Eqs. (4) and (6), the membership functionμA∼B(AB)can be declared as:(7)μA∼B(AB)=kAB,1,AB⩽AB,1,g-1(AB)-xC,1xC,2-xC,1,AB,1<AB⩽AB,2,xC,3-g-1(AB)xC,3-xC,2,AB,2<AB<AB,3,kAB,2,AB⩾AB,3,where AB,N(N=1, 2, 3) andkAB,n(n=1,2)are constant values related toμA∼B(AB). These constants are listed in Table 2. Notice thatkAB,nis equal tokxC,n.The graphical representation of the previously described steps is illustrated in Fig. 7, which also depicts the membership functionsμA∼B(AB).The fuzzy sets∅∼Mwere considered as triangular fuzzy sets, see Fig. 8. The general equation of the membership functionsμ∅̃M(∅M)is detailed in the following equation:(8)μ∅̃M(∅M)=k∅,1,∅M⩽∅M,1,∅M-∅M,1∅M,2-∅M,1,∅M,1<∅M⩽∅M,2,∅M,3-∅M∅M,3-∅M,2,∅M,2<∅M<∅M,3,k∅,2,∅M⩾∅M,3,where k∅,n(n=1, 2) and ∅M,N(N=1, 2, 3) are constants related to the membership functionsμ∅̃M(∅M). These constants are listed in Table 3and the membership functionsμ∅̃M(∅M)are shown in Fig. 8As illustrated in Fig. 8, the membership functionsμ∅̃M(∅M)are limited by the values ∅min, ∅med, and ∅max. These values relate to the minimum, medium, and maximum bughole diameter, respectively, that are accepted on the concrete surface. Such values are defined by the user depending on the tolerance of the production process, which is connected to the final application of the precast elements.Less tolerant production processes are represented by lower ∅min, ∅med, and ∅max, because the maximum diameter accepted on the final surface is small. Higher values of ∅min, ∅med, and ∅max, on the other hand, correspond to more flexible processes, in which the presence of bugholes up to a certain diameter is acceptable, e.g., in structural members that will be covered by any means at a later stage, or those where surface treatment is not necessarily required. Examples of concrete elements designed for different applications, and therefore with different production process tolerance, are shown in Fig. 9.To consider f(∅bh) in the fuzzy system, it was necessary to establish a parameter that represents the size distribution of the bugholes. For that, the area reduction ratio (AR) was created. This parameter is defined by Eq. (9) and its graphical representation is illustrated in Fig. 10a.(9)AR=1-Af(∅bh)Af(∅M),whereAf(∅bh)is the area under the f(∅bh) curve andAf(∅M)is the total area limited by ∅M.The parameter ARwas inspired by the modulus of fineness of aggregates parameter, which is a number that roughly indicates how fine or coarse an aggregate is. The modulus of fineness of aggregates is computed based on the grain size distribution curve of the aggregate [27]. The higher the modulus of fineness of an aggregate, the coarser the aggregate.The same parameter could be used to classify the fineness of bugholes. However, to avoid misunderstandings, since the modulus of fineness is, in fact, inversely proportional to the actual fineness of an aggregate, a slight modification of the modulus of fineness was used to represent the fineness of the bugholes on concrete surface; in particular, ARis the area reduction ratio. Lower ARratios reflect surfaces in which most of the bugholes have a diameter ∅bhconsiderably lower than ∅M, i.e., fine bugholes. Conversely, higher ARratios relate to surfaces with a considerable number of bugholes with diameters close to ∅M, i.e., coarse bugholes.The fuzzy setsA∼Rwere defined based on an independent approach and further application of the extension principle. First of all, the bughole size distribution curve was idealized as:(10)f(∅bh)=∅bha,where a is an exponent value related to different f(∅bh) curves.Next, the area under the f(∅bh) curve(Af(∅bh))was computed by its integral, which is indicated in the following equation:(11)Af(∅bh)=∫0∅Mf(∅bh)·d∅bh=∅Ma+1a+1.Based on Eq. (11), it is evident that different exponent values “a” yield different areas, and thus different ARratios. The equation that computes the exponent values “a” is shown in Eq. (12). This equation permits defining the set of curves that are indicated in Fig. 10b; each of these are connected to different ARratios. Notice that the presented analysis was performed for the unit value, i.e., ∅M=1.0, so the final result can be further applied to any ∅M.(12)a=AR1-AR.A closer look at Fig. 10b indicates that the variation between the curves for consecutive ARratios is not linear; therefore, the function that relates the different f(∅bh) curves and the corresponding ARratios had to be calculated. For that, the distance(DAR)between the curves in the diagonal direction was taken into account. Notice that theDARwas normalized so as to keep the calculations within the unit interval. Next, the relation between the normalizedDARand ARwas computed, yielding thus to:(13)AR=m(DAR)=1.0E-6·DAR3-2.0E-4·DAR2+1.8E-2·DAR.Finally, the extension principle was applied to compute the membership functionsμA∼R(AR)of the fuzzy setsA∼R. In this case, four levels of ARwere selected; they correspond to 2.5%, 12.5%, 50.0%, and 97.5%. The graphical representation of the extension principle applied to defineμA∼R(AR)is illustrated in Fig. 11, which also depicts the analysis performed to compute Eq. (13). The general equation obtained for theμA∼R(AR)is indicated as:(14)μA∼R(AR)=kAR,1,AR⩽AR1,m-1(AR,l),AR1<AR⩽AR,2,m-1(AR,r),AR2<AR<AR,3,kAR,2,AR⩾AR3.,where m−1(AR,l) and m−1(AR,r) are the inverse function ofAR=m(DAR), see Eq. (13), for the interval [AR1; AR,2] and [AR2; AR,3] respectively. Notice that, to simplify the calculations, m−1(AR,l) and m−1(AR,r) were approximated to the polynomial functions that are shown in Eqs. (15) and (16). These equations were determined based on the graphical representation of the extension principle that is depicted in Fig. 11. The application of the extension principle to determineA∼Rand its membership functionsμA∼R(AR)follows the same procedure that was applied to defineA∼BandμA∼B(AB).(15)m-1(AR,l)=aAR,1·AR3+bAR,1·AR2+cAR,1·AR+dAR,1,(16)m-1(AR,r)=aAR,2·AR3+bAR,2·AR2+cAR,2·AR+dAR,2,whereaAR,n,bAR,n,cAR,n,dAR,n,kAR,1(n=1, 2), and ARN(N=1, 2, 3) are constant values related toμA∼R(AR). These constants are listed in Table 4.The novel classification scale of the proposed expert system is based on the degree of intervention necessary to treat the concrete surface. It consists of a scale CSthat varies from 1.0 to 5.0. The former represents surfaces considered as defect-free, so no surface treatment is needed. Whereas the latter corresponds to surfaces that demand major treatment before they are considered to be finished.The novel classification scale is depicted in Fig. 12a. Based on this scale, the output fuzzy sets of the system were designed. In particular, it was decided to use singleton values, which correspond to the limits of each zone in the novel classification scale (Fig. 12a). The graphical representation of the output sets of the system is illustrated in Fig. 12b.Notice that the use of singleton values in the classification zones helps the potential users, most likely practitioners, to better understand the meaning of the classification score (CS) within the entire framework of the system. The proper understanding of the system is necessary because the rule base, which is described in the following section, is designed in a way that the users are able to adjust it according to the their expertise and the production process tolerances.The input parameters are connected to the system output through the rule base, which size depends on the number of fuzzy sets of each input parameter. In particular, the first input parameter (AB) has seven fuzzy sets, while the second (∅M) has three fuzzy sets, and the third (AR) has four fuzzy sets. This leads to a rule base matrix with 84 elements (=7×3×4). Each of these elements is determined based on the user’s expertise and the production process tolerances. The rule base of the system in its linguistic form, i.e., if-then expressions, is presented in Eq. (17), where the index “i” relates to the ith rule in the rule base matrix.(17)Ri=184:ifABisA∼Bi,ARisA∼Ri,and∅Mis∅̃Mi,thenCSisCSi.The rule base of the proposed expert system is open for adjustments so as to allow the user to fine-tune it depending on the production process criteria. Such flexibility is advantageous since structural elements produced in the same precast plant, but designated for different applications, can be evaluated by the same expert system with few modifications in the rule base. An example of a rule base matrix that will be further used as reference in the case study is illustrated in Fig. 17. These rules were designed based on the expertise of both authors and those responsible for the production process that was evaluated in the case study (see Section 3). The guidelines that were taken into account for designing such rule base are also discussed in Section 3 and can be used as reference for different applications of the proposed expert system.The inference engine consists of the standard Sugeno method. Note, however, that singletons (Fig. 12b) were used instead of pre-defined equations commonly considered by the Sugeno inference engine, see [17]. The aggregation method, which is the defuzzification for the selected inference engine, corresponds to the weighted average of the output from each rule as described in Eq. (18), whereCSiis the classification score from each Rirule from the rule base andμCSiis the corresponding degree of membership, which is computed by applying the Min operator across the antecedents of the rules.(18)CS=∑i=184CSi·μCSi∑i=184μCSi.The use of singletons in combination with the weighted average method allows for obtaining CSvalues that are within the classification zones (1–5). This system is equivalent to a system that uses fuzzy numbers in the classification scale and, for example, a centroid defuzzification method. To verify that, the proposed expert system was used to evaluate a hypothetical concrete surface (HCS) with random values of AB, ∅M, and AR. In particular, the following values were chosen: AB=2.0%, ∅M=8.0mm, and AR=20.0%. The evaluation took into account the proposed expert system and a modified version of it. In the modified version, triangular fuzzy numbers(C∼S)were used instead of singletons (CS) in the output of each rule. Also, the defuzzification was performed through the standard centroid method [17]. In both systems, the rule base was kept the same as indicated in Fig. 17. The results of this analysis indicate that the difference between the classification score(CSHCS)of both systems is about 1.7%. More specifically,CSHCS=3.77andCSHCS=3.83for the system with singletons and fuzzy numbers, respectively. Hence, for the present application, the output from the proposed expert system can be said to be similar to the output that would be obtained when using fuzzy numbers.After the classification score CSis computed, the system evaluates the obtained results in order to determine whether improvements in the mixture proportions are necessary. In particular, if the evaluated surface has a CSvarying from 4.0 to 5.0, the expert system advises the user to verify the list of recommendations presented in the European guidelines for SCC [6] to improve surface finish. This list presents suggestions, such as, modifying the composition of the SCC and/or the form release agent that is used in the production process, among others.To sum up, the final structure of the fuzzy classification engine is shown in Fig. 13.The proposed expert system was applied in a case study of a Brazilian precast concrete plant. Besides quality control, the application focuses on the optimization of the final surface appearance of precast elements produced with SCC. For that, an experimental investigation of six SCC mixtures and two types of form release agents was performed. The concrete surface appearance was analyzed using digital images that were taken from concrete board plates with dimensions of 1.00×0.30×0.08m (length×width×thickness). These images were then inserted in the expert system, which calculated the classification score of the concrete surfaces from all investigated mixtures and pointed out those with optimized results.The tests that were conducted in this study were carried out using SCC mixtures. In order to produce these mixtures, cement CP V ARI [28] was used together with coarse aggregate (CA), limestone filler (LF), high-range water-reducing admixture (HRWRA) based on polycarboxylate, and two types of fine aggregate: natural sand from dunes (FA1) and from crushed rocks (FA2). The physical properties of the aggregates are listed in Table 5, these were assessed based on the instructions found in [29–31].The compositions of the SCC mixtures that were produced in this study are presented in Table 6. The definition of these was based on the concrete composition C1, which was the one that the precast concrete plant had adopted in its production process.The following design parameters were considered for the SCC mixtures: (i) mortar content in volume (αvol); (ii) volume of materials finer than 0.075mm (Vf); (iii) ratio of water to volume of fine material (w/Vf); (iv) water to cement ratio (w/c); and (v) admixture dosage (Ad), as a percentage by cement mass. The values of the design parameters for each of the SCC mixtures are listed in Table 7. The slump-flow of all of the mixtures was held constant at 80.0±1.0cm. The mixing procedure is presented in Table 8.The definition of the initial concrete composition modification for the reference mixture, i.e., from C1 to C2, was based on the in situ observation of the concrete surface. As depicted in Fig. 14, the surface of the concrete plates presented honeycombs, which were likely caused by the lack of mortar to cover the aggregates as reported by Frigione and Zenone [32]. Therefore, the mortar content (αvol) was increased from 69.6% in mixture C1 to 75.0% in mixture C2.Additional SCC mixtures, C3 through C6, were prepared in order to adjust the concrete rheological properties, i.e., shear stress ratio and plastic viscosity, and evaluate their effect on the final appearance of the concrete surface. These modifications were based on previous research [33–35] that identified the effect of composition modification on concrete rheology. Although the rheological properties of the prepared mixtures were not measured in this research, qualitative assumptions regarding these properties were made based on visual analysis during mixing and testing of mixtures prepared in the laboratory. Moreover, the recommendations presented in the European guidelines for SCC [6] were also considered to determine the composition of the mixtures to be tested.In order to evaluate the final appearance of the concrete surface, boards that were 1.00×0.30×0.08m (length×width×thickness) were fabricated in laminated plywood forms. To simulate precast concrete plant production conditions, the SCC was poured from a height of 1.0m into a single point of the formwork to allow the SCC to flow within the mold through the reinforcement. Two different release agents were used in this study. Type A1 consists of an ethyl-alcohol-based compound with density of 0.860±0.01kg/dm3. Type A2 is a biodegradable-oil-based compound with density of 0.830±0.01kg/dm3. The details of the formwork, molding procedure, concrete boards, and the use of the form release agent are presented in Fig. 15a and b.The concrete boards were demolded after 20h. Next, a linear grid was marked on the corners of the surface of each concrete panel so that the pixel density per unit surface area could be determined for subsequent image analysis. Further, pictures of the concrete surface were taken with a Sony DSC V1 digital camera. These images were then evaluated by the image analysis tool. The dimensions of the analyzed concrete surface area are indicated in Fig. 15b.The surfaces were labeled asCn1An2, where n1 corresponds to the mixture composition and n2 to the admixture type. For example, C1A1 indicates that the concrete composition C1 (Table 7) and the Type A1 form release agent were used. An example of the concrete surface C1A1 is shown in Fig. 15c. The example previously presented in Fig. 5c depicts the surface C4A1.The concrete panels of the investigated precast plant are used in the facade of buildings with apparent concrete. For this reason, the final aspect of the concrete surface has to be smooth, and only small bugholes are accepted as they cannot be noticed at distance. Examples of buildings in which these panels are to be used are shown in Fig. 16.In that light, the value of 15.0mm was assumed as the maximum bughole diameter (∅max) that is acceptable to occur in the concrete panels in order to proceed with any surface treatments. At the other extreme, the value of 1.50mm was assumed as the minimum diameter (∅min) that is likely to be visible on the concrete surface from a distance of at least 2.0m. Finally, the value of 4.50mm was chosen as an intermediary value (∅med) between the ∅minand ∅max. Based on these values and the tolerance of the evaluated production process, the rule base of the system was designed. The idea was to classify the surfaces with low values of AB, AR, and ∅Mcloser to CS=1.0, and those with higher values of AB, AR, and ∅Mcloser to CS=5.0.The final configuration of the rule base of the system is presented in Fig. 17. The selection of each element of the rule base is based on the interpretation of the combination of the input parameter. The interpretation depends on the user’s expertise and production process tolerances. For example, “if ABis1∼, ARisS∼, and ∅Mis∅∼max, then CSis 2.0”, see Fig. 17. This is because such surface has only few bugholes with large areas; however, the total area of bugholes is not enough to compromise the surface quality since “ABis1∼”. Therefore minor corrections are likely necessary. On the contrary, if a surface attends the same rules than the previous example but “ABis7∼”, then “CSis 5.0”. This is because the surface quality is compromised by the same group of bugholes that now have larger areas (”ABis7∼”). Hence, major treatment is necessary.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
An independent image analysis and a fuzzy logic-based classification tool were combined to build an expert system for quality control of SCC surface finish. Based on the obtained results the following conclusion can be drawn.The developed image analysis tool allowed for a more objective evaluation of the surface finish when compared to contemporary methods such as the CIB bughole scale. Moreover, the use of three input parameters, in particular, percentage of bughole area (AB), maximum bughole size diameter (∅M), and bughole size distribution curve (f(∅bh)), was crucial to achieve a proper classification of surfaces with different aspects.Furthermore, the fuzzy logic-based classification tool, which is based on a novel scale, was effective in classifying the concrete surface depending on the degree of treatment required to the evaluated surface. Also, the flexibility of the rule base arises as an advantageous feature, because it allows the system to be used in various applications depending on the production process criteria.The system proved suitable for optimization when systematically used in experimental investigations. Such feature, in combination with the flexibility of the rule base, makes the proposed expert system interesting to the concrete industry, in special to precast concrete plants. For the studied case, the SCC mixture that presented the best results (C3) allowed for a reduction of 3.5% in the production cost when compared to the currently used mixture (C1).