@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An efficient scheme for coupling dissimilar hexahedral meshes with the aid of variable-node transition elements

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A scheme is proposed for 3D mesh connection using variable-node elements (VNEs).Shape functions of the VNEs are derived from point interpolation.The VNEs allow additional nodes on edges and faces of hexahedral elements.The VNEs lead to general one-to-many connection of hexahedral elements.The present scheme is effective for local mesh refinement and subdivision modeling.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Transition element,Variable-node element,Mesh connection,Nonmatching meshes,Subdivision modeling,Local mesh refinement,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Three-dimensional transition elements are proposed achieve efficient and accurate connections of nonmatching meshes with different resolutions. These elements, termed variable-node elements, allow additional nodes on element faces of conventional hexahedral elements, as well as on element edges. By taking proper polynomial bases and their absolute values that correspond to the additional nodes, compatible trilinear shape functions are systematically derived in master domains of the elements. When one hexahedral element meets many other hexahedral elements at its faces or edges, the variable-node elements enable one-to-many connection of the dissimilar hexahedral elements in a seamless way. The effectiveness of the proposed scheme is demonstrated through numerical examples of local mesh refinement and subdivision modeling involving nonmatching mesh problems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Since the finite element method (FEM) was proposed in the early 1960s, handling nonmatching meshes, which are caused by different resolutions of the meshes at the interfaces, has been considered a critical and challenging issue among a class of problems including global–local analysis [1–3], adaptive mesh refinement [4–9], and multi-physics and multi-scale problems [10–14]. To resolve this issue by satisfying nodal connectivity and compatibility of shape functions at nonmatching interfaces, the meshes can be regenerated using various mesh generation schemes [15–17] for entire domains including the nonmatching interfaces; however, mesh regeneration involves a cumbersome process. Therefore, a variety of techniques have been proposed to locally manage nonmatching interfaces [2–11,18–33], maintaining individual meshes with different resolutions. They can be categorized into two types: (1) methods that impose additional constraint conditions on the nonmatching interface between meshes with conventional finite elements and (2) methods that convert elements on nonmatching interfaces into special types of elements.With the first type of method, the issue of nonmatching meshes has been resolved using projection [18], penalty function parameters [19], Lagrange multipliers [2,3,20–23], the Arlequin method [24,25], the mortar method [26,27], and so forth. However, if constraints are imposed at nodes on nonmatching interfaces to connect them, these methods require some modifications of the system matrix whenever the constraints are imposed.With the second type of method, only elements located on nonmatching interfaces are replaced by nonconventional finite elements [4–7,28–31], which contain additional nodes on edges or faces of the conventional elements. Among others, variable-node elements (VNEs) based on the moving least square approximation [31] and their extended versions by point interpolation [4,5] provide a seamless transition between independently modeled meshes by adding an arbitrary number of nodes on element edges and element faces. Each node of a VNE has its own degree of freedom, and therefore, a symmetric system matrix is constructed in the same framework as the conventional FEMs. That is, when VNEs are used on nonmatching interfaces, the system matrix does not need to be modified.Here, three-dimensional (3D) VNEs consisting of Type-1, Type-2, Type-3, and Type-4 elements are proposed as an extension of previous work [4,5] and are applied to various problems involving nonmatching meshes. These elements are be categorized into the second type of method mentioned above. Although 3D transition solid elements have been proposed and applied to adaptive mesh gradation [5–8], they only allow one additional node on each element edge and face [6–8] or several nodes on only one element face of an eight-node hexahedral element [5]. In contrast, the VNEs proposed here contain several additional nodes on several element faces, and therefore, they may be more useful in general 3D problems. As shown in Figs. 1 and 2, the additional nodes are placed regularly: on one face and four edges in a Type-1 element; on two faces and seven edges in a Type-2 element; and on three faces and nine edges in a Type-3 element, where the faces are surrounded by four edges. A Type-4 element allows additional nodes on three neighboring edges that have a common node on the hexahedral element. Their shape functions are derived from point interpolation with polynomial bases and their absolute values, and they can be connected to a number of hexahedral elements by fulfilling mesh compatibility without limitation. That is, when nonmatching interfaces are formed by attaching one hexahedral element to many other hexahedral elements, one-to-many connection of the hexahedral elements is possible by replacing the one element with the VNE: consequently, the nonmatching interfaces are converted into matching interfaces in a straightforward manner. Because the proposed elements have polynomial-type shape functions in every subdomain for integration, the stiffness matrix can be calculated accurately by conventional Gauss integration.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses how to connect nonmatching meshes with the aid of 3D VNEs. Section 3 describes how shape functions of the VNEs are formulated through point interpolation in a systematic way. In Section 4, the performance of these VNEs is investigated using a standard patch test and numerical examples of engineering applications involving nonmatching meshes. Finally, some concluding remarks are given in Section 5.As mentioned in Section 1, many studies have assessed how to connect meshes with different resolutions [2–11,18–33]. However, most of them focused on two-dimensional problems with a few exceptions [5–8,29,30]. It is more complicated to deal with mesh connection in 3D problems because face-to-face nonmatching interfaces should be considered as well as edge-to-edge nonmatching interfaces. For example, in a 3D domain consisting of substructures, a nonmatching interface may appear between two substructures, as shown in Fig. 1a. In this case, direct and compatible mesh connection using previously proposed transition elements [5–8] is hardly tractable due to the limited distributions of additional nodes. This is why more general elements are needed. Using the proposed VNEs, nonmatching meshes can be converted into matching meshes directly. In Fig. 1b, the elements on the nonmatching interface are replaced with a set of VNEs consisting of Type-1, Type-2, Type-3, and Type-4 elements, which are described below.Consider four types of 3D VNEs, as shown in Fig. 2. Nodes are added to the eight-node hexahedral elements. Fig. 2a displays an (8+2p+2q+pq)-node VNE, which has pq additional nodes on one face and p or q additional nodes on each of the four edges of the hexahedral element, termed a Type-1 element. When additional nodes are located on two faces and seven edges, an (8+3p+2q+2r+pq+rp)-node element is termed a Type-2 element, as shown in Fig. 2b for p=2, q=3, and r=4. An (8+3p+3q+3r+pq+qr+rp)-node element, termed a Type-3 element, is constructed with additional nodes on three faces and nine edges, as shown in Fig. 2c for p=2, q=3, and r=4. The 3D VNE that has additional nodes only on the edges of the hexahedral element is considered as well. Fig. 2d shows an (8+p+q+r)-node element with additional nodes on three edges, termed a Type-4 element. As shown in Fig. 2, the proposed VNEs allow more general distributions of additional nodes than previous VNEs [5–8]. Hence, they lead to general one-to-many connection of hexahedral elements, satisfying nodal connectivity and continuity of shape functions at nonmatching interfaces.Consider a 3D vector field u(ξ) and its three components uα(α=1,2,3) interchangeably denoted by (u,v,w). In a 3D master domain, an independent variable ξ indicates the coordinate (ξ1,ξ2,ξ3), interchangeably indicated by (ξ,η,ζ) for convenience. The approximated displacement uh(ξ) for u(ξ) is expressed in the form of a 3×1 column vector as follows:(1)uh(ξ)=UTφ(ξ)=aTp(ξ),(2)φT(ξ)=ϕ1ϕ2…ϕNP,UT=U1U2…UNP3×NP(3)withUIT=uIvIwI(I=1,2,…,NP).Let NPand NBindicate the numbers of sampling points and polynomial bases in the point interpolation, respectively. In the framework of the FEM using point interpolation, the sampling points are nodes located on the master domain, and NPis identical to NB. WhenϕI(ξ)is a shape function associated with node I, φ(ξ) is an NP×1 column vector of the shape functions. An NP×3 matrix, U, is given as the combination of nodal variables indicated by UIin the form of a 3×1 column vector for each node. In addition, a is an NB×3 matrix of the unknown coefficients and p(ξ) is an NB×1 column vector of the polynomial bases. The shape functions obtained by point interpolation possess the desirable properties to be used in FEM analysis, such as the Kronecker delta condition (ϕI(ξJ)=δIJ), partition of unity (∑I=1NPϕI(ξ)=1), and linear completeness (∑I=1NPϕI(ξ)xI=x) [34,35]. By point interpolation, Eq. (1) is rewritten as follows:(4)uh(ξ)=UTP-1p(ξ),(5)P=P1P2…PNPNB×NP.For a trilinear hexahedral element containing eight nodes, NPand NBare equal to eight. In this case, p(ξ) in Eq. (4) and PIin Eq. (5) are given as(6)pT(ξ)=1ξηζξηηζζξξηζ,(7)PIT=1ξIηIζIξIηIηIζIζIξIξIηIζI(I=1,2,…,NP).From Eqs. (5) and (7), it can be seen that P is given specific values of the polynomial bases at the nodal coordinates in the master domain. Using Eqs. (6) and (7), the vector field is obtained from Eq. (4). Here, the shape functions of the hexahedral element are calculated by φ(ξ)=P−1p(ξ).For the VNEs shown in Fig. 2, additional bases corresponding to the additional nodes are introduced with the eight bases of the hexahedral element in Eq. (6). Let (ξ¯1,ξ¯2,ξ¯3) indicate the coordinates of an edge or face, and (ξ̃1,ξ̃2,ξ̃3) indicate those of a node on the edge or face. An edge is represented by two constant coordinatesξ¯a,ξ¯band one variable coordinateξ¯v(a,b,v=1,2,3), and the coordinates of the additional node on the edge are expressed byξ̃a,ξ̃b, andξ̃vwhereξ̃a=ξ¯a,ξ̃b=ξ¯b, and-1<ξ̃v<1. The additional basis is given as(8)|ξv-ξ̃v|(ξa+ξ̃a)(ξb+ξ̃b).In a similar way, an element face is represented by one constant coordinateξ¯aand two variable coordinatesξ¯v,ξ¯w(a,v,w=1,2,3). Thus, the coordinates of a node on the element face is expressed byξ̃a(=ξ¯a),ξ̃v(-1<ξ̃v<1), andξ̃w(-1<ξ̃w<1). The following basis that corresponds to the additional node on the element face is added to the components of p(ξ) in Eq. (6).(9)|ξv-ξ̃v||ξw-ξ̃w|(ξa+ξ̃a).According to the introduction of the additional bases in Eqs. (8) and (9), the matrices P with PIand U with UIare modified, and thus the shape functions of the VNEs can be obtained using Eqs. (1) and (4).For example, consider the conforming transition elements proposed in [6–8], one of the limited cases of 3D VNEs, wherein only one additional node is placed on each of three faces and nine edges. As shown in Fig. 3, this element can be considered a Type-3 element in the case of p=q=r=1. In this paper, the additional nodes on the edges are first numbered in the order they appear in the positive ζ-plane (or ξη-plane), positive η-plane (or ζξ-plane), and positive ξ-plane (or ηζ-plane) counterclockwise, starting from nine. Subsequently, the additional nodes on the faces are numbered in the same order as above. Thus, 12 additional bases are introduced corresponding to nodes 9–20, as follows:(10)|ξ-0|(η-1)(ζ+1)for node9,|η-0|(ξ+1)(ζ+1)for node10,|ξ-0|(η+1)(ζ+1)for node11,|η-0|(ξ-1)(ζ+1)for node12,|ζ-0|(ξ-1)(η+1)for node13,|ζ-0|(ξ+1)(η+1)for node14,|ξ-0|(η+1)(ζ-1)for node15,|η-0|(ξ+1)(ζ-1)for node16,|ζ-0|(ξ+1)(η-1)for node17,|ξ-0||η-0|(ζ+1)for node18,|ξ-0||ζ-0|(η+1)for node19,|η-0||ζ-0|(ξ+1)for node20.The point interpolation is performed with 20 nodes and their corresponding 20 bases. In this case, the shape functions obtained by point interpolation are the same as those of the conforming transition elements obtained by a hierarchical scheme [6–8] according to the additional nodes.As another example of a limited case [5], suppose that additional nodes are placed on only one face. This can be considered a Type-1 element in the case of p=2 and q=3, as shown in Fig. 2a. The following 16 bases are additionally introduced:(11)ξ+13(η-1)(ζ+1)for node9,ξ-13(η-1)(ζ+1)for node10,η+12(ξ+1)(ζ+1)for node11,η-0(ξ+1)(ζ+1)for node12,η-12(ξ+1)(ζ+1)for node13,ξ-13(η+1)(ζ+1)for node14,ξ+13(η+1)(ζ+1)for node15,η-12(ξ-1)(ζ+1)for node16,η-0(ξ-1)(ζ+1)for node17,η+12(ξ-1)(ζ+1)for node18,ξ+13η+12(ζ+1)for node19,ξ-13η+12(ζ+1)for node20,ξ+13|η-0|(ζ+1)for node21,ξ-13|η-0|(ζ+1)for node22,ξ+13η-12(ζ+1)for node23,ξ-13η-12(ζ+1)for node24.Using 24 nodes and 24 bases including the above bases, the shape functions are obtained in the framework of the point interpolation, which are the same as those in [5]. Note that the present formulation of VNEs not only reproduces limited cases of VNEs such as those mentioned in Section 1, but also provides more general cases of VNEs.The present VNEs, including Type-1, Type-2, Type-3, and Type-4 elements, are capable of connecting nonmatching meshes with different resolutions in 3D problems because the shape functions satisfy the continuity of shape functions at the element boundaries. Fig. 4displays several shape functions on the positive ξ-, η-, and ζ-planes of a Type-3 element, an (8+3p+3q+3r+pq+qr+rp)-node element in the case of p=2, q=3, and r=4. Reconsidering the shape functions of the VNEs on the element faces, they appear in bilinear form, which are compatible with those of neighboring hexahedral elements. The performance of the proposed VNEs will be discussed in Section 4.For numerical integration of the VNEs, subdomain-wise Gauss integration can be applied without any difficulty. The master domains of the VNEs are cut by the planes on which the terms inside absolute value symbols of the additional bases become zero, e.g., the plane of ξ=0 in the case of|ξ-0|(η-1)(ζ+1). Considering the intersections of the cutting planes, the master domains of the VNEs are divided into several hexahedral subdomains, as shown in Fig. 5. Because the shape functions in each subdomain are given as polynomials including a trilinear term, 2×2×2 integration points per subdomain are enough for accurate integration. When NSindicates the number of subdomains in an element, NS×(2×2×2) integration points could be adopted for numeral integration. To calculate a stiffness matrix, the shape functions of the VNEs are used for isoparametric mapping from the master domain to the physical domain, in the same manner as the conventional eight-node hexahedral elements.To summarize, a set of the proposed VNEs show generality beyond existing transition elements [5–8]. It is quite simple to derive their shape functions because conventional point interpolation is used with additional nodes and bases. Once the element type is determined with the number of additional nodes that are expressed by p, q, and r, the procedure of deriving shape functions is quite systematic and automatic, as in the two examples above. When node insertion is needed on eight-node hexahedral elements due to nonmatching meshes with different resolutions, the nodes and their corresponding bases are just added into the framework of point interpolation. All of the shape functions are thus obtained in the form of polynomials, and accurate integration is achieved using subdomain-wise Gauss integration. To assess the performance of the VNEs, several numerical examples are described in the following section.In this section, four numerical examples are used to demonstrate that the VNEs make it possible to efficiently connect nonmatching meshes. First, a patch test is carried out to verify the performance of the VNEs in terms of accuracy. The second example is a semi-infinite elastic medium with a concentrated load, wherein the numerical results are compared with an analytical solution in terms of accuracy. The third example is a pillar with dissimilar rectangular cross sections. This is chosen as an example to apply the VNEs to local mesh refinement. Finally, a cross connector of two axes is analyzed to demonstrate that the VNEs are effective for subdivision modeling as well as local mesh refinement. In the last two examples, the accuracy and efficiency of numerical results are discussed in terms of nodal stresses, which are recovered from the values at the integration points using global L2 projection [36].As seen in Fig. 6a, the model of the patch test is composed of 98 elements (three Type-2 elements, one Type-3 element, and 94 eight-node hexahedral elements). The size of the model is 1×1×1m3, and the material properties are given as Young’s modulus E=1×106Pa and Poisson’s ratio ν=0.3. The boundary conditions corresponding to a constant strain field are imposed at the exterior nodes as follows:u¯=10-3(2x+y+z)/2m,v¯=10-3(x+2y+2z)/2m,w¯=10-3(x+y+2z)/2m.By conducting finite element analysis with the VNEs, the uniform stress distributions are obtained over the entire domain. Fig. 6b shows the distributions of all stress components. It is confirmed from Fig. 6b that the VNEs passed the patch test completely. Because the shape functions of the VNEs are derived in the form of polynomials as explained in Section 3, the constant strain or stress field is exactly reproduced by the subdomain-wise Gauss integration.In Fig. 7, a semi-infinite elastic medium is subjected to a concentrated load normal to a traction free surface, which is the so-called Boussinesq problem [37,38]. To address this problem in an efficient manner, a quarter model of a half sphere is modeled with a radius of 10m. The magnitude of the concentrated load P is 10,000N, and the material properties are given as E=1×106Pa and ν=0.3. As shown in Fig. 7, the displacements are prescribed on Γxand Γyusing symmetry, while those in all directions are prescribed as the values of analytical solutions on the surface of the sphere Γs. The analytical displacement field is given as [37,38]:(12)ur=(1+ν)P2EπRzrR2-(1-2ν)rR+z,w=(1+ν)P2EπRz2R2+2(1-ν),where urand w denote the displacements in the radial and vertical directions, respectively. As shown in Fig. 7, R is the distance to the loading point, and r is the projection of R on the loading surface.First, three conforming meshes (CM-R1, CM-R2, and CM-R4) were constructed using eight-node hexahedral elements, varying the numbers of nodes and elements as shown in Fig. 8a. The suffixes R1, R2, and R4 indicate the refinement level of the corresponding mesh: i.e., one element in CM-R1 corresponds to 2×2×2 elements in CM-R2, and to 4×4×4 elements in CM-R4. Because the maximum stress is highly localized around the loading point, the overall solution behavior is governed by how many nodes and elements are used in discretizing the region near the loading point. Therefore, local mesh refinement near the loading point can be considered as shown in Fig. 8b and c. Based on CM-R1 in Fig. 8a, the locally refined meshes (LMT-R2, LMT-R4, and LMT-R8) in Fig. 8b were constructed by refining the region near the loading point, ΩP, with the aid of previously proposed VNEs or transition elements [5–8]. Similarly, the locally refined meshes (LMV-R4, LMV-R6, and LMV-R8) in Fig. 8c were constructed using the present VNEs. Note that the previous VNEs have only one additional node on each element edge and face, i.e., p, q, and r are equal to 0 or 1 in Type-1, Type-2, Type-3, and Type-4 elements, while the present VNEs can have general distributions of the additional nodes with arbitrary p, q, and r. When the refined meshes in ΩPare connected to the meshes in ΩRthat remain the same as in CM-R1, the use of the previous VNEs may require additional transition regions, e.g., ΩT1 and ΩT2 in Fig. 8b, due to their limitations of node insertion. On the contrary, the present VNEs facilitate a seamless connection of the nonmatching meshes in ΩPand ΩR. Note that the regions indicated by ΩPin Fig. 8 are all the same size regardless of the refinement level, and the meshes named using the same suffix have the same number of elements in ΩP. Comparing LMT-R4 and LMT-R8 with LMV-R4 and LMV-R8, the numbers of refined elements in ΩPof LMT-R2 and of LMT-R8 are the same as those of LMV-R4 and of LMV-R8, respectively; however, the total numbers of nodes and elements in LMT-R4 and LMT-R8 with the previous VNEs are more than those in LMV-R4 and LMV-R8 with the present VNEs, due to the presence of the transition regions in LMT-R4 and LMT-R8. That is, the present VNEs make it possible to conduct local mesh refinement on the minimal region.Fig. 9displays the simulation results using the meshes in Fig. 8. The vertical displacement at the loading point is shown in Fig. 9a. Although a singularity of O(1/R) in the vertical displacement appears at the loading point as seen in Eq. (12), the vertical displacement is plotted with respect to the number of nodes to show the capability of the refined meshes for the singularity. It can be seen from Fig. 9a that the solutions of the locally refined meshes approach infinity faster than those of the conforming meshes. In particular, the locally refined mesh with the present VNEs (i.e., LMV-R4, LMV-R6, and LMV-R8) requires a smaller number of nodes than the locally refined mesh with the previous VNEs (i.e., LMT-R2, LMT-R4, and LMT-R8) to obtain a similar level of convergence in terms of vertical displacement.Furthermore, two relative errors were calculated over ΩPto verify the performance of the VNEs in terms of accuracy. The relative errors in displacement norm and energy norm are defined as follows:Ed=∑I=2nnp(uIa-uIh)2∑I=2nnp(uIa)2,(13)Ee=∫ΩP(εa-εh)TC(εa-εh)dΩ∫ΩP(εa)TC(εa)dΩ,where nnp is the number of nodes in ΩP, anduIaanduIhare the displacement vectors at nodeI from the analytical solutions and from the simulated results, respectively. Because the component ofu1ais infinity when the loading point corresponds to node 1, the displacements at node 1 are excluded when calculating the relative error in displacement norm as seen in Eq. (13). Similarly, εaand εhdenote the strain tensors from the analytical solutions and from the simulated results. The analytical stress field, σ=Cε where C is a material elasticity tensor, is given in the cylindrical coordinate system, as follows [37,38]:σrr=P2πR2-3r2zR3+(1-2ν)RR+z,σθθ=(1-2ν)P2πR2zR-RR+z,σzz=-3Pz32πR5,(14)τzr=τrz=-3Prz22πR5.Using Eqs. (12)–(14), the relative errors in ΩPwere calculated and shown in Fig. 9b and c. Considering the results of CM-R4, LMT-R4, and LMV-R4, which have the same elements in ΩP, these three meshes provide similar levels of accuracy in terms of relative errors in displacement norm and energy norm; however, there are much fewer nodes in the locally refined meshes than in the conforming mesh. Note that the locally refined meshes with the present VNEs show the best performance among the meshes used in this example. That is, the locally refined meshes with the present VNEs lead to an accurate and efficient analysis.A pillar with dissimilar rectangular cross sections is shown in Fig. 10. The lower part of the pillar has a 6×4m2 rectangular cross section, and the upper part has a 3×2m2 rectangular cross section. The shear traction, t=10MPa, is applied on the top face of the pillar. In contrast, all nodes on the bottom face are fixed as shown in Fig. 10. The material properties of the pillar are given as E=200GPa and ν=0.3.The distributions of stress in the z-direction, σzz, were obtained using the conforming meshes (CM-R1, CM-R2, and CM-R3), as shown in Fig. 11a. The lower and upper parts are constructed using conforming meshes of the same resolution, and they are connected without any nonmatching nodes. As shown in Fig. 11a, the stress is concentrated in the joining region between the lower part and the upper part. Therefore, the local refinement near the joining region can be considered as shown in Fig. 11b. The VNEs function to connect nonmatching meshes with different resolutions in a seamless way. Based on CM-R1 in Fig. 11a, the elements are locally refined in the joining region, as shown in Fig. 11b. Note that the locally refined meshes (LM-R2 and LM-R3) are constructed by Type-1 and Type-4 elements without any gaps or overlaps between the lower and upper parts. As in Section 4.2, the meshes were named using the suffixes corresponding to their refinement levels. The resolutions for the refined regions of LM-R2 and LM-R3 are the same as those of CM-R2 and CM-R3, respectively. Fig. 11b shows the distributions of σzz, as well as the composition of LM-R2 and LM-R3. The stress distributions from the conforming meshes and from the locally refined meshes are very similar to each other.Furthermore, the stress distributions along a line connecting “A” and “B” in Fig. 10 are plotted in Fig. 12to demonstrate the effectiveness of the locally refined meshes with the VNEs in a more strict sense. Even though LM-R2 contains approximately 21% nodes of CM-R2, the result of LM-R2 is in good agreement with that of CM-R2. In particular, the result of LM-R3 is almost the same as that of CM-R3. Note that the total number of nodes of LM-R3 is only 11% of that of CM-R3. From the above results, it can be deduced that the locally refined meshes with the VNEs are useful for reducing the total number of degrees of freedom, while maintaining almost the same level of accuracy.In this subsection, a component connecting two axes is considered as an example of subdivision modeling and local mesh refinement. A cross connector of two axes can be divided into five parts, as illustrated in Fig. 13. The two axes corresponding to Part 1 and Part 2 have circular cross sections with a diameter of 17.5mm. All displacements are fixed at the nodes on the bottom and top faces of Part 2, and line loads, Fx=−400kN/m, are applied to Part 1 in the x-direction (see Fig. 13). The material properties of all parts are given as E=210GPa and ν=0.3. For simplicity, finite element analyses are conducted for a 1/4 model by considering the symmetry of the geometry and the boundary conditions.First, the distributions of von Mises stress were obtained using conforming meshes (CM-R1, CM-R2, CM-R3, and CM-R4) with hexahedral elements, as shown in Fig. 14. From CM-R1 to CM-R4, the models are constructed with finer elements. Next, subdivision modeling is carried out based on the conforming meshes. When an entire structure is modeled dividing itself into several substructures, the nonmatching meshes may appear when assembling the independently modeled substructures due to their different resolutions. Suppose that each part of the cross connector of two axes is modeled with the different resolutions as shown in Fig. 15. For simplicity in this example, the meshes of the five parts are from the conforming meshes: Part 1 and Part 4 from CM-R4, Part 2 from CM-R3, Part 3 from CM-R1, and Part 5 from CM-R2. Here, the issue of nonmatching meshes between the parts is resolved with the aid of 3D VNEs, as shown in Fig. 15a. The result of the subdivided model is shown in Fig. 15b. Because the tendency of stress distribution is similar to that of the conforming meshes in Fig. 14, it can be seen that the VNEs connect the different meshes without any gaps or overlaps.Subsequently, local mesh refinement is adopted near the joining regions of the parts indicated in Fig. 16, where the stress concentration occurs. Choosing CM-R1 in Fig. 14a as a base mesh for the cross connector of two axes, the elements in the joining regions are locally refined at the same level as in CM-R2, CM-R3, and CM-R4. The locally refined meshes (LM-R2, LM-R3, and LM-R4) are shown in Fig. 17. Note that all of the meshes in this example were named with the suffixes corresponding to the refinement levels, as in the two previous examples. In the joining regions, LM-R2 in Fig. 17a has the same number of elements as CM-R2. Similarly, the joining regions of LM-R3 in Fig. 17b and LM-R4 in Fig. 17c are discretized at the same level as in CM-R3 and CM-R4, respectively. From a different viewpoint, LM-R2, LM-R3, and LM-R4 can be reconsidered as meshes constructed by combining CM-R1 with CM-R2, CM-R3, and CM-R4, respectively. For the locally refined meshes, Type-1, Type-2, Type-3, and Type-4 elements are also utilized to convert the nonmatching meshes into matching meshes. On the whole, the distributions of von Mises stress in Fig. 17 coincide with the results from the conforming meshes in Fig. 14. Moreover, to examine the effectiveness of local mesh refinement using the VNEs from the local viewpoint, the stress distributions are compared with those of the conforming meshes in the joining regions. Fig. 18a shows the distributions of von Mises stress along a line connecting “A” and “B” between Part 3 and Part 4. The number of nodes of LM-R2 is approximately 36% of that of CM-R2. Nevertheless, the result from LM-R2 is in good agreement with that from CM-R2. Similarly, LM-R3 and LM-R4 contain 27% nodes of CM-R3 and 25% nodes of CM-R4, respectively. Even though the locally refined meshes are constructed with a relatively small number of nodes, they provide accurate solutions at the level similar to that of the results obtained using conforming meshes with the same resolution as in the locally refined regions. Meanwhile, Fig. 18b and c show the stress distributions along two arcs connecting “C” and “D” between Part 1 and Part 5, and “E” and “F” between Part 2 and Part 3. The locally refined meshes show good performance, efficiently reducing the total number of nodes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
