@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evaluating a concept design of a crowd-sourced ‘mashup’ providing ease-of-access information for people with limited mobility

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Investigated use of a map-based mashup incorporating volunteered ease of access data.Information Quality and Cognitive Authority were the theoretical frameworks used.Both pushchair users and disabled travellers found the concept useful.There were potential issues in relation to trust in the information.A set of information-related user requirements was developed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mashup,Accessibility,Journey planning,VGI,User contributed data,Quality,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study investigates the impact of using a concept map-based ‘mashup’ (www.accessadvisr.net) to provide volunteered (i.e. user contributed) ease of access information to travellers with limited mobility. A scenario-based user trial, centred around journey planning, was undertaken with 20 participants, divided equally between (1) those who have physical restrictions on their mobility, due to disability, illness or injury, and (2) those with practical mobility constraints due to being parents with young children who have to use a child’s pushchair when using public transport. Both user groups found the concept useful, but its potential impact was less for the pushchair user group. There were mixed views in relation to the ability of the mashup to convey the trustworthiness, credibility and reliability of information necessary for journey planning. The study identified a number of key information-related user requirements which help enable effective design of user contributed web-based resources for travellers with mobility-related issues.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Physical mobility plays a key role in social inclusion (Lucas, 2012). This applies to individuals with a physical disability, as well as those with other constraints on using the transport network. There still exists a problem of providing effective, easy to use travel information for public transport users with limited mobility. Nearly 20% of the UK population experience a disability, defined as ‘long standing illness, disability or impairment which causes substantial difficulties with day-to-day activities’ (Dept. Work and Pensions, 2013). Over half of this group experience some form of mobility impairment, which represents approximately 6.7million of the UK population who have find using the public transport network difficult to some degree. Information is critical for supporting independent travel for this group. Waara (2009) has highlighted the need for information supporting journey planning, and how ‘targeted traveller information for older and disabled travellers should enable assessment [by the passenger] of the usability of the public transport environment’. In relation to a user group with specific mobility limitations, Ray and Ryder (2003) describe how active and considered evaluation of the travel risks is undertaken by even the most outgoing and risk-taking of the wheelchair user community, before they start a journey.Despite equality legislation (Equality Act, 2010) there is still believed to be a lack of reliable and up to date information on accessible transport networks (Commons Select Committee, 2013). Those with mobility impairments have reported that they find it difficult to obtain information that enables them to undertake independent travel. When studying the barriers to travel by older/disabled passengers, Waara (2009) found that 24% of their sample stated poor accessibility, and 21% stated difficulties in obtaining the information needed to plan a journey. Research commissioned by the UK Dept. for Transport (2004) showed that disabled peoples’ experience of public transport is that it is often inaccessible and of poor quality, and that difficulties in obtaining information about the accessibility of services tend to add to their problems when travelling and make them less inclined to use public transport.The majority of previous research on accessibility of transport (e.g. Waara, 2009; Ray and Ryder, 2003; Dept. for Transport, 2004; Lucas, 2012) has focused on older passengers, travellers with permanent or temporary disability, or other forms of social exclusion. However, a recent large-scale EU funded project (ISEMOA, 2013) has highlighted that ‘people with limited mobility’ includes a broad range of potential travellers, amongst others, those with physical and practical barriers to using public transport successfully, such as those pushing pushchairs. For this reason, this study included both travellers with physical disability, and adults with young children who needed to travel with pushchairs (termed ‘pushchair user’ in this study), and compared and contrasted these two user groups.A relatively recent phenomena has been the emergence of volunteered geographic information (Goodchild, 2007) and neogeography – described by Das and Kraak (2011, p.1) as ‘the domain where users make use of geographic information using web 2.0 applications’. These have resulted in the emergence of information products where volunteered data (including geographic topology and location-referenced information) is combined with professionally produced geographic data to form a ‘mashup’. Mashups are defined by Flanagin and Metzger (2008) as ‘web applications that combine data from multiple sources to form a new integrated resource’. An example is provided by Knight and Bichard (2012) where the locations of public toilets are identified by members of the public, and are located onto a base layer map to provide an online map of facilities. Cardonha et al. (2013) describe development of a crowdsourcing platform to enable creation of accessibility maps. Hara et al. (2013) demonstrate that even untrained volunteers can identify the presence of accessibility problems with relatively high degrees of accuracy.One advantage of user-contributed data is that it can be very current. Goodchild (2008) stated that ‘perhaps the most significant area of geospatial data qualities for VGI [volunteered geographic information] is currency, or the degree to which the database is up-to-date’ and Parker et al. (2014) found that judgements of currency were influenced positively by including VGI within mashups. Mashups incorporating VGI can easily reflect changes in the environment, for example temporary closure of facilities or the accessibility of facilities during construction works. They can also provide a personal perspective on the potential facilitators and barriers for those with mobility limitations using the transport network.Since information can be provided by any member of the public, map mashups can capitalize on the capabilities of ‘citizens as sensors’ as described by Goodchild (2007). In particular, information can be provided by those with mobility limitations, for those with mobility limitations. However there are also several potential limitations to volunteered information (Parker et al., 2012; Zielstra and Zipf, 2010). For example, coverage may be patchy, and information incomplete with a lack of quality control. Web-based Wiki style sites are often cited as needing large user-bases in order to generate any sizeable quantity of content due to the ‘1% rule of thumb’, or ’90-9-1 principle’, which suggest that only around 1% of users of a website contribute the vast majority of new content, with a further 9% contributing sparingly (e.g. editing or rating content). The majority of individuals will use but not contribute content. In one of the few published empirical studies of this phenomenon, this general observation was supported within the digital health social network context (Mierlo, 2014).For map mashups incorporating user-contributed data to be successful, they need to meet the needs of target users. It is currently unclear how some user groups (who may have some specific needs and varying internet experience) react to these forms of data aggregation, and how volunteered, geographic-referenced information might be best presented to end users.Based on the ongoing information needs of travellers with limited mobility, and the emergence of map mashups, there are opportunities for web-based resources that provide user generated information on transport accessibility. The aims of this research were to better understand (1) users’ attitudes towards these integrated information products and (2) how they may be designed. The specific objectives of the study were to:•Assess reaction to a crowd-sourced travel information mashup using theoretically robust constructs.Compare the responses of two distinct user groups with mobility limitations.Identify key user requirements for presenting this kind of data to end-users.There are several theoretical perspectives that are useful for analysing the impact of information products. These emanate from differing disciplines, although they, to some extent, overlap in definition and intended application. A typical usability perspective (ISO, 2008) focuses on user goals within a context of use, and the interface being used to interact with the user. Closely related to usability, a user experience (UX) approach describes the ‘perceptions and responses that result from the use and/or anticipated user of a product, system or service’ (ISO, 2010) – although there has been discussion for several years over the definition and measurement of UX, and its relationship with other more goal-based frameworks such as usability (Law and van Schaik, 2010). In contrast, an information perspective (e.g. Barry and Schamber, 1998; Saracevic, 2007; Rieh, 2002) focuses on the attributes of the information being conveyed to the end user. Perspectives based on outcomes focus on the changes in behaviour that result from presenting alternative information sets to the end user. An example related to the added value of geographical information is provided by May (2013). Finally, a perceived value approach (Zeithaml, 1988; Sweeney and Soutar, 2001) takes a consumer perspective, and analyses the overall assessment of a product or service based on what is ‘received’, versus what is ‘given’.The aim of this study was to investigate the concept of using a mashup to provide information on the accessibility aspects of the transport network, such that other travellers can then use this information to form judgements in relation to their own travel. The study was less interested in the specific design of the website, or the judgement of it as a consumer product, as long as the usability was sufficient to not limit the potential impact of the information conveyed by the mashup. Therefore the study used the information perspective outlined above, and specifically that developed by Rieh (2002) that uses Information Quality and Cognitive Authority as the key dependent variables of interest. These were adopted by Rieh (2002) in relation to information search on the Web, and developed and used by Parker (2012) to assess user contributed data within geographically based information products. Information Quality is defined as ‘a user criterion which has to do with excellence or in some cases truthfulness in labelling’ (Taylor, 1986, p.62). Based on Wilson (1983), Rieh (2002, p.146) describes Cognitive Authority as ‘the influences that a user would recognize as proper because the information therein is thought to be credible and worthy of belief’. These two variables focus mostly on aspects of the information that is conveyed via a product (Table 1). Her original work (2002) included the term ‘scholarly’ since it was undertaken in the context of information search by scholars and this indicated work that was appropriate. For the purpose of this study, the term ‘appropriate’ was used instead. The table includes typical keywords in the text that were coded in relation to the construct.A concept website (www.accessadvisr.net) was developed that enabled information to be contributed to the mashup by travellers, relating to the accessibility of the local transport provision. The website was designed using HTML5 technology to enable the geolocation of users in relation to nearby transport stops and stations, and places of interest (‘Destinations’). Data were obtained from multiple sources in order to build the mashup – primarily:•Geospatial data and address/street view metadata on places of interest; such as restaurants, coffee shops, libraries, etc. were derived from Google using the Maps and Places APIs.Data on the geospatial locations and names of all UK transport stops (bus, train, tube, light rail, airports) were obtained from the National Public Transport open dataset (NaPTAN).Data on the accessibility of local bus stops were brokered from Nottingham City Council and Nottinghamshire County Council (and have subsequently been made available as part of the NaPTAN dataset).Data on the locations of on-street taxi ranks were brokered from Nottingham City Council.Data on the accessibility of local railway stations were manually scraped from the National Rail station features website.Data on the accessibility of local tram stops were brokered from the NET tram website.Users had access to a number of features through the AccessAdvisr concept website’s Graphical User Interface (GUI). From the homepage they could choose to browse a Google map and use toggles to turn on/off the locations of bus and coach stops, points of interest (e.g. cafes, shops, banks), taxi ranks, tram stops, and train stations. They could also navigate to separate pages in order to search for places of interest or transport stops. These searches could be based on their current location (automatically detected), or in a specified location of interest. These features could be accessed without creating a profile. By creating a profile a user gained access to additional features which enabled them to add places as favourites (for quick reference in the future), as well as the ability to add free-text comments and upload photos of places they visit.Basic geospatial information for each location could be supplemented with an overall Ease of Access rating, which could then be broken-down further in terms of the helpfulness of the staff, and whether the degree of accessibility experienced was ‘as advertised’. Examples relating to a train station are shown in Fig. 1.The transport locations also contained photographs which had been uploaded to the mashup, showing key aspects of the infrastructure that were relevant to travellers with limited mobility. Some examples are shown in Fig. 2; these include the date of upload so that travellers can see the currency of the data.For the purposes of the trial, and to support the travel scenarios described below, the concept website was pre-populated with volunteered data tagged to features of the transport network in Loughborough and Nottingham, a small town and city respectively in the East Midlands of the UK.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The aims of the study were to investigate attitudes towards the use of a map mashup that provided volunteered information on the ease of access of points of interest and transport nodes. Two groups of travellers with limitations on their personal mobility (those who experienced some form of disabling impairment, and those using pushchairs with young children) found the concept potentially useful, although the outcomes actually mattered less for those using pushchairs. There were very mixed views in relation to the trustworthiness, credibility and reliability of volunteered information contained within the mashups.The study identified a number of key information-related user requirements which were common to both groups that had mobility related difficulties in using transport. These are summarised below.The qualitative data in particular identified key user requirements if such a concept is to be useful to travellers with restricted mobility. The primary requirement is that support is user-centric rather than data-centric. Information must be structured around the activities the user is trying to perform, as opposed to being presented according to categories or sources of data. In this context, the overall task of the user is journey planning, based on start and destination locations, and taking into account the specific needs and constraints of the traveller.This study focused on accessibility information at discrete points of interest (POIs). However some form of journey-planner-style approach might enable ease-of-access information to be provided by individuals on the sections between POIs, e.g. the walking route between a car park and a café. It is not clear how users anticipated they might contribute value-added sentiment data (photos, videos, ratings) in practice since this question was not explored through the research study.Information on the accessibility of the transport network is relevant to all those with restrictions on mobility. However specific groups will have particular information needs, and inclusion of this tailored content will increase the usefulness of the concept. For the pushchair users, child-related content including location of toilets is needed alongside descriptions of the accessibility of the transport network.Although the accessibility ratings are useful, individually they lack the contextual information to enable individuals to make judgements about the likely impact on their travel, based on their specific constraints. The photographs were especially useful in illustrating specific barriers to travel; however they ideally need to be integrated within some form of journey planning tool and shown at specific locations so that relevant images can be easily accessed by potential travellers.Volunteered information was useful to the participants, but caused some concern in relation to its trustworthiness and associated constructs. In particular, where the contributing user group may be very diverse, tagging volunteered information with limited personal details will help users understand ‘who’ contributed that data.This study focused on the use of volunteered accessibility information for pre-journey planning. A fundamental component of volunteered information is its contribution, so that others can use it. However it is recognized that providing sufficient motivation, and easy tools for doing this, is non-trivial (Doan et al., 2011). Ongoing work is investigating the use of a mobile application to enable individuals to pass judgement on aspects of the transport network and to upload geographically referenced photographs.A challenge remains in terms of creating map mashups that incorporate crowd-sourced data. The crowd-sourced element has been shown to be useful; however an outstanding question arises over how to collect this subjective data in the first instance so that it can be used to populate a mashup. One solution may be to pre-populate a local region to create critical mass, and then look to expand the coverage. An alternative approach may be to provide a mashup that adds value without the crowd-sourced data, and provide easy means of users adding their own content.The main limitation in the study was the heterogeneity in the Physical Disability group, which contributed to quite wide variability in some of the responses. In addition, the Pushchair User group were younger and predominantly female (Table 2), which introduced a potentially confounding factor when comparing the two user groups. However, the aim of the study was not to isolate the impact of the presence of physical disability per se, rather to determine and compare the outcomes based on typical user groups who face mobility-related difficulties in using the transport network. The other limitation is the relatively low participant numbers which limited the quantitative analysis of data.