@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Computer modelling and finite element analysis of spiral triangular strands

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new mathematical geometric model of spiral triangular wire strands is proposed.The curve geometry of wire axes consists of the straight linear and helical segments.The concrete forms of derived parametric geometric equations are presented.These equations are used to generate an accurate 3D geometric and FE strand model.Examples are presented to highlight the benefits of the proposed approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Triangular strand,Geometric parametric equations,Computer modelling,Strand model,Finite element behaviour analysis,Stresses,Displacements,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper a new mathematical geometric model of spiral triangular wire strands with a construction of (3+9) and (3+9+15) wires is proposed and an accurate computational two-layered triangular strand 3D solid modelling, which is used for a finite element analysis, is presented. The present geometric model fully considers the spatial configuration of individual wires in the strand. The three dimensional curve geometry of wires axes in the individual layers of the triangular strand consists of straight linear and helical segments. The derived mathematical representation of this curve is in the form of parametric equations with variable input parameters which facilitate the determination of the centreline of an arbitrary circular wire of the right and left hand lay triangular one and two-layered strands. Derived geometric equations were used for the generation of accurate 3D geometric and computational strand models. The correctness of the derived parametric equations and performance of the generated strand model are controlled by visualizations. The 3D computational model was used for a finite element behaviour analysis of the two-layered triangular strand subjected to tension loadings. Illustrative examples are presented to highlight the benefits of the proposed geometric parametric equations and computational modelling procedures by using the finite element method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Spiral strands and ropes are widely used in civil, mechanical and mining engineering applications. These structures are usually subjected to large tension loads which are associated with torsion and bending effects. Triangular strand ropes are characterized by high structural stability, high fill factors and large bearing surfaces. They have a high strength-to-mass ratio and good efficiency of construction, and because of their increased outer-wire surface area, they have good wear properties. The use of these ropes is especially efficient when there is a heavy end load and severe abrasive wear.The triangular strand shape not only provides better resistance to crushing, but also offers a greater exposed surface area for contact with sheaves, drums or underlying layers of spooled rope. This feature, in connection with the use of Lang lay construction, distributes the abrasive wear over a greater number and length of wires. The smooth surface of the rope also helps minimize wear on drums and sheaves.Owing to the helical construction of the wires and strands in a triangular-strand rope, a torque is generated when the rope is restrained and tensioned. When a rope is suspended vertically, there is a load differential along its length due to the self weight of the rope. This load differential gives rise to an initial torque differential in the rope. Rebel et al. [1] showed how the results of the tension–torsion tests of triangular steel-wire ropes can be used to predict static in-shaft torsional behaviour. The expected changes in strand lay length in very deep shafts (deeper than 2500m) were calculated, and the associated problems and effects of severe changes in lay length on rope endurance and safety were discussed. Rebel et al. [2] investigated depth limitations in the use of triangular strand ropes for mine hoisting. The analysis showed that, using current available technology, torsional deformations in triangular strand hoisting ropes can be kept within acceptable limits for winding depths of at least 3200m.Numerous works have been devoted to the development of mathematical geometric models of round spiral wire strands and ropes as well as the modelling of their behaviour under static and dynamic loads. The round wire strands and ropes are treated either as a discrete set of concentric orthotropic cylinders, where individual layers of wires are replaced by equivalent cylindrical orthotropic sheets or as a configuration of helically curved rods, with different assumptions about the cable geometry and inter-wire contacts [3,4]. Utting and Jones’ analysis [3,4] based on the classical twisted rod theories for the behaviour of helical laid wires takes the contact deformation and friction effects into account whereas Costello’s approaches neglect them [5]. Jiang et al. [6] presented a concise finite element model of a three-layered straight helical wire rope strand under axial loads. For the global behaviour of wire strand, the finite element results showed better agreement with the experimental results of Utting and Jones [7] compared with results obtained by the closed-form analytical strand model of Costello [5].The orthotropic sheet model was first applied to cable modelling by Hobbs and Raoof [8] and then extended by Raoof and his associates over two decades [9]. Velinsky [10,11] presented the closed-form analysis for elastic deformations of multilayered strands and the design of wire ropes. Lee [12] presented the geometrical analysis applicable to any rope with axisymmetric strands. He derived the Cartesian coordinate equations, which describe the helix geometry of wire within a rope. Through the application of differential geometry and the use of engineering drawing development approaches, problems associated with the three-dimensional helix geometry of wire ropes could be solved. The derived geometric equations were used for an analysis of the geometrical properties of cables. Knapp et al. [13] developed the CableCAD software code for the geometric modelling and finite element analysis of cables. Elata et al. [14] presented a new model for simulating the mechanical response of a wire rope with an independent wire rope core. In contrast with previous models, the present model fully considers the double-helix configuration of individual wires within the wound strand. The double-helix geometry is modelled with parametric equations because of its complex nature. A review of previous studies on the geometric modelling and analysis of steel and synthetic cables can be found in [15–17]. Usabiaga and Pagalday [18] derived the parametric equations of the double helical wires for the undeformed configuration of the rope. Nawrocki and Labrosse [19] presented a finite element model for simple straight wire rope strands, which allows the study of all the possible interwire motions. Labrosse et al. [20] investigated the quantity of energy dissipated through friction due to the motions between wires when a cable is loaded.Evans et al. [21] investigated wire strain variations in tension–tension fatigue for two six-strand rope constructions under normal and overloaded conditions. It has been found that for ropes in tension, there is a considerable variation in wire strains both on different wires at the same cross-section and to a marginally lesser extent along the length of the same wire. It has also been found that a Lang’s lay rope has a wider variation of strains than the identical ordinary lay rope. Bradon et al. [22] presented a theoretical model of the torsional characteristics of parallel multi-part rope systems. In such systems, the ropes may cable, or wrap around each other, depending on the combination of applied torque, rope tension, length and spacing between the rope parts. Paczelt and Beleznai [23] developed the p-extension concept in the finite element method for simple straight two-layered wire rope strand which considers all possible inter-wire motions, contact and dry friction between the wires in case of small displacement and deformation. The structure can be subjected to tension, torsion and bending loading. The linear elastic material properties were assumed for the calculations.Argatov [24] developed the refined discrete mathematical model of a simple helical wire rope strand. The constitutive equations for a helical wire rope strand, which take into account both the Poisson’s ratio effect and the effect of contact deformation, were obtained in a closed form. Erdonmez and Imrak [25] proposed a new methodology of defining and modelling the nested helical structure for wire ropes, and presented an accurate wire rope 3D solid modelling, which can be used for finite element analysis. Both single and nested helical wire parametric equations are presented. Prawoto and Mazlan [26] presented computational, mechanical, and metallurgical properties of wire ropes under tension loading. Wang et al. [27] presented the finite element analysis of a hoisting rope and three-layered strand for the exploration of fretting fatigue parameters and stress distributions of the cross-section. The results showed that different wires in the rope or strand and distinct material models in the analyses both induce different stress distributions and fretting fatigue parameters. Frikha et al. [28] presented the asymptotic expansion method which has been applied to helical structures subjected to axial loads (traction and torsion) at its end sections. The proposed approach has been validated for helical single wire structures and seven-wire strands and compares favourably with reference analytical results or 3D finite element computations.By contrast with earlier references in which geometric models for round spiral strands were built, the main contribution of this paper is to propose a 3D mathematical geometric model for triangular spiral strands and by means of an implementation of the derived geometric model into a finite element model confirm its applicability. For this purpose an example on a spiral triangular strand subjected to a tension load is presented.The cables considered in this paper are spiral triangular strands made of one or two layers of circular wires helically laid over a central circular straight core wires. The right (left) hand lay strand is a strand in which the cover wires are laid in a helix having a right (left) hand pitch. If the rope is made up of six triangular strands, for each strand an equilateral triangle can be described as is shown in Fig. 1. Based on this fact, 3n1 wires in the first layer of the strand are assumed. This designation actually means that the number of wires in the first layer must be divisible by three, in order to distribute them on an equilateral triangle ABC (see Fig. 3).A mathematical expression of axes of the individual wires in the strand facilitates in the creation of a geometric model.A spiral triangular strand that is created from n0=3 parallel-lay straight wires in the core of the strand, 3n1=9 (in this case n1=n0=3) wires in the first layer and n2=15 wires in the second layer is considered in this study. The structure of a cross-section of the triangular strand made up of 3 straight core wires, 9 wires in the first layer and 15 wires in the second layer is shown in Fig. 2. Denotations of the wires diameters in the corresponding layer are δj(where j=0 for the core, j=1 for the first layer and j=2 for the second layer) and the gaps between the wires in the corresponding layer j are Δj. Gaps between wires of the adjacent layers are not considered. The lay angle of wires in the layer j of the strand is αj. We assume that the wires are laid in the right hand direction.An approach is based on the following further assumptions: Points of wires axes of the first layer in the cross section of the strand lie on an equilateral ABC triangle. Points of wires axes of the second layer of the strand lie partly on the sides of an equilateral KLM triangle and partly on circular arches inscribed into this triangle. A derivation of the mathematical expressions for the individual wires axes is based on the described geometric configuration of structural members of the strand.One of the options, of creating a geometric model of triangular strands with a construction of (3+9) and (3+9+15) wires is presented in the following sections of this paper. Subsequently, a proposed geometric model will be transformed into a finite element computational model and a behaviour simulation of a triangular strand subjected to axial loads will be performed.The surface generated by the wire can be formed by translation of the circle whose centre is on the wire axis and the circle lies at the normal plane of this curve. Therefore, it is sufficient to derive amathematical expression of the wires axes curves. Mathematical expressions of the wire axes for the first and second layer will be derived in the following sections.Let the right hand Cartesian coordinate system (O; x, y, z) be placed so that the z axis is identical with the oSaxis of the strand, and the x axis is perpendicular to the AB side of the ABC triangle as is shown in Fig. 3. Let S be the point of the wire axis, whose curve will be expressed.The SG part of the curve of the wire axis is an abscissa (line segment), which can be expressed by the following parametric equations(1)xl1(ψ)=(n1+1)(δ1+Δ1)23(2)yl1(ψ)=(n1+1)(δ1+Δ1)23tan(ψ-γ1)(3)zl1(ψ)=(n1+1)(δ1+Δ1)23tan(ψ-γ1)+3(n1-1)n1+1cotαwhere(4)γ1=arctan3(n1-1)(n1+1)and parameter ψ∊〈0; 2γ1〉 is the angle measured between OM and OS (Fig. 3).The GH part of the curve of the wire axis is the cylindrical helix with ohaxis, which goes through the X point (Fig. 4). Taking into account the condition of the smooth connection between the line segment and the helix segment, the parametric equations of the GH curve obtain the form(5)xh1(ω)=δ1+Δ13cosω+n1-12(6)yh1(ω)=δ1+Δ13sinω+3(n1-1)2(7)zh1(ω)=(δ1+Δ1)3[ω+3(n1-1)]cotα1whereω∈0;2π3is the rotation angle around the ohaxis of the helix.These two segments, i.e. the line and helix segment repeatedly appear in the subsequent sections of the curve, where they are turned by the angleκ=(k-1)2π3and moved in the direction of the z axis by the size of (k−1)hΔ1, where(8)hΔ1=(δ1+Δ1)32π3+3(n1-1)cotα1and the parameter k=1, 2, … determines the order of one type of the segment in the wire. For one thread k=3.The curve of the wire axis of the 2nd layer is also composed of straight line and helix segments. When deriving its mathematical expression we proceed as in the case of the wire of the first layer. For the straight line segment the following parametric equations are obtained(9)xl2(ψ)=(n1+1)(δ1+Δ1)+3(δ1+δ2)23(10)yl2(ψ)=(n1+1)(δ1+Δ1)+3(δ1+δ2)23tan(ψ-γ2)(11)zl2(ψ)=(n1+1)(δ1+Δ1)+3(δ1+δ2)23tan(ψ-γ2)+(n1-1)(δ1+Δ1)2cotα2where ψ∊〈0;2γ2〉 and(12)γ2=arctan3(n1-1)(δ1+Δ1)(n1+1)(δ1+Δ1)+3(δ1+δ2)The arch (helix) segment is expressed by the equations(13)xh2(ω)=δ1+Δ13cosω+n1-12+δ1+δ22cosω(14)yh2(ω)=δ1+Δ13sinω+3(n1-1)2+δ1+δ22sinω(15)zh2(ω)=(δ1+Δ1)3[ω+3(n1-1)]cotα1+δ1+δ22ωcotαwhereω∈0;2π3is the angle of rotation around the ohaxis of the helix.The size of the segment displacement to the next position in the wire is(16)hΔ2=(δ1+Δ1)32π3+3(n1-1)+π(δ1+δ2)3cotα2The axes of all the wires in one layer are identical curves moved in the direction of the z axis of a multiple of the size(17)v1=hΔ1n1for the first layer and of the size(18)v2=3hΔ2n2for the second layer of the strand.Finally, the curve of the axis of the i wire in the j layer can be expressed by the following parametric equations(19)xij(ψ)=xqj(ψ)cosκ-yqj(ψ)sinκ(20)yij(ψ)=xqj(ψ)sinκ+yqj(ψ)cosκ(21)zij(ψ)=zqj(ψ)+(k-1)hΔj-ivjin which for the straight line segment q=l and ψ∊〈0;2γj〉, and for the helix segment q=h and ψ=ω, and consequentlyψ∈0;2π3.The above parametric equations facilitate the definition of the geometry and position of an arbitrary wire in the triangular strand. Consequently, they are sufficient to construct the mathematical geometrical 3D model of triangular strands with a construction of (n0+3n1) and (n0+3n1+n2) wires.For an illustration, the typical geometric curves of the wires axes for the first and second layer of the triangular strand with a construction of (3+9+15) wires, obtained by the derived parametric equations, are shown in Fig. 5. Axes of 9 wires in the first layer of the triangular strand are shown in Fig. 6.The example is presented to demonstrate the features of the geometric modelling of triangular strands based on the proposed parametric equations and their computer implementation. To validate the above mathematical techniques, the triangular strand with a construction of (3+9+15) wires, will be modelled. Pro/Engineer Wildfire 5.0 software is used for the implementation of the derived geometric equations and for the strand modelling [29].The definition of the basic characteristics and input parameters of the triangular strand include wire diameters, gaps between the individual wires in the layers and lay angles is given in Table 1. Symbols of the individual quantities, their denotations in the Pro/Engineer Wildfire 5.0 software and their concrete values are introduced in Table 1.The generation of a computer geometric model of the triangular strand with the defined input parameters consists of the following main steps.(i)Generation of models for the individual wires. A geometric model of one wire of the first layer of the strand which consists of nine wires is created as follows. By means of Eqs. (1)–(8) and Eqs. (19)–(21) individual segments of the curve of the wire axis are defined and connected to the one line (curve). This line represents the axis (centreline) of the wire as is shown in Fig. 7. Using the Sweep command, through which a circular profile of a wire is moved along a trajectory of the spatial curve centreline and consequently, a surface model of a wire is established (Fig. 8). Thus, a generation of the wire model in the first layer of the strand is finished. The geometric models of the remaining wires in this layer are created analogously (Fig. 9a). Likewise, by means of Eqs. (9)–(16) and Eqs. (19)–(21) models of the wires of the second layer of the strand are generated (Fig. 9b).Generation of the complete strand model. For a generation of the final model of the strand an affiliation of the necessary number of wires in the individual layers is required. For this purpose, surface models of wires of individual layers are gradually inserted into the configuration and consequently the complete model of the triangular strand can be obtained. As a further step in the model generation, the surface models of the core wires must also be incorporated into the strand (Fig. 9c). Finally, a cutting of the model to a required length is performed. The 3D complete model of the triangular strand is shown in Fig. 10.The figures and visualizations make it clear that the mathematical model developed is able to generate triangular strands’ geometries. The obtained results confirm the correctness of the derived parametric equations and their mathematical importance.The geometric model of the triangular strand created in the Pro/Engineer Wildfire 5.0 software was further imported in the finite element ABAQUS/Explicit software [30], which was used for its finite element numerical analysis. Finite element analysis is applied to simulate the behaviour of the investigated strand subjected to tension loads.The material model is characterized by a linear relation between stresses and strains. Displacements and strains are supposed to be small, therefore the geometrically linear behaviour of the strand is assumed. This assumption is not restrictive in pure axial loading: Velinsky [31] showed that the results from linear and non-linear theories are very close in the usual practical axial load range.A nominal breaking strength of fn,w=1370Nmm−2 for a steel wire and a nominal ultimate tensile strength of Nn,s=40430.07N for a triangular strand with a nominal metallic cross-sectional area of An,s=29.511mm2 were considered in this study. The assumed modulus of elasticity of the wire material is E=190,000Nmm−2, the density is ρ=7850kgm−3, the Poisson’s ratio is ν=0.3 and the coefficient of friction between wires is μ=0.2. The wires are made of homogeneous, isotropic and linearly elastic material. Only, the elastic region of the triangular strand behaviour is considered.Eight-node linear brick element with three degrees of freedom per node (three translations in the directions of x, y and z coordinate axes) designated as C3D8R in ABAQUS/Explicit element library, with reduced integration and hourglass control was used for the mesh generation. This is a general purpose element, with one integration point located in the middle of the element. The element tends to not be stiff enough in bending. Stresses and strains are most accurate at the integration points. This element has been shown to perform well in similar applications involving the modelling of steel tension cables [32].Eight-node linear brick C3D8R elements were applied for the structural discretization. Circular wires of the triangular strand were discretized using these elements. Convergence studies were conducted to decide an appropriate mesh density, with the aim of achieving suitably accurate results whilst minimising computational time [33,34]. Meshes with dimensions of0.2×0.2mmwere used for the finite element analysis. The meshed model can be seen in Fig. 11. The meshes for each wire were generated independently.The surface-to-surface contact type was defined between surfaces of the individual adjacent wires of the strand. Surface-to-surface contact interactions describe contacts between wires in the individual layers and between wire layers caused by the tensile load acting on the strand. This approach gives more accurate results but is time-consuming. Because it is a demanding contact task, individual contact pairs have not been given in a solution, but the Global contact method was used. The principle of a global contact method for the contacts between the wires in the individual layers and contacts between the wire layers of the strand is shown in Fig. 12. A global search determines the globally nearest master surface facet for each slave node in a given contact pair [30]. A bucket sorting algorithm is used to minimize the computational expense of these searches. A two-dimensional example, excluding the consideration of “buckets”, is shown in Fig. 12. The global search computes the distance from node N to all of the master surface facets in the same bucket as node N. It determines that the nearest facet on the master surface to node N is the facet of element E. Node M is the node on this facet that is nearest to node N, and it is designated as the tracked master surface node. This search is conducted for each slave node, comparing each node against all of the facets on the master surface that are in the same bucket. Friction was modelled by Coulomb’s law with a friction coefficient of 0.2.All the numerical analyses of the triangular strand behaviour under axial tension forces were performed with one end clamped (displacements in the directions of x, y and z coordinate axes were disabled) and the second free end submitted to a loading force (with a displacement in the longitudinal z axial direction). The contraction of the wire cross-section and the strand cross-section was considered. The degrees of freedom of the nodes on the ends of the strand finite element model were defined according to the prescribed boundary conditions.The numerical analyses of the stresses and force–displacement properties of the strand were carried out on the model with an initial length ofL0=192.503mm. The model was composed of 1, 254, 854 elements and 1, 556, 957 nodes. Eight-node linear brick C3D8R elements were applied for the structural discretization of the strand model.The model of the triangular strand is loaded by an axial tension force acting in the direction of its longitudinal z-axis. For the model six different axial loading forces: F1=4,000N; F2=8,000N; F3=12,000N; F4=16,000N; F5=20,000N and F6=24,000N were considered. A global tension load (a global axial force Fk) of the strand was proportionally divided into element areas of individual wires of the strand.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In comparison with the theoretical analysis of wire strands reported in the literature where obviously spiral round strands were modelled and analysed, this paper was focused on triangular strands with a construction of (n0+3n1) and (n0+3n1+n2) wires.In order to precisely model the complex geometry of spiral triangular wire strands necessary for their finite element analysis, the geometric parametric equations have been developed and further implemented in the Pro/Engineer Wildfire 5.0 software code for the geometric modelling. The methodology and techniques for the implementation of the derived mathematical model in the Pro/Engineer Wildfire 5.0 software and procedures for the generation of the 3D triangular strand model were demonstrated.The application of the derived geometric parametric equations and analytical model was illustrated by numerical examples. To predict the behaviour of triangular strands under tensile loads, a mathematical geometric model has been implemented in a finite element program. For this purpose ABAQUS/Explicit software was used. The finite element analysis together with derived geometric parametric equations have been successfully applied to simulate the elastic behaviour of a two-layered triangular strand subjected to tension axial loads.The obtained results confirm the correctness of the derived parametric equations and the mathematical and physical importance of the finite element model developed.Computer modelling and analysis of wire strands and ropes have many applications: basic rope design (e.g. parametric studies to improve properties of strands and ropes), quality assurance (e.g. assessing the effects of deviations from design parameters), numerical testing (e.g. predicting strand and rope static and fatigue properties), investigating experimental variables to plan tests, and extrapolating test results to other conditions.The method holds promise in solving more complex analyses of triangular strand and rope behaviour. Future work will consider the application of derived parametric equations implemented in the finite element approach to more complex problems, including post-elastic and bending effects as well as the fatigue analysis of triangular strands and ropes with complex geometries.