@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Computational analysis of wind interactions for comparing different buildings sites in terms of natural ventilation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A particular building location can be selected attending to natural ventilation.A methodology is proposed to optimize sites considering buildings natural ventilation.A validated CFD model is used to represent outdoor and indoor spaces.In this case, the best location, from two real possible solutions, is evaluated.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Natural ventilation,Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD),Building design stage,Urban planning,Computational analysis,Comfort,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Nowadays building designers have to face up to new strategies to achieve the best sustainable building designs. Well planned natural ventilation strategies in building design may contribute to a significant reduction on building’s energy consumption. Natural ventilation strategies are conditioned to the particular location of each building. To improve natural ventilation performance of a building, the analysis of the influence of the location and the surrounding buildings on wind flow paths around the design building is a must. New computational tools such as Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) are particularly suited for modelling outdoor wind conditions and the influence on indoor air conditions prior to building construction. Hence, reliable methodologies are necessary to support building design decisions related to naturally ventilated buildings prior to construction.This paper presents a case study for the selection of the best future building location attending to natural ventilation behaviour inside the building, conditioned by different evolving environment. A validated CFD model is used to represent outdoor and indoor spaces. The methodology explains how to qualitatively and quantitatively analyze wind paths around and through a building to quantify the natural ventilation performance. The best location, from two real possible solutions, is then selected.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
For the last 10years energy efficiency has become more popular, mainly because of the climate change and environmental degradation. There is an increasing necessity to reduce the amount of energy required to provide thermal comfort conditions in buildings. More sustainable buildings are then designed thanks to the development and advances of new design techniques [1].Ventilation is a must to ensure a high indoor air quality and comfort. Methods for ventilating a building may be divided into mechanical/forced and natural strategies. Mechanical ventilation requires an external input power supplier to work while natural ventilation (NV) relies on wind and thermal buoyancy as driving forces [2]. The potential benefits of NV include lower energy costs compared with mechanical ventilation, as well as an improved indoor environmental quality and occupant satisfaction [3]. Therefore to achieve more sustainable buildings, designers are promoting the utilization of NV to improve and decrease the building energy consumption. While NV benefits may be achievable, its implementation and design presents certain challenges since it requires careful analysis of many variables.Natural ventilation, also called passive ventilation, uses natural outside air movement and pressure differences to both passively cool and ventilate building as early stated. The NV approach design requires an appropriate understanding of principles of local wind patterns, climate conditions, airflow around the building, building orientation, pressurization and façade design [4]. Design of naturally ventilated buildings is also influenced by the airflow through the building. Driving pressures derived from wind and thermal buoyancy are low compared to those produced by fans in mechanical ventilation systems. Therefore the buildings shaping, orientation relative to prevailing wind direction(s) and façade design should be considered in the initial design stages of construction to exploit local wind natural forces to drive the air through its interior.Natural ventilated buildings do not only suggest that natural airflow influences building design, but also that it might be a concept-making factor of the entire project. Building designers should take into account all these variables, even when its quantification before building construction would be not an easy issue. In fact, increasingly new technology methods allow nowadays designers to evaluate different architectural solutions to improve natural ventilation in its design stage. What happens then is that building designers often do not consider NV solutions due to its lack of expertise on using proper technologies to evaluate and implement it. Thus, designer’s awareness and understanding of the location potential is mandatory for proper design of a naturally ventilated building which reaches its maximum energy advantages. The relative position of the building with respect to surrounding buildings and prevailing winds may affect the whole performance of the building. Therefore when designers have the option for choosing the building’s position and orientation, the most energy efficient solution should be selected. Often, it is not possible to choose the building position or there is no space to rotate the building. Even in these cases, designers should choose the best façade opening distribution to optimize the natural ventilation resources of the location or modify the interior layout. Anyway, evaluation should be done for each particular case that might contribute to make buildings more site specific.The evaluation of NV performance pretends to provide information concerning indoor/outdoor airflow parameters in a building. There are many recent applications for predicting the ventilation performance of buildings. Ventilation can be typically predicted or evaluated using a wide range of methods: analytical models, empirical models, small and full-scale experimental models, multi-zone models, zonal models and CFD models. An overview of the methods is summarized by Chen [5], Yuguo and Heiselberg [6]. Among all of them, Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) simulations have been the most popular in recent years [7–10]. CFD has been widely used for simulation of wind and air movement in existing buildings. Literature is profuse in documents based on CFD direct application and experimental validation in order to design wind behaviour of NV in buildings [11–19]. Nevertheless, CFD has not been almost used in building early design stage, in which CFD can help building designer to achieve better and more detailed understanding of issues involving ventilation. Additionally, in this stage, there is no access to full-scale testing facilities although several studies have been done in CFD and reduced-scale models [21]. CFD enables building designers to choose the best constructive solutions by simulation techniques and not by trial-and-error experimental techniques, which need much time and economic resources to be performed. Nevertheless, CFD simulations have to be validated to assure that results are reliable.To simulate correctly the specific conditions of each location, a complex analysis of the building and of the background is necessary. Developing reliable CFD models requires a high level of expertise, which in many cases may not be available [22]. A wide CFD knowledge is essential to well define an indoor computational model and handle complex boundary conditions [23,24]. This is a handicap to be solved in the future. Nevertheless, in recent years, several standards and guidelines have been created to help designers to produce credible and verifiable CFD results [25–27]. In addition, CFD developers are increasingly creating more user-friendly software to allow non-specialized companies to work with CFD. In fact, companies are paying increasing attention to create more and more specialized CFD simulation divisions. Even when high computer power is necessary, parallel simulations help to reduce computational times. Although this methodology involves certain computational capabilities, every day designers are more prepared to integrate engineering analysis with architectural design.Natural ventilation offers the opportunity of reducing mechanical requirements of Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning (HVAC) systems by using the natural driving forces of external wind and the buoyancy effect from internal heat dissipation. Wind patterns around buildings affects ventilation, infiltration rates and associated heat losses through it i.e. energy consumption of the building. With regards to the location of the building, the analysis of surrounding wind effect on the prevailing wind direction will be crucial when designing the building in such way that wind pressures, that will drive air flow through its apertures, will be created to passively ventilate the building. Wind analysis should be locally done, since wind pressure varies considerably due to its interaction with urban context, like buildings, and natural environment. These interactions create complex air flows and turbulence [20].The present study shows a coupled CFD analysis of the effects of different building locations on the indoor airflow distribution of a naturally ventilated building in an urban environment. Selection of the future location to improve wind usage for NV purposes is carried out from the building design stage. Air velocity, indoor air change rates and air velocity streamlines are analyzed to better understand natural ventilation effect in the building. Impact of surrounding environment, including the main buildings, on the air flow behaviour through the building are modelled by CFD. Other aspects, like temperatures and sun heating, are assumed to be constant, while some others are already defined: building shape, façade openings and indoor layout.The objectives of the study are outlined in Section 2. The geometry of the building and surroundings are described in Section 3. Section 4 describes the computational model and the followed validation procedure. Section 6 presents the simulation results and its discussion. The paper conclusions are summarized in Section 7. Finally, last sections are “Acknowledgements” and “References”, with the acknowledgements and consulted bibliography, respectively.Designers have to face up the ability of dealing with complex designs that take into account many requirements to improve building energy performance i.e. local environmental conditions and building surroundings. Designers should choose, when possible, between more or less energetically location alternatives using an objective criterion. One of the most architectural implications on an advanced naturally ventilated building is the consideration of the influence of surrounding environment regarding wind patterns [28].The present paper follows a design methodology to face up the site selection procedure of a building. Relationship between building location, surrounding environment and natural ventilation is examined. Two available sites for the building are analyzed and compared under a NV point of view. The objective is to demonstrate that comparative results of different architectural alternatives should be done to get objective criteria to select building location at the design stage. The methodology summarizes a qualitatively and quantitatively analysis to choose the best building site using a computational fluid dynamics technique through a case study. The computational model is created with a systematic procedure and validated with full-scale measurements to assure credible results.The primary goal of this study is to offer a better understanding of the building location presuppositions associated with the utilization of natural wind driving forces to improve natural ventilation and therefore building energy efficiency.The present case study analyzes the design and construction of a modular sustainable and energy-efficient building. The aim of the entire project is to promote awareness of designers, students and society towards energy efficiency design of buildings and promote specialization of the professionals involved in this field. The building has been globally designed so that every construction element has a functional use and a bioclimatic purpose.The project is structured in three phases. Firstly a theoretical design that fulfills the requirements of the main building standards is done. The paper is focused on the analysis of the best location for using passive strategies such NV to reduce building energy consumption at the design stage. Secondly, the building is constructed attending to initial design requirements. Finally, the validation of the hypothesis and theoretical models developed at the design stage are done.The analyzed building is a rectangular-shaped one floor building (13.77m×5m.) 4m. height. The indoor layout is organised and shaped to provide low resistance air paths with two main rooms connected through a small corridor where the bathroom is placed. The main room has an outside door (2.5m×3.5m) and the secondary room has a window (1.5m×3.7m), both in the South face. Both rooms have two narrow windows placed in the upper North face (0.5×2m and 0.5×1m respectively). There is a vertical window (2×0.5m) in the building East face. The bathroom, which is placed between the main and the secondary room, has a door to the secondary room and a window in the upper North face (0.5×2m). A sliding door close the corridor between the main room and the bedroom.A natural ventilation concept is therefore integrated in the building body. The building is provided with several passive elements to protect against solar gains such as a pergola at the entrance, louvers elements in the South & East windows and a modular ventilated façade made of modular porcelain stoneware tile systems. The structure of the building is made of steel profiles and a concrete platform 0.5m. height. There is a machinery room in the building West face, where appliances for heating, air conditioning, ventilation and others are placed.The building will be placed in Valencia in two possible sites within the campus of the Universitat Politècnica de València (East of Spain). The campus is located in the East of Valencia and very close to the Mediterranean Sea. The city and its surroundings are located on very flat terrain; height differences are limited to less than 3m. Nevertheless the surroundings buildings heights are from 14 to 34m. height, which might influence wind patterns and NV effect on the building.A commercial code for CFD is implemented in the present research: Star CCM+. A 3D computational model is created to obtain a mathematical analytical solution of the problem. The Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes equations (or RANS equations) are solved in a geometrical domain taking into account the turbulent phenomena. The review literature shows that RANS techniques are more convenient for NV simulation and designing purposes [29]. The standard k–ε model is used for representing turbulence as used in [30]. Segregated flow model steady-state regime is used for the simulation. The gravity model is selected to include the buoyancy source terms in the momentum equations. The model is defined in a unique region with a single mesh so that indoor and outdoor volumes are together computed. Therefore the effect of the nearest buildings on the indoor air distribution is obtained minimizing the computational error that would result from a “decomposed domain” in which indoor and outdoor environments are computed in different mathematical models.The computational domain cuts off the surrounding environment at which wind effect is of main interest. The computational geometry is reproduced in detail using the design drawings and full-scale measurements. The near buildings are only modelled by their main external shape. Other small elements placed near the building are taken into account by imposing a roughness height on their surfaces. The study case building is modelled by its internal and external shape because indoor NV behaviour is of particular concern. However detail of the windows shading devices and indoor furniture distribution are not simulated.Fig. 1shows the simulated building (front and back view). The main room where the door is placed is 67.7m3, the bathroom is 16.48m3 and the secondary room is 88.17m3. The total indoor volume considered is 112.71m3.The entire computational domain is designed attending to specific recommendations [31]. The inlet boundary surface is placed 5·Hmax away from the first building placed before the case study building in the prevailing wind direction, where Hmax is the height of the tallest building (34m.). The outflow boundary is placed 15·Hmax behind the last building modelled in the prevailing wind direction to allow flow development. In order to prevent an artificial acceleration of the flow over the tallest building, the top of the computational domain is 5·Hmax away from the tallest building. The lateral walls are placed 1.5·W, where W is the width of the urban area represented (111.3m.).The specification of consistent boundary conditions must be done to achieve a CFD model that truly represents the real environment. In this case, a wind tunnel (WT) is simulated with a velocity inlet profile set in the WT East face. Pressure outlet condition is defined in the WT West face and symmetry planes are set in the WT top, South and North faces. Finally all the other faces in the model are set as walls. The wind tunnel boundary selection is detailed in the following sections.At the inlet of the computational domain the velocity profile is defined based on the reference velocity measured at the reference height. The available information from the nearby meteorological station in Valencia [32] is used to determine the wind speed at the reference height. The measured wind speeds ranged between 0.0 and 15.8m/s. Wind speeds are distributed normally with an average value of 3.05m/s and a standard deviation of 1.47m/s at 10m. height for summer months. The wind data is adapted for height using Justus and Mikhail expression [33](1).(1)u¯(z)u¯a(za)=(z/za)nIn which u(z) is the speed at z height, ua(za) represents the average speed measured at zaheight and “n” can be calculated as defined by expression (2). The velocity is measured in m/s and the height in m.(2)n=0.37-0.0881·ln(u¯a)1-0.0881·ln(za/10)The definition of the wind direction at a given location is not a simple task as wind can blow and fluctuate from any direction. However, statistical information about wind direction can be used to determine the prevailing wind direction. The compass rose follows this idea, so that it is commonly used when analyzing the wind resource at a given location. The compass rose represents wind speed and direction typically distributed at a particular location. Knowing the prevailing wind and the effect of nearby buildings at a particular location is essential for NV design. On the one hand, the impact of wind on the building shape creates areas of positive and negative pressure that should be taken into account to improve the NV flow. On the other hand, the presence of other buildings can modify the prevailing wind direction and it can generate turbulence trails that affect the NV flow.The definition of the velocity inlet direction is done taking into account the wind direction on the warmest seasons in Valencia, in which NV can play an important role on energy consumption reduction of the building. With CFD help, the most suitable location of the building is analyzed to assess the viability of the prevailing wind driven flows and the effect of surrounding buildings on NV performance to reduce the building energy consumption in summer. The prevailing wind on the warm seasons in Valencia (summer, autumn and spring) is approximately East-South-East (ESE) direction. Fig. 2shows the wind direction and frequency on the warmest months in Valencia. Therefore ESE direction is defined as the prevailing wind direction in the CFD model and set in the WT East face.The fluctuating approach of wind is not taken into account for the present study as it is very costful and actual resources limit the amount of cases that can be considered. Nevertheless it is important to know this mechanism to predict the ventilation efficiency before design [20]. Further research will be done by the authors to analyze this issue.Finally, the prevailing wind direction is set in the CFD model using the Justus and Mikhail expression (1) in the WT East face. A complete wind analysis will analyze not only the prevailing wind direction but also the complete wind interaction in the building. Therefore statistical wind information is used to cover the most probable cases. Nevertheless the approach can be repeated to each wind direction and modulus. Different inlet boundary conditions will provide different ventilation results. For the sake of conciseness, only the most probable inlet wind condition has been here depicted.”The face of the computational region placed behind the buildings is defined as the outlet boundary condition (wind tunnel West face). All wind entering through the wind tunnel East face leaves the wind tunnel through the wind tunnel West face. Based on the literature review [34] a relative static pressure of zero is set at the outlet of the computational domain. The top and the lateral walls of the computational domain are prescribed as symmetry condition to enforce parallel flow. To prevent a too strong artificial acceleration of the flow, the blockage ratio obeys the recommendation given in [35], below 3%.The computational faces not defined as inlet/outlet and symmetry plane boundary conditions are defined as walls. On the one hand building walls are defined as smooth surfaces and treated as non-slip walls. On the other hand, the bottom surface is defined with a roughness length z0=0.5m. to represent the numerous obstacles as for instance bushes and parklands. The roughness height is based on the updated Davenport roughness classification [36].To reduce the number of grid points in the wall-normal direction and therefore the computational costs, a wall function is applied as an alternative approach to compute the wall shear stress [31]. A wall treatment is used in the CFD model to place the first computational node outside the viscous sublayer and to make suitable assumptions about how the near-wall velocity profile behaves to obtain the wall shear stress. Since the near-wall sublayer is not resolved, estimating the velocity gradient from a linear variation will not give an accurate approximation of the shear stress at the wall. Certain turbulence models need to solve such layers, so modellers have to make sure that enough data points (prism layers) are present in that region. There are clearly many applications where it is necessary to solve the viscous-affected region. However, if the near-wall mesh resolution is not consistent with the modelling assumptions, significant errors can result. In this case, to considerate it, the y+ value is used, which is a non-dimensional distance (based on local cell fluid velocity) from the wall to the first mesh node. The high-y+ wall treatment implies the wall-function-type approach in which it is assumed that the near-wall cell lies within the logarithmic region of the boundary layer (y+>30) [37]. Correct values of y+ allows a proper assessment of the current CFD model mesh.The Finite Volume Method (FVM) is used with a 3D mesh. Computational results depend crucially on the grid that is used to discretise the computational domain in the FVM. Therefore a grid size study is done, to assess grid independence of the solution. The recommendations of Franke et al. are followed to generate the grid [31]. Therefore this grid is created with at least 10 cells per building side and 10 cells per cube root of building. The mesh base size is settled as 2 and 4m. for the first and the second building position, respectively, with a slow growing rate. Building positions are described in Section 5. The computational domain had a maximum blockage ratio of 2.6%, which is below the recommended maximum of 3% [26,31].The grid quality should be high for not introducing large errors and for capturing the important physical phenomena in the main volume of interest. A mesh size of 25mm is set in the near wall regions. The prism layer thickness measures 2mm. The exterior volume does not require a mesh as fine as in the indoor buildings volume. Fig. 3shows the mesh near the one-floor building represented in a horizontal and vertical plane.As introduced before, every numerical solution depends on the grid that is used. Therefore, a grid independence study is done to assess the validity of the numerical results for different grids. Three different size meshes of every model were created: M1 and M2. Ferziger and Peric requirements for consecutive grids [38] are followed. The models are created with different cell accuracy. The first model (M1) has 390,025 cells (M1.1), 864,801 cells (M1.2) and 1,330,180 cells (M1.3). The second model (M2) has 766,131 cells (M2.1), 1,205,064 cells (M2.2) and 1,762,943 cells (M2.3).The results of the different meshes are compared to analyze the grid independence of the solution. A qualitative analysis is done with velocity streamlines in each model. No appreciable differences are observed for each model on the indoor velocity streamline distribution. A quantitative analysis of this comparison is presented in Fig. 4. Two indoor line-probe are placed in the centre of each room to compare the velocity result in each mesh. Graphs results show that for models 1 and 2, the main room centre line-probe results are very similar with a maximum relative difference of 5.2% and 4.8% respectively. The relative difference in the second room centre line-probe of the model 2 is higher than the relative difference in the model 1 at 2.5m height (see Fig. 4). Nevertheless M2.3 mesh computational time is such that this relative difference can be assumed. Therefore, models with fewer cells are chosen to continue further with the research in order to achieve a balance between accuracy and computational time.To verify a CFD solution not only the grid-sensitivity analysis is a must but also full-scale wind velocity measurements to prove the reliability of the CFD model. In this case, indoor air velocity measurements cannot be done as the building has not still been constructed. In fact the aim of the research is to choose between the best location for the building attending to NV building performance before constructing it. Nevertheless on-site wind velocity measurements can be done in the place where the building is going to be located approximately to check that the order of magnitude of the CFD results are reasonable, at least in terms of external conditions for the actual location.The wind measurements are done using three “hotwire” air-speed transmitters (HD403TS). The hotwire air-speed transmitters measure air velocity between 0 and 5m/s, with an accuracy of ±0.03m/s. The air-speed transmitters are located in a vertical line at three heights (1m, 2m and 3m). The location of the sensors is selected taking into account the wind flow patterns so the future building does not influence them. The vertical line is placed three metres in front of the South-West building corner in location 1 and five metres in front of the centre of the future East opening in location 2 as indicated in Fig. 5. Note that Fig. 5 shows the case study building virtually placed in the two studied sites. The position of the vertical control lines is outlined (mm). In these locations the wind flows measurement with and without the one-floor building are supposed to be similar.To gather data that supported CFD model validation, the experiment is performed on a typical ESE windy day. Measurement devices are measuring wind velocity during all day, while external wind conditions are monitored by the Meteorology Station [32]. Wind data provided by field experiments represent averages over 10min or 30min time intervals. Longer intervals are not feasible, because meteorological conditions already change within 30min [35]. Then the 30min average “hotwire” air-speed transmitters measurements [32] that were more steady (2.93m/s±0.41m/s) are chosen to cross data with the CFD results. The validation criterion is determined by 0.20m/s absolute difference between measured and simulated wind speeds. The CFD model is modified by adjusting grid refinements of the interesting area and boundary conditions, since it is enough to meet the specified validation criteria. Table 1shows the comparison between simulated and measured wind velocities in the three positions checked for the two building locations. The CFD wind results at z=2m. (building location 1) and z=3m. (building location 2) are slightly out of the validation criteria range. Unfortunately several CFD modifications are done but it was not possible to adjust the three measurements at the same time. Nevertheless, it is concluded that the wind velocity order of magnitude between the CFD model and the “hotwire” air-speed transmitters are within the confidence interval of the measurements in all cases.As indicated, the particular case study consists of the analysis of two possible locations under a natural ventilation point of view to improve the future energy performance of one building from the design phase. The one floor small building studied is detailed in Section 3, it is located at the Polytechnic University of Valencia. The study shows a coupled 3D CFD analysis of the effects of different outdoor urban environments defined by the surrounding buildings. The research is specially focused on the impact of the mass-distribution of buildings on wind flow patterns and indoor air distribution for the prevailing wind direction.The two proposed sites are depicted in Fig. 6. On the one hand, it is seen that the immediate surroundings of the location 1 consists of a U-shaped medium building 14m. height that may block the South-East, North-East and North-West wind direction to the house. The 14m. height building is placed 32m. from the East face of the case study building in the East-South-East direction and 7m. from the North face in the North–North-East direction. There are some big trees in the immediate West, South-West and South direction that may influence the wind patterns in the building location although there are no big buildings that can block the wind in these directions.On the other hand, the immediate surroundings of location 2 have a 17m. height and 65m. long building placed 15.3m. from the East face of the case study building in the East-South-East direction. This building may block the North-East wind direction. There are two 5.5 and 7m. height buildings placed 5m. from the West face of the case study building in the West-North-West direction. These buildings may block the North-West wind direction. The South-East, South and West-South-West direction have some provisional blocks smaller than 1m, since it is an area under construction procedure. It is projected a plane green park in this area. This means that these directions will not have any big block for these wind directions. Additionally there is a 34m height building placed 124m from the case study building in the East-South-East direction that may also influence the prevailing wind patterns [14]. Fig. 7shows the East-South-East view of the two locations from ground level. Fig. 8shows the computational model used.The architectural configurations of the buildings are represented as simple blocks as illustrated in Fig. 10. Fig. 10 shows a South-West view of the two locations. Features smaller than 1m are not represented. The case study building of interest is represented with more details to achieve more reliable CFD results as pointed in Section 3. All openings are completely opened for the simulation, even though the main entrance is completely closed.As stated before, the prevailing wind in the warmest seasons in Valencia (summer, autumn and spring) is East-South-East. Therefore a quantitative and qualitative analysis of the prevailing wind patterns affection is proposed to determine the most suitable location to improve NV performance in the future building using CFD.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
