@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Configurable model for real-time crane erection visualization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We developed a configurable crane model for real-time construction visualization.The proposed model divided a crane into three configurable modules.The proposed model was defined using multibody structure that can be easily adapted to existing physics engine.We implemented a real cooperative crane erection scenario to test the proposed modeling method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Crane,Cooperative,Erection,Multibody,Physics Engine,Simulation,Visualization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Detailed simulation and visualization of crane activities have been recently introduced to help engineers identify potential problems with critical erection tasks; however, the development of real-time erection visualizations for different types of cranes and lifting objects is time-consuming, and usually requires a certain amount of effort in modeling and setting up the environment. This research proposes a configurable model which is reusable, fast-prototyping, and extendable to support real-time visualization of the erection process. The developed model of the crane is divided into three modules which can be reconfigured for different erection tasks. Each module is defined using multiple rigid bodies and the joint constraints of multibody dynamics. The proposed modeling method can also be easily adapted to existing physics engines. To evaluate the feasibility of the proposed method, we observed the processes involved in a common erection activity and compared this with the visualization results obtained using proposed method. We also simulated a cooperative cranes scenario taken from an actual construction project to demonstrate its usability. We found that the proposed modeling method was easily able to visualize various erection activities with different cranes and configurations.The increasingly versatile use of cranes in modern construction projects has introduced new challenges along with it: rigging objects have become larger, heavier, and more diverse, and yet shorter erection times are expected. Most objects that cranes work on are in the critical path for that project and thus a delay in these tasks often results in a delay for the whole project. Furthermore, some erection tasks involve high levels of risk, requiring high accuracy during the planning stage [9].In order to increase the efficiency and precision of crane erections, engineers try to use cranes that are more mobile and versatile, and perform cooperative erections at construction sites where possible. Mobile cranes are equipped with wheels or tracks, are easier to transport between sites, and are more flexible as they can be deployed at different places on the construction site according to the schedule demands. However, they are generally more difficult to control than tower cranes. Operators need to control the rigging mechanism as well as the motion of the crane, ensure that the crane is stable during the erection process, and also avoid any collisions.The increased use of cooperative erections is another trend seen in modern construction projects. Large cranes are not always available and site rental fees can be very high. Moreover, assembly and dismantling of large cranes requires more time. Thus, a cheaper alternative is the cooperative use of standard cranes that are available on-site [1]. The two cranes can also be used individually on site, which reduces the overall time cost and allows project managers more flexibility when scheduling the erection project, resulting in a more efficient plan; however, performing cooperative erections is challenging, even for experienced operators. The erection plan needs to be completed and checked before the actual erection to ensure that the load does not exceed the lifting capacity of each crane at any time. The erection paths and crane operations will affect the share of the load handled by each crane. Operators need to work cooperatively to be able to solve these problems and complete the task successfully.Rigging methods are also becoming increasingly versatile, especially in fast-tracked projects. Engineers now use a variety of lifting devices to stabilize the erection of decks, windows, pipes, equipment, and even irregularly-shaped objects. “Christmas tree” rigging (rigging of several objects in one erection cycle) and dress-up rigging (rigging of large equipment that has many accessories) are now common. Christmas tree rigging can reduce the number of erection cycles required, and dress-up rigging transfers workload from the post-erection phase to the pre-erection phase, which can reduce the risks involved in working at heights. While utilizing these erection methods can significantly reduce the time required for a task, they increase the complexity of the task itself. Many recent studies have applied visualization technologies for the identification of potential problems in complicated erection activities involving versatile lifting configurations and devices [37,10,18]. However, there is a need for an efficient and systematic method of fast prototyping crane erection visualization to reduce the time cost involved. In this way, the benefits of crane erection visualization and simulation can be realized and adapted for different types of erection tasks.In this study, we propose a configurable crane modeling method that allows engineers to efficiently prototype a crane erection activity through real-time visualization and simulation. By modularizing a crane model, this method allows engineers to easily visualize cranes with different lifting devices. We implement an real erection project to be performed with dual mobile cranes to verify the feasibility of the proposed method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presented a configurable crane model for visualizing erection activities using both single and multiple cranes. The model was defined as a multibody object with multiple actors and joints. We used PhysX to simulate and compute the defined model using position-based dynamics. A typical crane was modularized into three components: manipulation module, suspension module, and lifted-object module. In contrast to previous studies, the presented method allows developers to quickly prototype an erection activity and see a smooth, real-time visualization. Due to the modularization, this model can easily be modified to support other types of cranes and can simulate various erection scenarios with different lifting devices and objects. We also verified the feasibility of the proposed model by simulating an actual erection task using dual mobile cranes. The visualization result showed that the proposed model can generate a high quality and efficient simulation using a mid-range personal laptop computer.