@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Using three-dimensional finite element analysis in time domain to model railway-induced ground vibrations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The finite element analysis is used to assess the ground-borne vibrations.Time domain simulation is preferred for reducing the model size.Lysmer and Kuhlemeyer absorbing boundary conditions are analysed.Structural vibrations are calculated for realistic cases.A mesh tool is presented to automatically add infinite elements in ABAQUS model.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Railway ground vibrations,Finite/infinite element method,Viscous boundary,Vehicle dynamics,Soil–structure interaction,Finite element analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
For the prediction of ground vibrations generated by railway traffic, finite element analysis (FEA) appears as a competitive alternative to simulation tools based on the boundary element method: it is largely used in industry and does not suffer any limitation regarding soil geometry or material properties. However, boundary conditions must be properly defined along the domain border so as to mimic the effect of infinity for ground wave propagation. This paper presents a full three-dimensional FEA for the prediction of railway ground-borne vibrations. Non-reflecting boundaries are compared to fixed and free boundary conditions, especially concerning their ability to model the soil wave propagation and reflection. Investigations with commercial FEA software ABAQUS are presented also, with the development of an external meshing tool, so as to automatically define the infinite elements at the model boundary. Considering that ground wave propagation is a transient problem, the problem is formulated in the time domain. The influence of the domain dimension and of the element size is analysed and rules are established to optimise accuracy and computational burden. As an example, the structural response of a building is simulated, considering homogeneous or layered soil, during the passage of a tram at constant speed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Railway-induced ground-borne vibration has been the subject of many investigations over the last two decades. Many of these have focused on using prediction models, whereby the propagation of ground vibration waves is analysed considering different generation mechanisms (rail deflection, track irregularity, vehicle dynamics, etc.). However the problem of predicting the transmission of vibrations through the ground is complex. Three sources of complexity have been underlined by Gutowski and Dym [1]: the difficulty in precisely modelling the sources of vibration, the lack of understanding of the soil behaviour, and the difficulty in determining accurate values of soil properties. Additionally, in the railway case, the track transmits wheel/rail forces to the ground and must be taken into account.The modelling of the vibratory source depends on many factors and is not straightforward. The simplest models reduce the vehicle to a set of moving constant loads [2,3]. Analytical developments are still used nowadays for predicting the effect of a moving load on an infinite beam resting on a flexible layer. Initially, models were studied by considering an elastic isotropic homogeneous half-space [4,5]. These works pointed out the harmful effect of train speed when close to the track/soil critical velocities. Advanced formulations have been recently proposed by Koziol et al. [6,7] and offer the possibility to extend this approach to various load configurations and to multilayer subgrade, using a compound wavelet method/coiflet filters. Special attention was paid to numerical optimisations to avoid up numerical instabilities and other calculation difficulties. Other authors, as Lombaert et al. [8], include the effect of the vertical track irregularity through a non-stationary random excitation. More sophisticated models, as those proposed by Garden and Stuit [9] or Costa et al. [10], take into account the dynamics of the vehicle.The soil behaviour is generally considered as non-linear. Nevertheless, railway traffic generates ground vibration waves whose propagation generally induces small deformations: the shear strain is smaller than10-5in most practical cases. In this range of deformation amplitudes, the soil can be considered as an isotropic linear viscoelastic medium possibly composed of several homogeneous horizontal layers. This hypothesis was widely validated in literature (see, for example, the works of Sheng et al. [11], Lombaert and Degrande [12], Auersch [13] or Galvín and Domínguez [2]).The choice of the numerical procedure used to model the soil must be able to efficiently represent infinity. The boundary element method (BEM) is based on an integral transformation that makes it possible to reformulate Navier’s elastodynamic equations at the surface. The main difficulty is to determine a particular solution (Green’s function) for the specific case of the problem (homogeneous or layered soil, loads at the surface or under soil, etc.). BEM is numerically efficient but it is practically limited to linear formulations and simple geometries. The finite element analysis (FEA) is by contrast able to model a soil with complex geometries, insofar as proper conditions are applied on the domain border. Another advantage is that FEA software is well adapted to non-linear problems and is widely used at an industrial scale. Non-reflecting conditions have been recently classified by Wang et al. [14] as elementary boundaries, local boundaries or consistent boundaries. The latter includes the infinite element formulation, which is frequently used in acoustics and is proposed more and more by commercial finite element software packages. In the case of railway, the FEA formulation is usually restricted to two-dimensional analysis (as proposed by Yang et al. [15] or by Yerli et al. [16]) to comply with available computational resources, but recently three-dimensional models have been found in literature. Kouroussis and his co-workers [17,18] have proposed a three-dimensional model using the well-known Lysmer and Kuhlemeyer viscous boundary [19] combined with infinite elements. Connolly et al. [20,21] showed the capabilities of three-dimensional FEA by applying their prediction model for a sensitivity analysis of track embankment or trenches on resulting ground vibrations. To limit the model size, a periodic finite element–boundary element formulation has been recently developed, combining the advantages of these two methods (boundary elements for subdomain infinite formulation, finite element for the studied structures) and applicable for geometry invariant along the track direction. Efficient examples have been proposed by Degrande et al. [22] and Chebli et al. [23] for studying the ground vibration generated by ballasted railway track or shallow tunnel track.Most often, despite the importance of the vehicle dynamics, only the track/soil configuration is considered. This approach makes it possible to understand the soil behaviour but cannot be used by the train constructors to verify the influence of some vehicle components. Moreover the possible coupling between the subsystems is neglected in the analyses. Kouroussis et al. [17] presented a comprehensive study of vehicle/track influence with the aid of a compound vehicle/track/soil model. Special attention was paid to the excitation mechanism, considering the track and the vehicle behaviour on the forces transmitted to the soil. The results showed that the ground vibration level strongly depends on the vehicle configuration. It was also recognised that soil layering induces soil surface vibrations that can be completely different from those obtained in the case of a homogeneous half-space.This paper is an updated and revised version of the conference paper [24]. The use of this finite/infinite element model is discussed. Some properties of non-reflecting boundaries are presented. Viscous boundaries are analysed in order to demonstrate their efficiency on soil modelling and to show the conditions that lead to the best wave absorption. Rules in frequency and time domain analysis are also given, before presenting the detailed implementation of the model. Practical applications are presented, based on the passing of a tram on a singular defect. Free field responses are analysed, as well as the structural response of a building placed near the track, illustrating the possibilities of the proposed methodology and the interest of the FEA.The simulation of unbounded domains in numerical methods is a very important topic in dynamic soil–structure interaction and wave propagation problems. The frequency range depends on the purpose of the problem. If the dweller’s comfort or structural integrity is of interest, frequencies up to80Hzare important with a particular attention in the range between 5 and20Hz, according to the standard references. Higher frequencies are attenuated by the soil.When the soil is modelled as an elastic, homogeneous and isotropic medium, the wave field can be expressed as a superposition of plane waves [1], of two types: longitudinal waves (or P-waves) where the particle motion takes place in the direction of wave propagation, and shear waves (S-waves), moving perpendicularly to their propagation direction. The wave velocitiescPandcSare given by(1)cP=2G(1-ν)ρ(1-2ν)and(2)cS=GρwhereG,νandρare the shear modulus, the Poisson’s ratio and the density of the medium, respectively. Along the surface, additional waves, called Rayleigh waves, can develop in the case where shear waves reflect free surface. These waves propagate in the horizontal direction and their amplitude decreases exponentially with the depth. It is known that the P-wave is the fastest, followed the S-wave, itself a bit faster than the Rayleigh wave. In terms of transmitted energy, it is the opposite: in the case of a vertical concentrated load acting on the soil surface, the Rayleigh wave transports 67% of the total energy [25].In the case of layered media, reflection and refraction increase the problem complexity. Each layer can be defined by the body waves but the surface waves in layered media are dispersive. The frequency dependent phase velocities of the different vibration modes of the layered medium are therefore considered, depending on the configuration and the thickness of each layer. For this configuration, the use of numerical tools becomes necessary.A prediction model [26] has been developed, working in two successive steps (Fig. 1). The first step is based on the philosophy adopted by the train constructor where the vehicle is modelled using a classical multibody approach. Carbodies and bogie frames are defined as rigid bodies linked by interconnecting elements (springs and dampers) representing the suspension. As the vertical motion has a significant effect on ground vibrations, a two-dimensional model of the vehicle is sufficient at this stage. It is connected to the track, itself modelled by a classical 2D and 2-layer model, in accordance with the reviews of Grassie et al. [27] and Knothe and Grassie [28]. The rail is discretely supported by rigid sleepers. The flexible rail, defined by its Young modulusEr, its geometrical inertiaIr, its sectionArand its densityρr, is described using the finite element method. A spacing L of the sleepers has been considered, with a discretization ofNnelements for one sleeper spacing. Railpads and ballast are characterised by springs and dampers (kpanddpfor the railpad,kbanddbfor the ballast). Each sleeper is defined as a lumped mass m. The vehicle/track interaction is characterised by the contact law, defined as non-linear. The defect on the rail surface is also considered as a local unevenness and/or an overall roughness and can be represented by any kind of deterministic functions. The integration of the equations of motion is performed with the home-made C++ library, EasyDyn, dedicated to second-order differential equations and multibody problems [29,30].The second step considers the reaction forces of the ballast as the loads acting at the surface of the soil. It uses FEA to calculate the ground wave propagation and the resulting vibrations at the soil surface and in structures. The two-step simulation relies on the hypothesis that the track/vehicle and the soil subsystems can be decoupled, which is true only when the soil is stiff enough with respect to the ballast. Despite this, a condensed form of the soil impedance can be included in the track model with the help of a Winkler foundation or a more advanced development [31,32]: the track/soil interaction is defined through lumped masses and spring/damper elements whose parameters values are carefully fitted with the help of experimental and numerical receptance functions.A finite element model is bounded by nature. To mimic an unbounded domain like a soil, specific boundary conditions must be defined on the border, principally so as to prevent any wave reflection. Several possibilities have been proposed: classical boundaries, local boundaries and infinite elements.Classical boundaries (free or fixed conditions) must be used with care because they impose a total reflection at the border of the domain. The only way to decrease the influence of the reflected waves is to increase the size of the domain, by application of Saint–Venant’s principle.Local boundaries have been proposed by many authors for improving the absorption efficiency at the boundary. Local or distributed springs or damper elements can be imposed at the border, working normally and/or tangentially. The main difficulty is to find the correct coefficients. The work of Lysmer and Kuhlemeyer [19] is without any doubt the best-known local boundary in literature. They have investigated different possibilities for expressing infinitesimal dashpots and propose a boundary condition analytically expressed by(3)σ=aρcPẇ(4)τ=bρcSv̇where the normal and shear stressesσandτdepend on the normal and tangent velocitiesẇandv̇of the boundary (Fig. 2). Parameters a and b are dimensionless and can both vary from 0 to∞. According to [19,33], the maximum absorption for compression and shear body waves is obtained fora=b=1. The authors also studied the case of Rayleigh waves, important in a free surface, and they demonstrated that optimal parameters a and b depend on the depth of the soil surface for Rayleigh waves. For example, at the free surface, a is nearly equal to 2 sinceb=0. At a depth of twice the Rayleigh wavelength, both parameters converge to 1, as for the body waves.Infinite elements constitute the most natural option to deal with unbounded domains. Two possibilities exist to implement infinite elements [34]:•use of decay function, combined with ordinary finite element shape functions,mapping elements from a finite to an infinite domain.The idea behind both element types is to specify a decay aspect within the shape function in the form of1/ri(i=1,2,…). The goal of using these elements is to establish a behaviour that is similar to the infinite domain.For example, the mapping procedure is applied to the element in the far field to redefine the infinite domain. The method proposed by Zienkiewicz et al. [35] is well known and is still widely used at the present time. As illustrated in Fig. 3(a) (1D case), node 1, on the interface between finite and infinite elements, at distancer1=afrom the poler0(atr=0), has the coordinateξ=-1after mapping. Node 2 of coordinater2=2abecomesξ=0. The relation between the initial coordinate and the mapped coordinate can be written as(5)r(ξ)=-2ξ1-ξr1+1+ξ1-ξr2or(6)r(ξ)=2a1-ξwhich gives after inversion(7)ξ(r)=1-2ar.The shape function can finally be combined with standard quadratic interpolation to give(8)u(ξ)=12ξ(ξ-1)u1+1-ξ2u2whereu1andu2are the displacements of nodes 1 and 2 and u the displacements inside the studied element, respectively. The inverted geometric mapping is written(9)u(r)=(-u1+4u2)ar+(2u1-4u2)ar2and exhibits a decay in1/rand1/r2. In 2D and 3D cases, the same procedure is applied for the other coordinates (Fig. 3(b)). It is of interest to note that the pole position must be chosen with care to ensure that the element edges in the infinite direction do not cross over each other.To analyse the contribution of local and consistent boundaries, models have been developed under ABAQUS software. Each model consists of a half-sphere composed of finite elements. Specific conditions are applied, such as viscous boundaries according to Eqs. (3) and (4), consideringa=b=1, and mapped infinite elements, connected at the border. Notice that, in dynamic analysis under ABAQUS, viscous boundaries are automatically added at the border between finite and infinite elements.The choice of a spherical form allows a convex shape at the border, for easy meshing and for insuring the condition of non-crossing infinite elements. The software can be used to model the soil geometry but an automatic procedure does not exist to add and define the infinite elements at the boundary. A program has been created to fill this deficiency: from the original script file of a FEA model, it reads the geometrical information, searches for the boundary nodes and connects the infinite elements with the proper orientation. The use of infinite elements is transparent and perfectly joins the standard finite element procedure (see Appendix A for a detailed description of the tool).Lysmer and Kuhlemeyer [19] analysed the efficiency of viscous boundaries. For each type of incident body wave (longitudinal and shear waves), they calculated the ratio between the reflected and the incident energy flow. A mistake unfortunately appears in the final expressions, recently corrected by Kouroussis et al. [33]. This correction allows to complete the original analysis brought by the authors.Table 1summarizes the average proportion of energy absorbed by the boundaries, defined as the absorbed energy of the boundary for a specific value of Poisson’s ratioν. This reveals that the optimal viscous boundary absorbs nearly four times more efficiently than free or fixed boundaries, corresponding to the casea=b=0anda=b=∞, respectively.Fig. 4shows the variation of the effective energy ratio as a function of Poisson’s ratio and the incident wave angle fora=b=1. For incident P-waves (Fig. 4(a)), it emerges that the ratio increases up to 10–15° before decreasing. The maximum value also increases with the Poisson’s ratio, with an effective energy ratio ranging from 0.06 to 0.095. For incident S-waves (Fig. 4(b)), the shape is similar, except notable differences:•Up to approximativelyν=0.35, a second maximum appears around 50–60°, with a lower amplitude. Forν>0.35, the curve shape looks like the one related to the P-waves (the critical angleθS,cris close to 90°).The effective energy ratio is more important for S-waves for all Poisson’s ratio. A maximum value of 0.17 is obtained for the non-compressive case.In view of these results, the dependency on Poisson’s ratio was analysed using the average absorbed energy. This average takes into account each incident angle with the same importance. The efficiency of the viscous boundary can therefore be calculated for any Poisson’s ratio, as presented in Fig. 5. In essence, the best absorption with the Poisson’s ratio depends on the type of incident wave: 98.5% forν=0.2and P-waves, 96.5% forν=0.4and S-waves. The lowest efficiency is obtained forν=0.5:96.1%for P-waves, 90% for S-waves. Forν>0.4, the absorbed energy for incident S-waves drastically decreases whereas the curve related to P-waves decreases up to 96.2% atν=0.49after which it increases again, but very lightly.A second analysis can emphasise the efficiency of the viscous boundary. The studied case is a homogeneous soil with typical dynamic parameters (densityρ=1600kg/m3, Young’s modulusE=120MN/m2, Poisson’s ratioν=0.3and viscous damping ratioβ=0.0004s).Classically, “rule of thumb” are used to correctly define a frequency analysis of a general finite/infinite element model. Laghrouche and Le Houédec [36] analysed various situations for the case of a harmonic load in the frequency domain: in addition to the classical rule in FE analysis (a minimum of 10 elements per Rayleigh wavelengthλR), the domain sizeTd(corresponding to the model radius in the presented applications) must be greater than at least3λRto minimise the modelling error. In the case of a large frequency band model, these two combined conditions unfortunately impose a large number of elements. Due to the large dimensions of a finite/infinite element model, only the case of a harmonic load (in the frequency domain) has been studied and, most often, in 2D [15,16]. To avoid this limitation, Kouroussis et al. [37] recently studied various situations using frequency and time domain analyses. It was found that a time domain analysis was more appropriate to simulate wave propagation. As wave propagation is a transient phenomenon, the domain dimensions do not act upon the results if the boundary is defined correctly. In the case of three-dimensional analysis, computer memory imposes a limited number of elements.The present analysis is based on a transient load applied on a30cm×30cmsquare surface. The surface load is defined by the decay function(10)f(t)=0ift<t0Ae[-(t-t0)/td]ift⩾t0whereA=1N,t0=0.05sandtd=0.001s. These parameters are adjusted in order to get close to an impulse load. This situation corresponds to a weight falling on the soil surface, as in a test usually performed to determine the soil characteristics. Fig. 6displays the shape of the excitation. It also shows that frequencies up to100Hzare excited with nearly the same proportion.Fig. 7compares the numerical vertical velocity at the soil surface and at10mfrom the source, for various viscous boundary configurations (the same value of non-dimensional constants a and b is used). Two domain sizesTd=50mandTd=20mare shown. Regarding the signals, the following observations can be made:•The signal is made up of two parts: the incident vibrations (here between0.05and0.2s), composed partially of the Rayleigh wave contribution, and the reflected signal (after2s), with amplitude dependant on the values of a and b.As expected, fixed (a=b=∞) and free (a=b=0) boundaries cause a total reflection at the border. A particular property can be emphasised in these cases: the body waves interaction with the fixed surface generates reflected waves propagating with opposite phase with respect to those generated by the free boundary. This is due to the difference of impedance at the border. Through the different viscous boundaries, it appears that good performance is obtained fora=b=1, forTd=50mas well as forTd=20m. This observation corroborates the small influence of the domain size in time domain analysis if boundaries properly absorb the incident waves.The case ofa=b=2gives slightly better absorption than the reference case. This can be explained by the fact that the Rayleigh waves, dominating the incident waves, are better absorbed at the soil surface by a viscous boundary witha=2. The difference is however negligible.The commercial ABAQUS software proposes infinite elements in its library, working with the help of the mapping formulation. In static analysis, the infinite elements placed in the domain boundary make it possible to confirm Boussineq’s solution. In dynamic analysis, viscous boundaries are automatically added at the border between finite and infinite elements in order to better attenuate the incident waves and to avoid their reflection.Fig. 8compares the solutions obtained using the combined viscous/infinite elements boundary conditions. Similar results are obtained for dimensionsTdof20mand50m. Compared to Fig. 7 with the curves fora=b=1, a better absorption is obtained, demonstrating the benefit of the infinite elements. Combined with the viscous boundary, a finite/infinite element model offers an interesting tool to predict the dynamic behaviour of soil, particularly if complex geometries or non-linearities are needed.Due to the presence of singular rail surface defects, the tram case is a good example of dynamic track interaction where the quasi-static deflection has a small contribution on the ground vibrations. Moreover, tramways are typically close to buildings and high vibratory nuisances are often felt by the inhabitant. In this context, the T2000 LRV of Brussels has been studied in the case of a local defect defined at the rail surface. This multi-car tramway uses independent rotating wheels, resilient motor wheels and a low floor design. It consists of 3 cars for which specific configurations are adopted (Fig. 9):•The central car body has a classical rigid bogie (BR4×4 bogie), composed of four independent motor wheels (Fig. 9(b)).The leading bogies at the extremities are carried by an articulated frame allowing each wheel to be tangent to the rail (BA2000 bogie). It is made up of two independent rotating wheels driven by a motor placed inside the wheels, and two trailer wheels (Fig. 9(c)).Each bogie comprises rubber primary and air-spring secondary suspensions. The main dimensions are given in Fig. 9(a).A multibody model of the vehicle is derived and involves 18 degrees of freedom (dof), to take into account the vehicle bounce and pitch motions. The characteristics of the model (urban railway parameters and soil parameters) have been experimentally identified [17] on the tramway site of Haren (Brussels). The soil finite element model dimensions are equal toTd=25m(radius), which is sufficient for analysing this kind of problem. The track model consists of532doftaking into account the flexible rail, the sleepers and a lumped mass model for the foundation. The latter allows for the inclusion of the soil flexibility directly into the vehicle/track simulation. Vehicle and track dynamic parameters are presented in Tables 2 and 3, respectively. Regarding the soil geometry, two configurations were considered (Fig. 10): the first one considers an homogeneous soil with parameters obtained by a simple geoprospection method, the second configuration represents a 6-layer soil, deduced from investigations performed by Degrande et al. [38] where a progressive soil rigidity with depth is assumed, determined by complementary techniques (refraction survey and spectral analysis of surface waves). The ground viscous damping is assumed to be the same for each layer, and equal to0.0004s(0.0003sfor the homogeneous soil configuration).The studied case is the ground vibrations generated by the passing of the T2000 tram over a singular rail defect representative of any rail defect commonly encountered in tramway networks like rail joints, rail crossings or an event such as gear switching. This situation has demonstrated that the rolling stock dynamics is suspected to contribute to the wheel/rail forces and therefore to the generation of ground motion [17].The T2000 tramway is simulated in a straight line and the response is calculated at various distances from the track, in front of the local rail defect. The analysis mainly deals with the interaction of the wheels with the rough rail. The soil model consists of527,000dofand568,000finite/infinite elements. Four-node tetrahedral (C3D4) and eight-node cubic linear (C3D8R) elements are used for the definition of the region of interest (mean size:0.5m). Cubic elements are placed on the border in order to build the 3D infinite elements CIN3D8 connected at the interface, associated with the viscous damping layer (see Appendix A). The number of infinite elements is relatively small (less than20,000) and is proportional to the radius squared of the soil model. With these dimensions, the calculation time required to perform the simulation of the soil dynamics is nevertheless great but can be reduced by using an explicit integration scheme. Fig. 11gives a typical example of calculation time, for implicit or explicit integration schemes, when using 1 or 4 CPU cores. It clearly shows the benefit brought by the explicit integration scheme coupled with parallel calculation: it reduces the calculation time for ground simulation to a level similar to that required for the vehicle/track dynamic analysis. I should be noted that the time required to perform the simulation of the soil with the implicit scheme (about 20days) has been extrapolated. Despite the possibility reducing the CPU-Time, it remains high, which is a result of model complexity and can be seen as a drawback. In addition to this, excessive memory allocations limit the studies to small regions of interest (times presented in Fig. 11 concern a domain sizeTdof50m). The limitation does not affect the tram case, and the computational capabilities and efficiency of the proposed model is still valid for higher velocities [18,39], even those close to soil critical velocities [40,41].Fig. 12presents a comparison between experimental and numerical results when the tramway is running at a speedv0of30km/hand for a distance of2mfrom the track. Time history velocity is shown, rather than displacement, because this format is widely used in vibration assessment. Both soil configurations are analysed. Six separate areas are clearly shown in each figure, representing the passing of each wheelset on the defect. This effect is associated with dynamic interaction between the wheel and the singular rail defect, and generates high amplitude vibrations while everywhere else only small motions are observed, originating from the quasi-static loads. By comparing the numerical results with the experimental counterpart, it can be seen that the models correctly predict the levels and shapes of excitation. The layered configuration gives better results (with a small overestimation) than the homogeneous one, which lightly underestimates the maximum level. This shows that the detailed description of the soil is necessary to accurately predict the ground wave propagation.Using the discrete Fourier transform for both experimental and numerical data, a frequency analysis provides additional information. This is illustrated in Fig. 13where the corresponding spectral content of ground velocity in one-third octave band is plotted. The amplitude of the measured results has a maximum at frequencies around40Hzalthough the corresponding numerical results have maximums at20–25Hz. This difference has already been mentioned in previous works and analyses [17,39], with the assumptions of a background noise masking some phenomena. By analysing these results, it clearly appears that both adopted soil configurations have the same spectral layout but with an overall amplification for the layered configuration explaining the difference of level in Fig. 12.The preceding case concerning the study in the free-field is interesting for vibration phenomena assessment but it is rarely encountered in practice: urban railway vibrations depend unavoidably on the presence of buildings considered as complex geometries. The present work has been applied on a interesting issue concerning an urban environment. A building has been modelled using finite elements (Fig. 14) and placed near the track. The building is representative of classical private houses erected during the 20th century. The building presents a rectangular shape (7×10m) in plane and is composed, in cross section, of a ground floor and an upper one. The peripheral masonry walls are composed of plain masonry of non-perforated clay bricks (thickness0.25m, Young’s modulus10GPa, shear modulus4.2GPaand density1800kg/m3). The ground floor, the foundation walls and shallow strip foundations are connected with the soil model using tie constraints (no relative motion along the soil–structure interface). The floor slabs are composed of reinforced cast concrete (thickness0.20m, Young’s modulus20GPa, shear modulus8.3GPaand density2400kg/m3) and are embedded inside the masonry walls along each of its sides. The whole house consists of630,0004-node linear tetrahedra elements (C3D4), doubling the total number of elements (a mesh refinement of0.25mfor the building is necessary to avoid instability in the explicit integration scheme). The building is close to the track (the front wall is located at4mfrom the track), corresponding to a realistic situation in urban area. The layered soil configuration is retained for the simulation.Fig. 15presents the time history and the spectral content at the same location as Figs. 12 and 13, namely between the track and the building. Only the frequency content presents observable modifications starting from20Hz. In the middle of the building, at the foundation, difference becomes clear (Fig. 16): the presence of the building affects the frequency content of vertical vibrations by decreasing the amplitude in the frequency range30–60Hz, showing that the free-field case can be completely different from the built environment.Fig. 17shows the effect of the building, through the decrease of the peak particle velocity (PPV) with the distance. The vibratory level and its decrease with the distance change with the inclusion of the building. This demonstrates that the effect of the building is not only on an area from the building to its back, but also between the track and the building. Therefore it illustrates the importance of soil/structure coupling in this kind of problem.Fig. 18illustrates the ground wave propagation in the cases of free field domain and of an urban environment. The instants1.425s,2.425sand3.425semphasise the effect of each bogie on this propagation. Maximum and minimum surface velocities are displayed on each sub-figure. The following observations are noteworthy:•In both situations, the passing of each wheelset on the local rail defect induces significant vibrations around this defect.If the vehicle is far from the building, the ground wave propagation is identical in both studied cases. When the vehicle is close to the building, the ground waves completely change and the amplitudes are magnified. Fig. 18(e) and (f) show that the presence of the building attenuates the soil surface vibrations behind the building and amplifies it in front of the building.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
