@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Topology optimization of compliant mechanisms using element-free Galerkin method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A topology optimization method for compliant mechanisms of geometrical nonlinearity.A physically meaningful material density field using Shepard interpolation method.MLS method to construct the shape functions for meshless approximations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Compliant mechanisms,Topology optimization,Shepard function,Meshless method,Geometrical nonlinearity,Density approximant,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper will propose a topology optimization approach for the design of large displacement compliant mechanisms with geometrical non-linearity by using the element-free Galerkin (EFG) method. In this method, the Shepard function is applied to construct a physically meaningful density approximant, to account for its non-negative and range-bounded property. Firstly, in terms of the original nodal density field, the Shepard function method functionally similar to a density filter is used to generate a non-local nodal density field with enriched smoothness over the design domain. The density of any node can be evaluated according to the nodal density variables located inside the influence domain of the interested node. Secondly, in the numerical implementation the Shepard function method is again employed to construct a point-wise density interpolant. Gauss quadrature is used to calculate the integration of background cells numerically, and the artificial densities over all Gauss points can be determined by the surrounding nodal densities within the influence domain of the concerned computational point. Finally, the moving least squares (MLS) method is applied to construct the shape functions using the weight functions with compact support for assembling the meshless approximations of state equations. Since MLS shape functions are lack of the Kronecker delta function property, the penalty method is applied to enforce the essential boundary conditions. A typical large-deformation compliant mechanism is used as the numerical example to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Topology optimization is a numerical approach to determine the best distribution of material within a design space under specific loads and boundary conditions, so that the resulting layout can meet a prescribed set of performance targets. In the past two decades, as a lately developed approach in structural optimization, topology optimization has experienced considerable development with many applications in a wide range of engineering disciplines [11]. By now, various schemes have been developed for topology optimization of structures, such as the homogenization method [9,21], the solid isotropic material with penalization (SIMP) method [53,40,10], the evolutionary structural optimization (ESO) method [51], and the level set-based method [45,49,1,34], as well as some improved methods, e.g. the pointwise-density interpolation (PDI) method [39,42,22,27,38,50]. Topology optimization methods have been applied to a variety of applications for structures, materials and mechanisms, e.g. the design of compliant mechanisms.Unlike the conventional rigid-body mechanisms, which attain mobility from hinges, bearings and sliders, compliant mechanisms gain their mobility from relative flexibility of the constituents [24]. The synthesis of compliant mechanisms is mainly used to control the ratios between output and input displacements or forces, which can be described by geometrical advantage and/or the mechanical advantage. Compared to the rigid-body counterparts, compliant mechanisms can be built using fewer parts with less wear, friction, noise and backlash, and require less assembly processes. Due to these advantages, compliant mechanisms have been widely used in precision control devices and Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS).To apply topology optimization in mechanical designs, it is applicable to use linear analysis to find structural responses under the assumption of small displacement. But for structures involving large displacement or large rotation effect, it is necessary to consider geometrical non-linear analysis in the process of topology optimization [15,14,13,18,43,35,23]. It is also known that many parameters of materials may be subject to non-linearity. However in the design of compliant mechanisms the geometrical non-linearity is more important than material non-linearity [43,25]. Hence, in regards to topology optimization for practical compliant mechanisms, it is important to include geometrical non-linearity in the process of numerical analysis [47,48,43,35]. For instance, Sigmund [47,48] investigated topology optimization of multiphysics compliant actuators with large deformation for single material, and multi-material structures. Pedersen et al. [43] developed a topology optimization method for the design of large-displacement compliant mechanisms for path-generating. Luo and Tong [35] proposed a parametric level set method for topological shape design of compliant mechanisms with geometrical non-linearity.It is noted that the numerical process of most works for topology optimization of large deformation compliant mechanisms are often based on the standard finite element method (FEM) [43,47,48], which relies on meshes or elements that are connected together by meshes in a properly predefined manner. It is noted that the accuracy of numerical solution may be degraded seriously due to mesh distortion for the analysis of large deformation of compliant mechanisms. In this case, the standard FEM will experience difficulties in treating discontinuity caused by the inconsistence of mesh grids [8].To overcome this limitation of the standard FEM, several alternative methods have been developed to perform numerical analysis for topology optimization problems, without having to keep the connectivity of structured elements. To this end, some researchers have tried to apply meshless methods to topology optimization problems, only in terms of a set of arbitrarily scattered field nodes rather than structured meshes. The meshless or meshfree methods are relatively simple but able to provide sufficient numerical accuracy yet stability for certain classes of problems [7,3,31]. The typical meshless methods include the smooth particle hydrodynamic method (SPH) [19], the reproducing kernel particle method (RKPM) [32]., the hp-clouds (HP) method [17], the partition of unity method (PUM) [4], the element-free Galerkin (EFG) method [6], the meshless local Petrov–Galerkin (MLPG) method [2], and the point interpolation method (PIM) [30,20]. In particular, the EFG method e.g. [6] with weak forms has received great popularity in a range of areas including topology optimization of structures, due to its good numerical stability and accuracy for problems of computational solids mechanics. In EFG methods, the MLS approximation is usually used to construct the meshless shape functions, and the Galerkin technique of weak-forms is employed to discretise the state equation. This method is “meshless” in terms of the interpolation of design variables. However, the background cells independent of field nodes are required to integrate a weak form over the problem domain. Furthermore, the MLS approximation is required to be enforced to satisfy the Kronecker delta function property. One attractive feature of MLS methods is that its continuity can be inherited from the continuity of the selected weight function.The meshless methods have been applied to topology optimization problems to simulate the large deformation effect of structures [15,29,16,23]. However, having respect to topology optimization of large displacement compliant mechanisms, the number of research works is relatively small. For example, Du et al. [16] applied the EFG method to implement the geometrical nonlinear thermo-mechanical compliant mechanisms and showed that the meshless method can overcome the convergent difficulty in standard FEM. Luo et al. [36] introduced the meshless Galerkin method into the level set approach to develop a topological optimization method, which is further applied to multiphysics compliant actuators involving large deformation effect [37]. More recently, He et al. [23] applied PIM [30,20] to topology optimization problems for the design of structures and compliant mechanisms involving geometrical nonlinearity.Since the meshless method is more capable of modelling the large displacement effect of the geometrical non-linearity [15,18,43], this paper attempts to propose a meshless topology optimization method for micro complaint mechanisms based on the EFG method. In this method, the point-wise densities which are considered as design variables are uniformly described based on a set of scattered field nodes inside the design domain. Firstly, in terms of the original set of meshless density field, the Shepard function method functioned as a density filter is applied to generate a non-local nodal density field with enriched smoothness over the design domain. Secondly, instead of using the MLS approximants to formulate both the shape function and approximate densities over the computational points, the Shepard function method is also employed to approximate the densities on the computational points, while MLS approximants is used to formulate the trial function. Since the Shepard function method possesses non-negative and range-bounded property, it can ensure a physically meaningful approximation of topology optimization design. Finally, the MLS-shape function together with the Galerkin global weak-form is applied to develop the meshless approximation for the displacement field. Since the shape function using the MLS approximants does not satisfy the Kronecker Delta criterion [6,7], a penalty method is used to enforce the essential boundary conditions. To simulate large-displacements of compliant mechanisms, the output displacement maximization has been used as an objective function in this study.Shepard function method is a method for multivariate interpolations of scattered data, which can assign values to unknown points by using values from the scattered set of known points. In this study, the Shepard function is employed to construct a non-local pointwise density-based approximant, based on the concept of elemental SIMP [11]. SIMP has received much popularity due to its implementation easiness and conceptual simplicity, which has been widely used to relax the discrete topology optimization problem by allowing the design variables taking intermediate densities from 0 and 1.The Shepard function satisfies the zero order completeness for representing constant function and possesses the properties of non-negative and range-bounded, which are the fundamental requirements for topology optimization. Thus, a family of Shepard function is firstly used as a non-local approximant to construct a density field with global smoothness over the design space. Secondly, it is applied to interpolate the point-wise densities of computational points inside the design domain.Letφi(i=1,2,…nH)denote a set of non-negative data values at the associated sampling pointsxi=(Xi,Yi)within the support radiusrof an arbitrary point x.(Xi,Yi)defines the ith point location in the given Cartesian coordinate system. The approximation of the Shepard function method is stated as(1)φ(x)=∑i=1nHΘi(x)φiwherenHis the number of the nodes within the influence domain of current point x. The Shepard functionΘi(x)is expressed as a normalized formulation, which is given by(2)Θi(x)=ωix-xi∑j=1nHωjx-xjwhereωix-xiis the weight function, which is zero outside the domain of influential support, and decays with the distance from the interest point. In this study, when the Shepard function is used as the nodal density approximant [28,26,27], the weight function can be chosen as(3)ωix-xi=3πr2max0,1-Di(x)rwhereDi(x)=x-xi=X-Xi2+Y-Yi2. It is noted that the Shepard functionΘi(x)possesses the following properties: (1)∑i=1nHΘi(x)=1; (2)1⩾Θi(x)>0.It is apparent that the Shepard function has a mechanism similar to the smoothing effect of the density filtering schemes [12,33]. Meanwhile, the approximated values via the Shepard function are bounded between lower and upper values of the sampling points. This is the essential property for ensuring a physically meaningful density field approximant in topology optimization. The Shepard function is originally defined as a global interpolation. To improve its computational efficiency while maintain a reasonable accuracy, this study approximates the density at any field node in terms of the density variables of those field nodes located within a compact influence domain “r”, as shown in Fig. 1(a).With the Shepard function method, any density variable for a meshless field node can be calculated as(4)ρ¯(x)=∑i=1nHΘi(x)ρiwhere the nodal density variableρ¯(x)can be obtained by searching the total number of surrounding nodal variablesρiwithin the influence domain of the node x, andρ¯(x)is density at the concerned field node to be approximated by the Shepard function.nHis the number of nodes within the influence domain.This weight function is a radially linear ‘hat’ function defined by [12]. It means that only nearby points are considered in computing any approximated value. It is straightforward that the Shepard function can meet the following necessary conditions to ensure a physically meaningful density approximant in topology optimization of continuum structures: (1)0⩽ρ¯(x)⩽1; (2)∂ρ¯(x)/∂ρi⩾0.With the density field approximant, the Young’s modulus at the meshless field node x can be defined by(5)E(x)=ρ¯p(x)E0=∑i=1nHΘi(x)ρipE0whereE0represents the full-solid state material property. The design variableρiacts as the intrinsic nodal density allowing intermediate values between 0 and 1. The influence domain of the density interpolation is used to identify the design variable points influencing the density value of each computational point. It has been shown by [26] that the influence domain size used in the Shepard function-based density interpolation has a certain length-scale control effect. It is suggested that values between 1 and 3 times of the average distance can provide meaningful solutions, and 1.5 times of the average density point distance is an appropriate value for the radius of circular influence domain.Secondly, the Shepard function is utilized to construct an interpolation scheme for evaluating point-wise densities over all computational points inside the design domain, according to the previously obtained and smoothed densities of meshless field nodes. For implementing Gauss quadrature of the system stiffness matrix, the background virtual cells are required, which are independent of the set of field nodes. Here, 4×4 Gauss quadrature is used to numerically calculate the uniform integration cells according to the location of the computational points. The densities on the computational points (Gauss points) are interpolated via the Shepard function method, which can be given as(6)ρ¯gp=∑i=1nsθi(xgp)ρ¯(x)=∑i=1nsωi(x)∑j=1nsωj(x)ρ¯(x)wherexgp=(Xgp,Ygp), and(Xgp,Ygp)defines the location of Gauss point in the given Cartesian coordinate system. To let the Shepard functionθi(x)satisfy the interpolation conditionθi(xj)=δij, wherei,j=1,2,…,ns, a point-wise density field over the computational points can be constructed via the interpolation of the Shepard function with the following weight functions, expressed as(7)ωi(x)=ωD=23-4D2+4D3D⩽1/243-4D+4D2-4D331/2<D⩽10D>1whereD=xgp-x=Xgp-X2+Ygp-Y2rAs indicated in Fig. 1(b), “r” is radius of influence domain, and there are eight nodes which are considered as the associated points to the concerned computational point. It is easy to see that the Shepard function here satisfies the following properties:(1)Non-negative and range-bounded0⩽θi(x)⩽1.Partition of unity∑θi(x)=1.Interpolation conditionθi(xj)=δij.In this way, the Shepard method can ensure a physically meaningful interpolation to generate a point-wise density field for the numerical implementation of the SIMP-based topology optimization. By applying the Shepard function method in approximating the densities on field nodes and interpolating the densities on computational points, the point-wise density approximant is finally expressed as(8)ρ¯gp=∑j=1nsθj(xgp)∑i=1nHΘi(x)ρiUsing the background cells are required to implement Gauss quadrature of the system stiffness matrix, the system stiffness matrix can be expressed as(9)K=∫ΩBTD(x)BdΩwhereBis the geometric strain–displacement matrix, andDis the elasticity constant matrix. Here, 4×4 Gauss quadrature is used to numerically calculate the uniform integration cells according to the location of the computational points.Using the 4×4 Gauss numerical integration, the system stiffness matrixKcan be explicitly expressed by(10)K=∑i=14∑j=14hBTξi,ηjDξi,ηjBξi,ηjJξi,ηjwiwjwhereDξi,ηjis the material elastic constants at each Gauss point,wis the corresponding weighting factors andhis the thickness of material. The elasticity constantDξi,ηjcan be expressed as follows:(11)D(ξi,ηj)=ρ(ξi,ηj)D0=∑j=1nsθj(xgp)∑i=1nHΘi(x)ρiD0whereD0is the material elastic tensor of the full-solid state material. Thus, the stiffness matrix of the finite element can be explicitly given by(12)K=∑i=14∑j=14hBTξi,ηj∑j=1nsθj(xgp)∑i=1nHΘi(x)ρiD0Bξi,ηjJξi,ηjwiwjwhereNnis the standard Lagrangian shape function, andneis the number of nodes in each element and equals to 4 here.xnis the coordinates of nth node in each element.The moving least squares (MLS) technique is used to construct the meshless approximations, and the MLS approximation for a general functionu(x)at x can be described as below [6,7]:(13)uh(x)=∑j=1mpj(x)aj(x)=pT(x)a(x)wherep(x)is a complete polynomial of order m acting as the basis at x, anda(x)is the vector consisting of unknown coefficients.aj(x)(j=1,…,m)are the unknown parameters related to given points, which can be determined by minimizing a weighted discreteL2norm over all nodes in terms of the pre-known parametersuI.(14)J=∑I=1nw̃(x-xI)∑j=1mpj(xI)aj(x)-uI2where n is the number of nodes within the local support of x. The weight functionw̃(x-xI)≠0.uIis the nodal parameter of u atx=xI. The minimization of J with respect to the coefficientsa(x)results in a set of linear equations as(15)∂J∂aj(x)=2∑I=1nw̃(x-xI)∑j=1mpj(xI)aj(x)-uIpj(xI)=0The compact form for the above equation is given by(16)A(x)a(x)=B(x)uHereuis the vector consisting of the nodal parameters for all nodes inside the support domain, anduT=[u1,u2,…,un]. Solving Eq. (16) fora(x)leads to(17)a(x)=A-1(x)B(x)uSubstituting the above equation into Eq. (13), we have the following the MLS approximant(18)uh(x)=∑I=1nϕI(x)uI=Φ(x)uwhereΦ(x)is the vector of MLS shape functions related to the n nodes in the local support domain of x. The shape functionϕI(x)associated with node I at point x can be written as(19)Φ(x)=pT(x)A(x)-1B(x)In this study, the cubic spline weight function withC2(Ω)continuity is used, and the first-order derivative of the weight function, which is continuous over the entire domain, can be easily obtained via the chain rule of differentiation.The weight function and its derivatives are written as a function of the normalized radius ϒ as follows:(20)w̃(x-xI)=w(ϒ)=23-4ϒ2+4ϒ3forϒ⩽120forϒ>143-4ϒ+4ϒ2-43ϒ3for12<ϒ⩽1whereϒ=dIdmI=x-xIdmaxcI.HeredmIis the size of the support domain of the Ith node, which can be determined bydmaxandcI.dmaxis a scaling parameter which is typically selected as 2.0–4.0 for a static analysis, andcIis the distance to be decided by searching the surrounding nodes at the Ith node. It is noted that the support domains of a computational point for the calculation of displacement and the density interpolation are different. In this section, the support domain of the computational point is used to approximate the displacement field. In general, the computational accuracy of displacement field can be ensured by setting a reasonable value.In MLS meshless approximations, each node is associated with a weight function of compact support, which is required to be non-zero only inside the domain of influence of node I, in order to generate a set of sparse discrete equations. A lower order polynomial basis can be used to generate higher continuous approximations by choosing a proper weight function. Thus, the weight function plays an important role in meshless approximations. The MLS shape functionsNI(x)have the following properties [7,3]:(1)Order of the basis function is closely related to the consistency for completeness and reproducibility. Orderm=1(linear basis) can lead to linear consistency, which refers to the widely studied MLS shape function for meshless approximations, termed as “MLS-Shape function”.Considering the lowest orderm=0(constant basis), the MLS shape function will degenerate to the “Shepard function”, which owns non-negative and bound-ranged properties, like the method used to interpolate the densities on computational points.Partitions of unity, because the constant term is included in the basis.Desirable continuity of the approximation inherits from its weigh function of high continuity.It is important to consider geometrical nonlinearity in compliant mechanism design, which assumes the compliant mechanism undergoes large displacement but the material behaviours remain linear. Using the principle of virtual displacement, the equilibrium equation about the nonlinear problem is expressed as(21)Π(u)=∫Ωf¯δudΩ+∫Γit¯δudΓ+∫ΩSδεdΩ=0whereSis the second Piola–Kirchhoff stress matrix,uis the displacement vector,εis the Green Lagrangian strain vector.f¯is the body force in design domain Ω, andtis the force enforced on the natural boundary. The residual defined as the error using EFG method is then obtained as follows:(22)R(u)=∫ΩΦTf¯dΩ+∫ΓΦTt¯dΓ-∫ΩBTSdΩ=0whereBis the matrix that transforms a change in displacement into a change in strain, which is a function of the nodal displacementu.To solve the nonlinear equation, Eq. (21), the Newton–Raphson method [5] is used in this study. The relationship betweendφand duis required to be determined.(23)dR(u)=∫ΩBTdSdΩ+∫ΩdBTSdΩ=KTduwhere(24)dS=DdE(25)E=BuSubstituting Eqs. (24) and (6) into the first integration of Eq. (23) will yield(26)∫ΩBTdSdΩ=∫ΩBTDBdΩdu=KDduKDis the tangent stiffness related to the constitutive matrix, which is expressed as:(27)KD=KL+KNwhereKLis the usual small displacement stiffness matric as the one based on linear assumption,KNis the stiffness matrix caused by the geometrical non-linearity. They are stated as follows:(28)KL=∫ΩBLTDBLdΩ(29)KN=∫ΩBLTDBL+BNTDBN+BNTDBLdΩwhere(30)BL=ϕi,x00ϕi,yϕi,yϕi,x(31)BN=Lxxϕi,xLyxϕi,xLxyϕi,yLyyϕi,yLxxϕi,y+Lxyϕi,xLyxϕi,y+Lyyϕi,x(32)Lxx=∑k=1nϕk,xuxk,Lyx=∑k=1nϕk,xuyk,Lxy=∑k=1nϕk,yuxk,Lyy=∑k=1nϕk,yuykIn Eqs. (30)–(32),ϕi,xis the shape function derivative with respect to the coordinates of nodes,uxkis the displacement component of node k on the x axis.The second integration in Eq. (23) can be expressed as(33)∫ΩdBTSdΩ=∫ΩBNLTSBNLdΩdu=KSduwhere(34)S=SxxSxx00SxxSxx0000SxxSxx00SxxSxx(35)BNL=ϕi,x0ϕi,y00ϕi,x0ϕi,yKSis the initial stress matrix, which is a symmetric matric dependent on the stress level. Thus, the tangent stiffness matrixKTcan be expressed as(36)KT=dR(u)du=KL+KN+KSTo solve the non-linear equation, the Newton–Raphson iteration method [5] can be employed. Firstly, the initial valueu(1)is obtained via the linear equation:(37)KLu-f=0wherefis the force vector.Then, the displacement, strains and stresses, corresponding to the nodal parameteru(1)are obtained. By substituting these values into Eq. (22), the residualφ(1)between the external and internal forces can be obtained. Thus, the increments of the nodal parameters are calculated as:(38)Δu=-(KT)-1φ(1)After that, we can figure out the new nodal parameter:u(2)=u(1)+Δu. The above iteration is repeated untilΔusatisfies the specified convergence criterion.It is noted that the shape function formulated via the MLS method does not satisfy the Kronecker Delta conditionϕixj≠δij, which means the nodal parameteruiis not equal to the valueu(xi). Therefore, the imposition of essential boundary conditions is more complicated than that in the finite element method. In this study, the essential boundary conditions are enforced using the penalty method. The essential boundary conditions can be accounted by means of a penalty formulation:Findu∈(Hi(Ω))3, such that(39)Πp=12∫ΩεTDεdΩ-∫ΩuTbdΩ-∫ΓtuTt¯dΓ+α2∫Γu(u-u¯)T(u-u¯)dΓis stationary, whereHi(Ω)is the Sobolev space of orderi;Πpis the total potential energy;εis the strain vectors;Dis the strain–stress matrix;Γtis the traction boundary;t¯is prescribed traction;bis a body force vector; the scalar α is a penalty parameter used to enforce the essential boundary conditions.u¯are the prescribed nodal parameters on the boundaryΓu.Substituting Eq. (18) into Eq. (39) results in the following total potential energy, in matrix form, as(40)Πp=12uTK+Kuu-uTf+fuand invoking the stationary ofΠpobtains the following linear system:(41)K+Kuu=f+fuwhereKis the tangent stiffness matrix as in Eq. (27), andfis the same as in Eq. (28).Kuandfuare contributions from the essential boundary conditions, built from the following 2×2 matricesKijuand 2×1 matricesfiu, respectively, as follows:(42)Kiju=α∫ΓuϕiSϕjdΓand(43)fiu=α∫ΓuϕiSu¯dΓand(44)S=S100S2(45)S1=1ifuiis prescirbed onΓu,0ifuiis not prescirbed onΓu,i=1,2An important consideration for using the penalty method is the choice of an appropriate penalty parameter α. From the experience, the penalty parameter can be chosen as(103∼107)·E, where E is the Young’s modulus of the material under consideration. The penalty method presents the advantages, e.g. the dimension of the system is not increased and the matrix in the resulting system is symmetric and positive definite, provided thatKis symmetric and α is large enough.Topology optimization of compliant mechanisms is to design a structure that converts an input to a desired output. In this study, the displacement inverter is considered as an example of compliant mechanisms. The displacement inverter is used to transfer work from the input port to the output port, and it must be possible to control the displacement amplification of the mechanism. The optimal design of the inverter is to maximize the displacement/force/work performed on a work piece modelled by a spring with stiffness. The stiffness value of the spring on output port can control the displacement amplification.There are several different objective functions can be available for the design of compliant mechanisms. It is noted that most of them are originally for compliant mechanisms under the assumption of linear elasticity, which may not well suitable for the problem with geometrical non-linearity. It has shown that the displacement output can be used as the objective function to model the large displacement effect of them mechanism [43,35]. Thus, the optimization problem using meshless methods can be established as(46)Maximizeρ:uoutSubject to:∑j=1nρjVj-V‾=0,ρjmin⩽ρj⩽1,(j=1,2,…,n)a(u,δu)=l(δu),uΓD=u¯,∀δu∈H1where(47)f(u,δu)=12εij(u)Dijkl(ρ(x))εkl(δu)As aforementioned, u is the displacement field, andδuis the virtual displacement field belonging toH1.u¯is the prescribed displacement on the admissible Dirichlet boundaryΓD. ρ is design variable, which is the nodal density in this study.Vjis the discrete material volume andV‾is the total material constrain. n is the number of the design variables in the space, andρjminis the lower bound of the design variables that is determined as 0.0001 to avoid the numerical singularity when computing the global stiffness matrix. Many numerical optimization methods [41] can be applied to find the solution of this optimization problem, based on the sensitivity information of the optimization.To solve the optimization problem, it is necessary to compute the sensitivities (first-order derivatives) of the structural response with respect to the changes of the design variables, which can be determined by using the adjoint sensitivity analysis method. The output displacement can be expressed as(48)uout=LTuwhereLis a vector with the value 1 at the degree of the output point and with 0 at all other places. Introducing a vector of Lagrangian multipliersλand assuming the equilibrium has been found by solving Eq. (22), nothing is changed by adding the termλTRto the objective function (48) as(49)uout=LTu+λTR(u)Then sensitivity of the output displacement can be calculated as(50)duoutdρi=LTdudρi+λT∂R∂ududρi+∂R∂ρiwhere∂R∂u=-KTSinceR=0and the Lagrangian multiplier vectorλcan be chosen freely, the unknowndudρiin Eq. (50) can be eliminated whenλis chosen such that(51)LT-λKTdudρi=0which can be obtained by solving the system of the following linear equation(52)KTλ=LBy insertingλinto the Eq. (50), the sensitivity of the objective function can be simplified as(53)duoutdρi=λT∂R∂ρiThe displacement inverter is used as a numerical example to show topology optimization process of the micro compliant mechanism design, as shown in Fig. 2. The example is solved based on the proposed non-linear modelling of EFG method. The optimality criteria method is used to solve the optimization problem. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach, the results will be compared with that obtained by using non-linear modelling of FEM and linear modelling of EFG method, respectively.As given in Fig. 2, the design domain of displacement inverter is 400×400μm2. On the input port, the input work is modelled by a linear spring with stiffness Kin and a force Fin. The goal of the optimization problem is to maximize the displacement Uout, which is modelled by a spring with stiffness Kout. For simplicity of the computation, the design domain is discretised uniformly by using 41×41 nodes as shown in Fig. 3, and 40×40 cells are used for integration, inside which the 4×4 Guass points are used as the computational points (Fig. 4). In this case, Yong’s modulus is 3GPa, Poisson’s Ratio is 0.3. An input force Fin=1N, and an artificial spring with stiffness Kin=5×104N/m are applied to the input port to simulate the input work. An artificial spring with stiffness Kout=0.1×104N/m is used to simulate the resistance from a work piece. The material usage is limited to 25%.As shown in Fig. 5, a set of nodal densities acting as design variables of the topology optimization is used to represent material distribution which towards the lower limit 0.0001 (weak material phase) and the upper limit 1 (solid material phase) during the optimization. We can find that topology optimization is actually an iterative process to re-distribute a number of density points in the design space until these variables close to a so-called “0–1” distribution. It can be seen that the optimal topology does not have the discontinuously scattered nodes. It should be noted that the one-point connected hinges still appear in the optimal design, in order to enable the optimal structure have large rotation effect as a mechanism. However, the appearance of hinges is unfavourable in manufacturing. Furthermore, such a lumped compliant mechanism will easily subject to stress concentration and fatigue breakage [24]. For the issue of one-point connected hinges, it is out of the major scope of this paper. The reader may refer to some typical papers for more details [44,33,46,52].Using the proposed EFG method, the displacement distortion plot related to the optimal design is shown in Fig. 6. The output displacement of the optimal design is 37.06μm. Fig. 7shows curves of the objective function and the volume constraint over the iterations. The evolution of the optimization process using the proposed EFG method is converged after 103 iterations. According to the curve of the volume constraint, the proposed method is mass conservative. We found that the optimal design obtained by the proposed non-linear modelling of EFG method is similar to those reported in [11]. The results in this case show that the proposed method can find the optimal design of large-displacement compliant mechanisms.To demonstrate the importance of non-linearity in the analysis of compliant mechanisms, the optimal topologies and deformations using non-linear modelling of EFG method, linear modelling of EFG method and non-linear modelling of FEM are compared under different input and output constraints. For the comparison with the FEM method, the design domain is discretised by 40×40 quad element in FEM approach while it is discretised by using 41×41 nodes uniformly scattered in the EFG approach. The parameters for the three cases are given in Table 1and the optimal results are shown in Table 2.Compared with the FEM-based method, it can be seen that the EFG-based method is more capable to describe a distinct topology. This is caused by the difference of the design variables in these two methods. In the EFG method, the densities attached to the meshless field nodes are used as the design variables, while in FEM method the density of each finite element is assumed to be constant. Through comparing the topology obtained by using the linear and non-linear analysis of the EFG method, it can be seen that the displacement inverter with the linear EFG model has thinner connections and bars than that obtained by the non-linear EFG model. It’s known the topologies with thinner hinges and bars make it possible for the mechanism to bend and implement larger displacement outputs. The main objective of displacement inverter is to maximize the displacement at the output port. According to the results obtained in Cases 1 and 2, the output displacement of the inverter by non-linear EFG model is larger than the linear EFG model and non-linear FEM model. The numerical results demonstrate that the non-linear modelling of EFG method is more suitable to capture the structural behaviour of large deformation.Furthermore, to show the advantage of the non-linear EFG method in the design compliant mechanism, the input force in Case 2 is enlarged to Fin=1N in Case 3. During the numerical process, it is found that both the linear EFG model and non-linear FEM model experience convergent difficulty due to the output displacement is too large. For the linear EFG model, this problem may because of the limitation of the linear analysis. In regards to non-linear FEM analysis, this problem is due to the distortion of the element, which has reached the specified limitation. As to the proposed non-linear EFG method, however, this difficulty did not take place, in which the output displacement of optimal design can reach 122.8μm. It is known that the displacement is a linear function of the applied load for the linear analysis, which means the loads of two cases are proportional and the resulting displacement fields are proportional as well. Hence, in linear analysis, two cases with proportional loads must result in the same optimized design. However, regarding to non-linear analysis, the resulting displacement is a non-linear function to the applied load, which will cause different optimal designs for two cases with proportional loads. Thus, it can be seem that it is essential to use geometrically non-linear analysis in compliant mechanism design, and the proposed non-linear EFG method is more capable for large displacement problems.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper proposes an alternative topology optimization method for the design of large displacement compliant mechanisms with geometrical nonlinearity. The Shepard function method is applied to generate a non-local nodal density field with enriched smoothness over the design domain, so that there is no other filter scheme required during the numerical analysis. Furthermore, the Shepard function method is used again to interpolate the densities at all computational points. In this way, a physically meaningful material density representation is obtained based on a set of design variables located on the meshless field nodes. To implement the meshless approximations of state equations, the MLS method is used to construct shape functions with weight functions of compact support. The numerical example has demonstrated that the proposed method is capable to handle the design of large deformation compliant mechanism, and avoid the mesh distortion and convergent problem caused by large deformation. It is straightforward to extend the proposed topology optimization method to more advanced mechanics problems.