@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Vibrations of an aramid anchor cable subjected to turbulent wind

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Vibration response of the aramid cable excited by a turbulent wind is presented.Characteristics of the selected in situ measured wind records are described.Simulations of wind histories are generated using developed WindSimul software.A transient dynamic analysis is used to study the cable behaviour after relaxation.Attractors and Poincaré maps are created and interesting findings are presented.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Aramid anchor cable vibration,Turbulent wind velocity simulation,Cable relaxation,Nonlinear transient dynamic finite element analysis,Time-dependent behaviour analysis,Poincaré maps,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The vibration response of an initially pre-stressed anchor cable made of parallel-lay aramid fibres excited by a measured and artificially simulated spatial turbulent wind field is presented in the paper. Results of the analyses of in situ measured wind records are described. For selected data set statistical characteristics and power spectral density functions of the measured wind velocity components are calculated. The wind stochastic velocity fluctuation is modelled as a one-variate bi-dimensional random field. Cross-power spectral density functions, at different point locations are introduced. The combination of the weighted amplitude wave superposition method (WAWS) with the Shinozuka–Deodatis method is used for the analyzed problem. A time-dependent behaviour of the synthetic cable is investigated which is subjected to turbulent wind with large expected oscillations that arise as a result of slackening due to the relaxation effects. A nonlinear transient dynamic analysis is used in conjunction with the finite element method to determine the dynamic response of the cable subjected to turbulent wind at its initially prestressed state and in the selected times after the relaxation effect. The constitutive equation of the relaxation of the aramid cable follows an experimentally obtained law of the logarithmic type. To monitor the dependences of the individual quantities of cable vibration in the phase space, attractors and Poincaré maps are created by sampling the cable’s displacement and velocity at periods of relevant frequencies. Interesting findings based on the response of the cable with rheological properties to turbulent wind are presented.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cables are frequently used as fundamental structural members in tall and large span structures as well as in guyed towers, suspension or stayed roofs and bridges. Cable structures are in general lighter and more flexible than most other forms of constructions.They are more sensitive to turbulent wind than conventional structures. Cables are characterized by high strength and high resistance, but also by large amplitude oscillations which are mainly due to turbulent wind effects [1,2].To include nonlinearities of both structural and aerodynamic origins, a time-domain analysis for the prediction of the maximum dynamic response of strongly nonlinear cables and cable structures subjected to wind loads is recommended [3]. Time-domain approaches require the generation of input wind histories of multi-dimensional wind fields which can be simulated numerically. Wind records have shown that wind velocity can be considered as a stationary multi-dimensional and multi-variate random process. Consequently, the fluctuating component of the wind can be quantified by statistical functions whose spatial–temporal properties in the frequency domain are expressed by power spectral density functions.Large numbers of papers which deal with such problems have been published over the last decades and significant progress has been made in the simulation of wind effects and in the prediction of the dynamic behaviour of light-weight structures. It is recognized that the application of different turbulence models of wind often provides different evaluations for the dynamic response of the structure [4,5]. Kareem [6] summarized a historical perspective, recent developments and future challenges in the probabilistic numerical simulation of wind effects. Some authors present the results of measurements in situ or wind tunnel tests while others investigate the problem in general terms theoretically, compare various models and data or study specific aspects through numerical experiments [7]. Lazzari et al. [8] studied the modelling and simulation of wind velocity by considering a stationary, multivariate stochastic process, according to its prescribed cross-spectral density matrix. Naprstek [9] investigated the stochastic stability of movement influenced by parametric noise which is generated by the interaction of a moving bluff body and an air flow. Hanzlik et al. [10] presented the methodology for estimating wind effects based on a database-assisted design approach. Fu et al. [11] developed two artificial neural network approaches (a backpropagation neural network and a fuzzy neural network) for the prediction of mean, root-mean-square pressure coefficients and time series of wind-induced pressures acting on a large roof structure.Although considerable research related to linear and nonlinear cable dynamics subjected to deterministic and stochastic excitations has been performed in recent years, less effort has been devoted to the investigation of cables exposed to turbulent wind when the cable is excited by non-periodic fluctuating wind forces with varying spatial distribution.Most dynamic analyses of wind-excited stay or suspended cables are focused on the investigation of basic dynamically unstable phenomena and the modelling of aerodynamic forces acting on a cable which may be caused by: buffeting (from turbulence in the air flow), vortex shedding (from von Kármán vortexes in the wake of the cable), galloping (self induction), wake galloping (fluid-elastic interaction of neighbouring cables) and the interaction of wind, rain and cable [12–14]. Choi and Kim [15] proposed a design procedure of aerodynamically stabilizing cables using a FE-based buffeting analysis to stabilize the seesaw-like motion of a free cantilevered cable-stayed bridge structure during its construction. The most efficient positions for the hold-down stabilizing cables were numerically investigated and the required dimensions and pretensions of cables were also calculated. Won et al. [16] studied a partially earth-anchored cable system in order to reduce the dynamic wind response of cable-stayed bridges. The employment of earth-anchored cables changes the dynamic characteristics of cable-stayed bridges withstanding wind loads. Liu et al. [17] compared the results of full-scale measurements with wind tunnel test results for a long-span roof spatial structure. The time and frequency domain characteristics of full-scale wind load measurements were analyzed based on filtered data-acquisitions.However, some papers were oriented toward the nonlinear analysis of cables subjected to turbulent wind. Gattulli et al. [18] analyzed the cable response to turbulent wind by means of a large dimensional model by making use of the finite element method and by applying reduced models for the wind field and mechanical system. The ability of reduction techniques, for loading and cable descriptions, to accurately reproduce the dynamic response of a suspended cable excited by an artificially generated 3D turbulent wind is discussed. Gattulli et al. [19] presented the ability of a multimodal longitudinal active control to reduce non-linear cable oscillations through analytical–numerical models and experimental prototypes. Carassale and Solari [20] developed an analytic expression of the proper orthogonal decomposition for a class of processes, which include models usually adopted to represent atmospheric turbulence. Di Paola et al. [21] used a time-domain approach for analyzing nonlinear random vibrations of long-span suspended cables influenced by transversal wind. An efficient Monte Carlo-based technique was proposed to evaluate a stochastic behaviour of the cable. Carassale and Piccardo [22] investigated the random oscillations of small-sag, small-diameter cables induced by a turbulent wind through a reduced-order model containing both mechanical and aerodynamic non-linearities. Impollonia et al. [23] proposed a non-linear finite element model of inclined cables, i.e. cables with non-levelled supports, in large displacement and deformation fields in order to compute the dynamic response to wind loads which blow in an arbitrary direction. Datta and Jain [24] investigated the dynamic response of a modelled articulated tower subjected first to a random wind force and then to the combined effect of wind, wave and current forces. Kim et al. [25] described a geometrically nonlinear buffeting analysis of a cable-stayed bridge in a time domain.Vibration reduction in stay cables by means of viscous dampers is of great interest in preventing cable damage and improving serviceability of cable-stayed structural systems such as bridges, roofs, towers and masts. Impollonia et al. [26] presented a study on the effectiveness, as well as the limits, of rotational viscous dampers and springs inserted at the two ends of a bending-stiff taut cable. Zuo et al. [27] presented some characteristics of stay-cable vibrations observed using a long-term full-scale measurement system and interpreted these observations in a three-dimensional cable-wind context. The similarities and differences between vortex-induced vibration and rain-wind-induced vibration were investigated. Tesar and Lago [28] submitted the optimization for the number of and distance between dampers which were adopted in high voltage conductor lines subjected to aeolic and galloping vibrations.Cluni et al. [29] presented a parametric investigation of the axial fatigue performance of suspended cables subjected to lateral wind-induced vibrations. Tesar [30] proposed the solution of a nonlinear aeroelastic response in the ultimate range of spider-web structures subjected to wind induced vibrations. Karmazinova et al. [31] presented some selected failure mechanisms and load-carrying capacities of expansion anchors under static and dynamic tensile forces. Oskoei and McClure [32] presented a comparison between a detailed nonlinear time domain dynamic analysis and a simplified frequency domain approach to estimate the maximum probable response of weakly nonlinear cable roofs. This approach can be considered as an alternative to a detailed time-domain analysis in the preliminary design phase, or may be used to validate results obtained from more elaborated numerical models.Synthetic ropes are identified as an attractive material for use in prestressed cable stayed and suspended structures. It is clear that for these applications a good understanding of rheological properties of the structural response is highly desirable, as it relates directly to the reliability of the structural system during its designed working life [33–35].The vibration response of an initially pre-stressed anchor cable made of parallel-lay aramid fibres excited by a measured and artificially simulated spatial turbulent wind field and the behaviour of this cable with large expected oscillations as a result of slackening due to relaxation effects are investigated and presented in this paper. The proposed procedure for the nonlinear behaviour analysis and response evaluation of an anchor cable subjected to wind turbulence can be summarized by applying the following steps: analyses of in situ measured wind records; generation of numerical simulations of wind velocity histories; characterization of the anchor cable as part of a cable stayed structure; specification of the relaxation properties of a prestressed aramid cable; definition of the finite element model suitable for a transient dynamic analysis subjected to turbulent wind; the assignment of simulated turbulent wind histories and the determination of wind load forces; and the evaluation of resultant vibration responses of the cable at investigated times after relaxation effects with reference to the initial state of the oscillation. Attractors and Poincaré maps are used to monitor the time dependences of the individual quantities of the cable’s vibration.Results of the analyses of in situ measured wind records and the generation of numerical simulations of the wind velocity histories in the longitudinal, lateral and vertical direction are briefly presented in this section. The purpose of this study is to develop a 3-D wind simulation model which is required for the transient dynamic analysis of the time-dependent behaviour of the cable with rheological properties subjected to turbulent wind effects.Wind speed records were measured at Bily Kriz station in Beskydy by the Institute of Systems Biology and Ecology at the Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic. Since a high measurement frequency for research applications was needed, wind velocity was measured according to the propagation speed of ultrasound signals. Records were performed by a GILL R3-100 ultrasonic anemometer, which is part of a system for measuring the exchange of substances between the bark pocket and atmosphere. A view of the mast with the attached anemometer is shown in Fig. 1. The sampling frequency was 20Hz and the duration of records was 1year.The records comprised all three components of wind velocity i.e. in the longitudinal, lateral and vertical direction. The device was positioned 18m above the height of the terrain (approximately 5m above the pine trees) as is shown in Fig. 2.From the annual record of wind velocities, the data from 22nd December 2010 with the duration of 17.5h were selected for further statistical processing. This measurement consists of 35 records of 30min intervals. The criterion for selecting the chosen intervals preferably required the highest mean wind velocity for an entire interval, i.e. approximately the same preferably highest mean speeds with approximately coincident flow directions for a longitudinal component of the wind during individual 30min time periods.Fluctuating velocity components of wind were quantified by statistical functions. The velocity of the wind is considered to consist of a mean wind velocity component and a fluctuating velocity component due to the turbulence or gusting caused by the ground’s roughness. The wind velocity components u(Z,x,t), v(Z,y,t) and w(Z,z,t) can be expressed as the sum of the mean wind velocity componentsu¯(Z,x),v¯(Z,y)andw¯(Z,z), and the fluctuating time-dependent velocity components u′(Z,x,t), v′(Z,y,t) and w′(Z,z,t) in the form(1)u(Z,x,t)v(Z,y,t)w(Z,z,t)=u¯(Z,x)v¯(Z,y)w¯(Z,z)+u′(Z,x,t)v′(Z,y,t)w′(Z,z,t)where x represents the longitudinal direction (the along-wind direction), y is the lateral direction (the horizontal cross-wind direction) and z is the vertical direction (the vertical cross-wind direction) at height Z.The mean wind velocity is defined as(2)u¯=1T∫0Tu(t)dtand the standard deviation σufor the longitudinal direction is(3)σu=σu2=1T∫0T(u(t)-u¯)2dtwhere σ2 is the variance of the wind velocity component and T is the integration time. The longitudinal turbulence intensity is calculated as(4)Iu=σu¯100%For the lateral and vertical direction analogous expressions can be applied.For further analyses, two shorter records of wind velocity components in the longitudinal, lateral and vertical direction with a duration of 30min and 60s were randomly selected from the experimentally measured 17.5h record of wind velocity data.Statistical characteristics for the longitudinal, lateral and vertical component of the measured wind velocities obtained from the record with a duration of 17.5h, 30min and 60s are presented in Tables 1–3.In order to investigate the frequency characteristics of the wind velocity, the power spectral density functions (PSD) for the wind velocity components were calculated using the FlexPro software [36]. The discrete Fourier transformation was used to transfer the time domain into the frequency domain representation. The power spectral density functions were determined using the fast Fourier transformation.For each of the 35 measured records with 30min durations, power spectral density functions and their mean values were calculated for each discrete frequency, separately for the longitudinal, lateral and vertical component of wind. PSD values have been smoothed in the frequency domain using the Hanning window.Mean values of power spectral densities were approximated by the following non-dimensional normalized power spectral density functions–longitudinal direction–transversal direction–vertical directionNormalized non-dimensional average power spectral density functions of wind velocities in the individual longitudinal, transversal and vertical direction calculated from 35 measured records with a duration of 30min and their approximated functions in the forms of Eqs. (5)–(7) are shown in Fig. 3.In order to compare the frequency characteristics of the wind velocity components the approximated power spectral density functions calculated from expressions Eqs. (5)–(7) for the experimentally measured records were compared with those determined according to the analytical expressions proposed by several authors.For illustration purposes, a comparison of the mean power spectral density function obtained from the measurement of the wind velocity component in the longitudinal direction with those obtained by the analytical expressions proposed by other authors is shown in Fig. 4. From the figure it can be seen that global courses of individual power spectral density functions are similar and quantitative differences can be caused e.g. by the terrain’s properties, orography and parameters for the site of measurement. The corresponding analytical expressions of the mean power spectral density functions of the wind velocity component in the longitudinal direction proposed by the various authors are presented in Table 4.Obtained statistical and frequency properties of the longitudinal, lateral and vertical component of the measured turbulent wind can find a wider use in the analysis and design of structures in similar areas.The wind turbulence is usually modelled as a zero-mean, Gaussian, stationary random field that depends on time. If P1 and P2 denote two points located at {X1}={x1,y1,z1} and {X2}={x2,y2,z2}, then, from a probabilistic aspect, the complete characterization of the atmospheric turbulence is ensured by the knowledge of the correlation functionRukul({X1},{X2},τ)for every pair of turbulence components uk, ul, where τ being a time lag [44]. Assuming, that the atmospheric turbulence is ergodic, the correlation function is given by the Fourier transform of the cross power spectral density functionSukul({X1},{X2},ω)between turbulence components ukand ul, where ω is the circular frequency.For simulation purposes in this study, a spatial domain is discretized into 5 points (point locations) which represent significant nodes of the cable (Fig. 14a). The position of nodes of the simulation domain is identified by the vector(8){X}={x1,y1,z1,x2,y2,z2,…,x5,y5,z5}={x1,0,z1,x2,0,z2,…,x5,0,z5}The velocity at a given point can be regarded either as a one-variate four-dimensional (1V-4D) random field or a time-dependent one-variate three-dimensional (1V-3D) random field process. In order to simplify the concept, the wind velocity fluctuation can be characterized in a plane. Then the time-dependent one-variate two-dimensional (1V-2D) stochastic field process can be examined. Thus the discrete wind velocity fields can be written as the sum of the mean velocity vectors and the time-dependent turbulence vectors in the form(9){u(k)(Z(k),x(k),t)}={u¯(k)(Z(k),x(k))}+{u′(k)(Z(k),x(k),t)}(10){v(k)(Z(k),y(k),t)}={v¯(k)(Z(k),y(k))}+{v′(k)(Z(k),y(k),t)}where k=1,2,…,5 denotes the position of the kth node of the cable. The mean velocity can be expressed as(11)u¯(Z,x)=u∗KlnZz0where K is the von Kármán’s constant, u∗ is the friction velocity, Z is the height above the ground and z0 is the roughness length.The WindSimul computational software was created in the Matlab numerical computing environment to simulate the wind velocity components in all directions [45]. The graphical user environment of the developed WindSimul program is shown in Fig. 5.Wind velocity fields in the longitudinal {u(k)(Z(k),x(k),t)} and lateral direction {v(k)(Z(k),y(k),t)} at the individual heights are shown in Fig. 6.The time-dependent random turbulent fields {u′(Z,x,t)} and {v′(Z,y,t)} are transformed into stationary random processes{u̲′(k)(t)}and{v̲′(k)(t)}. The complete characterization of the process is given by its power spectral density matrix [44,46](12)[S{u̲′(k)}{u̲′(l)}(ω)]=S{u̲′(1)}{u̲′(1)}(ω)S{u̲′(1)}{u̲′(2)}(ω)…S{u̲′(1)}{u̲′(5)}(ω)S{u̲′(2)}{u̲′(1)}(ω)S{u̲′(2)}{u̲′(2)}(ω)…S{u̲′(2)}{u̲′(5)}(ω)⋮⋮⋱⋮S{u̲′(5)}{u̲′(1)}(ω)S{u̲′(5)}{u̲′(2)}(ω)…S{u̲′(5)}{u̲′(5)}(ω)The matrix (12) contains power spectral density functions and cross power spectral density functions between turbulent velocities. For the lateral direction an analogous expression can be applied. Cross power spectral density functions in Eq. (12) are obtained as(13)Su̲′(k)u̲′(l)=Su̲′(k)u̲′(k)(ω)Su̲′(l)u̲′(l)(ω)exp(-f(k)(l)(ω))where(14)f(k)(l)(ω)=|ω|Cz2(z(k)-z(l))22π(u¯(z(k))+u¯(z(l)))and Cz=10 is the attenuation coefficient [47].Several techniques were proposed in order to simulate stochastic wind velocity fields to be employed in structural analyses. Among those, the classic weighted amplitude wave superposition method (WAWS), based on the pioneering work of Shinozuka and Jan [48] and then modified by Deodatis [49] (in such a way to achieve ergodic realizations and to be efficiently implemented through fast Fourier transform algorithms), has demonstrated to guarantee the best quality of the obtained results [50]. However, such a procedure requires the Cholesky factorization of the spectral matrix. This leads to high computational expenses. On the other hand, an accurate wind simulation is fundamental for the wind-induced response and behaviour prediction of flexible cables and cable structures. Less demanding, however approximate, techniques may be obtained by exploiting the properties of the proper orthogonal decomposition (POD) of the spectral matrix [51,52].The Shinozuka–Deodatis method [48,49] is used in this study and consequently, the following expression is applied(15)uk′̲(t)≅Δω∑k=15∑j=1NωTkj(ωkj)cos(ωkjt+φkj)where ωkj=ωj+rΔω/3N, Tkj(ωkj) are the elements of matrix [T(ωkj)] and φkjare independent phases uniformly distributed in the interval 〈0,2π〉. [T(ωkj)] is a deterministic matrix obtained through a frequency-dependent decomposition of the power spectral density matrix. In this method the Cholesky factorization algorithm is adopted which provides [T(ωkj)] in the following lower triangular form(16)[T(ωkj)]=T11(ω)0…0T21(ω)T22(ω)…0⋮⋮⋱⋮T51(ω)T52(ω)…T55(ω)Power spectral density functions given by Eqs. (5)–(7) were used for the simulation of the wind velocity component in the longitudinal, lateral and vertical direction by the developed program. Eq. (15) was used analogously for the simulation of wind velocity components in the lateral and vertical direction.On the basis of the random selected records from experimentally measured wind velocities with durations of 60s, numerical simulations of the measured wind velocity component in the longitudinal, lateral and vertical direction were determined using the created program. For the best portrayal of the experimental measurements by simulations the following inputs were chosen in accordance with the measured record: the duration of the record t=60s, the mean wind velocity component in the longitudinal directionu¯=9.5945ms-1, in the lateral directionv¯=-0.0144ms-1and in the vertical directionw¯=2.1245ms-1, an effective height above the zero level Z=5.0m, the terrain category III according to EN 1991-1-4 [14] with the corresponding roughness length z0=0.3m, the frequency of the recording 20Hz and the frequency range from 0 to 10Hz (nmax=10Hz). From these input data the number of recorded time steps s=1200 and the number of discrete frequencies Nω=600 were considered for the simulations. The simulation with a duration of 60s represents one period.For the number of discrete frequencies N to be chosen with respect to zero mean velocity of the fluctuating wind component, a random function must consequently include one period. To achieve one period of the fluctuating component, the number of discrete frequencies is Nω=tnmax.Time courses of the wind velocity components in the longitudinal, lateral and vertical direction of the randomly selected measured record with a duration of 60s and their simulations at the point P1 are shown in Figs. 7 and 8.Statistical characteristics of the measured and simulated wind velocity components in the longitudinal, lateral and vertical direction are introduced in Tables 1–3. The relative rate of the appearance of the measured and simulated wind flow direction is shown through a wind rosette in Fig. 9.Relative rates and distribution functions of the occurrence of the measured and simulated wind velocity components in the longitudinal direction at the point P1 and the corresponding power spectral density functions are shown in Fig. 10.A comparison of the results obtained from the measured and simulated data was presented. These results confirmed the required correctness of the simulated fluctuating wind velocity histories and the possibility of their further use in dynamic analyses. The physical importance of the mathematical approach and the functionality of the developed program were demonstrated and proved.Longitudinal and lateral wind velocity power spectra such as power spectral density functions at the points P1 and P5, and cross power spectral density functions between the points P1 and P5, and/or P3 and P5 are shown in Figs. 11 and 12.The vibration response of an anchor cable for a television tower with a height of 200.0m is analyzed in this study. A global axonometric view of the tower with the anchor cables, detail of the spatial steel structure and a section of the structure with the denotation of the analyzed anchor cable are shown in Fig. 13. The tower is anchored by means of three cables at each of the four nodes situated in the same level. The cables are anchored to massive unmovable concrete foundations at the other end.Anchor cables are made of synthetic aramid fibres with a high-strength and high-modulus. The parallel-lay aramid cables have several advantages including low weight and therefore also less initial sag compared to traditional steel ropes and in addition, can achieve better fatigue properties. Earlier works [33] indicated that a stress rupture of aramid fibres can be described using a linear relationship between the tensile load and the logarithm of time to breaking point; especially when subjected to loading forces equivalent to 50% of the nominal breaking strength, resulting in a material lifetime of up to a 100years.Optimization studies and static analyses of the complex spatial tower structure with anchor cables, under relevant load combinations, using the mean wind velocity components were performed to stipulate the appropriate initial pre-stressing forces in the cables. The initial pre-stressing force of P(τ0)=285kN of the anchor cable at initial time τ0 is considered and the cable cross section is such as to operate in the subcritical range.One of the cables of the cable stayed tower structure was selected which was then further analyzed. A scheme of the investigated anchor cable and wind load directions is shown in Fig. 14. The distance between the supporting nodes of the analyzed anchor cable is ls=73.55m. The selected diameter of the cable is d=80mm, with a cross sectional area of A=5026.55mm2, having a modulus of elasticity of E=126500MPa and a weight per unit length of g=0.04734Nmm−1.In order to study a time-dependent dynamic behaviour of the aramid anchor cable subjected to a turbulent wind field due to its rheological properties, our main attention in this section is focused on the time-dependent losses of the cable’s initial prestress as a consequence of stress relaxation.The relaxation tests of aramid-based composite cables confirmed [53] that the relaxation versus log(τ) curve is a straight line and therefore the following expression can be written for the stress losses Δσ(τ)(17)Δσ(τ)=Alog(τ)+Bwhere Δσ(τ)=σ(τ0)−σ(τ), σ(τ0) is the initial stress due to the initial prestressing force P(τ0) at time τ0, σ(τ) is the stress at time τ and A and B are constants. The relaxation behaviour of the aramid fibres follows an experimental law of the logarithmic type and its rate follows a hyperbolic law. At the end of eight hours the losses had already reached 3/4 of their maximum values.The relaxation percentage pΔσ(τ) at time τ can be expressed in the form(18)pΔσ(τ)=Δσ(τ)σ(τ0)100%In our case, the initial stress σ(τ0) in the anchor cable due to the initial prestressing force, self weight and stress acting under the mean wind load is less than 10% (σ(τ0)=56.69MPa at the initial prestressing force P(τ0)=285.103N) of the ultimate strength of the cable(σult≐2200MPa)so that the following expression for the relaxation can be used Δσ(τ)=6.6log(τ)+13.3. This expression also includes additional elongations of the cable after installation which can influence the stress relaxation due to the setting of attachments, deformation after initial loading by wind actuating on the whole structure of the tower and others. The relaxation quantities (relaxation percentage), for this illustrative example, at the end of the two selected characteristic times τ1=3.8min and τ2=3801.6min (τ2=2.64day) obtained, according to Eq. (18), the following values pΔσ(τ1)=(17.2/56.69)100%=30.34% and pΔσ(τ2)=(37.2/56.69)100%=65.62%, respectively.For the time-dependent rheological analysis of the cable behaviour, the time domain was divided into a discrete number of times τ0, τ1, τ2, …. At each time, the cable was analyzed acting under the applied turbulent wind load with the imposed current geometry and prestress state originating from the previous relaxation effect. The current geometry of the cable corresponding to the actual prestress state was determined by nonlinear static analysis. In this approach, the dynamic response of the cable with the initial geometry and prestressing force was taken as the reference state.In an effort to assess the influence that the decreased initial prestressing force of the cable has on its dynamic behaviour, numerical solutions were performed for the following three states: an initial state with a cable prestressing force of P(τ0)=285kN, a state at time τ1=3.8min with a prestressing force of P(τ1)=189kN and a state at time τ2=3801.6min with a prestressing force of P(τ2)=93.3kN.The initial equilibrium of the anchor cable, assumed as the static initial configuration acting under its self-weight and the current prestressing force at the individual states was defined by a static nonlinear finite element analysis. Consequently, the corresponding sags in the middle of the cable span at the individual states s(τ0)=33.0mm, s(τ1)=52.1mm and s(τ2)=105.2mm were obtained by means of a static nonlinear analysis. All remaining cable parameters were kept constant such as were described in Section 3.The finite element method is applied to simulate the behaviour of the investigated cable subjected to dynamic effects of turbulent wind [54,55]. Finite element ANSYS software was used for its non-linear transient dynamic analysis in the time domain [56].The spatial element marked as SOLID 186 in the ANSYS 12 Classic library was used for the geometrically nonlinear analysis of the anchor cable. SOLID186 is a higher order 3-D 20-node solid element that exhibits a quadratic displacement behaviour. The element is defined by 20 nodes having three degrees of freedom per node: translations in the nodal x, y and z directions. SOLID 186 is used for the three dimensional modelling of the cable. The element supports plasticity, hyper-elasticity, creep, stress stiffening, large deflection, and large strain capabilities.SOLID 186 elements were applied for the structural discretization of the investigated cable. Convergence studies were conducted to decide on an appropriate mesh density, with the aim of achieving suitably accurate results whilst minimizing computational time. The model of the anchor cable consists of 210 finite elements and 1108 nodes. Elements with a length of 350mm were used for the analysis.Boundary conditions were set for the end supporting nodes of the anchor cable. The hinged ends at the places of supports were considered. These supporting nodes are fixed in all directions (displacements in the direction of x, y and z-axis are restrained) but can rotate in all directions. The degrees of freedom of the supporting nodes of the cable finite element models were defined according to the prescribed boundary conditions.The results obtained from uniaxial tensile tests of aramid fibres showed that the stress–strain relationship is linear up to rupture [53]. Consequently, the material model of the cable is characterized by a linear relation between stresses and strains and only the elastic region of the cable behaviour is considered. Hence, Hooke’s law is valid for its behaviour in the elastic range. Displacements are supposed to be large, therefore a geometrically nonlinear behaviour of the cable is assumed.A transient dynamic analysis (sometimes called a time-history analysis) is used to determine the dynamic vibration response of an anchor cable made of aramid fibres subjected to a turbulent wind load. As a starting point, vibration characteristics such as natural frequencies and mode shapes of the anchor cable were determined by modal analysis. The first natural frequencies of the cable obtained at individual states of prestress at times τ0, τ1 and τ2 are f1(τ0)=1.71Hz,f1(τ1)=1.41Hz and f1(τ2)=1.02Hz, respectively.The basic equation of motion solved by a transient dynamic analysis at time t is(19)[M(t)]{w¨(t)}+[C(t)]{ẇ(t)}+[KT(t)]{w(t)}={Fappl(t)}where [KT(t)]=[KE(t)]+[KG(t)] is the tangential stiffness matrix, [C(t)] is the damping matrix, [M(t)] is the mass matrix, {w(t)} is the nodal displacement vector,{ẇ(t)}is the nodal velocity vector,{w¨(t)}is the nodal acceleration vector and {Fappl(t)} is the applied load vector. To solve these equations at discrete time points the Newmark time integration method including an improved Hilber, Hughes and Taylor algorithm called HHT [57] for controlling numerical damping of high-frequency oscillations is applied. The adopted procedure is described in Appendix A.Geometric nonlinear behaviour with a large displacement range was assumed in the analysis. Incremental and Newton–Raphson iterative solution strategies with the updated Lagrangian formulation were used to solve the geometrically non-linear problem. Within an increment of load, the geometry and stress update were performed once the iterative process had converged. The convergence was verified with the displacements and forces criteria formulated independently. Computational time can be significantly shortened by applying parallel computations [58].The investigated anchor cable was loaded by the experimentally measured and theoretically simulated components of turbulent wind velocities in the longitudinal and lateral directions. The orientation of the anchor cable is nearly vertical (due to the large inclination of the cable) and hence the vertical component of the wind load was neglected.The analyzed aramid anchor cable was loaded by the measured and simulated wind velocity in the longitudinal u(t) and lateral v(t) direction as is shown in Fig. 7. Wind velocities u(t) and v(t) were transformed into wind load forcesFuappl(t)andFvappl(t)(in a general form) by means of the following relationships(20)Fuappl(t)=12ρcu2(t)AFvappl(t)=12ρcv2(t)Awhere ρ is the air density, A is the reference area of the structural component and c=0.8 is the aerodynamic coefficient. Wind load forces were applied during the period of 60s with a step of 0.05s.A nonlinear transient dynamic analysis of the anchor cable subjected to turbulent wind at initial time τ0, and at the times τ1=3.8min and τ2=3801.6min after the relaxation process, was performed in order to compare the time-dependent dynamic behaviour of the initially pre-stressed anchor cable and the behaviour of the cable after slackening due to the relaxation effect. The starting conditions of the cable at the individual times differ in value of the actual prestressing force due to relaxation and in the current geometry defined by the sag in the mid-span of the cable. The goal is to point out the differences in the cable’s behaviour and in its response to turbulent wind at the individual times due to the relaxation effects.In all analyses, the vibration response of the cable during 60s time intervals was investigated. The cable’s behaviour is described through the displacement components in the longitudinal (along-wind) and lateral (across-wind) local reference axes that coincide in the investigated cases with horizontal and transversal global reference axes x and y (see Fig. 14).The trajectories of motion for the midpoint of the cable loaded by the measured and simulated wind velocities during the time interval of 60s at the initial state (results of the analysis at the initial time τ0 without the influence of relaxation) and trajectories obtained by the simulated turbulent wind velocities at the times τ1=3.8min and τ2=3801.6min (states after the relaxation process) are shown in Fig. 15.Fig. 16shows the response of the midpoint of the anchor cable subjected to the measured and simulated turbulent wind at the initial state (at time τ0) and at the times τ1=3.8min and τ2=3801.6min where both displacement components in the longitudinal (displacement x) and lateral (displacement y) direction are present. In this respect a good agreement is found between the cable responses to the measured and artificially simulated turbulent wind at initial time τ0 (Fig. 16a and b). The sizes of the two components are quite different and as expected the longitudinal displacement component is prevailing. The changes of the initial response of the mid-point of the cable acting under the simulated turbulent wind due to relaxation at the investigated times τ1 and τ2 are shown in Fig. 16c and d.The cable’s response to the simulated turbulent wind effects was compared at individual states of the prestressing force. Examination of the direct comparison of the time histories (trajectories) shown in Fig. 16 it is clearly visible that the overall aspect and amplitudes of the cable motion are different at the individual investigated times. Amplitudes increase over a time due to the stress relaxation. The most significant differences and increments are in the displacements of the cable subjected to wind turbulence in the longitudinal (along-wind) direction as is shown in Fig. 16.Results confirmed that the relation between the dynamic behaviour of the cable at the initial state and the next states is strongly nonlinear.Dependency between the displacement and velocity of the midpoint of the cable in the longitudinal and lateral direction of the measured and simulated wind turbulence at the initial state and at the investigated times after relaxation are shown in Figs. 17 and 18. Figs. 17 and 18 demonstrate that the relaxation effect produces important nonlinear redistributions of anchor cable displacements and introduces additional deformations to the system. The maximum amplitudes of the response depend on the orientation of cable vibration, and consequently significant oscillations of the cable occur in the longitudinal direction. Fig. 17a and b demonstrate that the results of the field data analysis show consistent similarities with the simulated values.Indeed, significant differences are observed amongst the simulated cable responses to turbulent wind fields at different levels of prestressing. To explain these differences it may be useful to evaluate a power spectral density function of the displacement response associated to each state.Power spectral density functions for the displacement of the midpoint of the cable loaded by simulated wind velocities in the longitudinal x direction at the initial state and at the investigated times after relaxation are shown in Fig. 19. This figure describes how the power of the displacement is distributed with the frequency at individual prestressing forces of the anchor cable. From the comparison shown in Fig. 19, it is clear that this power is increased when the prestressing forces are decreased.Courses of the reaction components in the x- and y-direction at the supporting node of the cable acting under measured and simulated turbulent wind at the initial state τ0 and the changes in the courses of the reaction components acting under the simulated wind due to relaxation at the investigated times τ1=3.8min and τ2=3801.6min are shown in Figs. 20 and 21.Several parameters that may influence the cable’s vibration under turbulent wind include amplitude, frequency and direction of external excitation, current properties of the structure, current level of cable prestressing forces, etc. DTAttractor (Data Transformation to the Attractor) software has been created to monitor the dependences of individual quantities of the cable’s vibration in the multidimensional phase space and to describe a system toward which the system tends to evolve over time. Attractors and Poincaré maps were created by sampling the displacement and velocity of the cable’s midpoint at periods of relevant excitation frequencies. Each representation of the Poincaré map for former vibrations is simply one fixed point coherent with one-period motions as is shown in the following figures. All Poincaré sections were constructed with a phase that captured amplitudes of the cable’s oscillation at the investigated states.Poincaré maps are used to analyse the numerical results. The Poincaré map is a sequence of points (displacements at the midpoint of the cable) which characterize the dynamic response of the cable subjected to turbulent wind actions. Poincaré maps allow one to look at the time-dependent vibration behaviour of the cable in a straightforward manner. They show how displacements can lead to sparse arrays at individual times due to slackening of the cable after the relaxation process.The attractor represents a geometrical object toward which the trajectory of a dynamical system, represented by a curve in a phase space, converges in the course of time. The vibration response of the cable as a dynamical system can be described geometrically as a rotational motion on an attractor. Displacements of the cable’s midpoint in the longitudinal and lateral direction at selected periods and relevant velocities are transformed to the rotational motions expressed in the polar coordinate system for the 3-dimensional space. Mutual comparisons of the attractors at individual times show changes in the vibration response of the cable before and after the relaxation process. When the non-linearity of the system becomes more important, more complicated attractors may appear. The final trajectory in which the system settles may have a very irregular shape, without any apparent periodicity.Dependence between the displacement and velocity of the midpoint of the cable in the longitudinal direction of the measured and simulated wind turbulence is studied at the initial states using attractors as is shown in Fig. 22a and b. The time axis is cycled at a period T1(τ0) with a frequency of 1.71Hz (T1(τ0)=1/1.71=0.58s), which corresponds to the first natural frequency f1(τ0), of the cable vibration at initial time τ0 and enables the displacements of the cable under the unilateral oscillation to be captured. Intersections of the Poincaré section with the trajectory in the attractors are marked by points at the areas with the expected amplitudes of displacements. These corresponding Poincaré sections are shown separately in Fig. 23a and b.Attractors for the dependence of the displacement and velocity of the midpoint of the cable in the longitudinal direction of the simulated wind turbulence at the investigated times after relaxation are shown in Fig. 22c and d, and the corresponding Poincaré sections at the same times are shown in Fig. 23c and d.Attractors for the first natural double frequency of the cable’s vibration of dependence between the displacement and velocity of the midpoint of the cable in the longitudinal direction of the experimentally measured and theoretically simulated wind turbulence at the initial state (results of the analysis at initial time τ0 without the influence of relaxation) and at the investigated times τ1=3.8min and τ2=3801.6min after the relaxation are shown in Fig. 24. The corresponding Poincaré sections at the same times are shown in Fig. 25. The time axes are cycled at half periods. Thus, the selected periods allow the bilateral displacements at the midpoint of the anchor cable to be captured. A colour spectrum for the differentiation of the time dependence of monitored variables in the Poincaré sections is used (see the time axis on the right side of the figures). Consequently, the blue points correspond to the beginning of the time interval with a duration of 60s. Figs. 23d and 25d show that a lower density of points is seen at the times after the relaxation process, which corresponds to larger displacements at these states. Vibrations in a variety of modes and high-level dynamic responses of the cable to random excitations can occur. The overall characteristics of damping are different at the individual times, and are influenced by the current properties of the cable. From a dynamic perspective, the properties of the cables are modified by the initial value of prestress.Poincaré maps at the individually investigated times show that the displacements of the cable due to turbulent wind are more dispersed after relaxation when the initial prestressing force is successively decreased in comparison with those at the initial state. In this state when the cable is prestressed by the required prestressing force, at the end of the monitored time section, the displacements begin to become more clustered in comparison with those at the states after relaxation. This clustering can be attributed to the consolidation of the oscillation in certain limits due to a sufficient level of prestressing. In further investigations, it would be useful to monitor vibration during a longer time interval.Results of the time-dependent response analysis of the anchor cable loaded by the experimentally measured and simulated turbulent wind velocities at the initially prestressed state and at the states after slackening due to the relaxation effects were presented. The influence of the level of actual prestressing force on the cable response was evaluated. The performed comparisons between cable vibration responses at individual states confirmed that the level of cable prestress has a significant effect on its excited modes namely from both quantitative and qualitative aspects.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The vibration response of the initially pre-stressed anchor cable made of parallel-lay aramid fibres excited by a measured and artificially simulated spatial turbulent wind field and the behaviour of this cable with large expected oscillations after slackening due to the relaxation effects were investigated and presented in the paper.Synthetic aramid ropes have been identified as an attractive material for use in prestressed cable stayed and suspended structures. It is clear that for these applications a good understanding of the rheological properties of the structural response is highly desirable, as it relates directly to the reliability of the structural system during its design working life.Vibrations of aramid anchor cables, their stresses and deformations can be significantly influenced by time-dependent processes such as creep and relaxation. Since the stresses in the anchor cables in service conditions are limited to approximately 45% of their ultimate tensile strengths (UTS) the effect of the relaxation phenomenon can be reduced. The considerable relaxation effects occur for stresses higher than 50% of UTS. In these cases, the dynamic response along the lifespan of the structure should be evaluated by taking time dependent effects into account. However, time effects always introduce a significant redistribution of forces from the anchor cables to the main structure (tower).The relaxation effect produces important nonlinear redistributions of anchor cable forces and displacements as well as introducing additional deformations to the main system. The nonlinear dynamic analysis of the aramid cable evidenced, in particular, the sensitivity of the structure to relaxation effects.If proper attention is not devoted to these effects, structural reliability in terms of serviceability and, in some instances, of ultimate safety may be adversely affected. An appropriate evaluation of such effects for designing durable and safe structures requires the establishment of reliable methods for predicting stress relaxations of cables (a material properties problem), and for determining the consequent time-dependent response of cable structures with an adequate degree of accuracy (a structural analysis problem). The proposed approach can be used for these purposes since it provides time-dependent control of the dynamic behaviour of the polymer cable structures. The procedure provides the designer with effective ways of guiding the evolution of the dynamic system by an appropriate and rational choice of its initial parameters.Further investigations, aimed at a deeper comprehension of the nonlinear dynamic response of wind-excited aramid cables, should consider a fluid–solid coupled simulation of the cable interaction with an environment under the turbulent wind field and represent a future task for the authors.