@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A critical analysis of Building Information Modelling systems used in construction projects

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Construction life cycle project needs to be understood for BIM to be easily integrated.Interoperability is crucial for the uptake of BIM in the construction industry.Supply chain members need to collaborate on projects to deliver BIM compliant projects.There is a need for vendors/manufacturers to adopt a common language in publishing information about BIM software.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
BIM,Classification,Construction,Decision-support,Interoperability,Plug-ins,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Building Information Modelling (BIM) is now a global digital technology which is widely believed to have the potential to revolutionise the construction industry. This has been mainly a result of worldwide government initiatives promoting BIM uptake to improve efficiency and quality in delivering construction projects. This push has been accompanied by the release of a tremendous amount of BIM software systems which are now available in the market. Although this can be seen as a positive development, one cannot ignore how it has overwhelmed many professionals who cannot easily distinguish between the uses of these software systems. Previous studies about different BIM systems have generally been limited in scope focusing predominantly on operational issues. This study aims to conduct a comprehensive and critical appraisal of a wide range of BIM software systems currently being used in managing construction project information. To achieve this, five main methods are adopted. These include a systematic review of the literature, a structured questionnaire survey, action learning, focus group discussions and email surveys. It has to be noted that, although it is impossible to examine the totality of BIM systems, the study adopts a holistic approach looking at most of the major BIM system categories and 122 application examples which are common in the architecture, engineering and construction (AEC) industry.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Although collaborative practices in the construction sector have been encouraged with little success, emerging BIM systems provide great opportunities to overcome this everlasting industry-wide challenge. Ultimately, this depends highly on the effectiveness of information exchange and relevant capabilities. This is the underlying concept of the interoperability of BIM systems.The main aim of this study was to appraise a significant number of common BIM systems available in the market using interoperability as the main criterion. Other secondary factors considered in the appraisal include the different domains of use of BIM software systems, how BIM software systems are being used and whether BIM software systems are free or not. To this end, 122 BIM software systems were reviewed and classified according to the aforementioned criteria. For example, Clima-Win was classified under: Building Services domain; Specific applications: thermal calculations (meaning a tool used for building thermal calculations); Input files: gbXML, IFC, etc. (files that can be read by Clima-Win); Output files: XML, Excel, etc. (files that can be exported by Clima-Win); Plug-ins: Plug-in for Revit (Clima-Win plug-in can be installed in Revit and thermal calculations performed Revit); Availability: C (C for commercial to mean it is not free). Given that the authors are not aware of any comprehensive study of this nature, web links for the different BIM software systems were also provided. Similarly, these criteria were applied on all software applications presented in structured Table 2.One potential take-away from this study is enshrined in the question often heard from professionals during BIM workshops or seminars. The question is “which BIM software should I use?” From our experience, many construction firms have often invested in BIM software systems that perform similar functions. For example, a firm could be investing in Revit, ArchiCAD and Vectorworks at the same time. While each of these software systems have their pros and cons, all of them can be employed in a BIM project differently to achieve the same goal. Each one of them also has its strengths when coupling with other software systems such as 4D and 5D simulation software (i.e. interoperability and collaboration). While this study, particularly Table 2 does not offer a panacea solution, it offers some basis to start from. We strongly propose two pieces of advice to companies interested in adopting BIM. First, that a firm should think of its supply chain partners and the type of construction activities they are involved and then invest in software systems compatible with those used by its supply chain partners. Secondly, for large firms, they should consider the lifecycle of projects and purchase software that aligns with the project life cycle. Investing in two or more BIM software systems used in the same phase is not generally helpful, rather it is better to invest in different BIM software systems from different phases of construction. In both cases interoperability is key and this study will serve as a good starting point.Although the list of BIM software suggested in this paper is not exhaustive, an effort was made to cover key construction domains. By doing so, the study compliments others that have often focused on mostly one category of BIM software systems (e.g. BIM authoring tools or only energy simulation tools).To conclude, one major challenge in this emerging domain is that of trust. To what extent can one believe the information provided about the functionalities and capabilities of software by their respective vendors/manufacturers as presented on their websites. For open source BIM software systems it was easy to verify this by simply downloading and trying out the application. For commercial software, despite the availability of trial versions, it is a huge challenge as most trial versions are usually limited in scope. The authors suggest with confidence that one way to overcome this challenge is for users to provide feedback and ratings for different BIM systems. Given the complexity of the construction sector and supply chains the classification table incorporated in this paper should be upgraded and expanded to include other factors that can further support decision-making. Lastly, it is important to note that, most of the information related to the plug-ins discussed in this paper was mostly retrieved from vendors’/manufacturers’ websites. Given the important function of plug-ins in terms of interoperability, the next step of this study is to conduct a detailed appraisal of the potential of plug-ins in fostering interoperability. As a word of caution, readers should read this work taking into account the context of time. This is because the rate of development of BIM software systems is astonishing and vendors/manufacturers may develop or improve other aspects that have not been considered in this study.