@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fire emergency evacuation simulation based on integrated fire–evacuation model with discrete design method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A DDM with integrated fire–evacuation model for fire emergency evacuation.The key values of the parameters are obtained.Grid resolution is analyzed to determine an appropriate grid size.The total evacuation time (TET), waiting time (WT) and ratio of WT/TET are studied.Several important factors are found for the fire emergency evacuation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Emergency evacuation,Fire–evacuation model,Discrete design method,FDS+Evac,Total evacuation time,Waiting time,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Emergency evacuation under fire condition in a mass transit station is a great concern especially in developing countries. The interaction between fire and human is very important in the analysis of emergency evacuation under fire condition. An integrated fire–human model, FDS+Evac, is widely used to solve numerically the simultaneous fire and evacuation processes. However, when the simulation runs increase, the simulation time and cost will increase dramatically. The use of discrete design method (DDM) to reduce the simulation time and cost in fire emergency evacuation simulations is proposed. The method is applied to an underground subway station to study the influence of different factors on fire emergency evacuation. The grid resolution is analyzed to determine an appropriate grid size that will optimize the solution accuracy and time. Different fire locations, heat release rates, occupant loadings, ventilation conditions and material properties are considered under fire condition in the underground subway station. It shows that the heat release rate has a weak influence on fire emergency evacuation, but the fire location, occupant loading, ventilation condition and material property have a great influence on fire emergency evacuation. Furthermore, the five parameters have a coupled function on fire emergency evacuation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Due to the heavy casualties and tremendous loss of property in a fire accident in a subway station or in a tunnel such as Kitzseinhorn funicular fire in Austria (in 2000, 153 casualties), Baku subway fire in the Azerbaijan Republic (in 1995, 340 casualties) and the arson fire in Daegu, Korea (in 2003, more than 189 casualties), there are special concerns on fires in subway station. In case of an emergency under a high occupant load, jamming would occur around the exits of the station. Therefore, evacuation during fire emergency in an underground mass transit station is a key issue that should be studied carefully through detailed scenario analysis. There might be even more problems for those terminals having difficulties in complying with prescriptive fire codes of the fire administration, especially for those newly-built subway stations. The crowded condition under the maximum loading needs to be examined to perform a full risk assessment as one of the worst scenarios.It is often practically impossible to carry out full-scale fire experiments in a subway station in order to study the fire and evacuation behavior. Numerical simulations are increasingly used to study the fire characteristics in a subway station or in a tunnel. The use of advanced computer models for the analysis of evacuation problems in buildings under fire conditions or terrorist attacks has become an increasingly important research area.Galea and Perez Galparsoro [1] and Galea et al. [2] used a computer-based simulation model, EXODUS, for the prediction of human behavior in aircraft fire accidents. Kang [3] discussed a smoke model for CFD, which evaluated smoke visibility based on line of sight. The smoke model can be useful in tenability, evacuation and other life safety assessments. Chow [4] studied ‘Waiting time’ for evacuation under crowded areas, including the evacuation simulations of 69 malls and public areas with buildingEXODUS. Chow and Candy [5] studied the waiting time during emergency evacuation in crowded halls and proposed a waiting time index (WTI) to quantify jamming at the exits with buildingEXODUS and SIMULEX. An airport terminal with fire safety provided by performance-based design was taken as an example to illustrate the concept. Galea et al. [6] used evacuation models in the investigations of the collapse of the World Trade Center Towers in 2001. Galea et al. [7] and Grosshandler et al. [8] also used evacuation models to investigate the Rhode Island Nightclub fire.Cheng et al. [9] studied an announced evacuation drill from a retail store. The analysis results showed that pre-movement time was an important part of evacuation process. Strengthening detector, alarm equipments and staff training are very effective and necessary for fire safety in China. These data can also be used as input parameters for evacuation models in performance-based fire protection design or validating the evacuation models’ accuracy. Jiang et al. [10] studied the emergency evacuation in places for public entertainment in Mainland China with buildingEXODUS. Different ways on improving the emergency evacuation by varying the number of available exits, the width of the available exit and the stairway steps inside and outside the exits under different occupant loadings were studied. Oven and Cakici [11] studied the evacuation of a high-rise building in Istanbul and did numerical simulations with buildingEXODUS. Shi et al. [12] investigated the safety strategy of evacuation in metro stations in China and proposed an engineering calculation method for the metro station evacuation time. Jiang et al. [13] studied the maximum upstairs speed and the average minimum width of staircase utilized per person by taking two subway stations in China as examples with the software buildingEXODUS. A numerical simulation software, FDS+Evac, which combines fire model and evacuation model has been widely used recently [14] in fire emergency evacuation. Huang et al. [15] analyzed the fire safety issues in the construction area of a hospital using the FDS+EVAC software. Jiang et al. [16] carried out numerical simulations on the evacuation of a high-rise apartment using the buildingEXODUS software and compared the result with that of a fire evacuation drill. Ronchi et al. [17] reviewed several evacuation models (FDS+Evac, STEPS, SIMULEX, Pathfinder) for their applicability within Italian Fire legislation for tunnel safety.Due to the complexity of fire behaviors and human behaviors in fire emergency evacuation, many parameters are involved in the integrated fire–evacuation simulations. Most parameter lies in an interval, which means it is a continuous variable. Therefore, many simulations are needed to do the study on fire emergency evacuation, which will be time-consuming. Hence, an efficient simulation design method is needed to provide useful results with fewer simulation runs. Under this circumstance, a discrete design method is an appropriate technique to select the key values of the parameter. This method has been widely used in many fields for optimization design [18–20]. It is a suitable way to get the key values of the parameter.In this paper, a discrete design method is applied to fire emergency evacuation based on an integrated fire–human model to obtain the key parameter values and to study the influence of different parameters on the evacuation. The software FDS+Evac, which combines fire model and evacuation model, is used. The method is applied to an underground subway station. Different fire locations, heat release rates, occupant loadings, ventilation conditions and material properties are considered to study their influences on fire emergency evacuation. The predicted total evacuation time, waiting time, ratio of waiting time over total evacuation time and fractional effective dose are compared and analyzed.In this study, a combined evacuation calculation model and a Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) model of fire-driven fluid flow [14] is used, where the evacuation and fire parts can be interacting. Several commonly-used independent models, an agent model, an agent movement model, a fire CFD model, an exit selection model and a group model, are integrated into this fire and evacuation interaction model.In the interaction model, fire calculation is used as the platform of the evacuation calculation. Fire may have influence on evacuation conditions; it may incapacitate persons and in extreme cases block major exit routes. On the other hand, persons may also have influence on fire conditions by opening doors or actuating various fire protection devices. For now, the effect of smoke on the movement speeds of agents and the toxic influence of the smoke are implemented in the movement model of FDS+Evac.An approximate form of the Navier–Stokes equations appropriate for low Mach Number applications is used in the fire model [21,22]Purser’s Fractional Effective Dose (FED) concept [14,23] is used to represent the toxic effects of gaseous fire products. The FED value is calculated as follows.(1)FEDtot=FEDCO×HVCO2+FEDO2where FEDCO is the fraction of an incapacitating dose of CO,HVCO2is the carbon dioxide induced hyperventilation factor, andFEDO2is the fraction of an incapacitation dose of low O2 hypoxia.If the FED value exceeds 1, the agent will be considered to be incapacitated. It will not get any social forces from the other agents and walls with a target movement speed of zero.Suppose that we have m simulation targets, Ri(i=1,2,…,m), and n parameters, xi(j=1,2,…,n). Their relationships can be represented as follows.(2)R1=R1(x1,x2,…,xn)R2=R2(x1,x2,…,xn)⋯Rm=Rm(x1,x2,…,xn)Since most of the parameters are continuous variables, we need to discretize those continuous parameters to do numerical simulation.An equivalent method is one way to discretize the continuous parameter. Suppose we have xi∊[ai,bi]. We partitioned the interval [ai,bi] into k equal sub-intervals. Then, we get k+1 discrete values of xi, which are:(3)xil=ai+lk(bi-ai),l=0,1,2,…,kAnother way of discretization is to get the key values of the parameter. In this method, several key values are selected from the interval. Generally, the minimum, ai,and the maximum value, bi,are two of the key values. Since the key values have a strong influence on the simulation result, this method can get a better result than the equivalent method. Therefore, this method is used in this research.Fig. 1shows the flowchart of fire emergency evacuation simulation using the integrated fire–evacuation model and the DDM. The detailed steps are as follows.Step 1: Determine the parameters.In a fire emergency evacuation simulation, the simulation parameters include both the discrete and continuous parameters. Discrete parameters include material types/properties, ventilation conditions, etc. Continuous parameters include fire locations, heat release rates, occupant loadings, etc. For continuous parameters, we need to discretize them for the fire emergency evacuation simulation.In this study, fire locations (FL), heat release rates (HRR) and occupant loadings (OL) are selected as the continuous parameters for the fire emergency evacuation simulations.Step 2: Determine the key values using the DDM.For fire locations (FL), we first study the most possible fire scenarios. Then we determine the fire locations from these fire scenarios. In this study, three fire locations are selected, including a staff workroom fire, a kerosene arson fire near the left fixed stairs in the 2nd underground floor, and a train car fire.For heat release rates (HRR), we first determine the value interval. Then we select the key values of HRR. In this study, the value interval of the staff workroom fire is [1.28MW, 6.4MW]. Three key values are selected as 1.28MW, 3.2MW and 6.4MW. For the kerosene arson fire near the left fixed stairs in the 2nd underground floor, the value of HRR is determined by the amount of kerosene. In this study, 10l of kerosene is assumed to be poured and lit near the left fixed stairs in the 2nd underground floor. The heat release rate for this fire can be calculated with the following equation [23].Q̇=ṁ″·A·ΔhcwhereQ̇is the heat release rate,ṁ″is the mass burning rate per unit area, A is the burning area, and Δhcis the heat of combustion. For kerosene,ṁ″is 0.0078kg/m2s, A is 1.4×10×1.55=21.7m2, and Δhcis found to be 43.2MJ/kg. The resulting heat release rate isQ̇=0.0078×21.7×43.2=7.31MWFor the train car fire, its peak HRR can reach 35MW [23]. A commonly used HRR is 7.5MW in the study of subway station fire [24–26]. In this study, we selected 35MW and 7.5MW as the two key values of HRR.For occupant loadings (OL), the value interval can be (0m2/person, +∞m2/person). For the staff workroom fire and kerosene arson fire, we select 0.5m2/person as the high occupant load following local codes and 3m2/person as the normal occupant load [27].Shanghai metro line 1 was completed in 1995. The passenger flow has been increasing year by year with an average growth rate of 14.5% [28]. The train in line 1 has 8 compartments. The load capacity of each compartment is 310 persons. It is reported that the load factor reaches 133% in recent years [29], which means the load of each compartment is 310×133%=412 persons. Therefore, the total load of the train is 412×8=3296 persons. In the train car fire, 0.5m2/person is taken as the occupant load in the subway station. 3296 persons are taken as the occupants in the train car.Step 3: Carry out simulations with integrated fire–evacuation model.When the continuous parameters are discretized, we carry out simulations with the integrated fire–evacuation model. In this study, a software, FDS+EVAC, is used for the simulations.Step 4: Analyze the influence of different factors on fire emergency evacuation.Different fire locations, heat release rates, occupant loadings, ventilation conditions and material properties will have different influences on fire emergency evacuation. After simulations, the predicted total evacuation time, waiting time, ratio of waiting time over total evacuation time and fractional effective dose are compared and analyzed.One subway station in Shanghai is studied in this paper. It is 180m long, 17.7m wide and 12.66 high as shown in Fig. 2. The station has two underground floors with 4 exits. There are two fixed stairs and two traveling stairs between two underground floors. A workroom (X: 53.83m–56.83m; Y: 7.85m–9.85m; Z: 1.95m–4.45m) is located under each of the fixed stairs. In the ceilings of both the 1st and 2nd underground floor, there are several rows of supply air vents with the size of 0.5m×0.3m, and exhaust vents with the size of 0.5m×0.8m. But sprinklers are only installed on the ceiling of the 1st underground floor. The layout of vents and sprinklers in the ceiling of the 1st underground floor is shown in Fig. 3a. The layout of vents in the ceiling of the 2nd underground floor is shown in Fig. 3b. The parameters of the sprinklers [30] are shown in Table 1.FDS+Evac [14] is a combination of Fire Dynamics Simulator (FDS) and the evacuation module. It allows simultaneous simulation of fire and evacuation processes. It has three main features: (i) It can be used to simulate both low and high density crowds, where the movement dynamics is affected by the crowd pressure. (ii) The interaction between the evacuees and fire can be taken into account by simultaneous simulation, thus allowing a full coupling between the fire conditions and the human behavior. (iii) The decision making processes of the evacuees are modeled taking into account the sociopsychological aspects like the importance of familiar people (group dynamics) and places.A set of verification and validation cases for FDS+Evac has been documented [31]. The validation data consisted of generic literature data for door and corridor flow rates and specific case studies of the public library and large office building. In most cases, FDS+Evac was shown to be able to reproduce the experimental findings within the experimental uncertainty. For some cases, like the downward stair flow, a good agreement required adjustment of the model parameters. Therefore, this software is well validated and demonstrated to be applicable to many evacuation simulations in case of fire.In this subway station, there are five possible fire scenarios, a subway car fire, a garbage can fire, a staff workroom fire, a bookstall fire, and an arson fire. The garbage can fire, staff workroom fire and bookstall fire have a similar influence on emergency evacuation. Therefore, we select a staff workroom fire (fire case A), a kerosene arson fire (fire case B), and a train car fire (fire case C) as the designed fires in this study as shown in Fig. 2.•Fire case A: A sofa in the left workroom is assumed to be on fire, with a HRRPUA (heat release rate per unit area) of 2000kW/m2. The area of the sofa varies from 0.64m2 to 3.2m2. In this study, 0.64m2, 1.6m2 and 3.2m2 are selected. Therefore, in fire case A, three kinds of HRR are used as inputs to the simulations, which are 1.28MW, 3.2MW and 6.4MW, as shown in Table 3 and Fig. 5. In fire case A, four stairs are available for evacuation.Fire case B: 10l of kerosene is assumed to be poured and lit near the left fixed stairs in the 2nd underground floor. For this case, the left fixed stair cannot be used for evacuation since the fire blocks it. The heat release rate for this fire is 7.31MW as shown in Fig. 6.Fire case C: A fire is assumed to happen in the center part of the train when the train stops at the station. 35MW and 7.5MW are selected as the heat release rate as shown in Fig. 7.Three occupant loadings are simulated:Loading 1: A normal occupant load in the station is used. The population density is taken to be 3m2/person. The maximum number of occupants depends on its available floor area.Loading 2: A high occupant load is used to simulate the worst situation for evacuation. Following local codes [27], 0.5m2/person is the maximum occupant load.Loading 3: In the train car fire, 3296 persons are taken as the occupants in the train car. 0.5m2/person is taken as the occupant load in the subway station.The floors of the subway station are composed of concrete. The walls and ceilings are composed of gypsum board. The sofa is composed of upholstery. The properties of these materials [23] are listed in Table 2. The reaction properties of fuel [23] in numerical simulations are listed in Table 3. A total number of 18 scenarios as shown in Table 4are used to study and analyze the fire emergency evacuation. To study the effects of the fraction of CO (fco) and soot (fsoot) from fuel on the evacuation, different fco (0.25) and fsoot (0.3) are adopted in scenarios S13 and S14.In the numerical experiments, two kinds of grid sizes are used. A fine grid is used near the fire, which will be determined by grid resolution analysis in Section 4.4. The other grid size is a constant, 0.33m×0.33m×0.33m. Fig. 4 shows the 3D model of numerical simulations.CFD numerical simulations are time consuming. They require hours or even days to run on the latest personal computers or supercomputers. One of the most significant factors influencing the computation time is the size of the computational grid specified by the user. Because it is possible to over-resolve or under-resolve a space by specifying grids that are too fine or too coarse, it is important to determine an appropriate grid size that would optimize the solution accuracy and time.The grid size near the fire source is initially determined [32] by the non-dimensional expression D*/δx, where D* is a characteristic fire diameter(4)D∗=Q̇ρ∞·cp·T∞·g1/22/5and δx is the nominal size of a grid cell. In Eq. (4),Q̇is the heat release rate from fire (kW), ρ∞ is the density of ambient (kg/m3), cpis the constant pressure specific heat (kJ/kg/K), T∞ is the temperature of ambient (K), g is the acceleration of gravity (m/s2). The quantity D*/δx can be thought of as the number of computational cells spanning the characteristic diameter of the fire. When the grid size is taken as 0.1D*, the average axle center velocity and temperature in the LES (Large Eddy Simulation) model will meet Baum and MaCaffery experimental curve fitting equation [33]. For fire size Q=1.28MW, D* is computed to be 1.06m, then 0.1D* is approximately 0.1m which can be taken as a reasonable grid size. Considering both the computation time and accuracy, this study selected 0.1m as the grid size near the fire source in later analysis.In FDS+Evac, all of the parameters that describe a given fire and evacuation scenario are typed into a text file. The simulation procedure has three main steps: (i) Create an input file for FDS+Evac simulation, including (ii) Run the simulation, (iii) Analyze the output data.The detailed steps are as follows.(1)Define all the geometrical features in the fire and evacuation calculation, mainly including walls, ceilings, floors, windows, doors, exits, ventilations and sprinklers, as shown in Figs. 1 and 2 and Table 1.Define the reaction properties and the thermal properties of all the materials, as listed in Tables 2 and 3.Define the occupant loading parameters.Define meshes for both the fire calculation and the evacuation calculation.Set the simulation time and run the simulation.Analyze the simulation results.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
