@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Structural optimization under uncertainty in loading directions: Benchmark results

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A unified approach for structural optimization with directionally uncertain loads is presented.Worst load direction oriented approach for truss weight minimization with uncertain load directions subjected to stress and displacement constraints is considered.Worst load direction oriented approach for volume fraction minimization in topology optimization with uncertain load directions and compliance constraints is considered.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Optimal truss design,Multi-load structure optimization,Uncertain load direction,Optimal topology design,Nonlinear programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, using a recently developed unified approach, benchmark results are presented for structural optimization when the only source of uncertainty is the variability of the applied load directions. The worst-load-direction oriented framework can be applied to a broad class of engineering optimization problems. In each case, the central element of the solution searching algorithm is a standard multi-load structure optimization problem, which using an appropriate method, can be solved within reasonable time. The varying load directions are handled by additional linear or nonlinear relations, which describe the allowable perturbations of the nominal load directions. The result of the optimization is a performance measure minimal design which is invariant to the investigated uncertainty type and satisfies the response constraints. In order to illustrate the viability and efficiency of the approach, problem-specific models, algorithms and detailed benchmark results are presented for volume minimization of 2D continuum structures with compliance constraints and weight minimization of 2D truss structures with displacement and stress constraints. In each case, the computational cost of the proposed approach is comparable with its fixed load direction oriented equivalent because the worst-load-direction identification process is searching on the space of allowable direction perturbations, which generally means an easier and smaller computational problem than the standard multi-load structure optimization.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the real-world structural optimization problems, the optimal performance obtained using conventional deterministic methods can be dramatically degraded in the presence of sources of uncertainty. The source of uncertainty may be the variability of applied loads, spatial positions of nodes, material properties, and so on [1,2]. Various approaches have been developed to account for different types of uncertainty in structural design and optimization methods. Generally speaking, these methods are mainly based on two kinds of uncertainty models: probabilistic (stochastic) or possibilistic (fuzzy) models. Based on stochastic uncertainty models of mechanical parameters, various techniques were proposed by Marti [3], Rozvany [4], Choi et al. [5], Lógó et al. [6], Lógó [7], Lógó et al. [8], and Lógó [9] for evaluation and estimation of failure probabilities that can be utilized in the reliability-based structural design methods. Based on the probability distribution of the random data, and using decision theoretical concepts, optimization problems under stochastic uncertainty are converted into appropriate deterministic substitute problems. Due to the occurring probabilities and expectations, approximate solution techniques must be applied. Several deterministic and stochastic approximation methods are provided by Marti [10]. A fuzzy optimization approach for geometrical nonlinear space trusses was presented by Kelesoglu and Ülker [11]. Assuming uncertain-but-bounded parameters Ben-Haim and Elishakoff [12] developed the so-called convex model, with which Pantelides and Ganzerli [13] proposed a robust truss optimization method. For various classes of convex optimization problems, a unified methodology of robust optimization was developed by Ben-Tal and Nemirovski [14]. Calafiore and El Ghaoui [15] proposed a method for finding the ellipsoidal bounds of the solution set of uncertain linear equations by using the semidefinite program (SDP), which was presented originally by [16]. It is important to mention the pioneer works of Achtziger et al. [17] and Achtziger [18] as well, related to truss topology design and topology optimization of discrete structures, which contain the basic theoretical backgrounds on the field of the truss topology optimization. The multiple-load truss topology and sizing optimization was presented first time by Achtziger [19]. Similar work was presented by Alvarez and Carrasco [20] for minimization of the expected compliance as an alternative approach for multiple load truss optimization, which seems also very useful to tackle the uncertain optimization problems. In a recent paper, Dunning et al. [21] introduced a new probabilistic approach for robust topology optimization to minimize the volume-constrained expected compliance with uncertainty in loading magnitude and applied direction, where uncertainties are assumed normally distributed and statistically independent. The presented model was formulated as a statistical model, which after some manipulation was replaced by an equivalent multi-load problem in the function of the number of perturbed loads. In another paper, Dunning et al. [22] presented a new model for simultaneous minimization of expectancy and variance of compliance in the presence of uncertainties in loading magnitude using exact formulations and analytically derived sensitivities. A new theoretical approach for truss optimization with uncertain load directions was presented by Csébfalvi [23]. Benchmark results for this worst-load-direction oriented approach were presented in Csébfalvi [24]. A worst-load-direction oriented approach for topology optimization of continuum structure with uncertain-but-bounded load directions was introduced by Csébfalvi [25]. Benchmark results for the proposed approach were presented in Csébfalvi [26].In this paper, a framework is introduced for the worst-load-direction oriented structure optimization with uncertain loading directions which can be applied to a broad class of engineering optimization problems. The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 focuses on the mathematical formulation of the considered problem in the function of the investigated problem types. The model and a benchmark problem for sizing optimization of truss structures is presented in Section 3, where it will be shown that the result of optimization is a minimal-weight truss design, which is invariant to the investigated load uncertainty type and satisfies the displacement and stress constraints with the given constraint tolerance. The central element of the solution searching process is a standard multi-load sizing optimization model, in which a linear elastic material model used to describe the nonlinear relation between the design space and the response space. It will be shown that choosing an appropriate algorithm from the several possibilities, the nonlinear sizing optimization problem can be solved within reasonable time. The model and the benchmark problem of topology optimization of continuum structures with uncertain load directions is presented in Section 4, where it will be shown that the result is a volume-fraction-minimal design, which is invariant to the directional uncertainty and satisfies the compliance constraints defining the maximum allowed compliance values in the identified worst directions. In this paper, the standard “compliance minimization with given volume fraction” model was replaced with a newly developed reversed “volume fraction minimization with compliance constraints” model, where the compliance constraints define the maximal allowable compliance in the identified worst directions. In this study, the maximum allowed compliance is defined in the percentage of the nominal compliance. After this modification, the similarity between the two models is straightforward, because the standard truss optimization model can be described as “weight minimization with displacements and stress constraints”. In the reversed topology optimization model the objective function is linear and the standard nonlinear multi-load compliance computing algorithm developed for solid isotropic material (SIMP) used to define the constraints. The worst-load-direction identification process is searching on the space of allowable direction perturbations, which generally means an easier and smaller computational problem as the standard multi-load structure optimization. Finally, some concluding remarks are presented in Section 5.In this paper a unified approach for structural optimization with varying load directions will be presented that can be applied to a broad class of engineering optimization problems. The investigation was motivated by the fact that the optimal structure designs are frequently sensitive to the directional uncertainties of the applied loads. Hence a structure engineer must know the worst case scenario when the structure is optimized for the nominal load directions and must minimize the consequences of directional uncertainties in the structure optimization process. Easy to imagine that, in extreme cases, even a slight directional perturbation of the nominal loads may cause a structure to collapse. Therefore, a conception, which tries to manage this problem, may be an efficient and viable tool in the structure optimization. Theoretically an engineering optimization problem can be characterized by an objective function (a performance measure) defined in the design space and a constraint set defined in the response space. A design is feasible when its response satisfies all constraints in the response space. Generally there is a nonlinear relation between the two spaces and a nonlinear algorithm is needed to get the “best” design. In the traditional deterministic case, there is a one-to-one relationship between the two spaces because the applied loads are represented by fixed vectors in the design space. In the case of the directionally uncertain loads, the feasible perturbations of each nominal load direction have to be defined by additional linear or nonlinear relations. Fig. 1shows a directionally uncertain 3D unit load with maximum30∘allowable declination in any directions which can be described by an appropriate subset of spherical coordinates.It is very important to mention that the feasibility have to be completely redefined in the case of directionally uncertain loads. In this case a design is only feasible when its feasibility is invariant to the directional perturbations, which theoretically can be proved by the evaluation of uncountable infinite number of additional constraints. It will be shown that this problem may be resolved by introducing a worst-load-direction-oriented approach, where worst-load-direction means a feasible direction, in which the maximum of the constraint violation measures is maximal, where the relative percentage error may be an appropriate constraint violation measure. By definition, when a design does not violate a constraint with an allowable tolerance than its measure value will be zero. The essence of the proposed approach is very simple: starting from the optimal nominal solution and the deterministic constraint set, in a cyclically repeatable process the algorithm identifies the currently worst direction; defines an additional constraint set for the corresponding load and solve the extended (multi-load) optimization problem; the process terminates after a finite number of steps when in the currently worst direction the maximum of the constraint violation measures will be zero. It is important to note that in the presented feasibility-oriented approach the objective function is not affected by the varying load direction; it remains the same in each step. The sizing optimization of truss structures with displacement and stress constraints which is invariant to the directional uncertainty of the applied loads a good example for the feasibility-oriented case, which will be demonstrated in Section 3. The presented worst-load-direction-oriented approach was developed by Csébfalvi [23,24]. The central element of the algorithm can be solved as a standard nonlinear multi-load optimization problem. This element really may be a challenging and frustrating problem from computational point of view in the case of large-scale problems because there is a nonlinear relation between the design space and the response space. It has to be mentioned that the solution of this problem is a general computational problem of the multi-load truss optimization; therefore any progress in this area automatically extends the applicability of the proposed uncertain-load-direction oriented approach.When the feasibility region of the response space is not affected by the directional uncertainty then the required modifications are connected only to the objective function defined in the design space. It is easy to imagine that, when a structure is optimized according to the nominal load directions then it results in a varying performance measure on the perturbed load direction space. In this case, a natural engineering requirement would be to minimize the maximal fluctuation of the performance measure on the perturbed load direction space as much as possible.This requirement would be satisfied by defining an iterative process, in which step-by-step the currently maximal (worst) performance measure would be minimized by adding an extra term to the objective function according to the standard compliance-oriented multi-load approach. The process would be terminated when the relative percentage difference of the performance measure between two consecutive steps would be less than a given tolerance. The topology optimization of continuum structures with the compliance as the performance measure and the constant volume fraction as the only feasibility requirement of the response space is a good example for this objective-oriented approach (see Csébfalvi [25–27]).In this paper, the usual “compliance minimization with volume constraint” model was replaced with a newly developed reversed “volume fraction minimization with compliance constraints” model, where the compliance constraints define the maximum allowed compliance in the identified worst load directions. After this modification, the feasibility-oriented model for topology optimization becomes very similar to the standard truss optimization model which can be described as “weight minimization with displacements and stress constraints”. The reversed problem can be solved at a cost similar to that of solving a standard multi-load topology optimization problem using, for example, the fmincon optimization engine from MATLAB package. In the worst-load-direction searching phase we can exploit the facts that we only need a small subset of the entries of inverse of the large sparse (symmetric positive definite) stiffness matrix. This subset, which defines the non-zero coordinates of the current load set, can be got without forming the inverse explicitly. Several superfast algorithms, which are implemented in MATLAB) can be used to handle this problem (see, for example, Liu et al. [28]).In order to demonstrate the viability, variability and efficiency of the proposed worst-load-direction-oriented unified approach, we present the problem-specific models and algorithms with detailed numerical results for the cross-section size optimization of 2D truss structures with displacement and stress constraints and for the topology optimization of 2D continuum structures with maximum worst compliance constraints. The presented correctly described benchmark problems with reproducible numerical results may be used for testing the quality of exact and heuristic solution procedures to be developed in the future for structural optimization with varying load directions. To the best of the author's knowledge, the conception and the problem-dependent optimization models with varying load directions are new in the literature.Generally, the standard deterministic truss weigh minimization problem with cross-sectional areas of the bars as continuous design variables and nodal point displacements and element stresses as response variables can be written as follows(1)w(a)→min(2)a̲≤a≤a¯(3)u̲≤u(a,p)≤u¯(4)σ̲≤σ(a,p)≤σ¯(5)e(a,p)=0wherenis the number of bars,a=(a1,a2,…,an)is the vector of the design variables,w(a)is the weight of the structure,mis the total number of displacements (degrees of freedom),p=(p1,p2,…,pm)is the vector of applied loads,u=(u1,u2,…,um)andσ=(σ1,σ2,…,σn)are the implicit response variables (nodal point displacements and element stresses). The vector of equilibrium equations is denoted bye(a,p)=(e1(a,p),e2(a,p),…,em(a,p)). In the formulations, the under-bar (upper-bar) symbol always means lower (upper) bound. In the case of plane trusses, each applied load can be described in the following form:pi={pxi,pyi},i∈{1,2,…,m}, wherepxi(pyi)means the horizontal x-direction (vertical y-direction) load components.In the traditional deterministic formulationpis a constant vector (the loads are nominal loads). In this paper, we considered the following uncertainty on the loading: in addition to the nominal loading, each node is subjected to a load having random direction and constant intensity. The additional uncertain load vectorr, wherer=(r1,r2,…,rm)can be described in the following parametric form:(6)ri=Ri*{{rxi,ryi}|rxi2+ryi2=1,i∈{1,2,…,m}}whereRiis the load intensity.According to the modification, the goal is to minimize the weight of the truss on the set of the feasibled=p+rload combinations. In the following letDdenote the feasible load combinations. It is worth noting that after addingrtopwe get a mathematical program with infinite number of constraints since because each quadratic equation define a continuous set with uncountable infinite number of elements. The result of the optimization will be a robust minimal-weight truss design, which is invariant to the investigated load uncertainty type.In order to avoid dealing with infinite number of constraints the original problem has to be replaced by a more tractable equivalent algorithm based on a finite number of constraint sets.The essence of the algorithm is very simple.1.First, the algorithm solves the standard weight minimization problem with the nominal load directions and fixes the design variables according to the nominal solution.Using the currently fixed design variable set the algorithm solves step-by-stepn+mminimization andn+mmaximization problems on set of allowable load directions selecting exactly one response variable as objective function in each step to generate the actual pareto-front.If the2×(n+m)dimensional pareto-front is feasible then the algorithm terminates and the current solution will be the optimal solution of the varying load direction oriented problem.Otherwise the constraint sets connected to the detected unfeasible load directions will be appended to the current constraint set and after solving the weight minimization problem on the extended multi-load constraint set Step 2 will be repeated.According to the verbal description of the essence of the algorithm the mathematical formulation of the generic step can be described by the following way:Let{d1,d2,…,ds(i)}the set of the load sets at the start of Stepi,i∈{1,2,…}, where each load set is corresponding to a given load direction. In Step i the following weight minimization problem has to be solved for design variable seta:(7)w(a)→min(8)a̲≤a≤a¯(9)u̲≤u(a,dj)≤u¯,j∈{1,2,…,s(i)}(10)σ̲≤σ(a,dj)≤σ¯,j∈{1,2,…,s(i)}(11)e(a,dj)=0,j∈{1,2,…,s(i)}After fixing the current solutiona, the followingn+mminimization andn+mmaximization problems have to be solved on the set of the feasible load directions:(12)o→min(max)(13)o∈u∪σ(14)e(a,d)=0(15)d∈DAfter that the selection of the unfeasible load directions (the sample update) is straightforward.The feasibility of a loadd∈Dfor a giveno∈u∪σresponse variable value may be checked by the following non-smooth function of the “normalized” constraint violation terms:(16)λ=max{o←,o→}where(17){o←,o→}={max(0,100*o̲−oo̲),max(0,100*o−o¯o¯)}A pareto-front is feasible, ifλ≤ɛwhereɛis the maximum allowable percentage constraint violation. In the present study, an extremely smallɛ=1%tolerance was applied.In this section, detailed computational results are presented for the well-known ten-bar truss weight minimization problem to illustrate the essence of the presented varying load direction oriented approach. According to the usual assumptions, all dimensions throughout this paper are arbitrary, unless certain dimensions are specified. Following the initial data of formerly presented papers, in this case the length of each vertical and horizontal bar is 360. The constraints involve the stress in each member and the displacements at the nodes. The elements (nodes) are numbered by consecutive positive integers. The design variables0.1≤ai≤35,i∈{1,2,…,10}are the cross-sectional areas of the bars. The allowable element stressesσi,i∈{1,2,…,10}are±50and the nodal displacementsui,i∈{1,2,…,8}are limited to±5the horizontal and vertical directions. The displacements are indexed by consecutive positive integers in increasing node-direction order. For example,u1andu2describe the horizontal and vertical displacements of node one. The density of the material isρ=0.1and the elasticity modulus isE=1.0×104.A rightward horizontal load of 100 acts at node 1, a vertical downward loads of 100 acts at nodes 2, a vertical upward loads of 100 acts at nodes 3, and a leftward horizontal load of 100 acts at node 4. According to the definition, the nominal loading pattern can be described by the set of itsx−ycoordinate pairs:p=100*{{1,0},{0,−1},{0,1},{−1,0}}.In our benchmark problem each nominal loadpi={pxi,pyi},i∈{1,2,…,4}is perturbed by an additional load of 30 with a totally random direction0≤αi≤2π,i∈{1,2,…,4}. The perturbation load setrcan be described by the previously introduced quadratically constrained parametric form:r=30*{{rxi,ryi}|rxi2+ryi2=1,i∈{1,2,…,4}}.We have to note, that the introduced loading pattern with different parameters and assumptions was previously investigated by several authors, for example, by Ben-Tal and Nemirovski [14] and Calafiore and Dabbene [29]. Unfortunately, due to the missing or misleading parameter descriptions, it was unable to reproduce correctly their results from their papers. Therefore, retaining the original loading pattern, we developed a similar but new example in a correctly and therefore reproducible form and presented its exact solution, which can be used for testing the quality of exact and heuristic solution procedures to be developed in the future. It must be noted that the size of perturbing load is large enough and its directional variability is maximal, therefore this “overemphasized academic” example may be a challenging test problem for all possible computational approaches.In Fig. 2, we show the structure of the benchmark problem. In the applied visualization, the free (fixed) nodes are represented by white (grey) circles and the elements by white squares. The possible perturbation load directions are visualized by dotted circles. In this figure, the perturbation load directions have no real meanings because these are only illustrations.In Fig. 3a feasible nominal design is shown, which is probably one of the best solutions of the problem due to the applied “global” problem solving technique. In the graphical representation, each bar thickness is proportional to its cross-sectional area. The label of the figure presents the weight of the structure, the set of the cross-sectional areas, the set of the nodal-point displacements, and the set of the element stresses.In the problem solving process, the Wolfram Mathematica 8.0 package was used, which is an excellent problem solving and prototyping tool with a wide-range of state-of-the-art optimization solvers and other useful features. In the present study, a very general and stable optimization tool, namely, theNMinimizesolver was used with the following settings:{"RandomSearch", Method→"InteriorPoint","SearchPoints"→10}.According to our preliminary experiences,NMinimizewith these settings behaves as a “global solver”, which in a nonlinear developing environment is a very useful result. We note that setting:Method→"InteriorPoint"means a state-of-the-art nonlinear interior point solver.Starting from the nominal solution the algorithm identified 19 feasible load directions from the set of feasible load directions, for which at least one response variable is unfeasible. In the pareto-front searching process alsoNMinimizewas used with the previously presented robust and efficient settings. We have to emphasize that in its original form we have to solve a set of partly quadratically and partly linearly constrained optimization problems with a linear objective. In this problem the quadratic constraints define the spherical regions around the nominal loads and the linear constraints define the equilibrium conditions for fixed design variables. Because the quadratic constraints can be approximated by a set of piecewisely linear constraints with arbitrary accuracy, therefore we would be able to replace it by a standard linear programming problem, which using an interior point solver can be solved extremely quickly. Naturally this possibility would be only important when the cardinality of the space of the feasible load directions is high.After inserting the constraint sets of the identified worst load directions, the result will be a multi-load problem with1+19=20load cases. Solving this problem and checking the pareto-front for each response variable in each direction we get a solution, which is invariant to the allowed load perturbations. The fast convergence reveals that the presented robust approach is efficient, and theoretically and practically may be competitive with other previous approaches presented in the literature. We have to note, that Calafiore and Dabbene [29] used a sample of 1651 to get a probabilistically robust solution using a similar problem for the ten-bar truss problem. In this context the applied “probabilistically robust” terminology means that they provide only probabilistic quarantine for directional uncertainty. In Fig. 4, we show the “worst-feasible-direction” from the identified 19 “bad-feasible-direction”, for which the relative percent error isɛ=503.951for the tension stress of element 8 (σ¯8=301.975) on the set of feasible load direction combinations using the nominal cross-sections in the pareto-front searching process:In Fig. 5, we show the optimal solution, which we get in two steps withɛ=1%relative percent error setting. We have to mention it again, that our solution is really invariant to the uncertain loading directions within the given tolerance which in other words means that on the set of the directional load perturbations the probability of the failure is exactly zero. In this context, a failure can be defined in a very simple way: there is a feasible load combination, for which at least one response variable is unfeasible in at least one direction.Without loss of generality, our newly developed topology optimization model for continuum structures with uncertain load directions will be formulated only for two-dimensional (2D) continuum problems. The standard topology optimization problem of continuum structures can be described as follows:(18)c(x)=U′KU→min(19)V(x)=ϕV0(20)KU=F(21)0≤x≤1wherec(x)is the compliance,UandFare the global displacement and load vectors, respectively,Kis the global stiffness matrix,xis the vector of design variables (the element densities),V(x)andV0are the material volume and design domain volume, respectively, andϕis the prescribed volume fraction. The design domain is assumed to rectangular and discretized withn=ex×eysquare elements with four nodes per element and two degrees of freedoms (DOFs) per node. Both nodes and elements are numbered column-wise from left to right, and the DOFs2i−1and2icorrespond to the horizontal and vertical displacement of nodei,i∈{1,2,…,2n}, respectively. The optimization problem (18)–(21) can be solved by, for example, the well-known and the most widely used optimality criteria method or any other appropriate nonlinear solver (see, for example, Liu and Tovar [30]).As it was demonstrated by Andreassen et al. [31], it is very easy to extend the algorithm to account for multi-load cases. In the case ofmload cases, the load and displacement vectors can be defined asmcolumn vectors and the objective function will be the sum ofmcompliances:(22)c(x)=∑i=1mU′iKUi→min(23)V(x)=φV0(24)KUi=Fi,i∈{1,2,…,m}(25)0≤x≤1Now, it will be shown that the multi-load compliance-minimization model, after simple modifications can be used to solve the directional uncertainty problem. LetF=F(α),α̲≤α≤α¯denotes a load vector with varying load directions, where it is assumed that the nominal load directionα0is an inner point of the angle set:α̲≤α0≤α¯.Theoretically, it is very easy to rewrite the standard fixed load direction oriented single load model according to the varying load direction:(26)c(x)=U′KU→min(27)V(x)=φV0(28)KU=F(α)(29)α̲≤α≤α¯(30)0≤x≤1According to the modification, the compliance have to be minimized on the set of all feasible loadsF(α), whereα̲≤α≤α¯. It is worth noting again, that after inserting theα̲≤α≤α¯relation the result will be a very hard mathematical program with infinite number of constraints since setαis in general a continuous set with uncountable infinite number of elements.The result of the optimization will be a compliance-minimal design for the prescribedϕvolume fraction, which is invariant to the investigated load uncertainty type. As we are only interested in linear elastic structures, the stiffness matrixKand its inverseK−1will be symmetrical.Let us denote byp=|α|the number of the external point loads with directional uncertainty. Here it is assumed that all uncertain variablesαi,i∈{1,2,…,p}are statistically independent. An uncertain load with magnitudefi,i∈{1,2,…,p}can be written in terms of two orthogonal loads. For simplicity, it is assumed that one load is defined in the horizontalxdirection, and the other in the verticalydirection:(31)fi={fix(fi,αi)=ficos(αi),fiy(fi,αi)=fisin(αi)}According to the usual convention, the result will be a2×(ex+1)×(ey+1)dimensional sparse load vectorFwith maximum2×pnonzero entries such that odd entries of the vector correspond to horizontal loads and even entries to vertical loads.Firstly, in order to avoid dealing with infinite number of constraints the original problem will be replaced by a more tractable equivalent algorithm based on a finite number of constraints. Secondly, a new optimization model has to be defined according to the reversed order. After the modifications, the result will be the following algorithm which is very similar to the previously investigated truss model:1.Letc0define the optimal nominal compliance for load vectorF0and volume fractionφ0,τthe prescribed compliance tolerance whereτ≥1, andτc0the maximum allowable compliance on the set of the feasible load directions. Letmdefine the number of load cases in the optimization problem and set its value to zero.Using the current stiffness matrixKand maximizing the compliance on the set of the feasible load directions:α̲≤α≤α¯, the result will be the worst load-direction vectorF*with the corresponding worst compliancec*. Ifc*≤τc0then the algorithm terminates with the optimal solution. Otherwise,mwill be increased by one, vectorF*will be appended to the multi-load set:Fm=F*, and after solving the following minimization problem Step 2 will be repeated:(32)ϕ=V(x)V0→min(33)ci=Fi′K−1Fi≤τc0,i∈{1,2,…,m}(34)KUi=Fi,i∈{1,2,…,m}(35)0≤x≤1In this section, a benchmark problem will be presented with two directionally uncertain external loads, to show the essence of the solution searching process. The example, presented in Fig. 6, is a cantilever beam, where a ground structure is given with geometry scale80×40×1and two unit loads acting in the bottom-middle and bottom-end positions witch are denoted byfi,i∈{1,2}from left to right in the given order. All dimensions throughout this paper are arbitrary, unless certain dimensions are specified.We suppose, that the uncertain load directions form a symmetric arc around the nominal loads:240∘=270∘−30∘≤αi≤270∘+30∘=300∘,i∈{1,2}. The Young's modulus isE0=1, the Poisson's ratio isν=0.3, and the starting volume fraction, used in the nominal problem solving process, isϕ0=0.25. The penalization power isp=3and we use sensitivity filtering with filter radiusrmin=1.5.In this example, the goal is to find a volume-fraction-minimal solution which is invariant to the uncertain load directions with toleranceτ=1.05. The constant 1.05 allows maximum 5% fluctuation in the compliance space around the nominal compliancec0.The compliance-minimal nominal solution, wherec0=278.29, is presented in Fig. 7. In the algorithm, the nominal solution with{α1,α2}={270∘,270∘}will be the starting base of the optimal solution searching process. In Fig. 8, the shape of the compliance-minimal nominal solution is shown. In Fig. 9, to illustrate the change of the compliances on the set of the feasible load directions, the generated compliance values are shown on the grid points of a61×61grid using the nominal stiffness matrixK0. This grid is fine enough to get good quality approximations for the load direction sets:240∘≤αi≤300∘,i∈{1,2}. The worst load directions of the nominal design with{α1*,α2*}={240∘,249∘}andc*=320.36are shown in Fig. 10. In the worst directionτ*=1.15which does not satisfy the requirement; therefore the nominal design is not an acceptable solution of the problem. The starting base of the optimization with the nominal volume fractionϕ0=0.25is presented in Fig. 11. In Fig. 12, we show the best shape of the first iteration withϕ=0.300. The worst load direction after the first iteration is shown in Fig. 13with{α1*,α2*}={249∘,256∘}andc*=295.75. In the worst directionτ*=1.06which is not a tolerable (but not so bad) value. The starting base of the second iteration with two “dangerous” load direction sets and the result of the second iteration withϕ=0.301is presented in Figs. 14and 15. In Fig. 16, the worst load directions after the second iteration, where{α1*,α2*}={246∘,254∘}andc*=292.49is shown. In the worst directionτ*=1.05which satisfies the requirement, therefore the algorithm terminates. In Fig. 17, the generated optimal compliance values on the grid points after two iterations are shown. Comparing the optimal design with the nominal design, which was presented in Fig. 7, the first impression, may be that these designs are practically the same. Fortunately, the unified visualization of the nominal and robust compliances may help to detect the real differences between the nominal and optimal shapes and understand the rearrangement mechanism of the optimal solution searching process (see Fig. 17). The result of the optimization is a more balanced shape, which tries to reach a nearly flat one according to the given tolerance.As a conclusion, it is important to note that the results good demonstrate the fact, that the optimal design searching process, using the presented simple and easy-to-understand rearrangement strategy, finds a really good solution very quickly with a very small volume fraction incrementΔφ=0.051.In this study, to solve and visualize the benchmark problem, the MATLAB 7.11.0 package was used, which is an excellent developing and prototyping tool with state-of-the-art optimization solvers and other useful tools, for example, for sparse matrix manipulations and visualizations. In the optimization process the fmincon solver was applied to solve the multi-load volume fraction minimization problem and the worst-load-direction searching sub-problems. The structural model (SIMP) with straightforward modifications was based on the 88 lines long efficient topology optimization code developed in MATLAB by Andreassen et al. [31].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
