@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Approximation of large data from the finite element analysis allowing fast post-processing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Efficient methods to visualize the results from finite element analysis and imple-mentation of these methods in post-processing results are described.The stored data from finite element analysis are replaced by continuous functions suitable for representation in computer graphics.Approximation of data in space and also the approximation in time is used.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Finite element method,Finite element mesh,Visualization,Approximation,Multigrid,Post-processor,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The article describes efficient methods to visualize the results from finite element analysis and implementation of these methods in post-processing results. The work is based on premise that computer memory and performance are limited and amount of data processed by complex finite element analysis is enormous. Therefore, some kind of simplification and approximation of resulting data has to be used. Multigrid method was the inspiration for research work and development of post-processor.The stored data from finite element analysis are discrete values. The paper deals with several ways of replacing them by continuous functions suitable for representation in computer graphics, which are different from the approximation functions used in finite element method. Special attention is devoted to approximation errors – difference between these functions. Finite element mesh is decomposed into subdomains with respect to approximation errors. The ways of creating mesh hierarchy are described in details and also the possibilities of nodal value interpolations in simplified mesh are discussed in the text.Besides the approximation of data in space, also the approximation in time is used. Pseudo-code of the approximation algorithm key parts is shown. Various types of approximation functions were investigated to reach the lowest approximation error and the highest compression factor. Results are summarized in the article.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Numerical methods, such as the finite element method (FEM), the finite difference method, the finite volume method and others, used in scientific and engineering problems, generate huge amount of data in the form of numbers in output files. Such output is not suitable for humans because too many numbers are getting immeasurable. It is necessary to represent the output in a graphic form. The graphic representation of output data from numerical methods is partially similar to the classical computer graphics but there are also significant differences. In the case of output file with the size more than approximately one gigabyte, the graphic representation generates large demands on the computer memory and time.Extremely large output files are not created artificially. As an example can serve analysis of reactor vessels in nuclear power plants which is used in the process of prolongation of their service life. The vessels are approximately 40 years old and detailed thermo-hydro-mechanical analysis has to be performed. Usually, two-dimensional axisymmetric or fully three-dimensional models are considered and it means hundreds of thousands degrees of freedom are used. The number of time steps is between 10,000 and 15,000. The output files contain displacements, strain and stress components, temperature, relative humidity (or moisture content) and several internal parameters (e.g. creep strains, damage parameter, etc.) in all time steps. The output files with size in the order of gigabytes are generated. More details can be found in [1,2].This work is based on premise, that computer memory and performance are limited. Without some kind of simplification and compression no program can efficiently process large amount of data generated by extensive finite element analysis. Data structures used for representation of large finite element meshes are described in [3]. Some techniques for compression of polygonal meshes can be found in [4,5]. However, these methods are not suitable for handling the results from the finite element analysis.The multigrid method [6–9] was the inspiration for this work. Multigrid method allows to solve partial differential equations using the hierarchy of domain discretizations. The main idea of multigrid method is to make the convergence of iterative method faster due to global corrections of error that is made from time to time on the coarser mesh. There are many variations of multigrid method. However, all of them need existence of mesh hierarchy that represents domain discretizations of different mesh sizes.Basic steps of multigrid method are:•Smoothing – The main goal of the smoothing phase is the high-frequency error reduction. It can be done e.g. by few iterations of the Gauss-Seidel method.Restriction – Restriction of the residual from the finer to the coarser mesh.Solution of the coarse problem.Prolongation – Interpolation and projection of the correction computed on the coarser mesh to the finer mesh.The main problem with a mesh hierarchy is that often none is available. Only the finest mesh exists. The coarser meshes must be either generated directly by a mesh generator [10,11] in the pre-processing phase or it must be created from the finer mesh. But generating coarser mesh from the finer one is very problematic or even impossible, because corresponding nodes between different levels should be preserved to be sure that multigrid method will work correctly without special modifications.Therefore, it was decided to do visualization of the results from the finite element analysis on the fine mesh that is used for solution of FEM. Different methods of simplification and compression of the resulting data in space and time were developed and data were projected back to fine mesh. Results of the projection and comparison of methods are presented in this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
