@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Development of a noise prediction software NASEFA and its application in medium-to-high frequency ranges

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A noise prediction software NASEFA was developed.For effective maintenance, NASEFA is composed of three main modules.NASEFA solves the acoustic energy density and intensity on boundary and in the field.Finally, for the validation of the NASEFA, interior and exterior noise predictions of various structures were performed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Energy flow analysis,Energy flow boundary element method,Noise analysis,Medium-to-high frequency,Interior noise problems,Exterior noise problems,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
For the analysis of noise problems in medium-to-high frequency ranges, the energy flow boundary element method (EFBEM) has been studied. EFBEM is numerical analysis method of energy flow analysis (EFA), and solves energy governing equations using a boundary element method in complex structures. Based on EFBEM, a noise prediction software, “noise analysis system by energy flow analysis” (NASEFA), was developed. For effective maintenance, NASEFA is composed of three main modules: the translator, the model converter, and the main solver. The translator changes the FE model to the NASEFA BE model, and the model converter changes the BE model to an EFBE model, including various data, such as structural materials, medium properties, sources, and boundary conditions. NASEFA then solves the acoustic energy density and intensity on boundary and in the field. Moreover, it analyzes interior and exterior noise problems for single and multiple domains in two and three dimensions. Finally, for the validation of the software developed, interior and exterior noise predictions of various structures were performed. The results obtained with NASEFA were compared with those of the commercial SEA program and experiment. From these comparative studies, the usefulness of NASEFA was established.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Traditionally, the finite element method (FEM) and boundary element method (BEM) have been used for the analysis of the vibrational/acoustic responses of complex engineering systems in low frequency ranges. As the frequency is increased, however, these methods need higher-order shape functions or more numbers and smaller mesh sizes of fine elements, so they have been found to be inadequate methods because of the unreasonable computation times required. Statistical energy analysis (SEA), which provides one averaged energy density with respect to time and space in a subsystem, was developed for analyses in high frequency ranges [1]. However, in noise analysis, SEA does not offer detailed information such as the variation of energy density and energy flow in the domain of interest.For several years, various attempts have been made to improve upon the weaknesses of SEA in high frequency ranges and to overcome the limits of frequency in traditional FEM and BEM. One promising method, called energy flow analysis (EFA), was introduced by Belov et al. [2]. The EFA method is based on an energy equation analogous to the heat conduction equation in steady state, where the main quantities are energy density and energy flow as in SEA. This differential equation leads to a continuous analysis of structures or acoustical fields, whereas SEA is based on a discrete analysis. Using this method at high frequencies, the spatial variations of time- and locally space-averaged energy density and energy transmission paths can be predicted effectively in a structure or acoustical field. Moreover, the EFA method has been considered appropriate for vibrational/acoustic analyses in medium frequency ranges in which none of traditional FEM, BEM, or SEA is suitable. Nefske and Sung [3] implemented a finite element formulation of the energy governing equation of EFA, and used it to predict the vibrational responses of one-dimensional systems such as an uncoupled beam or two coupled beams excited by a harmonic force. The multi-dimensional case was investigated by way of a direct generalization of the one-dimensional space. Bouthier and Bernhard [4] derived the energy governing equations for the flexural waves in membranes and Kirchchov-Love plates and for the acoustic waves in enclosures, which are valid for traveling plane waves and for a diffuse field. Le Bot [5] studied a vibroacoustic model for high frequency analysis of multi-dimensional systems such as plates or acoustic enclosures. Vlahopoulos et al. [6] performed energy flow finite element analysis of built-up structures composed of only plate elements. Park et al. [7,8] developed energy flow models of in-plane waves in isotropic thin plates and flexural waves in orthotropic thin plates. Seo [9] formulated EFFEM of a multi-dimensional problem and performed EFFEA of various built-up structures. Song and Hong [10] developed a non-conservative joint for EFA of a coupled beam structure. Song et al. [11] extended this method to penetration beam–plate structures, in which a beam and a plate are coupled by a point junction. Kwon et al. [12] developed energy flow models for out-of-plane waves in a finite thin shell.Recently, for the analysis of noise problems in medium-to-high frequency ranges, application of the boundary element technique to the energy governing equation of EFA has been investigated by Kwon et al. [13,14]. The energy flow boundary element method (EFBEM) is effective for the analysis of noise, such as interior and exterior noise problems in medium-to-high frequency ranges, because BEM is advantageous in the analysis of acoustics fields.The aim of the present study was to implement boundary element formulations of the EFA energy equation and to develop noise analysis system by energy flow analysis (NASEFA), a noise prediction software based on EFBEM. Finally, to confirm the utility and validity of the developed software, NASEFA was used to predict the interior noise of a simple car structure, and the results were compared with the commercial SEA program. Experiments with underwater radiated noise were performed for a reinforced cylindrical structure, and again the results were compared with NASEFA.The plane wave approximation is particularly valid for highly reverberant acoustical environments at high frequencies. The EFA energy governing equation for a plane wave can be rewritten in the following form:(1)∇2e-k2e=π¯in,where e is the wave energy density, k is a positive real, defined as k=ηω/cg, andπ¯in=-(ηω/cg2)πin. Here, η is the structural damping loss factor, ω is the exciting frequency, cgis the group velocity of the corresponding wave, and πinis the input power to the structure. Generally, Eq. (1) is called the modified Helmholtz equation. The original energy transmission relation can be modified as follows:(2)q¯=∇e,whereq¯=-(ηω/cg2)q, and q is the wave intensity. In Eq. (2), e becomes the potential function ofq¯. The fundamental solutions of the modified energy equation are those of the equation(3)d2G(r)dr2+(n-1)rdG(r)dr-k2G(r)=δ(r),where G(r) is the fundamental solution of Eq. (1), δ(r) is the Dirac delta, r is the distance between the source point and the field point, and n represents the dimension of the domain. The corresponding fundamental solutions to the three-dimensional problem can be obtained as follows:(4)G(r)=-14πrexp(-kr),For radiation in spherical symmetric geometries the EFA energy governing equation is(5)∇·1r2ddr(r2e)r→-k2e=π¯in,In Eq. (5), far-field and low damping conditions are assumed. The energy transmission relation of spherical wave property is as follows:(6)q¯=1r2ddr(r2e)r→,wherer→is the unit vector for the distance r. At this time, the fundamental solution must satisfy the following equation:(7)∇·1r2ddr(r2G)r→-k2G=δ(r),and for three-dimensional case the solution is obtained as(8)G(r)=14πcgr2e-kr.If the Direct approach of BEM is considered, the domain of interest must be closed. Thus, Direct BEM was applied to interior noise analysis with a closed domain. The energy density at a point ξ in the three-dimensional domain can be written as follows:(9)c(ξ)ẽ(ξ)-∫Sẽ(x)∂G(|x-ξ|)∂n(x)dS(x)=-∫Sqˆn(x)G(|x-ξ|)dS(x)+∫Vπ‾in(z)G(|z-ξ|)dV(z),where the fundamental solution of Eq. (4) is used. x is the point on the boundary S and z is the position of the input power in the three-dimensional domain V, c(ξ) is β/4π and β is the internal solid angle at a point ξ.A key conceptual step in indirect BEM is to embed the real system within the infinite field to produce a fictitious system with the assumption that fictitious sources exist on the original boundary of the real system. When the three-dimensional system is considered, the energy density can be expressed by(10)ẽ(x)=∫SΦ(ξ)G(|x-ξ|)dS(ξ)+∫Vπ¯in(z)G(|x-z|)dΩ(z),and the intensity can be written as(11)q̃n(x)=∫SΦ(ξ)∂G(|x-ξ|)∂n(x)dΓ(ξ)+∫Vπ¯in(z)∂G(|x-z|)∂n(x)dV(z),where G is the fundamental solution of Eq. (4) or (8) and Φ(ξ) is the fictitious source on the boundary. It should be noted that the boundary integrals in Eq. (11) may have a Cauchy Principal value in certain cases.For the analysis of vibro-acoustic coupling problems, the concept of radiation efficiency is used. Radiation efficiency is defined as follows:(12)σ=πρ0cA〈v2〉,where ρ0 is the density of acoustic fluid, c is the speed of sound, A is the area of plate, and 〈v2〉 is the time average value of the square of normal velocity.In Eq. (12), intensity can be written by(13)q=σρ0c〈v2〉=σρ0ceρplate,where e is vibrational energy density and ρplateis the density of plate. From Eq. (13), the vibrational energy density is changed to a boundary condition for acoustic analysis problem.The noise prediction software named ‘NASEFA’ consists of three major parts, the translator, model convertor, and solver module. A brief procedure for the analysis is represented in Fig. 1. The features and structure of the parts are described in the following sections.The BE model, generally, has only geometry information about the boundary of the concerned domain, whereas the EFBE model needs material properties for calculating the radiation efficiency for each element and power transmission/reflection coefficients on the interfaces between domains in multi-domain problems. Moreover, the interface element is used for the description of discontinuous energy density on interfaces in multi-domain problems. These are the key differences between the BE and EFBE models.In NASEFA, the BE model performs a function offering the fundamental data and is composed of a database of BE nodes, BE elements, element properties, and materials. Fig. 2shows the data structure of the EFBE model. The EFBE model includes not only boundary information but also properties of the domain of concern. The interface element is newly generated by NASEFA as a virtual element, used for the expression of power transmission between elements on the common interface of multi-domains.Boundary conditions, such as acoustic energy density and energy flow, are used for energy flow boundary element analysis. In NASEFA, the absorption coefficient and vibrational energy at a boundary is also applied. The absorption coefficient is replaced with the mixed boundary condition of the Sabine room acoustics model where the acoustic power dissipated at the wall due to absorption is related to the energy density at the wall. When the vibrational energy is used for a boundary condition, it is changed into the acoustic energy density, calculated by the radiation efficiency of the infinite plate above the critical frequency, and below the critical frequency, and the acoustic energy flow is calculated from the radiation efficiency of the finite plate used. Fig. 3shows the kinds of boundary condition used in NASEFA.NASEFA offers a function for readily obtaining an EFBE model; this function is carried out by the translator module and the model convertor module. The translator module makes a NASEFA BE model from a bulk file framed by the preprocessor of a commercial FEM software, and the model converter automatically changes the BE model created by the translator to an EFBE model. These two modules help the user to make the EFBE model.NASEFA solves the acoustic energy density and intensity on boundary and in fields, and moreover, it analyzes the interior/exterior noise problems for single and multiple domains in two and three dimension. In NASEFA, Solver is composed of four analyzers: 2D interior/exterior noise analyzers and 3D interior/exterior noise analyzers. In each analyzer, two kernel matrices are structured using the EFBE technique and the unknown values on the boundary and at field points are obtained by calculating algebraic equations. Here, field points that have the shape of a plane, box, cylinder, and sphere are readily generated with the input of several factors in NASEFA.The GUI programs was written with resources from the Microsoft Foundation Class (MFC) of Visual C++, a well-known Windows programming tool kit. The NASEFA GUI provides not only convenience to the user but also provides a systematic organization of the noise prediction procedure. Furthermore, the user can directly control the program flow by selecting appropriate menus. The GUI has menu bars so that the user can switch to other inputs or EFBE analysis stages. The GUI layout of NASEFA is shown in Fig. 4. The main window is used to display the geometric shape of the EFBE model and the results of the EFBE analysis.The validation of NASEFA was performed from a practical point of view. NASEFA was used to predict the interior noise of a simple car structure (see Fig. 5) and complex cabin model of ship, and the results were compared with the commercial SEA program. As mentioned earlier, SEA has a power balance equation, which, unlike NASEFA, is a system of linear equations based on the energy valuables, among each subsystem. Thus, SEA cannot directly use the BE database model and cannot perform the spatial treatment of acoustic energy values within one subsystem. But there is little difference of computation time between SEA and NASEFA.Fig. 5(a) shows the boundary element model of a simple box-type automobile for NASEFA. The dimensions of the model are B×L×H=2.5m×4.0m×2.0m and the dimensions of windshield glass in the models are B×H=2.5m×1.4m. The position of excitation and measurement are (X,Y,Z)=(0.0m,0.6m,0.6m) and (2.0m,1.25m,1.0m) respectively. The BE model is composed of 1277 nodes and 1274 elements. In the case of the SEA model, the model shown in Fig. 5(b) is considered as one subsystem. The material properties of this model are those of steel (E=21.0×1010Pa, ρ=7800kg/m3, ν=0.3). The thickness of all plates is 0.8mm. The prediction of this model by NASEFA and SEA was performed over 23 center frequencies in a one-third octave band from 63 to 10,000Hz. Fig. 6is the comparison result of pressures predicted by NASEFA and SEA at various frequencies. In these results, the SEA result indicates representative values of one subsystem over center frequencies. However, the NASEFA result shows values in the true position, which is the center position, over center frequencies. The figure shows that there are not large differences between NASEFA and SEA results. However, NASEFA can represent the spatial distribution of acoustic energy density and intensity as shown in Fig. 7. Thus, unlike SEA, NASEFA can consider the effects of local damping treatment even within a subsystem.Fig. 8shows cabin model. When the source is located in engine room, pressure values are predicted at engine room around, 3rd deck, 2nd deck, Upper deck, A-deck, B-deck, C-deck, and D-deck. The BE model is composed of 150 cabin and 600 elements. The material properties of this model are those of steel (E=21.0×1010Pa, ρ=7800kg/m3, ν=0.3). The thickness of all plates is 0.8mm. The prediction of this model by NASEFA and SEA was performed over 9 center frequencies in a one-third octave band from 31.5 to 8000Hz. Fig. 9is the comparison result of total pressure values predicted by NASEFA and SEA. Fig. 10shows the pressure values at each location. The figure shows that there are not large differences between NASEFA and SEA results.For the validation of NASEFA, an experiment measuring underwater radiation noise was performed with a reinforced cylindrical structure in a water tank. This experiment was carried under steady state conditions. The shaker (type B&K4809) applies a force to the underwater structure with white noise under 12kHz. All transducer signals are acquired using an analyzer. The underwater noise radiated from the structure was measured with a hydrophone. Then, this measurement was compared with the energy density predicted by NASEFA.Fig. 11shows the geometry of the reinforced cylindrical structure and experimental set-up for measuring the underwater radiation noise. The material properties of this structure are those of steel. The cylindrical structure is reinforced with nine circumferential stiffeners of thickness 5mm. The reinforced cylindrical structure was excited by a shaker, the location of which is shown in Fig. 8 and the noise experiments on the underwater structure were performed in a one-third octave band from 315 to 12,220Hz. However, measurements were poor in the last frequency band and thus the results are presented from 315 to 10,000Hz.For the underwater radiation noise experiment, the structure was submerged in a water tank and a hydrophone was placed at a distance of 5m under the water surface and 2m from the structure (Fig. 12). The EFBEM model was composed of 1728 elements. If inner elements such as reinforced beams which are not boundary elements, are used in EFBEM, the predicted results are invalid. So EFBEM model which is excluded reinforced beam is used for the EFBEM analysis. The acoustic energy density analyzed using the NASEFA was replaced with the acoustic pressure, with the density of the fluid medium being 998kg/m3 and with a wave speed of 1481m/s. The values of the injected powers, as determined by experiment, are shown in Fig. 13. Fig. 14shows some comparisons of the measured acoustical pressure in one-third octave band frequencies with the predicted acoustical pressure versus frequency at points 1, 5 and all nine points (see Fig. 12). The results showed no significant difference between the measurements and predictions. The figures show that there were some differences in the low frequency range, below 1000Hz, but the macroscopic evolution was predicted accurately. From this experimental result, the accuracy of NASEFA was confirmed.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
For the effective noise analysis of built-up structures in medium-to-high frequency ranges, the NASEFA software, based on EFBEM, was developed. For effective maintenance and updating, NASEFA was developed and consists of three main modules: the translator, the model converter, and the main solver. NASEFA solves the acoustic energy density and intensity on boundary and in fields. Moreover, it analyzes the interior and exterior noise problems for single and multiple domains in two and three dimension.To confirm the software developed based on EFBEM, a numerical comparison between SEA results and EFBEM results of a simple box-type automobile and complex cabin model were first performed, and this showed advantages of EFBEM over SEA. Additionally, a comparison between predicted results simulated with the software and experimental results measured with a reinforced cylindrical structure was performed. Generally, the predicted results simulated with NASEFA agreed well with the global variation and response level of the experimental results.Thus, the software developed, NASEFA, can be an improved tool for effective EFBEM of various real built-up structures, such as automobiles, aircrafts, ships and railroad vehicles, in medium-to-high frequency ranges.