@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Computer-aided modeling of braided structures overbraiding non-cylindrical prisms based on surface transformation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Obtain the braiding surface based on the surface transformation.Establish the geometrical modeling method based on the intersection of braiding surface and helical surface.Build the geometrical models for complicated braids overbraiding mandrels generated by extruding, sweeping, revolving and lofting.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Geometrical modeling,Braided structures,Non-cylindrical braids,Composites,Overbraiding,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents the geometrical modeling methods for braided structures overbraiding non-cylindrical prisms. This modeling method comes from the motion analysis of braiding process. The motion of strands in braiding process could be decomposed into circumferential motion, radial motion and axial motion based on the movements of carriers and take-up roller. These motions could be re-composed to form two independent surfaces: the braiding surface and helical surface, which include all information of strand movements in braiding process. Therefore, the strands could be obtained by the intersections of these two surfaces. The helical surfaces define the position of strands and the pitch while the braiding surfaces define the interlacing patterns and the outline of braids. For different braids overbraiding complicated structures, the simulated braids could be obtained by changing the braiding surfaces. Based on this theory, this paper illustrated the modeling methods for braids overbraiding prisms, which generated by extruding, sweeping, revolving and lofting respectively.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Braiding is a traditional technique normally employed for producing rope-like structures. From old natural fiber ropes to modern high-performance ropes, the braiding has extensive influences on our industries. With the development of composites, it has been extended its horizons to develop 3D complex performs that can be used in advanced fiber-reinforced composites by overbraiding a complicated mandrels, as shown in Fig. 1. These complicated structures include not only the common structures like some revolting structures in Fig. 1(a) but also tubular composites in Fig. 1(b) and their combined structures in Fig. 1(c). These structures with special outlines are widely used and play important roles in aerospace and automobile industries due to their number of advantages including the high strength-to-weight ratio and the flexibility to the complicated shapes [1–3].The complicated outlines and the existence of strand crimps increase the complexity and difficulty for the analytical and geometrical modeling. Up to now, most of relevant research works focused on the discussions about the relationships among structural parameters and the corresponding performances based on the experiments. As to the geometrical modeling, some scholars [4,5] presented the modeling methods for cylindrical structures with different braiding patterns based on different theories, while for non-cylindrical braids, there are few scholars involved in this field.Computer-aided design together with the finite element method create powerful sophisticated tools for the modeling and analysis of complicated braids and make it possible to analyze the interactions and the distribution of stress and displacement and this analytical method has become the effective method for engineering researches. For this analytical method, the premise and base is the precise and accurate geometrical models.This paper aims at the geometrical modeling of complicated braided structures, which could be generated by extruding, sweeping, revolving and lofting. The modeling method introduced in this paper is based on the intersection of braiding surface and helical surface using SolidWorks® as the tool. This modeling method is derived from the motions analysis of the braiding process. Therefore, in this paper, the motions of braiding process are discussed at first and two kinds of surfaces are obtained based on the decomposition and re-composition of the sub-motions. Then, the modeling method based on the intersection of surfaces is given for geometrical modeling of complicated braided structures. Based on this, the braided structures overbraiding prisms generated by extruding, sweeping, revolving and lofting are introduced respectively in details.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
