@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Real-time finite element structural analysis in augmented reality

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An integrated platform for performing real-time FEA simulations in AR.AR visualization of FEA solutions and a tangible interface for enhanced data exploration.AR-assisted configuration of wireless sensor network to acquire loads onsite for FEA.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Real-time finite element analysis,Augmented reality,Scientific visualization,Wireless sensor network,Enhanced data exploration,Structural analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Conventional finite element analysis (FEA) is usually carried out in offsite and virtual environments, i.e., computer-generated graphics, which does not promote a user’s perception and interaction, and limits its applications. With the purpose of enhancing structural analysis with augmented reality (AR) technologies, the paper presents a system which integrates sensor measurement and real-time FEA simulation into an AR-based environment. By incorporating scientific visualization technologies, this system superimposes FEA results directly on real-world objects, and provides intuitive interfaces for enhanced data exploration. A wireless sensor network has been integrated into the system to acquire spatially distributed loads, and a method to register the sensors onsite has been developed. Real-time FEA methods are employed to generate fast solutions in response to load variations. As a case study, this system is applied to monitor the stresses of a step ladder under actual loading conditions. The relationships among accuracy, mesh resolution and frame rate are investigated.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Numerical simulation has been widely conducted by engineers to analyze and predict the behavior of real-world physical systems. As a versatile tool, finite element analysis (FEA) has been implemented in various fields of engineering, such as structural mechanics, electromagnetics, heat and fluid flow. Nowadays, almost all practical FEA studies are completed with the help of computers and professional software, such as ANSYS, Abaqus and COMSOL. Benefitted by the well-developed computational techniques, such as automatic mesh generation and scientific visualization, engineers are able to handle complex modeling and result interpretation easily.However, traditional computer setup has limited the FEA processes, from model building to result display, in a totally virtual and offline environment. The virtual environment deprives the human senses of the physical characteristics, such as scale, orientation and material, and the surrounding physical context is usually not provided. It is not intuitive and efficient to examine and interpret FEA results without senses of scale and the necessary context. Before performing FEA, engineers must obtain proper loads and boundary conditions (BCs). To acquire these parameters in an actual operating environment, measurements can be conducted onsite, for instance, measuring the load variations on a crane with load cells. The load data will be processed and transferred into FEA systems, which usually involves some tedious and error prone tasks, such as manual data transfer and coordinate transformations, and the results are obtained offline.Another problem lies in the interactivity. Traditional FEA usually consists of three steps, i.e., pre-processing, solving and post-processing. In the pre-processing stage, a mesh model is created and the relevant parameters, such as loads, material properties and constraints, are prescribed, normally via manual entry. Next, the FEA system builds and solves the equations. The results are post-processed and displayed according to user’s requirements. The computation time depends largely on the number of nodes and the processor performance. There is always a tradeoff between model accuracy and computation time. In practice, most FEAs tend to achieve accurate and detailed results by using fine meshes and nonlinear models, which would certainly require considerable computation time. Users usually have to repeat certain standardized steps to cope with parameter variations. Traditional FEA systems thus have weak interactivity. In a number of situations, FEA systems are expected to update results efficiently in response to parameter variations, e.g., geometry modifications in product design [1]. Real-time performance is required in certain special applications such as interactive entertainment and surgery simulation [2]. This demand motivates the development of real-time interactive FEA technologies.Augmented reality (AR) technology has been developed in the last two decades to enhance a user’s perception of and interaction with the real world. AR supplements reality by superimposing computer-generated information, such as graphics, texts and audio, over the real-world environment in real time. AR allows the utilization of physical objects, the properties of which cannot be sufficiently embodied in a virtual FEA environment, e.g., scale, orientation, etc. An intact physical context is also preserved for reference. Superimposing FEA results on the corresponding real objects will facilitate results exploration and interpretation. The onsite environments also make it possible to acquire loads and BCs directly using proper sensors and instruments. Tangible interfaces can be developed for intuitive user interaction.With the goal of utilizing AR technologies to assist structural analysis, this paper proposes a novel system which integrates FEA simulation, scientific visualization and load measurement into an AR-based environment. Unlike traditional FEA systems, the integrated system is able to acquire load data directly from real-world environments, and the deformations and stresses of structures are simulated in real time. A wireless sensor network (WSN) is established and registered onsite to acquire spatially distributed loads. The real-time FEA results are superimposed on physical structures to give lucid illustrations. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. A review of related studies is given in Section 2. Section 3 elaborates the architecture of the integrated system, as well as the relevant methodologies. The proposed system is implemented with a case study in Section 4 followed by a discussion in Section 5, and conclusions are drawn in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Load data acquisition and FEA simulations are carried out separately in practical applications due to the virtual and offline environment imposed by traditional FEA tools. With the use of AR, the coupling of these two processes becomes possible and promising. This paper proposes a framework to integrate sensor measurement, FEA simulation and scientific visualization into an AR-based environment. Integrating scientific visualization into the AR-based environment allows superimposing of FEA results on physical objects, and facilitating result data post-processing and interpretation. The FEA simulator is able to acquire load data directly from the onsite environment. The load acquisition module plays the role of interface between the simulator and real-world loads. Utilizing an offline pre-computation, the simulator is able to update the results in real time. A case study was carried using a step ladder, which is considered having moderate failure risks in usage. The relationships among the node numbers, accuracy of the result and frame rate were investigated. The current real-time FE model has limitations for dynamic and nonlinear problems. However, it is competent for addressing many practical situations. The research contributes a novel method to investigate full-field structural stresses onsite, which has the potential to be applied to monitor mechanical or civil structures in the actual operating environments.