@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multibody system dynamics simulator for process simulation of ships and offshore plants in shipyards

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A simulator was developed for dynamic analysis of operations in shipyards.We based the simulator on six kernels including multibody dynamics kernel.The simulator contains some functions for motion analysis of floating platforms.The graphical user interfaces were also included for the convenience.The simulator was verified by applying to the operations in shipyards.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multibody system dynamics,Modeling and simulation,Ship,Offshore plant,Scenario management,Lifting,Transporting,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Since various existing simulation tools based on multibody system dynamics focus on conventional mechanical systems, such as machinery, cars, and spacecraft, there are some problems with the application of such simulation tools to shipbuilding domains due to the absence of specific items in the field of naval architecture and ocean engineering, such as hydrostatics, hydrodynamics, and mooring forces. Thus, in this study, we developed a multibody system dynamics simulator for the process simulation of ships and offshore structures. We based the simulator on six kernels: the multibody system dynamics kernel, the force calculation kernel, the numerical analysis kernel, the hybrid simulation kernel, the scenario management kernel, and the collision detection kernel. Based on these kernels, we implemented a simulator that had the following Graphic User Interfaces (GUIs): the modeling, visualization, and report GUIs. In addition, the geometric properties of blocks and facilities in shipyards are needed to configure the simulation for the production of ships and offshore plants, so these are managed in a database and connected to a specific commercial CAD system in shipyards. We used the simulator we developed in various cases of the process simulation of ships and offshore plants. The results show that the simulator is useful for various simulations of operations in shipyards and offshore industries.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Requests for accurate dynamic analysis using a simulation tool have been increasing in many engineering fields, including in the shipbuilding industry. Unlike the conventional mechanical systems such as cars and machinery, all ships and offshore structures differ in purpose, shape, and size [1]. Thus, even though process planning may be set up based on the experience of similar ships and offshore structures, many unexpected problems may occur during their production. For example, an interference between a block and the wire ropes, the desynchronization between the cranes, the excess of the maximum tension of the wire ropes, etc. can occur during the production of ships and offshore plants. Fig. 1shows such problem during production in shipyards.Moreover, due to the recent increase in the demand for offshore plants and new-concept ships, new manufacturing methods in shipyards are frequently reviewed with simulation, including with dynamic analysis, to confirm their availability and safety [2]. Since various existing simulation tools based on multibody system dynamics focus on conventional mechanical systems, such as machinery, cars, and spacecraft, there are some problems with the application of these simulation tools to shipbuilding domains due to the absence of specific items in the field of naval architecture and ocean engineering, such as hydrostatic, hydrodynamic, wake, and mooring forces. Therefore, some recent studies focused on developing a simulation tool for the shipbuilding process based on the multibody system dynamics theorem.The remainder of this paper is as follows. Section 2 reviews previous works related to this study. In Section 3, the developed multibody system dynamics simulator for the shipbuilding process is introduced. Its application to shipbuilding follows in Section 4. The last section summarizes this study and briefly discusses the next study.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
