@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A numerical and experimental study of woven fabric material under ballistic impacts

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Finite Element models were created for single- and multi-layer woven fabrics.Both FE models were used in simulations of ballistic impacts at various velocities.Ballistic impact tests were conducted on a woven fabric in-service groin protector.Simulations of ballistic impact tests were performed using the validated FE model.Fabric responses predicted by FE models matched reasonably well with test data.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Numerical modeling,Woven fabric,Body armor,Ballistic impacts,Finite element,Kevlar,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The objective of this research was to use finite element modeling and simulations to evaluate the ballistic resistance of woven fabrics and soft body armor. In the work of this paper, nonlinear finite element (FE) simulations were performed to evaluate the response of single- and multi-layer woven fabrics under ballistic impacts. A shell-element based fabric material model was first validated using perforation tests performed on a single-layer fabric under high-velocity impact by a spherical steel projectile. The validated model was then used to replicate high- and low-velocity impacts by a blunt aluminum projectile on eight-layer Kevlar targets. Results from the multi-layer simulations were shown to have good agreement with experimental data. Finally, the validated fabric model was used to simulate a full-scale ballistic test on a groin protector panel of the interceptor body armor system. The simulation results of both the single- and multi-layer impacts were shown to match well with experimental data in terms of the projectile's residual velocities. This research confirms the effectiveness of the fabric model and can be extended to a wide range of applications involving soft body armors.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Woven fabrics have been employed as protective materials for hundreds of years. Modeling these materials has been a difficult task due to the complex nature of both the fiber material and the woven structure [1]. Woven fabrics are generally made of strands, or yarns, of a particular material woven in a cross-hatched pattern consisting of ‘warp’ and ‘fill’ yarns. Typically, fabrics are characterized by the geometry of the weave as well as the material used. Despite the firm understanding of the characteristics of the yarn material, determining the bulk behavior of fabrics remains a challenge and is still under investigation.Since the 1950s, extensive experiments have been conducted in the interest of capturing and studying the behavior of woven fabrics under ballistic impacts, accompanied by theoretical study and model development. In an early work by Susich et al. [2], they studied the impact points on a nylon sheet that had been perforated by a 0.22 caliber projectile, and characterized the behavior of multiple sheets. Wilde et al. [3] investigated the behavior of nylon during ballistic penetration using high-speed photographic equipment. Laible and Demommee [4] conducted experiments on the ballistic protection of Kevlar and fiberglass laminates; they found that Kevlar was superior in projectile containment. Prosser et al. [5] performed projectile perforation tests in which optical sensors were used to capture the fabric responses. In the experimental studies of ballistic impacts, high-speed photography was often used to capture projectiles’ perforations and fabric responses [6,7]. Under the direction of the U.S. Department of Transportation, multiple studies have been conducted to assess the performance of Kevlar and Twaron fabrics in resisting impacts and penetrations [8,9], with focus on high-speed imaging and numerical modeling of aircraft engine containment structures.Given the challenges in testing woven fabrics under ballistic impacts, various modeling approaches have been employed to study their behavior. These modeling efforts can be divided into two major categories: analytical and numerical [10]. In analytical models, well-established principles of continuum mechanics are used to develop constitutive models to predict the general behavior of fabrics. Early efforts in the development of analytical models for woven fabrics began in the 1970s, as seen in the work by Wilde et al. [3] in which a simplified mechanical model was developed to predict the energy loss of the projectile. Vinson and Zukas [11] formulated a stepwise procedure for determining the strains, projectile positions, forces, and accelerations for impacts on both nylon and Kevlar fabrics. Leech [12] developed a model for studying the eigen frequencies and Floquet waves of cloths and nets using Hamilton's principle and Fourier representations. While these early models sufficed for the time, more complex and comprehensive models were developed in the 1990s. Parga-Landa et al. [13] developed a comprehensive analytical model based on conservation of momentum to predict the velocity history of the projectile. Three primary friction forces were identified: projectile-fabric, inter-layer, and yarn intersection frictions, with yarn intersection friction being the primary cause of the observed strain gradients. Benloulo et al. [14] incorporated a time-dependent failure criterion into the model by Parga-Landa et al. [13] with an assumption that any energy lost by the projectile must be equal to the energy transferred into the fabric (i.e., drag was neglected). Billion and Robinson [15] developed an analytical model of a projectile in non-homogeneous, or hybrid, packs of fabrics based on a linear prediction of kinetic energy loss as a function of projectile penetration depth. Hou et al. [16] developed an analytical model for a three-dimensionally woven fabric incorporating yarns woven perpendicularly to the typical weave plane. An analytical model was developed to calculate the energy absorption of the yarns as well as the deformed shape of the fabric at point of impact. Due to the complex nature of fabrics, there is currently no single, agreed-upon analytical model that can be generally applied to a wide range of fabric materials.Numerical methods, specifically the finite element (FE) method, provide a practical means of finding a solution to studying the fabric behavior [17]. With explicit modeling of the fabric components, this approach can capture particular phenomena such as yarn interactions and crimping that may cause difficulty to the analytical methods. Freeston and Claus [18] developed a wave-centric fabric model in which strains in individual yarns were described by strain wave reflections at yarn intersections. Roylance [19] used a single-yarn numerical model to study wave propagation and its effect on strain. In the work by Roylance et al. [20], they developed a numerical model to address many of the shortcomings of impact-related numerical models. Based on the previous work on single yarns, Roylance et al. [21] developed a model for an entire sheet of woven nylon fabric. The model stepped away from their previous work in which fabric cross-overs were modeled as pin joints and slippage at the fiber joints was incorporated. Multiple layers of fabric were handled by simply increasing the density of the fabric in the model and did not account for inter-layer friction or slippage. Shim et al. [22] developed a model that had similar underlying formulation to that of Roylance et al. [20], but used a different approach in determining the properties of fibers. The fiber properties were determined using a four-element viscoelastic model that was developed by Termonia and Smith [23] for modeling polymer responses. The model was validated using perforation tests and showed significant improvement over the model developed by Roylance et al. [20].All of the aforementioned models relied on some assumptions regarding the weave geometry and yarn interaction. In the work by Shockey et al. [8], a full three-dimensional (3D) model was developed to explicitly represent all yarns using solid elements. Despite its high complexity, this model could generate realistic behaviors without making major assumptions. The development of 3D models was also seen in the work by Tarfaoui and Akesbi [24] to characterize other weave configurations, i.e., twill weaves. D'Amato [25] modelled a unit cell consisting of three intersecting yarns in the tri-axial weaves of a carbon fiber composite. To study the friction effects at yarn crossovers, Duan et al. [26] modeled a plain weave fabric using solid elements and conducted impact simulations with various boundary conditions. While 3D models generally had good accuracies, the implementation of such models was found to be impractical for design engineers to use. Simons et al. [27] sought to optimize the solution process of the model previously developed by Shockey et al. [8] using a commercial solver. Lim et al. [28] developed a model for LS-DYNA utilizing membrane elements and relying on a strain-rate dependent, isotropic elastic-plastic material model to account for the viscoelastic properties of yarns as well as strain-rate dependent failures.Currently, the numerical modeling of woven fabrics has evolved into simplified micro-mechanical models. In this approach, a representative volume cell (RVC) is characterized and used in repetition to model an entire sheet. For example, in the work by Teng et al. [29], a sheet of fabric was reduced to its smallest, periodically repeating sub-domain consisting of an intersection of one warp yarn and one fill yarn. Early development of an RVC-based numerical method was seen in the work of Dasgupta et al. [30], which was primarily focused on the thermo and thermo-mechanical properties of woven fabrics. Tan et al. [31] developed an RVC model utilizing a sinusoidal beam approximation for yarns to predict the failure strengths of various yarn configurations in tensile loading conditions. Tabiei and Ivanov [32] implemented an RVC-based model into LS-DYNA in an effort to accurately capture the yarn locking and packing before the elastic properties of yarns played a role in energy absorption. Building on their previous work, Ivanov and Tabiei [33] implemented a second model to implement the crimping behavior of the yarns as well as contact forces and frictions at fiber crossovers. Boisse et al. [34] used the RVC technique to study various weave geometries under quasi-static loading conditions. Xue et al. [35] developed a constitutive model based on the microstructure of the fabric using a unit cell technique, which allowed for calculating shear deformations due to the trellising effect. One novel technique developed, termed multi-scale modeling, combined 2D and 3D models [36] so that models with high accuracy in terms of point-of-impact behavior could be explored at a far less computational cost than a full-scale 3D model [37].In the current work, numerical models of single- and multi-layer Kevlar woven fabric sheets were created in LS-DYNA based on the work by Ivanov and Tabiei [33]. The single-layer model was first used in simulations of impacts by a steel ball under various impact velocities and validated using experimental data. The numerical model of an eight-layer fabric was then used to simulate the impacts by an aluminum cylinder at various impact velocities and the results were also validated against experimental data. Finally, an experiment was performed in which a 9-mm bullet was fired at both single- and multi-layer Kevlar woven fabric sheets used in production body armor. The fabric model was then used to simulate this experiment to demonstrate real-world applicability of the numerical model.In this section, the viscoelastic loose fabric model in LS-DYNA (MAT 234) is introduced [38]. This fabric model was developed based on the work by Ivanov and Tabiei [33] for polymer fabrics in impact and other high-strain rate applications. In this fabric model, the RVC approach was used to capture both the reorientation of the yarn matrix during impact and the viscoelastic properties of the individual yarns. Fig. 1illustrates a single crossover point of a warp yarn and a fill yarn, with the geometric parameters given by the span or yarn length (L), fabric thickness (t), yarn width (w), and yarn cross-sectional area (S). These parameters and the initial angle between yarns were provided as user-specified material parameters.The primary source of energy dissipation in woven fabrics is the viscoelastic behavior of the yarns. Most soft body armor in use consists of polymeric materials that require accurate modeling of the viscoelastic response of the fabric at room temperature. The material model MAT_234 in LS-DYNA used a three-element viscoelastic model to model the tensile response of the yarns, as shown in Fig. 2.The first element, a, is a Maxwell element without a dashpot and accounts for primary bond failures. The second element, b, is a Kelvin–Voigt element and accounts for the secondary bond failures. The differential equation of viscoelasticity can be written as(1)(Ka+Kb)σ+μbσ˙=KaKbɛ+μbKaɛ˙where the stress rate (σ˙) and strain rate (ɛ˙) at time step (n + 1/2) can be written in terms of stress and strain increments as(2)σ˙(n+1/2)=Δσ(n)Δt(n),ɛ˙(n+1/2)=Δɛ(n)Δt(n)Material model MAT_234 also uses this three-element viscoelastic model for strain-rate dependent failure. For element a, the strain failure is determined by(3)ɛa=σKa>ɛamaxwhere Kaand εa maxare input parameters.For the Kelvin–Voigt element b, the strain failure is determined by(4)ɛb=ɛ−ɛa>ɛbmaxwhere εb maxis calculated using Kaand εa max[33].Because the viscoelasticity equations are set up at time step (n + 1/2), equilibrium at the yarn crossovers is also considered at this time-step for consistency. Under the equilibrium condition, the yarn force component, which is normal to the friction surface or fabric sheet, is calculated by(5)F=d(n)L(n+12)(σ(n)+Δσ(n)2)Swhere d is half of the distance between the centerlines of a fill and warp yarn, L is the yarn length at a joint, and S is the cross-sectional area of the yarn. Details and the equations and calculations of yarn strains and stresses can be found in Ref. [33]. The equilibrium equation at each time step is solved numerically in LS-DYNA using the Newton–Raphson method.The employment of the RVC technique allows the material model to capture the trellis-like response of yarn intersections. The warp and fill yarns initially form an angle, e.g., with a braid angle of 90° for plain weave fabrics. During deformation, the yarns may rotate to a certain angle at which point the geometry of the yarns allows no further rotation. At the point of maximum rotation, the fabric is considered ‘packed’ and the trellis is to be collapsed. The packing process is illustrated in Fig. 3. The maximum rotational angle, or the locking angle, of the yarns is governed purely by the geometry of the yarns.The locking angle can be determined using the initial angle (assumed to be 45° for a plain woven fabric), the width (w), and the span (s) as(6)θlock=45∘−0.5sin−1wsThe rotational angles of the yarns were determined at each time-step in the material models. Details on calculating the rotational angles can be found in Ref. [33]. The consideration of this rotational angle allows for the implementation of rotational friction at the intersection. Although the rotational friction is often neglected, the energy dissipated through friction in impacts, especially in low-speed impacts, is believed to be high and should be considered in simulation models. To implement the rotational friction, the yarns are approximated as overlapping bands with some contact area, and the friction moment is given by(7)M=2v〈F〉∫rdAAwhere v is the coefficient of yarn-to-yarn friction, “〈 〉” are Macaulay's brackets, F is the yarn force component normal to the friction surface calculated in Eq. (5), r is the radius from the origin of the coordinate system to dA, and A is the contact area. The frictional moment is then used to calculate the respective stress components in the yarns.The material model for woven fabric was first validated using the experimental work on a single sheet of Twaron fabric, which had nearly identical material properties to Kevlar 129 [22]. In this experiment, a steel projectile, which was 9.0 mm in diameter and weighed 3.5 g, was shot toward a 110 × 120 mm sheet of plain-weave Twaron clamped along the 110-mm edges. The tests were conducted at different impact speeds ranging from 140 to 420 m/s at 10 m/s intervals. A laser-photodiode system was employed to record the pre- and post-perforation velocities of the projectile.The FE model of a single sheet of Twaron fabric was generated, as shown in Fig. 4, with the size and thickness matching the test sample. Square membrane elements were used with a mesh size of 1.3 mm. All six degrees of freedom of the nodes along the shorter edges were constrained to represent the clamped fixture in the experiment. Table 1summarizes the material properties assigned to the fabric model. The spherical steel projectile was modeled using shell elements with a sufficiently dense mesh to accurately capture the curvature. Given its unnoticeable deformation in the experiments, an elastic material model was used for the steel projectile. The contact between the projectile and fabric was handled by the automatic-general-interior contact in LS-DYNA for its good numerical stability and ability to handle edge contacts as well as self-interaction of the fabric layer. Based on a comprehensive study on friction of Kevlar by Martinez et al. [39], the coefficients of static and dynamic friction were chosen as 0.5 and 0.25, respectively, for the Kevlar–steel interaction. Per recommendations of Ivanov and Tabiei [33], a small damping coefficient was included in the simulation to account for damping due to air resistance.A total of 29 simulations were run at initial velocities ranging from 140 to 420 m/s with an increment of 10 m/s. The residual velocities (i.e., post-impact velocities) of the projectile and the absorbed energy (i.e., the energy loss of the projectile) were obtained from the 29 simulations and plotted with their respective initial velocities in Fig. 5. The residual velocities were measured at 200 μs from the beginning of the simulation.Four distinctive regions were observed from the results in Fig. 5, from both the experiments and simulations. For the first region, the projectile had initial velocities from 140 to 180 m/s and was captured by the fabric and can be seen in the 170 m/s impact case in Fig. 6. The transition from capture to perforation was clear in the experimental data at 180 m/s, marked by a significant increase in residual velocity. The simulation data did not exhibit as clear a transition as seen from experimental data, but the downward trend corresponded to the contained projectile and the transition point was within 10 m/s of the experimental data. In the work of Shim et al. [22], there was no clear indication of how the non-zero residual velocities for the captured cases were measured in the experiments. Therefore, for the captured cases, this study was focused on the post-impact deformations of the woven fabric from simulation results, which were compared to experimental observations. To this end, the residual velocities of the captured cases from simulation results were not very indicative.The initial velocities from approximately 190–270 m/s constituted the second region, a low-speed perforation region corresponding to 30–130 J of initial energy. As noted by Shim et al. [22], this region exhibited large deformations and high-energy absorption that was linearly related to the initial kinetic energy.The third region was identified as a transitional region with initial velocities from 270 to 310 m/s: the fabric response evolved from high-energy absorption and large deformation to low-energy absorption and small deformation. Both the simulation results and experimental data by Shim et al. [22] showed a clear trend of dramatically increased residual velocities compared to the initial velocities. Fig. 7shows the deformed fabric for the case of the 290 m/s impact. While this velocity is on the upper end of the low-speed regime, it effectively illustrates a characteristic low-speed displacement profile with a large deformation observed before perforation. More importantly, the simulation results exhibited a well-defined transition region similar to the one observed in experiments, indicating that the model was capable of capturing complex behaviors of the fabric.The fourth region, which was from 310 to 420 m/s and corresponded to 170–320 J of initial energy, encompassed the high-speed response of the fabric. In this region, very little energy was absorbed by the fabric and the residual velocities of the projectile had a linear correlation with the initial velocities, as seen from both simulation results and experimental data. It can be seen from the energy plot in Fig. 5 that the simulation and experimental curves did not match well before they eventually converge at 420 m/s. While the experimental data showed a decreasing trend of energy absorption in relation to the initial velocity, the simulation results showed a nearly flat curve of absorbed energy in this high-speed response region. Nevertheless, the fabric response from simulation results matched the observations by Shim et al. [22]: the projectile perforated relatively cleanly through the sheet and a distinct deformation cone was no longer present. As seen in the case of the 390 m/s impact (Fig. 8), the small deformation surrounding the impact point is characteristic of a high-speed response and is also in agreement with the low measured absorbed energy.Overall, the simulation results for the single-layer penetrations indicated good applicability of the FE model to fabric impact problems. Compared to experimental data, the low-speed response was found to be more accurate than the high-speed response with respect to energy absorption. The residual velocities predicted by the simulations matched well to experimental data. The deviation of simulation results from the experimental data in the high-speed tests could be attributed to a handful of factors. Primarily, since the material model was incapable of capturing the yarn pull-out behavior, it predicted a reduced energy absorption by not accounting for the friction during yarn pull-out. Ivanov and Tabiei [33] also noted that the thickness of the fabric sheet did not have a true physical analog; rather it was an estimated term based on the individual yarn thickness, as well as crimping at yarn intersections. This, along with other unknowns, could reasonably account for the mismatch in high-speed energy absorption. Nevertheless, the results had an overall good fit to experimental data; this warranted the usage of the FE model in subsequent simulations.To further determine the applicability of the FE model, simulations were carried out on tests of multi-layer Kevlar fabrics. As observed in the single-layer testing, the projectile penetrated the fabric at nearly all velocities. For woven fabric to be a viable solution in body armor, it must be assembled in multiple layers. Woven-fabric armors typically consist of at least eight layers and often 28 or more layers. These multi-layer configurations have a new energy absorption mechanism due to inter-layer frictions, which can dramatically change the body armor behavior.Starrett [7] performed a range of experiments on 8- and 16-layer Kevlar targets impacted by aluminum projectiles of varying masses and tip shapes. The initial and residual velocities of the projectile were recorded and the impact tests were captured using high-speed video. In this section, the FE fabric model was evaluated using the experimental configurations to further determine its applicability to full-scale simulations of multi-layer armors. Simulations were conducted on two cases in the work by Starrett [7] in which eight-layer Kevlar 129 fabric targets were impacted by blunt-tipped 6061-T6 aluminum cylinders that measured 5.38 mm in diameter and weighed 2.79 g. The eight-layer fabrics were stitched together along all four corners to reduce slippage of the interior fabric layers during impact. The targets measured 200 mm × 200 mm and were clamped to a stationary fixture along two parallel edges, with the other two edges unrestrained. The projectiles were shot toward the center of the target at initial velocities of 267 and 428 m/s, respectively. For the case of 267 m/s, the aluminum projectile was fully contained by the eight-layer Kevlar fabric. In the case of 428 m/s, the experiment resulted in a full perforation, allowing the measurement of residual velocity. In both cases, the tips of the aluminum projectiles were found to deform slightly after impacts.The FE model of the eight-layer fabric, shown in Fig. 9, was similar to the single-layer model in that each layer was meshed with 1.3 mm square membrane elements. The eight layers were then arranged on top of one another to create the final assembly with each layer in direct contact with the adjacent layers. The boundary conditions of the eight-layer model were the same as the single-layer one, i.e., the two vertical edges were fully constrained and the two horizontal edges were free. The projectile, which had a blunt or flat tip, was modeled using shell elements of sufficiently small size to capture the cylindrical shape. An elastic material with properties corresponding to 6061-T6 aluminum was assigned to the cylinder to capture the small deformations observed by Starrett [7]. Given the anticipated severe deformations and the large number of nonlinear contacts between the projectile and the fabric as well as between the fabric layers, the general interior contact algorithm was employed for its accuracy and stability in such scenarios.Similar to the single-layer case, the coefficients of static and dynamic frictions were defined as 0.5 and 0.25, respectively, between the projectile and fabric. The mutual dynamic friction coefficient between the fabric layers 0.5. A damping coefficient was assigned to the fabric to account for air resistance. In this case, the damping coefficient was larger than that used in the single-layer model with consideration of the air-buffer between adjacent layers of the eight-layer fabric. Consequently, there would be more damping due to air in a multi-layer impact than that in a single-layer impact. Because it was very difficult, if not impossible, to implement the true effect of air resistance in LS-DYNA, a reasonable damping coefficient was deemed appropriate to account for this effect.Nonlinear FE simulations were performed and the time histories of the displacements and velocities of the projectile were extracted from simulation results. For the impact at 267 m/s, the projectile was contained by the fabric; this was in agreement with the experimental observations. At 200 μs, the residual velocity was 60.3 m/s in the simulation while it was approximately 57.6 m/s in the experiment (see Fig. 10). While the residual velocity in the simulation was within 5.2% error compared to experimental data, the velocity histories of both low- and high-speed cases showed some variations during the first 75 μs. The simulation results showed a more rapid reduction in velocity than that in the experiment. As time progressed, both curves showed a trend toward a gradual, linear slope and became nearly overlaying within the last 50 μs. Over the duration of the impact, the displacements of the projectile were slightly less than those from the experiment, indicating less projectile penetration predicted by the simulation (see Fig. 11). The smaller penetration depth can be attributed to the more rapid reduction in velocity observed during the initial stages of impact. Nevertheless, both sets of data matched very closely and the ultimate penetration depth of the projectile was 24.5 mm from the simulation, while it was 24.8 mm from the experiment. Successive states of the simulation at 25 μs intervals are shown in Fig. 12. In line with observations by Starrett [7], the deformation region assumed a pyramidal shape.For the high-speed (428 m/s) impact, simulation results were also comparable to experimental data. The projectile was observed to fully penetrate all layers in the simulation and retain a majority of its velocity. The velocity history in Fig. 10 showed the simulation results again dropping faster than the experimental results during the first 50 μs of impact. After the penetration, the simulation results showed a residual velocity of 316 m/s while the experimental result was approximately 324 m/s, approximately a 2.5% difference. The displacement histories in Fig. 11 for both the simulation and experiment showed a nearly linear relationship with time, with a slight divergence emerging after 50 μs. Fig. 13shows six successive instances of the projectile at 25 μs intervals in the simulation. Similar to the single-layer case, a notable decrease in the overall deformation around the impact point was evident at high impact velocities. Despite its smaller magnitude, the deformed region assumed a pyramidal shape, which was in agreement with the observations of Starrett [7].Overall, both the low- and high-speed simulation results agreed well with experimental data. The multi-layer model differed only slightly from the single-layer model in that the viscous damping coefficient was increased. The increase was justified given that there were nine bodies in contact as opposed to two. Unlike the case of the single-layer fabric under high-speed impact, the results of the multi-layer fabric under high-speed impact remained very close to experimental data. This re-convergence may be attributed to the higher energy absorbed in general due to eight layers of fabric in contact. The velocity loss of the projectile due to air resistance was calculated by Starratt [7] and found to be less than 1 m/s. Although neglecting air resistance could incur some errors, the overall results from the multi-layer simulations further demonstrate the applicability of the FE model to complex impact scenarios involving woven fabrics.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
