@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A numerical study of occupant responses and injuries in vehicular crashes into roadside barriers based on finite element simulations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An FE model incorporated with a hybrid-III dummy was developed for roadside vehicular crash simulations.Occupant injury risks were evaluated for vehicular crashes into two roadside barrier systems.Barrier performance was assessed using occupant injury criteria based on vehicle responses and occupant responses.Correlations between injury criteria based on vehicle and occupant responses were studied.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Crash test dummy,Occupant injury criteria,Roadside barrier,Crash simulation,Finite element (FE),Concrete barrier,W-beam guardrail,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Occupant responses and injuries are important considerations in the design and assessment of roadside safety devices such as barriers. Although incorporating occupant responses and injuries into the design of safety devices is highly recommended by the current safety regulations, there are limited studies that directly consider occupant responses and injuries. Crash test dummies are seldom equipped in the state-of-the-art crash testing of roadside barriers and thus occupant responses and injury risks are evaluated primarily based on vehicle responses. In the present work, occupant responses and injuries in automotive crash events were investigated by incorporating crash test dummies into the vehicle model that was used in the finite element (FE) simulations of roadside crashes. The FE models of a Ford F250 pickup truck and a Hybrid III 50th percentile crash test dummy were employed and a passive restraint system was developed in the FE model. The FE model was validated using existing experiments including a sled test and a full-frontal impact test. Simulations of the Ford F250 impacting a concrete barrier and a W-beam guardrail were conducted and the occupant responses were analyzed. Furthermore, occupant injuries were quantitatively estimated using occupant injury criteria based directly on dummy responses and compared to those based solely on vehicle responses. The correlations between vehicle responses and occupant injuries were studied.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Traffic barriers are effective safety devices in preventing vehicles from crossing the median so as to avoid head-on collisions. Median barriers are especially effective in reducing the chances of small, light passenger vehicles crashing into large, heavy vehicles. In the current safety standard, the Manual for Assessing Safety Hardware (MASH) [1], the impact performances of a barrier system under vehicular impacts are assessed by “the risk of injury to the occupants of the impacting vehicle,” “the structural adequacy of the safety feature” and “the post-impact behavior of the test vehicle” [1]. Although the occupants should not experience severe or fatal injuries, there is currently no crash dummy specified by MASH to be used in barrier crash testing to obtain occupant responses.The ultimate goal of designing a median barrier system is to save life and minimize the injury to the occupant. It is of great significance to comprehend the mechanism of occupant injury in automotive crashes. To establish proper injury criteria for estimating the levels of injury severity, it is necessary to study the parameters that can be used to assess occupant responses such as accelerations, forces, stresses, and strains. Over the years, a number of injury criteria have been established to estimate the level of human injuries. Research on injuries of human bodies including the head, neck, thorax, abdomen, pelvis, and lower extremities has been conducted in the field of impact biomechanics in the last 60 years [2,3]. Since different parts of the body have different injury mechanisms, injury criteria for different body regions have been proposed for assessing the restraint system in automotive crashes [4,5]. For example, the head injury criteria (HIC) [6], which was based on the head translational accelerations, was adopted by the U.S. federal government in the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards (FMVSS) No. 208 [7]. A certain HIC value corresponds to a certain probability of a skull fracture. Although injury criteria should be established for each type of injuries for different body parts, directly evaluation of injury criteria on human bodies in vehicular crashes is nearly impractical. There are two approaches to study occupant responses and injury criteria in vehicular crashes: the direct approach that employs a crash test dummy [8] and the indirect approach that utilizes the dynamic vehicle responses. For the direct approach, crash test dummies are instrumented to record data on its dynamic behavior in vehicle impact tests and injury levels can be determined using the measured quantities. With their good repeatability and controllability, crash test dummies are often used to help establish injury criteria for evaluating the effectiveness of occupant protection system in vehicle designs.Full-scale crash testing [9,10] and computer simulation are the two most common approaches to evaluate the impact performances of barrier systems before their placements on highways. Since it is infeasible to test all possible crash scenarios using physical testing, computer simulations, such as those using finite element (FE) analysis, provide a supplemental way to study barrier impact performances and evolve new designs. Once reliable FE models such as vehicle and median barrier are established, different impact conditions could be studied. Over the past two decades, researchers at the National Crash Analysis Center (NCAC) have developed a number of FE models of various vehicles that could be used to study vehicular crashworthiness and roadside barrier crashes. These vehicles vary from small passenger cars to pickup trucks and are available in the public domain. To construct these FE models, reverse engineering technique was used [11,12] and the majority of the models were partially or fully validated using experimental data of full-frontal impacts. These models released by NCAC have been widely used in simulation studies of median barrier crashes and consistently modified and improved by various users. Besides a number of vehicle models, NCAC has also developed a number of roadside barrier FE models including a concrete barrier, W-beam guardrail and cable median barrier [13]. With the FE models of vehicle and roadside barrier systems, computer simulations can be conducted to evaluate the impact performances of the barriers [14–17].Although examining the vehicle responses and barrier performances is helpful to assess occupant safety in a crash, the occupant responses should be directly examined. This is because, as pointed out in MASH [1], the relationship between occupant risk and vehicle dynamics during interaction with roadside barriers is very difficult to be quantified. For example, a safe vehicle response may indicate a potentially satisfactory occupant safety but not a guarantee. To this end, incorporating a crash test dummy in the crash testing of barrier systems serves as a means to directly evaluate occupant safety. Crash test dummies are full-scale anthropomorphic test devices that are used by the automotive industry for decades to simulate human bodies and instrumented to record data of dynamic responses in vehicular impact testing. Incorporating a crash test dummy in the crash testing of roadside barriers is ideal but difficult due to the high cost, level of instrumentation, and required expertise. As a result, using crash test dummy is encouraged but not required in the current safety standard, MASH. Nevertheless, there is no obvious impedance to incorporating a dummy model, such as those used in vehicle crashworthiness design in automobile industry [18–20], in the crash simulations of roadside barriers.The first technique to develop FE models of occupants in crashes was aimed at crash test dummies rather than the real human beings; this strategy was referred as “crash test dummy based modeling” [21–30]. In developing FE models of crash test dummies, the whole dummy was disassembled into a number of units such as head, neck, shoulders, thorax, lumbar spine, pelvis, and lower and upper extremities. Each of these units is composed of a few small components. These individual components with reasonable meshes and material properties are assembled into the corresponding larger unit. At the unit level various testing was done to ensure consistency between FE simulation results and test data [21]. Finally the FE model of the entire dummy was validated in a sled testing configuration. A second approach in developing the FE models of crash test dummies adopted a design strategy directly based on accurate and detailed representations of human bodies. These models resembled a real human body in geometry and structures and naturally incorporated the effects of body size, posture, and muscular activity. For example, Gayzik et al. [31] used three techniques namely the computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and upright MRI to scan the geometry of a human body and construct an FE model. The disadvantage of this approach is that human bodies are generally too complicated to be modeled accurately and thus models based directly on human bodies have not been widely used as dummy based models.The need to incorporate occupant injuries into the design and evaluation of roadside barriers requires in-depth understanding of occupant responses in roadside crashes. In this study, the occupant responses and injuries during roadside barrier crashes were evaluated based on crash dummy responses using FE simulations. The major research objectives of this study were to: (1) incorporate a crash test dummy model with a vehicular model in crash simulations of roadside barriers; (2) validate the integrated dummy and vehicle model using existing data of crash tests; and (3) investigate dummy responses in crash simulations and study the correlation of occupant based on dummy responses and those based on vehicle responses. In Section 2, the FE model of a 2006 Ford F250 pickup truck with airbag, steering wheel and column, dashboard, and seatbelt is presented and a Hybrid III 50th percentile human dummy model is incorporated into the vehicle model. This integrated model is validated in Section 3 based on test data of a sled test and a full-frontal impact. Occupant injury criteria based on human responses and vehicle responses are discussed in Sections 4 and 5, respectively. An analysis of occupant injuries in roadside crashes into a concrete barrier and a W-beam guardrail is presented in Sections 6 and 7. Finally, the correlation between vehicle responses and occupant injuries are discussed.The FE model of a 2006 Ford F250 pickup truck developed at NCAC [32] was chosen as the base model in this research. This vehicle model had 738,165 nodes, 698,501 shell elements, 2353 beam elements, and 25,905 solid elements as shown in Fig. 1a. The mass of the vehicle was approximated 2500 kg, which met the TL-3 requirement of a 2270P test vehicle (pickup truck) specified by MASH. This vehicle model was validated by NCAC using a full-frontal impact test, and exhibited numerical instability in barrier crash simulations. To use it in the current work, this model was revised by eliminating initial penetrations and redefining contact between parts wherever necessary to improve its numerical stability and simulation accuracy.In the NCAC model, the steering (excluding steering wheel and column) and suspension components were modeled but some compartment components such as the seat, dashboard, and the restraint systems were not considered. The passive restraint system, i.e., the airbag and seatbelt, is important for occupant protection in a crash event. Although it may not contribute significantly to the overall vehicle responses, the passive restraint system is critical to reduce the impact forces and accelerations on the occupant. Without passive restraint system, it is impossible to incorporate an occupant (dummy) model into the vehicle model and study occupant responses in roadway crashes. In this study, the FE models of the airbag (see Fig. 1b), steering wheel and column, dashboard, and seatbelt were added to the FE model of the Ford F250 along with a Hybrid III dummy model (see Fig. 1c).Modeling airbag deployment and its after-deployment interaction with external objects such as the steering wheel has been a challenging task, particularly when considering fabric density, bag elasticity, inflation and venting rate, etc. [33,34]. The deployment of an airbag starts with the inflator that triggers a rapid chemical reaction to generate and pump nitrogen gas into the fabric bag to inflate it.To simulate the airbag, the inflator needs to be characterized on the mass flow rate during deployment, which can be done using an airbag tank test [35]. In the tank test, the inflator was ignited and exploded inside a constant volume tank and the gas pressure history was measured and used for deriving the mass flow ratem˙as follows.(1)m˙=cvp˙VtcpRTiwherep˙is the gas pressure rate inside the tank, Tiis the constant inflator temperature, Vtis the known tank volume, and cv, cpand R are three gas constants.Applying the above equation to the pressure data measured on the driver side airbag of a 2001 Ford F150 in the tank test by NHTSA, the mass flow rate was obtained and used as the air flow input for a realistic airbag model. The airbag control volume model in LS-DYNA, i.e., *AIRBAG_SIMPLE_AIRBAG_MODEL, was used in this study. To make the airbag more realistic, nitrogen gas properties were used and the airbag fabric material properties were obtained from Avula et al. [33]. The fabric had a thickness of 0.35 mm, a density of 1000 kg/m3, Young's Modulus of 100 MPa, and a Poisson's ratio of 0.4. Contacts were defined and the aforementioned airbag input mass flow rate was used.A seatbelt is an effective and mandatory safety device in a vehicle's restraint system to protect the occupant in a crash. The most commonly used seatbelt is the three-point restraint system that is composed of a belt fixed at one end, a D-ring, and a retractor, as illustrated in Fig. 2.Seatbelt modeling involves modeling the retractor, the D-ring and the belt fabric. The retractor model in LS-DYNA is based on a simplified concept of a physical retractor and requires the user to provide a loading curve (load vs. pullout) and an unloading curve (load vs. payout). The terms pullout and payout are defined as the lengths of belt extracted from and retreated into the retractor, respectively. The seatbelt force is determined by the load curve based on the belt pullout. Both locking and load limiting mechanisms can be simulated using the corresponding retractor loading curves. Any slack in the belt is eaten up to maintain a tightened belt. The D-ring is modeled by a slipring element in LS-DYNA with no geometric representation of the physical ring. The slipring element is essentially a nodal point attached or fixed to the vehicle's frame. No belt slip will occur if the forces in the belt on both sides of the ring satisfy the following equilibrium condition:(2)T1T2=eμθwhere T1 is and T2 are the belt forces, µ is the coefficient of friction between the belt and D-ring, and θ is the wrap angle. The coefficient of friction is the only parameter needs to be provided by the user; the wrap angle is calculated during the simulation based on the belt positions.The belt fabric model was consisted two types of elements, shell elements for contacts with the dummy and seatbelt elements for load bearing (equivalent to rod elements but with the ability to go through the D-ring element). The material of the belt is usually made of interwoven cottons and nylons and can be modeled by MAT_FABRIC in LS-DYNA.Most of the cars today are equipped with collapsible steering columns. While the exact mechanism varies from design to design, the basic form remains the same. Part of the column is manufactured using diamond structure which is less stiff and easy to be compressed once a force is introduced. The magnitude of force on the steering column may go up to a few kilo-Newtons before the steering column collapse. To simulate its collapse, a steering column was typically modeled as two rigid pieces jointed by a translational joint to allow relative movement along their longitudinal direction. In a real vehicle, a universal joint is used to connect the steering column to the steering gear box so as to convert rotations to translational motions. This conversion was modeled by a spherical joint that allowed the steering column to rotate about the steering gear box. This simple FE model captured the main features of the steering column, i.e. collapsible and free to rotate. The dashboard in a real motor vehicle has a complex geometry and connections with surrounding components. The exact replica of the real dashboard structure is nontrivial and unnecessary to crash analysis. In the FE model, a plastic layer was constructed using shell elements to represent the geometric surface of the dashboard.The FE model of a Hybrid III 50th percentile male dummy developed by NCAC [28–30] was used to obtain occupant responses in roadside barrier crash simulations. This dummy model (see Fig. 1c) had 228,000 nodes, 210,439 shell elements, 242 beam elements and 186,800 solid elements. It adopted elastic materials for the skeleton, viscoelastic material (MAT_006 in LS-DYNA) for the polyvinyl skin, simple rubber model (MAT_007 in LS-DYNA) for rubber parts, and viscous foam (MAT_062 in LS-DYNA) for foam parts. Accelerometers were installed on the head, chest and pelvis of the dummy. A linear potentiometer was installed in the dummy's chest to measure chest compression. Load cells were installed on the femur bones to measure the axial forces. The numerical stability and accuracy of this dummy model was improved by removing initial penetrations and redefining contact between parts. The improved dummy FE model was validated in a sled test and a frontal impact test.The vehicle and dummy models from NCAC were developed using reverse engineering techniques and the material properties were based on component or coupon testing. In this study, the models were improved by re-meshing and using more sophisticated contact algorithms (e.g., automatic-general-interior) between parts with complex geometry and/or involving edge contacts. A number of initial penetrations were observed in the original vehicle and dummy models. These initial penetrations were removed in this study by re-meshing combined with part separation (which was done by shrinking the penetrating parts to the smallest amount but enough to eliminate the penetrations). In the improved model of this study, the material properties were kept the same as those in the original models.Two commonly used barrier systems, the New Jersey concrete safety shape barriers and the G4 (1s) W-beam guardrails, were used in the roadside barrier impact simulations. Concrete barriers have a large rigidity compared to the vehicular structures; so they do not deform much and often referred as rigid barriers. In the FE model, the concrete barrier was modeled using shell elements on its geometric surface and a rigid material model (MAT_020 in LS-DYNA) was adopted.The G4 (1s) W-beam guardrail is a semi-rigid barrier system. It consists of rivet-connected steel W-beam rails mounted on steel posts typically spaced at 1.905 m (6 ft. 3 in.). A wood or steel block-out is added between the rails and posts to reduce the chance of vehicle tires snagging on the posts during impacts. Modeling of the W-beam guardrail imposed more challenges than the concrete barrier since more meshes are required to describe the rich details and capture the deformation of the guardrail components. In this study, material properties of the guardrail and soil foundation were obtained from the W-beam guardrail model developed at NCAC [32].The dummy model was first validated using experimental data of a sled test as shown in Fig. 3. The D-Ring, which played an important role in relating the shoulder belt force to retractor force, was modeled using a slip-ring element in LS-DYNA. By adjusting the coefficient of friction μ between the belt and D-ring, better correlation with test data could be reached.In Fig. 3, the kinematics of crash dummy in both the sled test and numerical simulations are compared at three time instants. With the improved dummy model, the kinematic profiles were shown to be consistent with test results, especially the head position and upper body posture. It was also noted that there was a discrepancy between the simulated forearm positions at 150 ms and test data, i.e., the simulated forearm was oriented more vertically comparing to that in the test. Nevertheless, the dummy model was still considered accurate enough in capturing dummy responses based on the time histories of deformations, accelerations and contact forces. Fig. 4shows the simulated chest compression compared to test data. It can be seen that the simulation results match well to test data in both the overall trend and peak value. Fig. 5shows the acceleration histories of the dummy head, chest, and pelvis from the simulation and test. The dummy model was found to be capable of capturing the peak accelerations at these three locations as well as matching the overall trends of the accelerations. Fig. 6 shows the time histories of axial forces in the left and right femur bones from both simulation and sled test. The simulation results were shown to compare favorably with test data. It was also observed that, compared to the original NCAC model in sled test [30], the present dummy model showed improved accuracy in predicting head accelerations and femur forces, which were important to the occupant injury evaluation.Full-frontal crash tests are usually used in crashworthiness analysis to test the restraint system such as airbag, seatbelt and knee bolster. In a full-frontal crash test, a vehicle with a restraint system and a crash dummy impacts a rigid wall at 56.3 km/h (35 mph). The acceleration histories of a test vehicle at different locations were measured by accelerometers and used to study vehicular crashworthiness. Accelerometers were typically mounted at the center of gravity (CG), rear deck, rear seat cross-members, and top and bottom of the engine. All accelerations were measured in the local coordinate systems of the accelerometers and the raw data were filtered using an SAE CFC filter (60 Hz).Using the revised FE model of the pickup truck, a full-frontal impact simulation was performed and the simulated vehicle profiles were compared to test data (see Fig. 7). It was observed from the comparison that the simulated vehicle deformation matched well to testing results. Fig. 8shows the time history of total impact force from the simulation compared to that from the test (i.e., measured by the load cells on the rigid wall). Fig. 9shows the time histories of vehicle accelerations along vehicle longitudinal direction from both simulation results and test data. It can be seen that the simulation results generally matched well to test data, especially on the peak accelerations and their timing. There were noticeably two peaks in the time history of impact forces; the first one was due to the buckling of the pickup truck chassis/frame and the second one was due to the subsequent motion of engine and rear cargo/deck. Since accelerations were affected by impact forces, similar peaks were also observed in the time histories of accelerations at the CG, seat cross-members and rear deck.The dummy responses in the full-frontal impact simulation were also studied and compared with test data, as shown in Fig. 10. The comparison showed that simulation results had a good match with test data on dummy accelerations at three locations, i.e., head, chest, and pelvis. The acceleration histories showed that the peak accelerations occurred at approximately 50 ms on the pelvis, at 70 ms in the chest, and at 80 ms on the head. This observation was consistent with the fact that the load was transferred from the lower body to the upper body. The loads on the dummy were the results of contacting with the vehicle's interior parts, which were categorized into four main groups: (1) the knee impacting the knee bolster; (2) the pelvis and back contacting the seat; (3) head impacting the airbag; and (4) the chest and pelvis being constrained by the seatbelt. While the dummy model captured head accelerations well in the simulation, the simulated peak acceleration on the pelvis lasted approximately 5 ms instead of a sharp peak as seen in test data.Significant challenges existed in validating the combined model, such as interactions between the dummy and vehicle components, particularly the airbag, seatbelt, and seats. Given this level of complexity, on top of the complexity of airbag and seatbelt modeling, more tests are required for the validation of the combined, complex model. Other test scenarios with detailed test data, e.g., offset-frontal impacts, are needed toward a more complete validation. Given the level of difficulty in performing full-scale crash tests, this remains as a challenge to the full validation of a simulation model. Since the main focus of this study was to investigate the difference between the current safety evaluation based on vehicle responses and those based on occupant responses, the partially validated FE model served the purpose of identifying the difference rather than getting the absolute occupant injury levels.Skull fracture and brain injury are the primary concern of head injury due to the high likelihood of life loss. Facial features such as nose could also be injured but there has not been sufficient number of studies performed. Pain and damage to the human brain are not well understood and they are currently believed to be related to compressive and shear forces induced by pressure gradients. Skull fracture has been thoroughly studied and the injury criteria have been established based on the tolerance curve developed at Wayne State University. The skull can typically sustain a high acceleration for a short period of time without being damaged. The injury criteria adopted by the FMVSS No. 208 is the HIC [6] defined as(3)HIC=Max{(t2−t1)[∫t1t2a(t)dt(t2−t1)]2.5}where a(t) is the head resultant acceleration in multiples of the gravitational acceleration (g), and t1 and t2 are two time instants with t1 occurring before t2. By the definition of Eq. (3), HIC depends on both the time interval (t2 − t1) and acceleration history a(t). The most commonly used HIC is HIC15, which is calculated using an interval of 15 ms (i.e., t2 − t1 = 15 ms).The probability of skull fracture [37] is given by(4)p(HIC)=12π∫−∞ln(HIC)−6.963520.84664e−t2/2dtIt can be seen from Eq. (4) that the probability of skull fracture is affected by the HIC value. For example, an HIC15 value of 700 will result in a 31% probability of skull fracture. Thus the chance of skull fracture is small in the case of a small HIC. An intact skull generally provides good protection to the brain, but there is no guarantee that brain injury would not occur even without a skull fracture. To this end, the HIC serves as a direct measurement of skull fracture, but not a direct measurement for brain injury. For example, the rotational acceleration of the brain relative to the skull may cause brain injury without causing skull fracture. In the absence of rotational accelerations, the HIC can still be used as an assessment for the effects of translational accelerations. Currently, there is no substitute criteria that are proven better than the HIC and thus the HIC is still used in federal regulations.Based on cadaver tests, Eppinger et al. [38] developed the TTI criterion that was defined as the average of peak chest acceleration and peak lower spinal acceleration. According to FMVSS No. 214 side impact safety evaluation, the maximum allowable TTI is 85 for a four door vehicle and 90 for a two door vehicle. A study by Mertz et al. [39] demonstrated that the location of the belt on the shoulder and pelvis of the dummy influenced the chest compression and that a 40-mm chest deflection of the Hybrid III dummy was associated with a 25% risk of thoracic injury for belt restrained occupants. Mertz et al. [39] developed the thoracic injury risk curves based on chest compression responses of the Hybrid III dummy with shoulder belt loading compared to car occupants in similar exposures. According to Mertz's injury risk curve for belt-restrained occupants, a 50.8 mm (2 in.) chest compression in the Hybrid III dummy was associated with a 40% risk of injury and a 76.2 mm (3 in.) compression was associated with a 95% risk of injury. For frontal impact tests, the FMVSS No. 208 permits chest acceleration beyond 60 g for a period of less than 3 ms and a maximum 76 mm chest compression.Neck injuries occur when the neck bends exceeding the human limit. Mertz and Patrick [40] developed the maximum acceptable flexion and extension bending moments using sled tests conducted on volunteers and cadaver subjects. As in most studies, tests with human volunteers only provided data up to the pain threshold, and cadaver tests were used to establish the limits for serious injuries. Compression in the neck usually occurs in rollover accidents in which the body weight is applied to the head via neck. Based on measurements made with Hybrid III dummy under impacts of a tackling block that was reported to cause serious head and neck injuries among American football players, Mertz et al. [39] investigated the neck responses and established a maximum value of 4-kN for axial compressive neck loading. The current tolerance levels, 3.3-kN for tension and 3-kN for shear, were developed by Nyquist et al. [8]. They used a Hybrid III 50% male dummy with a three-point belt to reconstruct real-world collisions and correlated test results with occupants’ field injuries. In a frontal impact, the loads on knees along the femur bone could cause dislocation of the hip. With the wide usage of lap belt, the number of pelvis injuries in frontal crashes is largely reduced and pelvis injuries are more often seen in side crashes. In FMVSS No. 208, there is no direct criterion established for pelvis injuries in frontal impact. For side impacts, the maximum allowable acceleration on pelvis is 130 g. Injuries of the lower extremities (i.e., legs, knees, ankles and feet) are often overlooked since they are normally not life threatening. Currently, femur injury criterion is the only lower limb measure that is used in FMVSS, which allows a maximum force of 10-kN on the femur bones. Load levels within this limit are considered safe without causing pelvis injuries. This criterion served as an indirect criterion for pelvis injury and does not address any potential injuries below the knee, though those injuries are frequent and often result in disabilities.Crash test dummies have not been adopted in crash testing of roadside safety devices; state-of-the-art occupant safety is evaluated primarily by examining vehicle responses such as vehicle trajectory and kinetic energy. Occupant injury risk is believed to be affected by impact severity and estimated using criteria developed based on vehicular responses. The severity of an impact may be quantified by impact force, impact velocity, and acceleration, etc. For example, Council and Stewart [41] used peak longitudinal and lateral impact forces (averaged over a moving 50-ms time interval) to the vehicle as a measure of impact severity. Currently, the impact severity and injury evaluation for most roadside barriers are based on the flail space model [42] adopted by MASH. Because there is no real occupant or crash test dummy used, a hypothetical occupant is assumed at the vehicle's CG location and “to be propelled through the vehicle compartment (flail space); to strike the instrument panel, windshield, or side door; and to subsequently ride down the remaining part of the collision event in contact with the vehicle.”Fig. 11a shows the definition of flail space (a 0.6 × 0.6 m square box) in MASH and the occupant impacting the vehicle interior. After initial contact, the occupant is assumed to remain in contact with the vehicle and have the same acceleration as that at the vehicle CG point. Impact severity and occupant risks are evaluated two parameters: (a) occupant impact velocity (OIV), which is the relative velocity between the hypothetical occupant and the instrument panel; and (b) occupant ridedown acceleration (ORA), which is the largest 10-ms average accelerations of the hypothetical occupant during the subsequent ridedown. Although MASH specifies a preferred maximum value of 9.1 m/s for OIV and 15.0 g for ORA, the OIV of 12.20 m/s and the ORA of 20.49 g are also acceptable. In case of relatively small vehicle accelerations and/or very short durations, the occupant impact velocity will be set equal to the vehicle's change in velocity prior and after impacting the barrier. Such impacts, e.g. an impact at 50 km/h and 15° angle, are usually not severe and the OIV and ORA are not evaluated.The European Committee for Normalization (CEN) adopted the theoretical head impact velocity (THIV), post-impact head deceleration (PHD), and acceleration severity index (ASI) as measures of occupant risk. These criteria are recommended but not required in MASH. The concept of THIV, as shown in Fig. 11b, is similar to OIV but also considers yaw motion of the vehicle in calculation and uses a different size of the vehicle interior (a 1.2 × 0.6 m rectangular box). The PHD is the maximum value of the resultant acceleration filtered by a Butterworth low-pass filter with a cut-off frequency of 10 Hz and averaged over a moving 10-ms time period. The ASI is defined as(5)ASI(t)=[(a¯xa^x)2+(a¯ya^y)2+(a¯za^z)2]12wherea¯x,a¯y,a¯zare the 50-ms average vehicle accelerations anda^x,a^y,a^zare the threshold accelerations (a^x= 12 g,a^y= 9 g, anda^z= 10 g). Normally the maximum value of ASI(t) is taken as the single index and the more ASI exceeds unity, the larger the occupant risk to injury. Using ASI and THIV together, the CEN defined three impact severity levels/classes: A, B and C as shown in Table 1. According to CEN, impact severity at level A offers a greater level of safety to the occupant than level B, and level B has a greater safety level than level C[43]. The PHD is not used by CEN in evaluating occupant injury probability and barrier safety performances.The New Jersey concrete barrier and the G4 (1s) W-beam guardrail were used in the evaluation of dummy responses in roadside crash simulations. In the simulations of the vehicle impacting the concrete barrier, four impact speeds and four impact angles were considered, resulting in a total of 16 (4 × 4) simulations. The four impact speeds were 50 km/h (31.1 mph), 70 km/h (43.5 mph), 100 km/h (62.1 mph) and 120 km/h (74.6 mph), and the four impact angles were 15°, 20°, 25° and 30°. In the simulations of the vehicle impacting the W-beam guardrail, four impact speeds and three impact angles were considered, resulting in a total of 12 (4 × 3) simulations. The four impact speeds were the same as those for the concrete barrier and the three impact angles were 20°, 25° and 30°.In this section, the vehicular responses were first obtained and analyzed. Occupant injuries based on vehicular responses and crash dummy responses were then obtained, and finally the two types of criteria were analyzed on their correlations.Vehicular responses in roadside barrier crashes are typically used to evaluate the impact performances of roadside barrier systems, such as the vehicular kinematics and dynamics, and integrity of roadside barriers. Major evaluation criteria for vehicular responses specified in MASH include: (a) the vehicle should be redirected by the barrier, i.e. the vehicle should not be allowed to override or underride the barrier; (b) vehicle should stay upright during the impact, which was met by requiring its pitch and roll angles below 75°; and (c) post-impact vehicle preferably does not intrude into adjacent traffic lanes; this is measured by the exit angle (i.e., the angle between the barrier's longitudinal direction and vehicle traveling direction at time of the vehicle losing contact with the barrier).The yaw, pitch, and roll angles of the vehicle (see Fig. 12) were used to examine the vehicle's orientation and stability in a crash event. The yaw angle indicated how much the vehicle was redirected, and the pitch and roll angles could be used to assess the stability of the vehicle during the crash. Table 2gives the maximum pitch and roll angles of all 16 simulations of vehicle impacting the concrete barrier. It can be seen that all the pitch and roll angles were acceptable except for the case with an impact speed of 100 km/h and a 30° impact angle. As for the post-impact responses, it is important for the vehicle not intruding into adjacent traffic lanes after being redirected by the barrier. One measure of the vehicle's post-impact response is the exit angle, which is defined as the angle between the barrier's longitudinal direction and the vehicle's travel direction at the time when the vehicle loses contact with the barrier. The preferred exit angle should be less than 60% of the initial impact angle as specified by MASH. The exit angles from simulation results of all cases of the vehicle impacting the concrete barrier are shown in Table 2. There were three cases identified with exit angles exceeding the preferred maximum value: (1) at an impact speed of 70 km/h and a 15° impact angle; (2) at an impact speed of 100 km/h and a 15° impact angle; and (3) at an impact speed of 100 km/h and a 30° impact angle. A higher exit angle was not encouraged since it implied a higher likelihood that the vehicle rebounding back into the traffic lanes and exposed to secondary impacts.Fig. 13shows the simulation results of the vehicle impacting the concrete barrier with an impact speed of 100 km/h and at a 25° angle, which is the standard test condition specified by MASH. In this oblique impact, the front-left corner of the truck was the first to contact the barrier, resulting in a lift of the vehicle by the slope at the base of the barrier (see Fig. 13a). The truck was then in contact with the barrier on its left side (Fig. 13b) and was finally redirected (Fig. 13c). In this case, the 2006 Ford F250 was safely redirected and stayed upright during the impact, with an exit angle of 13.35° that met the MASH requirement. Deformation of the vehicle was local and mainly in the left-front corner. The vehicle compartment was intact and thus imposed no harm to the occupant.Occupant responses are rarely evaluated in real-world crash testing but can be closely evaluated in simulations. In the aforementioned case, the airbag installed on the steering wheel deployed at 40 ms but had no contact with the dummy and due to the sideways movement of the dummy (see Fig. 14). The contact force between the dummy and airbag is therefore zero during the impact. It is also observed that the dummy's head impacted the driver-side window, resulting in an acute increase in head acceleration to 100 g at approximately 0.12 s. The examination of acceleration histories of each part of the dummy showed that the maximum acceleration occurred in the head.Table 3summarizes the maximum pitch, roll, and exit angles of a Ford F250 impacting the W-beam guardrail. It can be seen that most of the impact cases had very small pitch and roll angles, except for the impact at 120 km/h and at a 30° impact angle in which the maximum roll angle was 30.9°. In all of the simulated impacts, the pickup truck was shown to have maintained an upright position and thus was stable for the entire impact duration. It was also observed that the vehicle was not safely/smoothly redirected in all impact cases due to vehicle snagging caused by the rail and/or post going behind the wheel and getting entangled (see Fig. 15a). As a result of the entanglement, the vehicle spun around guardrail rather than being smoothly redirected (see Fig. 15b). This is also shown by the negative exit angles given in Table 3. In cases where the vehicle was still in contact with the guardrail at the end of the simulation, the exit angle was not calculated.Similar to the cases of concrete barrier crash, the maximum acceleration occurred in the dummy's head, but the maximum value was less than 25 g and thus much smaller than the maximum acceleration in the case of impacting the concrete barrier. In the case of the W-beam guardrail, the head did not hit the airbag or the drier-side window; so the peak acceleration was mainly due to the neck constraint. Since the W-beam guardrail was flexible and allowed for transverse deflections, the vehicle's kinetic energy was largely absorbed by the guardrail and the impact severity was reduced. The flexibility of the guardrail could be measured from its original (i.e., undeformed) location to the current (i.e., deformed) location, as shown in Fig. 16. Table 4 gives the maximum W-beam deflection for each impact case, varying from 0.50 to 1.99 m. Since larger deflections often imply more severe impacts, the maximum deflection was increased with the increasing of impact speed and impact angle.Two major vehicular responses, the OIV and ORA, are recommended by MASH for evaluating occupant injuries in the crash testing of longitudinal barriers (note that there is no dummy used in these tests). Table 5 shows the x- and y-direction OIVs and ORAs of the Ford F250 in the impacts into the concrete barrier. The x- and y-directions are the longitudinal and transverse directions of the barrier, respectively. According to MASH, the OIVs and ORAs of all these impacts were all acceptable. As a comparison, the impact severity levels adopted by CEN were also determined for the impacts into the concrete barrier, as shown in Table 6. It was found that in six impact cases the occupant risk was unacceptably high (i.e., Level D). This revealed some inconsistencies between the two most commonly used guidelines for evaluating roadside barrier performance.Similarly, the CEN impact severity levels for impacts into the W-beam guardrail were obtained and given in Table 6. In one of these impact cases, the occupant risks were unacceptably high (i.e., Level D). In the impact at 120 km/h and a 30° angle, the pickup truck overrode the guardrail and thus was considered unsafe; the evaluation of occupant injury was unnecessary. The OIVs and ORAs of the Ford F250 impacting the W-beam guardrail were calculated and given in Table 7. According to MASH requirement on OIVs and ORAs, the W-beam guardrail did not exhibit any unacceptable occupant risk in all of these impacts. This evaluation, once again, contradicted to the CEN evaluation of the W-beam guardrail on impact severity. Comparing to the results of the concrete barrier under impacts of the Ford F250, it can be seen that the W-beam guardrail had lower impact severity than the concrete barrier due to the guardrail's flexibility and energy absorption feature during impacts.Impact severity estimations based on vehicular responses, such as the ASI, OIV, ORA, THIV and PHD, may not necessarily be good indications of the occupant injury risk. These criteria only utilize vehicle responses, particularly the vehicle CG accelerations; they neither consider the effects of restraint systems nor can differentiate restraint systems from one to another. For example, if the ASI values are the same, the risk of occupant injury will be considered the same regardless of the types of restraint systems. This is certainly not the case for real world crashes. Furthermore, occupant injuries are different at different locations/parts of the body such as head, neck, chest, pelvis, and legs. Each body part has its own form of injury and thus should have its own threshold values for the specific type of injury. None of these can be indicated by the injury criteria based on vehicle responses such as OIV, ORA, THIV, PHD and ASI. These criteria are at best approximate assessments of the injury at the whole body level.With the aid of numerical modeling, specifically the FE analysis, crash tests of roadside barriers can now be simulated with crash test dummies incorporated into the model. Using these models, a direct injury evaluation can be performed based on dummy responses rather than vehicle responses. For example, occupant risk criteria such as HIC and the maximum chest compression (MCC), which are typically used in frontal impact tests, can be calculated for vehicular impacts into the concrete barrier as well as the W-beam guardrail. According to NHTSA specifications, the HIC15 should be less than 700 and MCC should fall below 76 mm.The HIC15 values of the Ford F250 impacting both the concrete barrier and W-beam guardrail were calculated using accelerations on the head of the crash dummy, as shown in Table 8. In the impacts into the concrete barrier, two cases were found to fail the HIC15 criteria (i.e., HIC15 > 700): at impact speeds of 100 km/h and 120 km/h, both at a 30° impact angle. Recall that the CEN impact severity levels in Table 6 indicated four other cases with severe occupant injuries in addition to the above two cases. This suggested that the CEN standards were more conservative than the HIC15 with a 700 threshold value on injury evaluation in median barrier crashes. On the other hand, the MASH OIV and ORA values in the impacts into the concrete barrier did not indicate any unacceptable occupant risks; this suggested that the injury criteria by MASH might not fully capture the occupant injury risks in vehicular crashes into a concrete barrier.In the impacts into the W-beam guardrail, all the HIC15 values were below the 700 threshold except for the case with an impact speed of 120 km/h and a 25° impact angle, which had an HIC15 of 1442. This unacceptable high HIC15 was caused by the high accelerations in the dummy head that impacted the driver side window. According to the CEN impact severity levels in Table 6, this impact case had an acceptable impact severity level, i.e., Level B. In addition, the OIV and ORA values of this case (see Table 7) were all considered safe by MASH. These inconsistencies implied the necessity of considering crash test dummy responses in the injury evaluation and barrier performance assessment, since only such responses and the corresponding injury criteria could identify severe impacts and injuries on the occupant head, such as the HIC15 criteria. In the next section, the correlations of injury criteria based on dummy responses and those based on vehicle responses are assessed and presented.Despite the strong needs to incorporate occupant injury risks in the design and evaluation of roadside barriers, using a crash test dummy in barrier testing has not been set as a requirement in the current standard (i.e., MASH and CEN). This is due to the complexity of crash testing setup and instrumentation even without the crash test dummy. Nevertheless, a good understanding of the correlation between vehicle responses and occupant injury risks would help improve the barrier designs under current situation as well as provide useful information to update the current standards. With the lack of crash test dummy in the physical testing, this task can be best achieved using computer modeling and simulations. In the work of Council and Stewart [41], they studied the relationship between occupant injury and the peak longitudinal and lateral impact forces on the vehicle averaged over a 50-ms time interval. The results of the study did not indicate any strong correlation between the two responses. Ray et al. [44] investigated the correlation of OIV to HIC15 using test data of three sled tests; their results led to an update to the NCHRP Report 350 to increase the maximum lateral OIV from 9 m/s to 12 m/s. Shojaati [45] studied the results of nine sled tests and suggested using an exponential function to describe the relationship between HIC15 and ASI.In this study, the correlations between injury criteria based on crash dummy responses (i.e., HIC15 and MCC) and those based on vehicular responses (i.e., ASI, THIV, PHD, OIV and ORA) were studied for vehicular impacts into the concrete barrier and W-beam guardrail. For OIV and ORA, the correlations were studied on their longitudinal components (i.e., OIVxand ORAx) and lateral components (OIVyand ORAy). Table 9shows the correlations of HIC15 and MCC with the other seven criteria in the cases of impacting the concrete barrier. For HIC15, a regression function is first created for each of the seven criteria using a quadratic polynomial, which may be replaced by a power-law function if the polynomial function does not have a good R-square value. If both the polynomial and power-law functions do not have good R-square values, the one with higher R-square value is presented in Table 9. The same procedure was applied to MCC; the coefficients of correlation functions and corresponding R-square values are shown in Table 9.It can be seen from the results in Table 9 and Fig. 17 that HIC15 correlated well with ASI, THIV and OIVx, but correlated poorly with PHD, OIVy, ORAxand ORAy. This indicated that ASI, THIV, and OIVxcould be used to calculate the HIC15 value and determine the corresponding occupant injury risk using the correlation functions. The MCC was shown to have poor correlations with all the seven vehicle response based criteria. This was as expected because the vehicle responses were mainly accelerations obtained on locations not even on the passenger restraint systems.For vehicular impacts into the W-beam guardrail, the corrections of HIC15 and MCC with the seven vehicle response based criteria were also obtained and the coefficients of correlation function and R-square values are shown in Table 10. In these cases, the quadratic polynomial functions gave poor R-square values and thus an exponential function was adopted in addition to the power-law function. The coefficients of the functions with better R-square values are shown in Table 10. Fig. 19 shows the correlations between HIC15 and the seven vehicle response based criteria, and Fig. 20 shows the correlation between MCC and the seven criteria.For the case with an impact speed of 120 km/h and a 25° angle, the HIC15 value was abnormally high compared to the cases with 120 km/h at 20° and 30° angles. Thus this case was considered an outlier and was excluded from the correlation analysis. As shown by the results in Table 10, there were no strong correlations found between the HIC15 and all vehicle response based injury criteria except for ASI (see Fig. 19a). It was also observed from Table 10 that the MCC only had a good correlation with THIV (see Fig. 20b), but had no strong correlations with all other vehicle responses based injury criteria (i.e., ASI, PHD, OIV, and ORA). Compared to the cases of vehicular impacts into concrete barriers, the correlations between HIC15 and MCC with vehicle response based criteria were generally weak in the cases of W-beam guardrail. This was due to the large guardrail displacements and deformations during the impacts, in addition to the complicated vehicle-guardrail contacts and interactions. To this end, full-scale crash tests incorporated with crash test dummies are recommended so as to obtain and use occupant responses in the design and evaluation of longitudinal barriers.In this study, a numerical study was performed to address occupant responses and injury risks in the evaluation of roadside barrier safety performance. The finite element models of a Hybrid III crash test dummy and the passive restraint system including airbag, seatbelt, steering column and dashboard were improved using crash test data and incorporated into a 2006 Ford pickup truck model for simulations of roadside barrier crashes. The integrated model was validated by comparing to published experimental data and was shown to have improved numerical stability and accuracy in predicting impact forces and acceleration histories. Crash simulations were then performed on two longitudinal barrier systems: a rigid concrete barrier and a semi-rigid W-beam guardrail. Both the vehicle and occupant responses were extracted from simulation results and occupant injuries were evaluated using criteria based on vehicular responses (i.e., ASI, THIV, PHD, OIV, and ORA) and using those based on dummy responses (i.e., HIC and MCC). Discrepancy was observed on occupant injuries based on the two types of criteria. For example, some crash tests with OIV and/or ORA values below the MASH thresholds had unacceptably high HIC15 values. Among vehicle response based criteria, discrepancy was also found between the CEN and MASH criteria. While the MASH criteria (i.e., OIV and ORA) may underestimate the occupant injury risk, the CEN criteria (i.e., ASI, THIV, and PHD) may overestimate the injury risks. To this end, an accurate assessment of occupant injury should be directly based on occupant responses in addition to vehicular responses.A correlation study was also performed on occupant injury criteria based on dummy responses, specifically the HIC15 and MCC, with those based on vehicular responses (i.e., ASI, THIV, PHD, OIV, and ORA) for both the concrete barrier and W-beam guardrail crash cases. While a good correlation was found between HIC15 and the ASI, THIV, and OIVxin the impacts into concrete barrier, no good correlation is found between HIC15 and other criteria and between MCC and all vehicle response based criteria. For impacts into the W-beam guardrail, good correlation was only found between HIC15 and THIV and between MCC with ASI. The lack of generally good correlations between the two types of criteria indicated the need of incorporating occupant responses in the design and evaluation of roadside barrier systems. It should be noted that the numerical simulation results and observations from this study should not be taken as definitive conclusions. Full-scale crash tests incorporated with crash test dummies are recommended to verify the numerical results and further validate the simulation models. Nevertheless, the discrepancies observed in this study between criteria based on occupant responses and those based on vehicular responses reinforce the needs to use o ccupant responses directly in the evaluation of safety performance of roadside barrier systems.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
