@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A relationship-based and object-oriented software for monitoring management during geotechnical excavation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A software for geotechnical excavation monitoring was developed.Seven objects were used to describe monitoring object hierarchical relations.Two objects representing and managing construction progress were extracted.An object-oriented data structure was proposed.The software features high scalable for various geotechnical projects.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Geotechnical monitoring,Software development,Relationship-based,Hierarchical structure,Object-oriented,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The efficient management of monitoring data is necessary for large geotechnical engineering projects. The development of an information management, prediction and warning software system for geotechnical monitoring is presented in this study. Seven categories of property objects that describe the hierarchical relationships among the monitoring objects, as well as two objects that represent and manage the construction progress, are proposed based on the requirements of geotechnical monitoring, data flow and the monitoring objectives of the site. The corresponding data structure and database were established using the object-oriented method in the Visual C++ environment. The software integrated various types of information and document management schemes, including data input and processing, CAD drawing visualisation, data modelling and prediction, as well as an early warning function. The applied case studies indicate that the software system is highly flexible and reliable and can be widely applied to monitor the sites of various geotechnical construction projects, such as tunnels, underground caverns, slopes and foundation pits.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The monitoring of the construction of large civil engineering projects, such as hydropower and metro projects, usually features long construction periods, complex geological conditions and busy sites. The efficient management of large amounts of monitoring data and construction information, including monitoring data acquisition and processing, safety assessment and feedback, is imperative to ensure the quality and safety of the construction project [1,2]. Determining the correlations between different monitoring variables, construction progress, geological conditions, environmental variables and the changes in these factors over time using extremely abundant monitoring information is essential. These correlations and trends are used to guide the construction and rectify problems. Accomplishing this task in time by manually collecting and analysing relevant documents without support from professional software is difficult. Currently, geotechnical engineering monitoring information can be managed via three types of methods:(1)For small projects with a simple structure, geology and surrounding conditions, fewer monitoring data are needed. In these situations, contractors generally use common data processing software (e.g., Microsoft Excel) to manage the observation results, but some additional simple developments (such as Excel VBA) are occasionally needed tostore and compute data, plot charts, analyse trends andgenerate reports. Sometimes, the drawings are managed by common CAD software, and the documents are managed by word processing software. Professional software that integrates information management and analysis is seldom used in such projects.Self-developed or integrated monitoring software systems are generally adopted for projects that require higher levels of data analysis and timely feedback. These situations are often mid-size and large projects with relatively complicated structure, geology and surrounding conditions that produce extremely large quantities of monitoring data. A number of software systems with different functions are currently available. For instance, GDMS, a fully functional system for design and construction management, developed by the GeoData Corporation, Italy, supports remote automated data collection, automatic alarms, CAD drawing visualisations and tunnel construction progress management based on a geographic information system (GIS) and web technology. However, this program is not convenient to use because of its complexity [3]. Vista Data Vision (VDV), another web-based geotechnical engineering data management system with full functions, features curve chart comparisons and vector drawing visualisations based in Google Maps. However, sometimes certain elements of this program are unsatisfactory, especially regarding construction progress, document management and information exchange among participants during construction [4]. GEOSCOPE, which is similar to VDV, was developed based on GIS and also cannot manage construction progress [5]. SYTGEOScop, a monitoring management software program, is characterised by remote data collection, alarms and charts, but does not include CAD drawing visualisations, document management or progress management [6]. Geo-Engrade, which is similar to SYTGEOScop in its major functions, is known for its small size [7]. The GGU GmbH Corporation also developed a series of independent software known as GGUs. They are GGU-TIME GRAPH, GGUCAD and GGU-GEO GRAPH, which together satisfy various geotechnical engineering requirements. However, these programs were not integrated into one system, which represents a problem. Additionally, many other researchers have developed various software systems for the purpose of monitoring management [8–12]. All of these systems were essentially developed in GIS or CAD, and they achieve similar functions but still suffer from some of the shortcomings mentioned above.Expert systems and decision support systems, e.g. the Decision Aids for Tunnelling (DAT), are well-known programs that focus on tunnel construction schedule arrangement, cost analysis and decision making. However, professional knowledge and skills are required to use these programs [13,14]. By using the fuzzy set theory and GIS, Cheng et al. developed a monitoring-data-based risk decision support system for foundation pit excavation [15].Generally, the main shortcomings of the previously mentioned existing software systems can be summarised as follows:(1)If tasks, including management, analysis and the querying of the collected multi-source information are not performed in the same software, good comparisons, correlation analyses and automation in the application are difficult to obtain. For instance, conducting comparative and consistency analyses among different types of monitoring data is difficult (i.e. generally, different types of nearby instruments should report similar information; if not, differences will exist). The correlation between the monitoring data and the construction progress (e.g. a chart of crown settlement vs. distance between settlement point and working face) also becomes difficult to compute. The above analyses are very important to quickly discern the main reasons for abnormal variations in the monitoring data.Geotechnical engineering monitoring is always poorly understood and a systematic design for the management of monitoring objects is always lacking. Thus, comprehensively and effectively demonstrating the complicated relationships between monitoring objects is not convenient, which leads to a poor flexibility in the software systems.Representing and managing construction progress is insufficient. This fatal defect needs to be solved because the principal purpose of a monitoring system is to analyse the correlation between monitoring data and construction progress. Additionally, insufficient attention is paid to document management, information exchange among participating construction organisations and other aspects.Many systems do not sufficiently support vector drawings that provide good visualisation experiences for users in practice. These systems also usually lack a bidirectional link to the property/data window from drawing windows (i.e. the ability to easily switch between these windows via a shortcut menu or right-click menu).As mentioned above, current monitoring systems do not fully and effectively apply data collected at high costs. Thus, satisfying the strict requirements of the owners, designers and contractors is difficult [16–18]. In fact, site managers and engineers are eager to have a comprehensive monitoring software system rather than a system with a single function, as described above. In this context, the main functions of the monitoring software systems are listed as follows: ① database technologies can be used for various operations, such as management; the storing, sharing and querying of the monitoring data; relevant design; geological investigation; construction progress and other multimedia information; ② spreadsheet technology can be used to input, process and analyse monitoring data; generate curve charts and produce reports; ③ links between the monitoring data and relevant properties in CAD drawings for investigation, design and monitoring can be constructed; ④ statistical and numerical analytical algorithms can be used to predict trends, identify risk, evaluate projects and provide early warnings.A comprehensive geotechnical engineering monitoring software program was developed in this study by integrating the above-mentioned four functions and a case application is presented. This software is convenient for users to gain a clearer and fuller understanding of the general situation of the whole project, construction progress, safety conditions and potential risks. Additionally, information querying, risk identification, online communication and information publishing are easily performed. This system has the advantage of closely connecting all construction participants to facilitate information search, exchange and feedback in a convenient and timely manner.For a geotechnical monitoring system to be easy to operate, its main function must be information management. This function depends on the efficiency of the database structure and the structure of the data, which describes the complicated relationships among various monitoring objects.Monitoring points are the basic objects managed by the monitoring system. Each point is associated with several properties, including instrument types, instrument parameters and installation information, such as drilled borehole, coordinates, monitoring section, building or contract. These properties not only comprise the basic information of each monitoring point but also reflect the multiple relationships among various monitoring objects.By analysing the logical relationships between monitoring procedures and monitoring objects in geotechnical engineering construction, seven types of objects were extracted in this study as the basic elements to organise the system data: engineering project, contract section, project unit, section, monitoring point type, monitoring points group and monitoring point (Fig. 1). These seven objects are briefly described below using a metro project as an example. This classification is also applicable to other similar geotechnical engineering projects.(1)Engineering project (Project): this element represents a specific construction project. For example, a metro line construction can be regarded as a project that includes several contract sections.Contract section (Contract): each contract section is implemented by an independent contractor. A contract section includes several project units.Project unit (Unit): this element refers to a relatively independent unit within one contract section. For instance, one station or one section of a tunnel can be viewed as a project unit.Monitoring section (Section): monitoring points are always installed along a certain plane, which is called the monitoring section. Each project unit contains several monitoring sections.Types of monitoring points (Point type): multiple monitoring methods may be applied to one section and different instruments are used to obtain physical variables for the purpose of corroboration. Each point type can contain several groups.Groups of monitoring points (Group): this element refers to a group of monitoring points of the same point type. Points from the same group are always distributed closely and observed simultaneously.Monitoring point (Point): this element can either be an installed sensor, a convergence line or a settlement monitoring point.In addition, the concept of a “face” object, “layer” object and “construction step” are used to describe the construction progress. A “face” object describes the horizontal block construction within the project unit, while a “layer” object represents the vertical layering construction within the same face. The “construction step” records the specific construction procedure within a certain “layer.” Therefore, the construction progress of all faces can be dynamically traced and managed by combining the recorded information of horizontal and vertical construction procedures. Thus, the developing trends in the monitoring data, along with the construction progress, can be conveniently analysed. This methodology is explained further below (also, see Fig. 1):(1)The face describes the horizontal construction: Whenseveral parallel and vertical planes cut a project unit, various entities with definite vertical boundaries and the same horizontal excavation direction are formed. Each entity represents a face. For example, when a tunnel is excavated using the centre diagram (CD) method, the left and right pilot tunnels may be defined as two faces. The face object is subordinate to a project unit, which usually contains several faces.The layer describes the vertical construction: A vertical block cut by various horizontal planes within the same face is called a “layer”. For example, the left pilot tunnel mentioned above can be divided into 3 layers: the upper bench, the lower bench and the inverted arch.Construction step: Each layer records several key construction procedures. For example, the “upper bench” consists of three construction steps: excavation, primary lining and secondary lining.The seven property objects and two construction progress objects employed in this study are expected to be able to summarise the complicated logical relationships among various monitoring objects. These relationships include not only the spatial affiliation but also take the temporal construction procedures into account.Although the 7+2 object concepts are extracted from tunnel construction, they are also effective for other geotechnical projects, such as pit and slope engineering. The use of project, contract, point type, group and point in pit engineering is identical to that in tunnel engineering. However, the unit and section slightly differ. Each pit may be viewed as a project unit, and the different types of monitoring targets around the pit (e.g. nearby buildings, roads and support structures) may be viewed as various “sections.” Thus, the term “monitoring target” may be better than “section” in pit engineering. As for the description of the construction procedure, the concepts of face, layer and construction step are suitable for describing all excavation and supporting actions in geotechnical engineering, but they do not appropriately describe the filling procedure. Hence, an assessment should be performed when using this system for dam projects.The objects mentioned above constitute the property information of the system (property library). The point objects are related to the monitoring data (data library) and CAD drawing documents (graphics library), while the layer objects are associated with the construction progress library. The processing, analysing and charting of the monitoring data; report generation; trend prediction; warnings and other functions are performed in the data library.By the way, the hierarchical relationships among 7+2 object are basic and already exist in engineering; it should not be called innovative. However, the development of a practical engineering software using existing theories is meaningful in solving engineering problems.Data tables for the 7+2 objects are established in the relational database. The linked fields in the tables in Fig. 2, where only the main fields are listed, show the relationships between objects.The monitoring data are stored in 2 database tables. The first one contains the original data table for storing actually observed data (Table 1), such as the elevation in settlement observation due to the total station or frequency record due to the vibrating wire stress gauge. The other contains computed data table for storing processed data (Table 2), which were computed from original data using a certain formula, e.g. transforming frequencies to stresses. The data table is divided into 2 tables to increase the efficiencies of the query because computed data are queried much more often than original data during daily use.The programming implementation of the relationships between monitoring objects is illustrated below using the Visual C++ platform which contains very strong type-safe data structures. CMap, CList and CArray are applied as the base classes to derive the data class during system development.All monitoring objects generated by the system are stored in the “PropTree” database table, whose fields and meanings are listed in Table 3. The relationships among all property objects can be traced by the cascading of “object index and ParentIndex” in the PropTree table.The property objects with nesting relationships are shown on the interface using a hierarchical tree control (CTreeCtrl), in which each node represents a specific property object. The ItemData structure of the tree nodes is assigned the “object index” of the property object. The nesting level and the ownership of tree nodes also represent the relationships among the property objects.Based on CMap, Class CMapIndex2Node maps the “object index” of the property objects onto the structure stTreeNode for the tree nodes. The members of stTreeNode are the fields of the PropTree table.struct stTreeNode{TCHAR chName[MAX_NUM];//object name of the tree nodeint nDBID; //object IDint nType; //object typeHTREEITEM hItem; //handle of tree node that can be used to call the member function of CTreeCtrlint lParentIndex; //object index of parent nodeint nPnType; // point type of the node……};class CMapIndex2Node: public CMap <int, int&, stTreeNode∗, stTreeNode∗&>{public:CMapIndex2Node ();void Serialize (CArchive& ar);∼CMapIndex2Node ();……} m_MapIndex2Node;During the initialisation stage, the system first reads the PropTree table from the database to obtain all property objects and then constructs all nodes of the tree control and class m_MapIndex2Node simultaneously. The ItemData of the tree nodes are assigned as the “object index” of the PropTree and mapped onto the stTreeNode.In this circumstance, the “index” of property objects can be obtained from the ItemData of the tree nodes, which will then be mapped onto the stTreeNode via m_MapIndex2Node. The node type, as well as its ID in the database and the point type, can be revealed from the node struct stTreeNode. Thus, all property object tables and associated data can be queried using this ID. Therefore, the property objects in the entire system are comprehensively and clearly stored and accessed. Fig. 3shows their relationships and implementation.The system was developed based on C/S using Visual Studio 2010, and the database was based on the MS SQL Server 2008, supported by Windows XP, Windows 2003 and Windows 7.The system data flow is illustrated in Fig. 4. The overall system design framework is shown in Fig. 5. The monitoring database includes the following: ① a property library centred on monitoring objects; ② a data library associated with monitoring objects; ③ a graphics library in which various CAD drawings and image data are stored; ④ a library that manages the construction progress of layers; and ⑤ an auxiliary information library, related to the participant organisations, personnel, received/delivered documents, instrument maintenance and other information involved in construction. In addition, the system database is used to process and analyse the monitoring data, produce charts and reports, evaluate risk, and generate predictions and warnings. These results are shared with the owners, designers, supervisors, contractors, monitoring staff and other construction participants through the Intranet/Internet.This geotechnical engineering monitoring management system was implemented based on the object-oriented programming method, and various main objects were established, including monitoring points of all types, curve charts, prediction models, construction progress, CAD drawings, pictures, documentation, etc. The point object corresponds to the property class and the data input classes, which contain various monitoring instrument types, such asmulti-extensometer and settlement point. In addition, global objects, such as CMapIndex2Node, process the complicated relationships between monitoring objects.Major classes are explained briefly as follows and their inheritance relationships are shown in Fig. 6.(1)CMoniSysApp is an application class that implements some structures and interfaces for handling the relationships among all monitoring points and pictures.CMoniSysView is a system view class. It is also the common parent class of CPointProp and CPointData. CMoniSysView encapsulates the functions of database operation, such as reading, writing and querying, and contains the interfaces for CAD drawing.CMoniSysDoc is a system document class, which includes interfaces of construction progress of contract sections or project units, monitoring log management, report management, etc.CPointProp is the parent class of all monitoring point property classes formed by common properties extracted from different types of points. Specific point property class, such as multi-extensometer and settlement class, is derived from CPointProp. These specific point property classes provide the property input interfaces with their own characteristics and achieve the virtual functions of their parent class. These functions include inserting, deleting and the modification of property records.CPointData is the parent class of all monitoring data classes and is abstracted from the data input interfaces of different point types. Specific point data classes such as classes of the multi-extensometer and settlement are derived from CPointData. These point property classes provide data input interfaces with their own characteristics and manipulation functions which include data input table control; data input, storage and modification; error check, computation and statistics; modelling and prediction; chart drawing and a III level warning system, according to monitoring data control standards.CMyCADDrawing is a graphics class used to manage, visualise and edit CAD drawing documents that are relevant to monitoring work. It also generates a bidirectional link between the property/data of monitoring points and the graphical elements (e.g. a circle in a layout drawing denotes a settlement point) by establishing the association between the seven property objects and corresponding graphical elements.CMyChart is a curve chart plotting class, which produces and visualises various time series curves and spatial distribution charts of monitoring data.CProgress is a construction progress class used to store the construction progress of layers, record monitoring logs and dynamically manage the construction progress.CModer, a data modelling class for data development trend prediction, encapsulates several commonly used mathematical models in geotechnical monitoring, such as the BP neural network, Verhulst, grey and time series models. Using CModer and these mathematical models, development trends in monitoring data can be predicted, and potential hazards can be identified. Warnings may also be triggered if the data rapidly change. The mathematical models are not been introduced in detail because they are familiar to readers and the relevant references are easily accessed.Programming practice revealed that the object-oriented method can clearly capture the relationships among the major objects in the monitoring system and naturally form the functional module. The object’s function is built in, whereas the association with other objects is achieved by calling their open interfaces. The module enjoys good encapsulation, high cohesion and low coupling. The system developed using the object-oriented method is easily maintainable, highly reliable, expandable and reusable.The object-oriented method is not absolutely perfect. Unfortunately, a unified concept or object-oriented idea for global objects is lacking, and the corresponding effective representation is insufficient. Furthermore, the object-oriented method still leads to code-level reuse. However, acquiring all source code is difficult in most cases because this code originates from different software developers, which necessitate the integration and reuse at the binary-level. This process constitutes the further development of the object-oriented method Component Object Module (COM).The Wucun Tunnel is a six-lane tunnel located on the Chenggong Expressway, Xiamen City, Fujian Provence, southeast China. This single tunnel has 13.5m net width and 5.0m net height. The JC3 contract section, which is 650m long, was constructed using shallow-buried excavation methods. This project faced significant challenges, including complex geological conditions, old infrastructure and complicated construction. ① The groundwater table was located only 2–4m beneath the surface. The top of the tunnel entrance is embedded at a depth of 9–27m in the subgrade fill. The surrounding rocks of the tunnel are mainly loose and consist of soft residual silty clay and intensely to completely weathered fragmental granite with gravel-shaped. According to the Chinese Code for Highway Engineering Geological Investigation (JTG C20-2011), approximately 50% of the surrounding rocks are of grades of V and VI, which can easily deteriorate into quicksand in the presence of water. This rock shows a poor self-stability and serious excavation difficulties. ② Numerous old buildings and underground pipelines are situatedabove the tunnel. Fourteen buildings located just above the tunnel, 20 buildings are partially located over it and another 61 buildings are located within 50m of the tunnel (Fig. 7). This overlying infrastructure necessitates adequate protection during tunnel construction. Most of these old buildings consist of less than 7 floors of masonry structure and a natural foundation; only a few were built with a frame structures. Furthermore, several buildings contained cracks (identified as general-damage buildings) prior to tunnel construction. ③ A complex construction process is needed, due to the nature of the two shallowly buried, large span and close-spaced tunnels. The entrance was constructed using the centre cross diaphragm (CRD) method and the CD method was adopted in the inclined shaft area. Uneven ground settlement and damage to overlying buildings constitutes the highest risk for the construction of this tunnel. Therefore, an independent, third-party monitoring scheme was selected. The monitoring covers the settlement of buildings (structure), ground surface and pipelines; building (structure) inclination; the crack and blast vibration; the surrounding soil layered settlement; the underground water level; the tunnel convergence and crown settlement. The uneven settlement of key buildings was automatically monitored using electronic liquid level gauges.Due to the large quantity of monitoring data, the system software developed according to the above-mentioned method was applied to this project, to accelerate the information feedback, processing, analysis and early warnings. The following is a brief introduction of methods to implement this system via the proposed concepts and methodologies.(1)First, 7 objects were extracted and the system property library was formed. In this case, the entire Chenggong Expressway monitoring is the “project.” The project contains two contracts: the twin-tube tunnel (JC3) and a 1200m long cut-and-cover deep pit (JC2). Two “project units”, the entrance unit and the shaft unit, were defined for different construction methods in the JC3 contract. The entrance unit includes several sections. The “experimental section” is the first section of the JC3 contract, which the contractor used to examine the rationality of their construction methods. Several types of instruments (point type), such as uneven (differential) building settlement, building cracks, underground water table, crown settlement and convergence of tunnel, were installed in the experimental section. Each building (#104,#105,…,etc.) was viewed as a group while processing uneven (differential) building settlement. Each real single settlement point (or point from another point type) installed on a building represented a “point” in the system.After the property library was formed, the actual point data, such as the point type of building settlement, including the observed time and elevations measured by optical level, were input. Subsequently, the settlements accumulated since the initial time were calculated and stored in a database. After the data for all points were input, the data library was established.The graphics library managed all digital CAD drawing documents used in the system, including monitoring the work layout, profiles, design drawings and geological maps. These drawing files can be loaded into the database and may be viewed, zoomed, panned and edited such as in a real AutoCAD environment.The progress library was built as follows. For instance, the CRD construction method was adopted for the entrance unit. The twin tube tunnel consisted of four “faces”; each single tube consisted of two faces (left and right). Two “layers” comprised each face for a total of eight layers (CRD1-CRD8, Fig. 8). For each layer, the mileage of the working face, geological condition, observed time and other construction information were stored in the database, forming the progress library.The auxiliary library managed information that involved control standard values, personnel, participant organisations, instrument maintenance and other necessary information. For this case, the designer provided two control standard values, the maximum accumulated values and maximum variation velocity for each type of point type. Additionally, a III level warning management rule was adopted (Table 4).Finally, the most important applications can be implemented based on the data in 5 libraries established by the users. This implementation is illustrated as follows. After the client computers were connected to the server and the software was initiated, the wallpapers of the client computers were compulsorily refreshed to the latest construction status, as shown in Fig. 8. The construction progress of JC3 tunnel was displayed using a colour filling (a beige fill represents an unexcavated tunnel, while pink and purple denote the progress of different layers), and the current construction mileages of the major tunnel layers were listed in the lower right corner. The magenta colour of buildings indicates that the buildings lie just over the tunnel, the yellow colour indicates only parts of the buildings are over the tunnel, and the green colour indicates the buildings do not intersect the tunnel (Fig. 8). If accumulated values (current values minus initial values) or variation rates (relative to previous observation) exceeded the I–III warning levels after new data were input, especially the monitoring data measured by total station, optical level or many other instruments, these values or rates are identified and corresponding reports are generated automatically. In this case, an alarm message would automatically notify the client computers and an alarm voice would be activated. Furthermore, short alarm messages would simultaneously be sent to specific mobile phones registered in the system.When the monitoring layout drawing is shown on a screen (in a drawing window, e.g. Fig. 9, which displays all monitoring points and provides shortcut menus to data window and chart window), the monitoring points that contain accumulated values or variation rates that exceeded the I, II or III warning levels would be marked in yellow, orange and red, respectively (Table 4, Fig. 9). Points that show variation rates that exceed the III warning level would flash to attract attention. Once a warning activates, the user would likely want to know detailed information about the point. These operations are very convenient in this software. For example, to learn more, the user can be guided to property, data and chart windows via right-clicking or a shortcut menu in the CAD drawing window or vice versa (jumping from data window Fig. 10or chart window Fig. 11to drawing window Fig. 9). This easy-to-use function is called a bidirectional link of the drawing-property/drawing-data/drawing-chart. Furthermore, the system can predict developmental trends for the monitoring data for the next few days by using data modelling technology, such as the logarithm function, exponential function, hyperbola, polynomial moving average, grey model and BP neural network. By comparing prediction values with the control standards, the safety of the construction in the predicted period could be accessed, to some extent (Fig. 12).Moreover, a large LED screen (4m×1.5m) was installed at the site headquarters, where it continuously broadcasted the monitoring information (text, chart, data), construction progress, alarm messages and general project descriptions (Fig. 13).With the collection and storage of abundant monitoring data, corresponding geological data and construction progress, this system can greatly help users to conveniently browse, search and analyse these data; conduct comparison analyses to find the cause of abnormal developments in the data; and assess the safety status according to the III level warning management rule. Thus, reliable decisions can be made.The Chenggong Expressway project was smoothly monitored using this system without structural or environmental accidents, and the original plan to relocate more than 50 families in building #34 was cancelled. Therefore, money was saved, and the normal life of the local residents was guaranteed. This system played a beneficial role by facilitating quick decision-making, environmental risk protection and information sharing among construction participants. Furthermore, the system was also successfully applied to monitor construction safety at the Xiaowan Hydropower station, Yunnan Provence, southwest China.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presents the development and methodology of a software system for monitoring information management, accident prediction and warning in geotechnical engineering construction. Targeting the requirements of the site contractors, supervisors and managers, this system integrates database management, data input and processing, CAD drawing visualisation and bidirectional property/data links to drawings, as well as data modelling and prediction.Due to the geotechnical engineering monitoring data flow, 7+2 property objects were extracted to describe the hierarchical relationships among the monitoring objects. The structure of the relationships and database were defined, and the source code was developed in the Visual C++ environment. Due to the object-oriented method, the software system is highly flexible and can be widely applied to monitor the construction of geotechnical engineering projects, such as tunnels, slopes and foundation pits. A application of this system demonstrated that it not only can offer an intuitive overall view of monitoring work but can also discover risks as soon as possible and provide instant feedback to the construction managers.It should be noted that the theoretical models incorporated in this paper are not innovative ones, however, the development strategy and the practical application of an engineering software may present some useful references. For improvement, further research is needed to investigate the incorporation of a structural computation and numerical analysis module into the software to establish a computer-aided design system. Risk assessment and decision-support functions should also be included to form an expert-level system.