@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The verification of the quantities of interest based on energy norm of solutions by node-based smoothed finite element method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Propose a verification method for the quantities of interest using NS-FEM.Find two kinds of energy norm of solutions possessing upper bound attribute.Extend to the computation of bound on the quantities of interest in elastic problems.Examine the bounding and convergence property of the energy norms of solutions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Bounds,Node-based smoothed finite element method,Finite element method,Verification,Quantity interest,Elasticity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Verification of the quantities of interest computed with the finite element method (FEM) requires an upper bound on the strain energy, which is half of the energy norm of displacement solutions. Recently, a modified finite element method with strain smoothing, the node-based smoothed finite element method (NS-FEM), has been proposed to solve solid mechanics problems. It has been found in some cases that the energy norm formed by the smoothed strain of NS-FEM solutions bounds the energy norm of exact displacements from above. We analyze the bounding property of this method, give three kind of energy norms of solutions computed by FEM and NS-FEM, and extend them to the computation of an upper bound and a lower bound on the linear functional of displacements. By examining the bounding property of NS-FEM with different energy norms using some linear elastic problems, the advantages of NS-FEM over the traditional error estimate based methods is observed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
One problem with the FEM is the verification of the finite element solutions; this leads to the development of error bound methods for providing the evaluations of the global quality of finite element analyses [1–6]. In engineering design, verification of the computation of the quantities of interest plays an important role in improving the structural design for safety, such as the displacements at a point, the stresses in a local area and the stress intensity factors at crack tips. Some verification methods have been proposed for computing upper and lower bounds on quantities of interest that are the functions of displacements [7–10], and a key ingredient of these methods is the computation of global upper and lower bounds on the total strain energy.It is known that finite element approximations based on the potential energy principle and the complementary energy principle produce a lower bound and an upper bound on the total strain energy, respectively [11]. The former is referred to as the displacement method, the latter the equilibrium method, which is not commonly used in the commercial softwares for the difficulties arising in handling the boundary conditions [11–14]. In recent years, the methods for the computation of guaranteed upper bound on the energy norm of the exact error in the finite element solutions have been developed [15–20], which provided an alternative approach for finding an upper bound on the strain energy by solving independent subproblems based on elements or patches. In these methods, boundary loads on element edges are needed to construct elemental independent subproblems for solving the equilibrium stresses, or the boundary loads on element edges are waived in constructing the patch based independent subproblems to solve the equilibrium stresses, that is the so called flux-free methods.Recently, a modified finite element method with strain smoothing, the node-based smoothed finite element method (NS-FEM), has been proposed to solve solid mechanics problems. It has been found that the strain energy computed by NS-FEM bounds the exact strain energy from above in the computational experiments [21–26]. This method was first proposed to develop a stabilized nodal integration scheme for the Galerkin mesh-free method by introducing a strain smoothing stabilization to compute nodal strains by a divergence counterpart of a strain spatial averaging [27].In this study we analyze the bounding properties of the NS-FEM, and give some inequalities for comparing different energy norms of displacements computed by the FEM and the NS-FEM. We also extend this method to compute the upper and lower bounds on the functions of displacements, and all of the examples are specifically chosen, such as tension, bending problems with different boundary conditions, and the problem with stress concentration, to show the performance of the method.This paper is organized as follows, in Section 2 the problem statement and definitions are introduced. In Section 3 the NS-FEM and some properties are briefly described thereof. In Section 4 the upper and lower bounds on the linear functionals of solutions are derived, and some lemmas and remarks to these bounds are given. In Section 5 some numerical experiments are reported and commented on. Finally some conclusions are drawn in the last section.For simplifying the expression of the method in this paper, we only consider the equations of two dimensional linear elasticity. Let us consider a bounded elastic bodyΩ⊂R2, the boundary ofΩis assumed piecewise smooth, and composed of Dirichlet portionΓDand Neumann portionΓN, i.e.∂Ω=ΓD∪ΓN‾. The strong form of the problem reads: finduinV={v∈(H1(Ω))2|v=0onΓD}, such that-Dσ(u)=finΩ,subject toNσ(u)=tonΓN, whereH1(Ω)denotes the usual Sobolev space,uDthe displacement onΓD, andD=∂∂x10∂∂x20∂∂x2∂∂x1,is the differential operator matrix,fthe load,tthe prescribed boundary traction. Stressσ(u)=σ11,σ22,τ12Tis related to strainε(u)=DTu=ε11,ε22,2γ12Tby the material law,σ(u)=Eε(u), in whichEis the matrix of elastic moduli,E=λ+2μλ0λλ+2μ000μ,whereλandμare Lame’s constants,μ=E2(1+ν), andλ=Eν(1+ν)(1-2ν)for plane strain problem,λ=Eν1-ν2for plane stress problem, here E andνare Young’s elastic modulus and Poisson’s ratio, respectively.Nis the matrix constructed withn1andn2that are the components of the unit external normal vectornonΓN,N=n10n20n2n1.The weak form of the above equation reads: finduinVsuch that∫ΩεT(u)Eε(v)dΩ=ℓ(v)∀v∈V,in whichℓ(v)=∫ΩfTvdΩ+∫ΓNtTvdΓ. The energy norm associated with the bilinear form∫ΩεT(·)Eε(·)dΩis defined as‖v‖2=∫ΩεT(v)Eε(v)dΩ.In order to obtain an approximate solution of the weak problem (2), a finite-dimensional counterpart of all these variational forms given above can be built using the Galerkin FEM. We denoteVh⊂Vthe finite element spaces of continuous functions that are piecewise polynomials of degreer⩾1. The corresponding finite element solution inVhis denoted byuhand satisfies the equation:(1)∫ΩεT(uh)Eε(v)dΩ=ℓ(v)∀v∈Vh.Now let us consider the output, which is a linear functional of the solutionudefined asℓO(u), i.e.ℓO:(H1(Ω))2↦R. Similar toℓ(u),ℓO(u)should has the form asℓO(v)=∫ΓOpTvdΓ. Since the output is used in the right hand side of the dual problem defined as follows, it is required that the outputs depend explicitly on the solutionu. In order to derive upper and lower bounds on the outputℓO(u), we introduce the following adjoint or dual problem: finduD∈Vsuch that(2)∫ΩεT(v)Eε(uD)dΩ=ℓO(v)∀v∈V,and the corresponding finite element approximation,uhD∈Vh⊂V, such that(3)∫ΩεT(v)Eε(uhD)dΩ=ℓO(v)∀v∈Vh.In this paper, we use the simplest two dimensional elements, the linear triangular elements, to implement the above primal and dual problems.Let us partition the computational domainΩinto smoothing subdomainsΩ¯=Ω¯1∪Ω¯2∪…∪Ω¯NwithΩi∩Ωj=∅ifi≠j, where N is the number of finite element nodes (including the nodes onΓD) located in the entire computational domain, and for every nodek=1,…,N, the smoothing domainΩkis obtained by connecting sequentially the mid-edge point to the centroid of the surrounding triangles of the node as shown in Fig. 1.Given any strain fieldε, the smoothed strain fieldεˆon each smoothing domainΩkis obtained by a nodal smoothing operation asεˆk=∫Ωkωk(x-xk)εdΩ,whereωk(x)is a diagonal matrix of the smoothing functionωk(x)that is positive and normalized to unity:∫Ωkωk(x)dΩ≡1.The smoothed strainεˆkis a constant over the smoothing domainΩk. For two-dimensional elasticity problems the diagonal matrix can be chosen to beωk(x)=diag{ωk(x),ωk(x),ωk(x)}. For simplicity the smoothing functionωk(x)is taken asωk(x-xk)=1/Ak,ifx∈Ωk,0,otherwise,whereAk=∫ΩkdΩis the area of the smoothing domainΩk. Therefore, the smoothed strain in the smoothing domainΩkwill be(4)εˆk=1Ak∫ΩkεdΩ.The NS-FEM is obtained by replacing in the weak form (2) the exact strain fieldεwith the nodally smoothed strain fieldεˆ. The NS-FEM solutionuˆhis an approximation of the solution,u, to the partial differential equation of elasticity. Denote byΦithe shape function matrix for node i, for example for two-dimensional problems the shape function matrixΦi(x)=ϕi(x)00ϕi(x),in whichϕi(x)is the shape function for node i. The NS-FEM solution is then expressed as(5)uˆh=∑i=1NΦi(x)uˆhi,whereuˆhi=uˆ1i,uˆ2iTis the vector of displacements at node i. Since the strain field is given by the derivatives of displacement, we define the approximate strain obtained from the approximate displacements asε(uˆh), that is(6)ε(uˆh)=∑i=1NDTΦi(x)uˆhi.Then according to (4) by replacingεwithε(uˆh)we obtain the smoothed strainεˆk,(7)εˆk(uˆh)=1Ak∫Ωkε(uˆh)dΩ,and, more specifically,εˆk(uˆh)=1Ak∑i=1N∫ΩkDTΦi(x)dΩuˆhi=1Ak∑i∈Nk∫ΩkDTΦi(x)dΩuˆhi,whereNkincludes all nodes in the patchΩ¯kthat is formed by the elements sharing node k. The strain energy in the smoothing domainΩkis∫ΩkεˆkT(uˆh)Eεˆk(uˆh)dΩ=AkεˆkT(uˆh)Eεˆk(uˆh)=1Ak∑i∈Nk∑j∈NkuˆhiT∫ΩkDTΦi(x)dΩTE∫ΩkDTΦj(x)dΩuˆhj.Therefore, the local stiffness matrix associated with node k is obtained as(8)K^ij(k)=1Ak∫ΩkDTΦi(x)dΩTE∫ΩkDTΦj(x)dΩ,and the global stiffness matrix for the NS-FEM will beK^ij=∑k=1NK^ij(k).The entries (in sub-vectors of nodal forces) of the force vectorfˆin the right hand side of the algebraic system can be simply expressed as(9)fˆi=∑k∈Nkfˆi(k).The above integration is also performed by a summation of integrals over smoothing domains; hence,fˆiis an assembly of nodal force vectors at the surrounding nodes of node k,fˆi(k)=∫Ω(k)Φi(x)bdΩ+∫Γt(k)Φi(x)tdΓ.Note that the force vector obtained in the NS-FEM is the same as the one in the FEM, if the same order shape function is used. For further implementation of the NS-FEM, please refer to the appendix in [22].In this section the upper and lower bounds on the functions of displacements are calculated based on the bound on the energy norm of solutions. Since the dual problem (2) holds for anyvinVandubelongs toV, one can write the outputℓO(u)asℓO(u)=∫ΩεT(u)Eε(uD)dΩ.Using the parallelogram identity, we can also rewrite the above output in the form as followsℓO(u)=14κu+1κuD2-14κu-1κuD2,whereκ∈Ris a parameter to be optimized to narrow the gap between the upper and lower bounds afterwards, and surelyℓO(u)satisfies the following inequalities(10)14κu+1κuDLB2-14κu-1κuDUB2⩽ℓO(u)⩽14κu+1κuDUB2-14κu-1κuhDLB2,where the subscripts LB and UB denote the lower and the upper bounds, respectively, that is‖·‖LB⩽‖·‖⩽‖·‖UB.We can see these expressions of upper and lower bounds are non-computable, since they depend on the exact solutions of both primal and dual problems. We can use finite elements (displacement method) to compute a lower bound onκu±1κuD. Since‖uh‖⩽‖u‖and‖uhD‖⩽‖uD‖,‖κuh±1κuhD‖⩽‖κu±1κuD‖as the problem is linear. It means thatκuh±1κuhDis a lower bound onκu±1κuD, it then can be used in place of the lower bound terms in (10). Thus we can rewrite the bounding formulation (10) as(11)14κuh+1κuhD2-14κu-1κuDUB2⩽ℓO(u)⩽14κu+1κuDUB2-14κuh-1κuhD2.More details for deriving the above formulations can be found in [7,17]. The key ingredient of computing output bounds is finding an upper bound onκu±1κuD2, if we can compute an upper boundκu±1κuDUB2onκu±1κuD2, we can obtain an output bounds according to (11).Lemma 1The energy norm computed with the compatible strain of FEM solutions always bounds the energy norm computed with the smoothed strain of NS-FEM solutions from below, i.e.(12)∫ΩεT(uh)Eε(uh)dΩ⩽∫ΩεˆT(uˆh)Eεˆ(uˆh)dΩ.Since Eq. (1) holds for allvinVh, imposingv=uhinto Eq. (1), we have∫ΩεT(uh)Eε(uh)dΩ=ℓ(uh).Both the FEM and the NS-FEM have the same right hand side when the same shape function is used in meshTh, then with the finite element solutionuhas a test function to the NS-FEM we get∫ΩεˆT(uˆh)Eεˆ(uh)dΩ=ℓ(uh).By comparing the above two equations, we have(13)∫ΩεT(uh)Eε(uh)dΩ=∫ΩεˆT(uˆh)Eεˆ(uh)dΩ.sinceεˆT(uˆh)andεˆ(uh)are piecewise constant over the domainΩ, the hat ofεˆ(uh)on the right hand side of the above equation can be omitted, that is∫ΩεˆT(uˆh)Eεˆ(uh)dΩ=∑k=1N∫ΩkεˆT(uˆh)Eεˆ(uh)dΩ=∑k=1NAkεˆT(uˆh)Eεˆ(uh)=∑k=1NεˆT(uˆh)E∫Ωkε(uh)dΩ=∑k=1N∫ΩkεˆT(uˆh)Eε(uh)dΩ=∫ΩεˆT(uˆh)Eε(uh)dΩthen with (13), we have∫ΩεT(uh)Eε(uh)dΩ=∫ΩεˆT(uˆh)Eε(uh)dΩ,and according to0⩽∫Ω(ε(uh)-εˆ(uˆh))TE(ε(uh)-εˆ(uˆh))dΩ,we obtain the inequality (12).□The energy norm computed with the compatible strain of NS-FEM solutions always bounds the energy norm computed with the smoothed strain of NS-FEM solutions from above, i.e.(14)∫ΩεˆT(uˆh)Eεˆ(uˆh)dΩ⩽∫ΩεT(uˆh)Eε(uˆh)dΩ.This inequality can be readily proved with the following orthogonal property of the NS-FEM [21,22],∫ΩεT(uˆh)Eεˆ(uˆh)dΩ=∫ΩεˆT(uˆh)Eεˆ(uˆh)dΩ.□The two inequalities in the lemmas give the comparison of different kinds of energy norms obtained by FEM and NS-FEM, the energy norm by the compatible strain of FEM solutions is the smallest, while the energy norm by the compatible strain of NS-FEM solutions is the largest. Now we define another form of energy norm associated with the bilinear form∫ΩεˆT(·)Eεˆ(·)dΩas⦀v⦀2=∫ΩεˆT(v)Eεˆ(v)dΩ.It is well known that the energy norm by the compatible strain of FEM solutions is a lower bound on the exact energy norm of solutions, i.e.∫ΩεT(uh)Eε(uh)dΩ⩽∫ΩεT(u)Eε(u)dΩ,or in the compact form‖uh‖2⩽‖u‖2. Large amount of numerical examples have been tested to show that the exact energy norm of solutions is between‖uh‖2and⦀uˆh⦀2, but theoretical analysis still lacks in proving that‖u‖2is between‖uh‖2and⦀uˆh⦀2, or between‖uh‖2and‖uˆh‖2, or greater than‖uˆh‖2.Let us use⦀uˆh⦀2and⦀uˆhD⦀2as the upper bounds on‖u‖2and‖uD‖2, respectively. Since the problem is linear and according to Lemma 1,⦀κuˆh±1κuˆhD⦀2is an upper bound onκu±1κuD2, and it can be used in place of the upper bound terms in (11), that is(15)⦀κu±1κuD⦀UB2=∫ΩεˆTκuˆh±1κuˆhDEεˆκuˆh±1κuˆhDdΩ.Expanding the right hand side, we have(16)∫ΩεˆTκuˆh±1κuˆhDEεˆκuˆh±1κuˆhDdΩ=κ2⦀uˆh⦀2+1κ2⦀uˆhD⦀2±2∫ΩεˆT(uˆh)Eεˆ(uˆhD)dΩ.Now we have the computable formulations for the upper and lower bounds in (10), here the computable means these bounds are solvable with the methods of finite elements or node based smoothed finite elements. They are summarized as follows,(17)ℓ+=12∫ΩεT(uh)Eε(uhD)dΩ+12∫ΩεˆT(uˆh)Eεˆ(uˆhD)dΩ+κ24(⦀uˆh⦀2-‖uh‖2)+14κ2(⦀uˆhD⦀-‖uhD‖2),ℓ-=12∫ΩεT(uh)Eε(uhD)dΩ+12∫ΩεˆT(uˆh)Eεˆ(uˆhD)dΩ-κ24(⦀uˆh⦀2-‖uh‖2)-14κ2(⦀uˆhD⦀-‖uhD‖2).The parameterκis optimized to reduce the bounds gapℓ+-ℓ-, which is obtained as(18)κ2=⦀uˆhD⦀2-‖uhD‖2⦀uˆh⦀2-‖uh‖2,substitute it to (17), the final computable formulations of the upper and lower bounds are obtained,(19)ℓ+=12∫ΩεT(uh)Eε(uhD)dΩ+12∫ΩεˆT(uˆh)Eεˆ(uˆhD)dΩ+12⦀uˆh⦀2-‖uh‖2(⦀uˆhD⦀2-‖uhD‖2),ℓ-=12∫ΩεT(uh)Eε(uhD)dΩ+12∫ΩεˆT(uˆh)Eεˆ(uˆhD)dΩ-12⦀uˆh⦀2-‖uh‖2⦀uˆhD⦀2-‖uhD‖2.According to Lemma 2, we can also use‖uˆh‖and‖uˆhD‖in stead of⦀uˆh⦀and⦀uˆhD⦀, respectively, in the above bounding equations. In our experience of computation, it can be used as the second line of defense in verifying the output solutions, especially when⦀uˆh⦀or⦀uˆhD⦀loss the upper bounding functions.Remark 1The bounds gapℓ+-ℓ-is the square root of the product of the differences between the energy norms of solutions in the primal and dual problems.The average of bounds is the average of outputs computed by the FEM and the NS-FEM.Lettingv=uhin (3) gives(20)ℓO(uh)=∫ΩεT(uh)Eε(uhD)dΩ,and in dual problem, if we use the NS-FEM as the solution method, (3) will be changed into the form as(21)∫ΩεˆT(v)Eεˆ(uˆhD)dΩ=ℓO(v)∀v∈Vh,lettingv=uˆhin the above equation results inℓO(uˆh)=∫ΩεˆT(uˆh)Eεˆ(uˆhD)dΩ.From the bounding formulations (19), we obtain that the average of bounds is the average of outputs computed by the FEM and the NS-FEM, that is12(ℓ++ℓ-)=12(ℓO(uh)+ℓO(uˆh)).□We illustrate the method with some examples of linear elasticity, and linear triangle finite elements approximations are used for both primal and dual problems. Uniform mesh refinement is used in all examples to illustrate the bounding property with respect to the mesh size.The first example is a rectangle elastic body assumed in a plane stress state, its geometrical and material data are plotted in Fig. 2, a uniform loadp=1is acted on the right end of the body. Different meshes are used to compute the bounding results, the coarsest mesh with mesh size H is plotted in Fig. 3, the other meshes with mesh sizesH/2,H/4,H/8,H/16are not plotted. Different displacement constraints cases and loading cases with uniform loads as shown in Fig. 2 are considered, including both bending and pure tension modes. Only one outputℓ1O(u)=∫ΓtuTndΓis considered in this example to illustrate the bounding algorithm.For problem (a) in Fig. 2, outputℓ1O(u)is the same as the load in loading case, it means that the output is the energy norm of displacements, which leads to that the primal problem is the same as the dual problem, then from (19), we can readily show thatℓ+=∫ΩεˆT(uˆh)Eεˆ(uˆh)dΩandℓ-=∫ΩεT(uh)Eε(uh)dΩ. Fig. 5 shows the lower and upper bounds results of the energy norm of solutions. For this subproblem we also use the mesh with mesh size2Has shown in Fig. 4to test the method. With this coarsest mesh with eight elements, the energy norm of solutions computed with the NS-FEM is 49.60 that is not an upper bound on the reference value that is 49.69. But when the mesh size is smaller, the results computed with the NS-FEM is really an upper bound on the exact energy norm of solutions. The finest mesh consists of 8192 elements, and on which the gap between the two bounds is 0.0104, quit small as compared with the reference value 49.69. In Fig. 5, we also plot the values of‖uˆh‖2which is represented by SF, it also bounds the reference value from above, even in the case of the coarsest mesh. But for the other examples, the values of‖uˆh‖2are too large to be effective, all of them are not plotted in the figures.For problem (b) in Fig. 2, the primal problem is of bending, while the dual problem is the same as problem (a). The left end of the plate is fully fixed, it is still nearly pure bending, so the exact solution of the outputℓ1O(u)is zero. Fig. 6gives the results of energy norm of solutions of the primal problem computed with the FEM and the NS-FEM. The energy norm of solutions computed with the NS-FEM is an upper bound on the exact value even for the coarsest eight elements mesh. This means that the upper bound property of the NS-FEM may not only depend on the mesh size. With the bounds formulations in (17), we calculate the lower and upper bounds of the exact output as shown in Fig. 7, and the average of the bounds is exactly the output.For problem (c) in Fig. 2, the output is with the same form as the one in the example of problem (a), and they are approximately equal. It is a pure tension problem, in such a case the FEM can always give the exact energy norm of displacement, and the corresponding output is 50, which is not related to the mesh sizes. The NS-FEM behaves the same as the FEM, it always gives the exact energy norm of solutions not depending on the mesh size. We do not plot the energy norm of solutions and the output as all of them are constant.For problem (d) in Fig. 2, the output is zero as the result of problem (b). We do not compute the results using the coarsest eight elements mesh, because there is only one element on the left end of the plate, it means that there is no node in the middle of the edge, which could be fully fixed. Since problem (c) is the dual problem for problem (d), from the results of problem (c) we know that all of the output results calculated on different meshes are constant, which are independent of the mesh size. With the bounds Eq. (19), we find the terms with square root are zero, and the other terms, the outputs, are also zero. Therefore the upper and lower bounds are all zero, which are the same as the exact solutions. We do not plot the bound on the output as it is a constant, but we plot the energy norm of solutions in Fig. (8). We found that for this problem, the energy norm of solutions by the NS-FEM is not convergent, although they provide an upper bound on the exact solution. The difference between problem (b) and problem (d) is only the Dirichlet boundary conditions, i.e., the displacement constraints.The second example is an elastic plane stress problem with a crack of opening mode [28], see Fig. 9, which involves an elastic plate under tension with a crack of length 8 perpendicular to the direction of loading. Since the symmetry of geometry and loading, we need only to solve the open mode stress intensity factorKI, and the shear mode stress intensity factorKII=0. The stress intensity factor is considered in this example as the second outputℓ2O(u)=KI.The stress intensity factor at the crack tip is calculated with the displacements at the two node pairsPi-Pi′andPj-Pj′on the crack edges as [29](22)KI(u)=2πμκ+1ϕITrjri(rj-ri)ui-rirj(rj-ri)uj,whereϕI=(-sinϕ,cosϕ,sinϕ,-cosϕ)T,ϕII=(-cosϕ,-sinϕ,cosϕ,sinϕ)T,ui=u1i,u2i,u1i′,u2i′T,uj=u1j,u2j,u1j′,u2j′T;riandrjare the radial distances from the crack tip to the node pairsPi-Pi′andPj-Pj′, respectively;μis the shear modulus andκis a parameter which allows the simultaneous consideration of the plane stress and plane strain cases, withκ=(3-ν)/(1+ν)for the plane stress andκ=3-4νfor the plane strain.In Fig. 10, eight nodes are arranged on the crack edge in the coarse mesh, node 4 and node 5 on the crack edge are selected for the extrapolation. With the truth mesh that is obtained with mesh sizeH/16, the stress intensity factorKIis calculated as 395.41. The stress intensity factorKI=393.5was given in [30], the relative differenceη=|393.5-395.41|/393.5=0.49%is very small, thus we can set 395.41 to be the reference stress intensity factor. The results of stress intensity factor and its upper and lower bounds obtained on different meshes are plotted in Fig. 11. For clearly showing the output results, the outputs by the FEM and the NS-FEM are also plotted in Fig. 12, which shows that the outputs are also an upper and a lower bounds on the reference stress intensity factor.We introduce the relative half bound gap given in [17]ρG=12ℓ+-ℓ-ℓO(u)as a measure of the accuracy of the bounds. It is certainly an upper bound on the relative error between the average of the bounds and the exact outputℓO(u). If the exact outputℓO(u)is not known, we use the average of the bounds calculated with the finest mesh as a reference value, that isρG=ℓ+-ℓ-ℓ∗++ℓ∗-,whereℓ∗+andℓ∗-are an upper bound and a lower bound calculated with the finest mesh. Fig. 13shows the convergence rates ofρGfor the bounds results in the corresponding figures. The convergence rates for the twoρGbelow is 0.7, the accuracy is better than the one above, which is corresponding to the bounds shown in Fig. 11, the convergence rate is 0.5. This Figure shows all gaps for outputs or bounds can converge, but the convergence rates are different, the lowest rate is due to the divergence of NS-FEM in the example.We examine the NS-FEM with linear triangle elements and extend it to compute the upper and lower bounds on outputs in elasticity using three energy norms of displacements, the first one is the energy norm of finite element solutions, and the second one is the energy norm formed by the smoothed strain of NS-FEM, the third is the energy norm of NS-FEM solutions. With the values of three energy norms in ascending order, we construct two intervals, and in our computational experiments, the exact energy norm of solutions is always in the two intervals, even sometime it violates the first interval, but is in the second interval. Another feature of the bounding procedure is that they are very easy to implement, as this simply requires a modification of a few lines of our underlying finite element code. This is an advantage over the equilibrium method to obtain upper bounds, and it can be used as an alternative heuristic approach, for example the relaxation method that relaxes the stiffness matrix with some smaller part of the local stiffness, for the verification of outputs.There are still some problems to be solved for this method. The first one is that sometimes it does not provide an upper bound with a coarse mesh, e.g. the mesh with eight elements in the subproblem (a) of the first example. Therefore, in the practical applications, we should always use the second interval as the second line of defense for verifying the outputs. The second one is that the energy norm formed by the smoothed strain of NS-FEM occasionally does not asymptotically converge to the exact solution, as shown in Fig. 8. The NS-FEM generally provides a bound from above by relaxing the stiffness, but there is a lack of conditions for guaranteeing the asymptotic convergence.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
