@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A parametric subdomain discretization for the analysis of the multiaxial response of reinforced concrete sections

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An improved discretization strategy for arbitrary shaped R.C. sections is presented.The integration process uses parametric and nested parametric transformations.The algorithm provides also a direct treatment of circular or hollow circular sections.The widely used fiber approach is simply a particular case of the proposed approach.A general and compact procedure to build 3D interaction domains is presented.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Arbitrary shaped sections,Circular and hollow circular sections,Parametric discretization,Numerical integration,Multiaxial stress response,Ultimate strength domains,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The paper presents an improved sectional discretization method for evaluating the response of reinforced concrete sections. The section is subdivided into parametric subdomains that allow the modelization of any complex geometry while taking advantage of the Gauss quadrature techniques. In particular, curved boundaries are dealt with two nested parametric transformations, reducing the modeling approximation. It is shown how the so-called fiber approach is simply a particular case of the present more general method. Many benchmarks are presented in order to assess the accuracy of the results. The influence of the discretization into subdomains and of the quadrature rules, chosen for integration, is discussed. The numerical tests highlight also the effects of spurious stress distributions in the tensile concrete zone, due the interpolation functions adopted for the Gauss integration. It is shown how balancing the number of subdomains and the number of sampling points such spurious effects vanish. The method shows to be accurate, very flexible in the discretization process and robust in analyzing any sectional state. Moreover, it converges faster than the fiber method, reducing the computational demand. All these properties are of great importance when the computations are iteratively repeated, as for the case of the sectional analysis within a computational procedure for a R.C. frame analysis.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The analysis of complex reinforced concrete sections with arbitrary shapes and with any arbitrary arrangement of reinforcements has been widely investigated in literature. Before the advent of computers, only the simple rules of working stress design were available and graphical or cumbersome hand computation methods were proposed in order to find the neutral axis position and then strains, stresses and stress resultants. Starting from the 70s, computers allow the full exploitation of the numerical analysis techniques and several computational tools suitable to deal with a thorough analysis of reinforced concrete structures have been introduced.Common problems of the daily practice span from the derivation of the ultimate interaction domain of sections under biaxial or multiaxial states to the nonlinear analysis of R.C. frames.To this purpose the so-called fiber approach [22,8], is widely used. Such a method subdivides the section into small subdomains, called fibers, and the contribution of the stress acting in each subdomain is taken into account by the Riemann mid-point integration rule. The fiber approach, mainly thanks to its simplicity, is largely used both to assess the behavior of the R.C. section itself – e.g. to construct moment–curvature diagrams or interaction domains – and as a subroutine in the definition of the state of a generic reinforced concrete finite beam element with distributed nonlinearities.Many other methods have been proposed utilizing from Green’s theorem [19,21] to graphical pixel integration [20] and closed form solutions of curved trapezoidal subsections [9].Starting from the proposal given in [14] – and already used in several works ([5,15,6,4]), this paper presents an improved sectional discretization method in which the section is subdivided into parametric subdomains that allow the modelization of complex geometry while taking advantage of the Gauss quadrature techniques. In particular, curved boundaries are dealt with two nested parametric transformations, reducing the modeling approximation. It is shown how the so-called fiber approach is simply a particular case of the present more general method.The present method is robust and presents a high level of accuracy, as well as the following advantages:–it fits better the geometry of sections with curved boundaries, thanks to the double parametric transformation;it offers a high flexibility in the discretization process, allowing to balance the number of subdomains and the number of sampling points;it converges faster than the fiber method, strongly reducing the computational demand.Since each parametric transformation requires the evaluation of the Jacobian and the choice of an appropriate set of continuous shape functions, the proposed procedure is deeply examined with examples having growing complexity and aimed to (a) examine its effective robustness and its computational cost and (b) highlight the main differences with the already mentioned fiber approach.The main focus of the paper is on numerical integration of the surface integrals, since it constitutes the most elaborate and time consuming part. For these reasons and also for the sake of clarity, the procedure is validated with respect the multiaxial response of R.C. sections based on the Bernoulli sectional kinematic hypothesis and by using usual non linear stress–strain relationships.The paper is organized as follow. The first part presents the integration strategy, based on two different types of subdomain: the quadrilateral one and the circular sectorial one. In the first case, only one parametric transformation is needed, in the second one an additional and intermediate transformation is required. Then, on the basis of the Bernoulli sectional kinematic, the generalized kinematic and static quantities are recalled and the section equilibrium is derived through the Virtual Work Principle.The basic algorithm may be used in two different ways. Working with given section strains (elongation and curvatures), through integration one can deduce directly the section forces while, working with applied section forces (axial force and bending moments), the determination of the section strains requires the solution of a nonlinear system of equations. In both cases the numerical integration of the sectional response is the core of the problem.The first part ends presenting a rational procedure aimed to compute the ultimate interaction domains, both for biaxial and multiaxial states.The second part of this work is addressed to validate the methodology. Many benchmarks with different discretization criteria and different nets of Gauss points are presented and the influence of the discretization into subdomains and of the quadrature rules, chosen for integration, is discussed. The numerical tests highlight also the effects of spurious stress distributions in the tensile concrete zone, due the interpolation functions adopted for the Gauss integration. It is shown how balancing the number of subdomains and the number of sampling points such spurious effects vanish. The method shows to be accurate, very flexible in the discretization process and robust in analyzing any sectional state. Moreover, it converges faster than the fiber method, reducing the computational demand.Let’s consider the sectional domain, referred to a right handed reference system(0,x,y,z)with the origin placed at the centroid of the concrete domain. The x-axis is normal to the sectional plane and oriented along the element, Fig. 1.Once a constitutive law is assumed, the stressesσin a generic point of the section can be evaluated from the strainsε, and once a suitable interpolating matrixasis defined, the generalized stressesfscan be evaluated by direct integration of the local stresses over the section’s domain. Such an integral can be written as:(1)fs=∫Aasy,z,εσεdASince the stress distribution on the section is not linear, the evaluation of the integral (1) is performed numerically. Actually, the most used numerical approach is the so-called fiber approach [8] that, by dividing the section in a finite number of subdomains, called fibers, calculates the surface integral as the weighted sum of each fiber contribution. In such a summation, the weights are represented by the areas of the fibers (see Fig. 2). This integration scheme is known as Riemann mid-point integration rule, or Riemann middle sum. Thanks to its simplicity, such an approach is largely used both to assess the behavior of the R.C. section itself and to define the state of a R.C. beam–column element with distributed nonlinearities [22].This paper presents an improved sectional integration scheme, by introducing parametric and nested parametric transformations well-known in finite element procedures. As pointed out in [9], almost all algorithms are applicable to polygonal cross sections with straight edges, but only few of them provide direct treatment of circles. The proposed integration scheme deals, in a general way and within the same parametric framework, not only with polygonal cross sections, but also with circular, semicircular or hollow circular sections. In addition, the fiber approach is simply a particular case of the present more general method [18].In order to deal with arbitrary shaped sections, the numerical integration is based on parametric transformations. The section is divided into subdomains and the actual geometry of each subdomain is transformed to a unit square parent geometry by using parametric equations. In this way, sampling points refer to the parent domain and the relation between the reference and the actual geometry is ruled by the Jacobian of the transformation. The procedure is presented with reference to the following surface integral:(2)I=∫Af(z,y)dAby considering these two types of subdomains:1.Quadrilateral subdomains.Circle or semicircle or circular ring subdomains.Obviously, sections composed by both can be dealt with. The application fields of such discretization choices are shown in Fig. 3. In case 1, only one parametric transformation is needed. In case 2, an additional and intermediate transformation is required.In this first case, the transformation from the given quadrilateral subdomain to the unit square parent domain (Fig. 4) is ruled by the well-known bilinear interpolation functions [3]:(3)Ni=(1+ζ·ζi)(1+η·ηi)4,i=1,2,3,4so that the sectional coordinates are mapped as a function of the vectorc, containing the coordinates of the nodes, as follow:(4)x=zy=N·cwith(5)N=N10N20N30N400N10N20N30N4(6)c=z1y1z2y2z3y3z4y4TThe corresponding determinant of the Jacobian matrix is:(7)det(Jt)=18z24·y13-z13·y24+z14·y23-zz23·y14ζ+z12·y34-z34·y12ηzij=zi-zj,yij=yi-yjIn this second case, two transformations are needed (Fig. 5). The first one uses polar coordinates to transform the sector in a rectangular domain by using the relationships:(8)z=ρ·sinθy=ρ·cosθThe relative Jacobian of the polar transformation is:(9)det(Jp)=ρAfter this additional and intermediate transformation, the obtained rectangular subdomain can be transformed to the unit square parent domain through the same transformation previously presented for the quadrilateral subdomain.As shown, the generic integral can be expressed with reference to the basic square parent domain. The differential must contain the corresponding Jacobian matrix, as shown in the following expression:(10)I=∫Af(z,y)dA=∫-11∫-11f(ζ,η)det(J(ζ,η))dζdηNow, only a numerical integration strategy is required. The problem is hence reduced to algebraic form through sums, which for the quadrilateral subdomain are:(11)I≈∑i=1n∑j=1nf(ζi,ηj)det(Jt(ζi,ηj))·wi·wjand for the circular sector subdomain are:(12)I≈∑i=1n∑j=1nf(ζi,ηj)det(Jt(ζi,ηj))det(Jp)wi·wjNote that, in this second case, two Jacobian matrices are involved. The sampling points location(ζi,ηj)and the relative weights(wi,wj)depend on the quadrature rule adopted [1]. The most common quadratures rules are:–Newton–Cotes rule, that integrates exactly polynomials of ordern-1.Gauss–Legendre rule, that integrates exactly polynomials of order2n-1.Gauss–Lobatto rule, that integrates exactly polynomials of order2n-3.where n is the number of sampling points used.In dealing with R.C. sectional problems, the Gauss–Lobatto scheme seems to be more effective, since it samples also on the border of the domain, where the maximum strains usually lie. Note that by puttingn=1, the proposed procedure collapses on the mentioned fiber approach (Riemann mid-point integration rule) with the difference that, here, the areas of the fibers are not input quantities, but they are automatically calculated given the nodal coordinates of the generic subdomain.Aiming to focusing the attention on the numerical integration of the surface integrals, the state of a R.C. section based on the well-known Bernoulli hypothesis is presented. By using such an assumption, it’s clear that only the problem related to normal stresses can be dealt with. However, this is a well established hypothesis in reinforced concrete design and allows to determine, for example, moment–curvature diagrams or ultimate strength domains. In addition, the state of the so-obtained section can be used in formulating beam–column finite elements in which the normal stresses are dominant in the structural behavior, because it has been observed that plane section hypothesis remains valid for a wide range of loading [2]. Hence, the following hypotheses are assumed:(a)plane sections remain plane;shear deformation is neglected;perfect bond holds between steel and concrete.According to these hypotheses, in a deformed configuration, the normal displacement at a generic point P (Fig. 6) of the section is given by:(13)d(x,y,z)=d0(x)-y·ϕz(x)+z·ϕy(x)whered0is the displacement at the origin andϕz,ϕy(x)are, respectively, the rotations around the z and y axes. The corresponding normal strain results:(14)ε(x,y,z)=∂d(x,y,z)∂x=ε0(x)-y·χz(x)+z·χy(x)whereε0is the normal strain at the origin andχz,χyare, respectively, the curvatures around the z and y axes. The kinematic variables can be grouped by introducing the sectional displacement vectors(x)and the sectional deformation vectores(x):(15)s(x)=d0ϕzϕyT(16)es(x)=ε0χzχyTThrough the sectional interpolating matrix:(17)as(z,y)=1-yzEqs. (13) and (14) can be written in matrix form as follow:(18)d(x,y,z)=as(z,y)·s(x)(19)ε(x,y,z)=as(z,y)·es(x)With reference to a section belonging to a beam–column element, Eqs. (18) and (19) decompose the kinematic field into the product of a matrixas(z,y), depending on the coordinates in the sectional domain, by a function of the coordinate x of the section along the beam axis.The section’s equilibrium equations are derived through the Virtual Displacements Principle, by equating the work done by the static quantities of the actual equilibrated field and the kinematic quantities of a virtual kinematic field:(20)δWi=δWeBy considering the section belonging to a unitary length segment of the beam, the virtual external and internal works are respectively:(21)δWe=δes(x)T·fs,e(x)(22)δWi=∫Aδε(x,y,z)σ(x,y,z)dAwherefs,eare the external forces acting on the section. By combining Eqs. (20)–(22) and remembering Eq. (19), it follows that:(23)δes(x)T·fs,e(x)=δes(x)T·∫Aas(z,y)Tσ(x,y,z)dA∀δesSince such an equation is valid for any virtualδes, the following relationship is obtained:(24)fs,e(x)=∫Aas(z,y)Tσ(x,y,z)dA=∫A1-yzσ(x,y,z)dAthat defines the generalized section stressesN,Mz,Mywhich equilibrate the distribution of the internal uniaxial stresses σ. These stresses are related to the virtual internal work and define the section resisting forcesfs,r:(25)fs,r(x)=∫A1-yzσ(x,y,z)dA=N(x)Mz(x)My(x)These integrals will be continuous over the concrete domain and discrete sums on the reinforcing bars. The section is in equilibrium if the external applied forces equal the restoring ones:(26)fs,e=fs,rDespite several materials, or material types can be present in the sectional domain (confined and non-confined concrete, concrete layers cast at different times, effective and non-effective concrete areas, reinforcing bars, etc.), the stress σ in Eq. (25) can be defined as a function of the strain ε by a suitable constitutive law, so that we can write:(27)fs,r(x)=∫Aas(z,y)Tσ(εes(x))dAThe most known stress–strain relationships are those proposed in [16,13]. The use of Eq. (26) in the design practice and in finite element analysis can be associated to the following two types of problems:–Type 1 Problem: given the strain state (described by the generalized sectional strainses), determine the resultant section forces (the generalized stress statefs,r). Such a situation is met in a displacement based element and the problem has a direct form.Type 2 Problem: given the external section forcesfs,e(the generalized sectional stresses), determine the strain state (the generalized sectional strainses). Such a situation is met in a flexibility based element and the problem has an indirect form.The first problem is formulated in a direct way. In fact, given the section deformationses=ε0χzχyT, the strain ε can be obtained point wise in the sectional domain through Eq. (19); the section stresses in any point can be then evaluated by the assumed constitutive law. Finally, the integral of the stresses over the sectional domain gives the section forcesfs,raccording to Eq. (27). For these reasons, Problem 1 requires a suitable numerical integration strategy only.The second problem involves the solution of a nonlinear problem that can be stated as follows: for an assigned vector of section forcesfs,e=NMzMyT, reckon the section deformationsesgiving corresponding internal forcesfs,r(resisting or restoring forces) equal tofs,e:(28)fs,e=fs,r(es)Such a condition is written in homogeneous form as follows:(29)g(es)=fs,e-fs,r(es)=0and solved by the Newton–Raphson (NR) method. The main steps of the NR solution are:1.Choice of an initial solutiones0.Linearization of the problem as follows:(30)g(es)≅g(es0)+J(es0)·(es-es0)=0whereJ(es0)is the Jacobian matrix evaluated ines0.Search for a new solution, by solving Eq. (30):(31)es1=es0-[J(es0)]-1·g(es0)Iteration until convergence.In a more explicit form, the Jacobian matrix is given by the equation:(32)J(es)=∂g(es)∂es=∂(fs,e-fs,r(es))∂es=-∂fs,r(es)∂eswhich shows howJ(es)equals the derivatives of the resisting forcesfs,r(es)with respect toes. By expanding Eq. (32) we have:(33)∂fs,r(es)∂es=∂∂es∫AasTσ(es)dA=∫AasT∂(σ(es))∂esdA=∫AasT∂σ∂ε·∂ε∂esdA=∫AasT∂σ∂ε·∂(as·es)∂esdA=∫AasT∂σ∂ε·asdA=∫AasTEtanasdA≅kswhereEtanis the tangent modulus andksis the tangent sectional stiffness matrix. The following relationship between Jacobian matrix and tangent stiffness matrix holds:(34)J(es)=-ksFinally, the recursive equation of the NR solution results:(35)es,i+1=es,i+[ks(es,i)]-1·g(es,i)=es,i+Δeiand it is iterated until convergence.For a linear elastic material, the expanded form of the sectional stiffness matrixksis:(36)ks=∫AasTEtanasdA=∫AEtan1-yz-yy2-yzz-yzz2dAThe stress–strain relationship is simplyσ=Eεand∂σ/∂ε=E, where E is the Young’s modulus. For the special case of homogeneous sections, Eq. (36) can be rewritten as:(37)ks=E∫AasTasdA=E∫A1-yz-yy2-yzz-yzz2dAIn addition, if the system(y,z)coincides with that of the principal axis of the section, the first order moments equal zero and the two flexural components uncouple, so that Eq. (37) becomes:(38)ks=EA000Iz000IyInstead, for a nonlinear stress–strain relationship and non homogeneous sections (the R.C. case), the tangent modulus varies with the sampling point P on the section. In this case there is not a reference system more effective than another. The simplest way is to assume the origin in the centroid of the concrete section. As a consequence, the tangent stiffness matrix is always full.In conclusion, two types of problems arise when dealing with the sectional state. The first one is written in an explicit way, the second one requires a numerical strategy for solving systems of nonlinear equations. Clearly, the numerical integration over the section must be performed in both problems.The construction of strength domains of cross sections of structural members has a long history and an overview of the state of the art in the field may be found in [11].As known, an ultimate domain is a volume containing all the states[N,Mz,My]acceptable within certain limits, stated according to given hypotheses. Its border is the locus of the points corresponding to an ultimate sectional state. In such a surface lie the points having as coordinates the triplets of values[N,Mz,My]which lead a fiber of concrete or a bar of steel to reach its ultimate strain.Several research lines have been pursued to deepen this topic, using both accurate analytical expressions and numerical algorithms based on the integration of the governing equations and constitutive laws for the materials. Clearly, in dealing with complex sections, the difficulties related to obtain analytics expressions are avoided by using general computational tools.Generally speaking, the problem may be solved both in the space of deformationses(ε0,χz,χy) as well as in the space of forcesfs(N,Mz,My). In fact – given the ultimate strains of the materials – the failure surface can be built point wise as follow:1.By working in the space of deformations, an ordinate sequence of Type 1 problems must be solved. The sequence will explore all the deformative states corresponding to an ultimate value of the material strains.By working in the space of forces, an ordinate sequence of Type 2 problems must be solved. The sequence will explore, once again, all the stresses states corresponding to an ultimate value of the material strains.As explained in Section 4.2, a Type 1 problem is direct and requires only a numerical integration scheme; a Type 2 problem, instead, is indirect and requires also the solution of a nonlinear system of equations.Usually, the methods based on analytical expressions can calculate the failure surface only as a succession of direct problems; the methods based on computational tools, instead, can use both the methods and the choice is done on the basis of the robustness of the procedure and on its effectiveness.Among the numerical methods working with an ordinate sequence of Type 1 problems, Vinciprova and Oliveto [23] propose a direct procedure based on the calculation of a family of isogonic lines, each of them associated with a given angle for the neutral axis. Sfakianakis [20], in addition, proposes an alternative fiber model which employs computer graphics as computational tool for the integration of normal stresses over the section area.Between the numerical methods working with an ordinate succession of Type 2 problems, Rodriguez and Aristizabal-Ochoa [19] include in the study also the effects of creep and concrete confinement and solve the nonlinear problem by adopting a quasi-Newton method. Marmo et al. [17] present the ultimate state analysis of prestressed reinforcement concrete sections in presence of softening stress–strain laws; to increase the robustness of the nonlinear solution scheme, they used a secant approach.Concerning the effectiveness of the procedure, if it’s true that an ordinate succession of Type 1 does not require the solution of a nonlinear system of equations, it’s also true that in the design practice the complete 3D domain is not so common. Engineers are more interested in 2D domains, associated e.g. to a constant value of the axial forceN‾. In this case, the domain cannot be built as an ordinate sequence of Type 1 problems since the static quantityN‾is present as an input variable, but an ordinate sequence of Type 2 problems is required.For these reasons, in the following, the problem of defining the 3D failure surface is presented with reference to the space of forces so that, with the same framework, also 2D domains can be defined. In any case, note that the proposed algorithm can also be applied in the space of deformations, by simply using the kinematic dual quantities.Hence, the present procedure works by defining the 3D domainN,Mz,Myas a succession of 2D domainsN‾,Mz,My, reckoned for a constant value of the axial forceN‾.According to [5], and with reference to Fig. 7, the interaction domain can be built through the following steps:1.A valueN‾=N∈[N+;N-]is chosen.In the planeN‾,Mz,My, the points associated to an ultimate limit state are defined. To this purpose:–an angleφ=0–2πis at first chosen;this angle gives a line on which the local variable λ is defined so that:(39)Mz=λ·cosφMy=λ·sinφwith the bisection method, the value of λ to which correspond the forces producing an ultimate state is obtained.By repeating this process for a discrete set of angles φ and axial forcesN‾, the interaction domain is built point wise. Note, once again, that the same approach is applicable also to the definition of 2D domains (Mz,y-NorMz-My).In this work, the quadrature process uses two different tools: the parametric domain subdivision and the choice of a net of sampling points, according to an assumed interpolation function. At the limits, one can subdivide the section with the number of subdomains strictly necessary to model the sectional geometry, and then adopt in each subdomain a large number of sampling points (strategy 1), or, otherwise, one can subdivide the given section into a large number of subdomains and then integrate, into each subdomain, with only one sampling point (strategy 2, also called fiber approach). The choice of the number of subdomains and the number of sampling points influences the accuracy of the procedure. The problem is different with respect to standard F.E. procedures. In a basic standard F.E. procedure, once an interpolation function complying with continuity and completeness has been chosen, the convergence to the exact solution depends on the discretization. As rich is the set of the deformation modes, as accurate is the solution. Differently, the present case involves only a quadrature problem. Simply, one could say that it is not important how the interpolating stress shapes are close to the actual ones, but it is important that the generalized stresses be evaluated in a correct way. In truth, the choice of the interpolation function adopted for the Gauss quadrature may lead to less accurate results due over-modulation effects [12].These potential inaccuracies are investigated in the next by means of a series of examples having growing complexity. Aim of these examples is to show how a suitable choice of the subdomains subdivision and of the sampling points may reduce, under the same accuracy, the work for the integration process with respect to the widely used fiber approach.The three reinforced concrete sections shown in Fig. 8are considered, namely:–a square section reinforced with symmetrical bars;a L shaped section with distributed bars;a hollow circular section with distributed bars.As already explained, the first and the second sections need one transformation only, while the third involves two parametric transformations. For the sake of clarity and in order to compare the results with those of other sources [7], the stress–strain parabola-rectangle relationship has been used for concrete [10]. The steel is assumed having an elastic perfectly plastic behavior. The strength and ultimate strains of concrete and steel are listed in Table 1.The benchmarks are set as follows:–for the square R.C. section, moment–curvature diagrams and interaction domains both for biaxial and triaxial states are computed with different discretization strategies;for the L-shaped and hollow circular R.C. sections we compute only the interaction domains. Also in these cases different discretization strategies are used.For the sake of comparison, all the cases are studied also with the fiber discretization method. The results are compared among them and with other solutions. The influence of the discretizations into subdomains and that of the choice of the nets of sampling points are discussed in terms of accuracy and of number of sampling points used for the quadrature process.We consider the square R.C. section of Fig. 8(a), loaded by three different axial forcesN=-240-1200-1680kN.First, we shall adopt a fine discretization in order to have an immediate comparison with the reference solution. Then we shall explore less refined models in order to detect the onset of less accurate solutions. Finally, the sources of such inaccuracies are explored, in order to define the best discretization criteria and obtain accurate solutions with a limited computational demand. In particular, we want to show that, for the same level of accuracy, the present approach demands a number of integration points considerably less with respect to the classical fiber approach.Initially the section in subdivided through 30 subdomains and a symmetric net of3×3Gauss Lobatto integration points (GLO). The corresponding moment–curvature diagrams are shown in Fig. 9. These results fully agree with those reported in [7], that we assumed as reference solution. The vertical lines (States 1–4) superimposed to the diagrams of Fig. 9(a) mark the four different states assumed by the section shown in Fig. 10. In the first state the section is fully compressed. In the others, the concrete fibers below the neutral axis are unstressed and give rise to a discontinuity of the stress distribution. Approaching to the ultimate state the stress in the upper fiber tends to the maximum design value of-15MPa.Now the same problem is solved again by adopting other discretizations. We consider the square R.C. section of Fig. 8(a) subjected to an axial forceN=-240kNand we search for the corresponding moment – curvature diagrams. Two sectional discretization strategies have been considered:1.A subdivision made of a single subdomain and eight nets of sampling pointsn=1–8.A subdivision made, progressively, of 1, 2, 4 and 8 subdomains and of a fixed total number of eight sampling points in the vertical direction.Fig. 11(a) shows the results for the strategy 1 andn=1–4. We observe that by increasing n, the accuracy quickly increases, with acceptable results forn=4. Fig. 11(b) shows the results of the strategy 1 andn=5–8. Forn⩾5there are no practical differences. Fig. 11(c) shows the results of the strategy 2, in which different number of subdomains are used, but the total number of the sampling points along the vertical axis remains fixed and equals eight. We do not observe any practical difference with respect to the previous case.The models working with a single subdomain and few sampling points, whose results showed in Fig. 11(a), are those less accurate. The reason of these inaccuracy is simply explained. Since the tensile stress is null beyond the neutral axis, not know a priori and state-dependent, the stress distribution presents across this line a sharp discontinuity. But, into a subdomain cut by the neutral axis, the continuity of the interpolation function in modeling the stress distribution gives rise to spurious non-zero concrete stresses also over the neutral axis. In a discretization which uses few and wide subdomains this can lead to the effects of Fig. 11(a). With reference to the ultimate state, Fig. 12highlights the causes of this lack of accuracy making evident the influence of spurious stresses beyond the neutral axis and how such influence vanishes forn⩾5.For the second discretization strategy and by considering subdivisions with 1, 2, 4, 8 subdomains, the corresponding interpolated stress distributions are shown in Fig. 13, where we observe that the adoption of more subdomains reduces the spurious stresses to a limited part of those subdomains that are cut by the neutral axis. Moreover, by increasing the number of subdomains one can reduce the number of sampling point without loss of accuracy. With a high number of subdomains one can integrate into the single subdomain with only 1 point, according to the so-called Riemann mid-point integration rule. In the engineering field, this last choice is called fiber approach and, as shown, it is simply a particular case of the present more general approach.As shown before, from the point of view of the accuracy, the best solution is a suitable balance between the number of subdomains and the number of sampling points. Such an aspect is now examined searching for the three sections shown in Fig. 8 the corresponding interaction domains. Many tern of the internal actionsN,Mz,Myhave to be set and, as a consequence, many and diversified positions of the neutral axis have to be faced. In the following, several integration schemes are tested and compared, aiming to check the robustness of the proposed procedure as well to compare it with the widely used fiber method. The characteristics of the materials and the assumed constitutive laws are the same of the previous examples (see Table 1).For the sake of continuity, we start again with the square section of Fig. 8(a) and consider the caseN‾=0. The integration schemes are shown in Fig. 14and summarized in Table 2. The resulting interaction domains(Mz,My)are shown in Fig. 15. Fig. 15(a) groups together those having results that are more accurate and that lead to practically coincident domains, while Fig. 15(b) shows the less accurate ones. For the accurate solutions, Table 2 reports the total number of sampling points. From the same table we can see that by reducing the number of sampling points and the number of subdomains the accuracy decreases, but also that even with few subdomains (2×2) and a suitable choice of sampling points (4×4GLO) the same results of the more refined fiber discretization (12×12subdomains and only one integration point) are obtained.In particular, the histogram of Fig. 16clearly shows how an accurate result can be obtained also with half of the sampling points required by the fiber approach (64 versus 144 samplings). Finally, Fig. 17presents the full interaction domain surface, obtained through 16 subdomains and3×3Gauss–Lobatto integration points.The second example concerns the L-shaped R.C. section of Fig. 8(b). Fig. 18shows the integration schemes and Fig. 19presents the interaction domains(Mz,My)withN‾=0. Table 3summarizes, for each case, the total number of integration points, while Fig. 20compares these numbers for the case of solutions with same accuracy. The same accuracy is achieved by means of 144 sampling points with the fiber approach and by 64 sampling points with the present method. Fig. 21(a) shows the surface of 3D interaction domain. The relative bottom, top and lateral views are given in Fig. 21(b)–(d).A particular case is that of the circular hollow R.C. section (Fig. 8(c)). As known, in this case a large number of fibers is required in order to model the curved geometry of the section in a correct way. Differently, the present approach models automatically the generic sectorial domain and, by using two nested parametric transformations, converts it into the same unit square domain to which the integration rules refer. The discretization schemes are shown in Fig. 22and summarized in Table 4, which gives the total number of integration points. Fig. 23compares the interaction domains(Mz,My)withN‾=0. Fig. 24compares these numbers for the case of solutions with same accuracy. In particular, the histogram reported in Fig. 24 shows that, for the same accuracy, the classical fiber approach requires 740 samplings points, while the present approach only 64 (ten times less). Fig. 25(a) shows the surface of the 3D interaction domain. The relative bottom, top and lateral views are reported in Fig. 25(b)–(d).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
An improved sectional discretization strategy for evaluating the response of reinforced concrete sections is presented. The section is subdivided into parametric subdomains that allow the modelization of any complex geometry while taking advantage of the Gauss quadrature techniques. It is shown how the so-called fiber approach is simply a particular case of the present more general method. Tests of accuracy have been made with reference to square, L-shaped and hollow circular sections. Moment–curvature diagrams and biaxial and triaxial interaction domains have been computed and compared among them and with other solutions. The influence of the discretizations into subdomains and of the choice of the net of sampling points have been studied and discussed. The method is robust and presents a high level of accuracy, as well as the following advantages:–it fits better the geometry of sections with curved boundaries, thanks to the double parametric transformation;it offers a high flexibility in the discretization process, allowing to balance the number of subdomains and the number of sampling points. In doing this, the effects of spurious stress distributions in the zones in traction may be strongly reduced and made vanishing;the method shows to be robust and to converge faster than the fiber method, reducing the computational demand.All these properties are of great importance when the computations are iteratively repeated, as for the case of the sectional analyses within a computational procedure for a R.C. frame analysis.