@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A feasibility study of BBP for predicting shear capacity of FRP reinforced concrete beams without stirrups

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
BBP model for shear capacity prediction of FRP-RC beams without stirrups.Collection of a large dataset of FRP-RC beams failing in shear from the literature.Assessment of several shear design models available for FRP-RC beams.Evaluation of shear capacity trend against influencing parameters of FRP-RC beams.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Shear capacity,FRP reinforced concrete,Biogeography-based programming,Evolutionary computation,Empirical models,Experimental database,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Shear failure of concrete elements reinforced with Fiber Reinforced Polymer (FRP) bars is generally brittle, requiring accurate predictions to avoid it. In the last decade, a variety of artificial intelligence based approaches have been successfully applied to predict the shear capacity of FRP Reinforced Concrete (FRP-RC). In this paper, a new approach, namely, biogeography-based programming (BBP) is introduced for predicting the shear capacity of FRP-RC beams based on test results available in the literature. The performance of the BBP model is compared with several shear design equations, two previously developed artificial intelligence models and experimental results. It was found that the proposed model provides the most accurate results in calculating the shear capacity of FRP-RC beams among the considered shear capacity models. The proposed BBP model can also correctly predict the trend of different influencing variables on the shear capacity of FRP-RC beams.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The deterioration of reinforced concrete (RC) structures due to corrosion of steel reinforcement has become a serious and costly problem in recent decades [1–9]. In order to avoid such problem, the use of fiber reinforced polymer (FRP) bars as internal longitudinal flexural reinforcement has emerged as an alternative solution for structural members subjected to severe environmental exposure [4,8,10]. FRPs are non-corrodible materials with the potential of reducing life-cycle costs in applications where corrosion of steel reinforcements causes costly maintenance. The use of FRP bars, however, is not only limited to cases where corrosion is the main concern. FRP bars have remarkable properties, such as durability, high strength to weight ratio, non-magnetism and good fatigue properties making them attractive as reinforcement for RC structures [5,11]. They are most common in applications such as parking garages and bridge decks subject to severe corrosion from deicing salts, or in hospital magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) units where non-ferromagnetic systems are required. They have also been introduced in integrally insulated sandwich walls where low thermal conductivity is desired [12].Direct substitution of steel reinforcement with FRP materials is not possible without consideration of their structural performance [9]. Shear failure in RC beams is one of the most undesirable modes of failure due to its rapid progression. Consequently, for safe design, a number of guidelines and standards provide methods for shear design of FRP-RC members [13]. It is commonly accepted that the shear transfer in RC elements without transverse reinforcement is composed of several shear mechanisms including shear resisted by un-cracked concrete compressive zone, friction forces developed along the concrete crack length (aggregate interlock) and shear from dowel action of longitudinal reinforcement. The relative contribution of each mechanism changes as the load increases. In the case of FRP-RC beams without stirrups, FRP modulus of elasticity is significantly lower than that of steel bars. Consequently, crack widths are larger and shear stiffness of FRP reinforcement is lower, thus reducing both aggregate interlock and dowel action mechanisms [10].Several artificial intelligence (AI) methods are increasingly used as alternatives to more classical or conventional techniques. AI techniques have been used to solve complicated, practical problems in different sectors, such as engineering, economics, medicine, military, marine, etc., and are becoming more popular nowadays [14]. Symbolic regression (SR) is a relatively new branch of AI. It is a process of evolving summary expressions for available data by analyzing and modeling numerical multivariate data sets, when some data of unknown process are obtained. Unlike traditional linear and nonlinear regression methods that fit parameters to an equation of a given form, SR tries to form mathematical equations by searching the parameters and the form of equations [15,16]. In other words, SR searches nonlinear equation form and its parameters simultaneously for an addressed modeling problem. It attempts to derive a mathematical function to describe the relation between dependent and independent variables. The problem of SR is an optimization problem the purpose of which is finding the best combination of variables, symbols, and coefficients to develop an optimum model satisfying a set of fitness cases [16]. Depending on the type of optimization strategy applied for SR, different branches of SR have been introduced, such as Genetic programming (GP) [17], Immune programming (IP) [18], Dynamic ant programming (DAP) [19], Clone selection programming (CSP) [20] and artificial bee colony programming (ABCP) [16]. Various types of GP have been applied successfully in different areas of civil engineering. However, IP, DAP, CSP and ABCP are new branches of SR that need to be applied to a variety of real world problems and their performance should be investigated.Biogeography-Based Optimization (BBO) is one of the recent metaheuristic algorithms proposed by Simon, which is inspired by the geographical distribution and migration of species in an ecosystem [21]. In recent years, BBO has been comprehensively developed to the extent that it performs better than other widely used heuristic algorithms like genetic algorithms, ant colony optimization, particle swarm optimization, differential evolution, and simulated annealing for some well-known benchmarks [22–24]. BBO has been successfully applied to several practical problems, such as sensor selection problems for aircraft engine health diagnostics [21], groundwater possibility retrieval systems [25] and power flow problems [26].In this paper, Biogeography-Based Programming (BBP), inspired by BBO, is proposed as a new type of machine learning method for SR for predicting the shear capacity of FRP-RC beams. Moreover, a qualitative analysis of the influencing parameters using the proposed model is also carried out. The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents a literature review on different equations of several building codes and various AI methods for simulating the shear capacity of FRP-RC beams. Section 3 describes basic concepts of BBO, Section 4 introduces the proposed BBP model as a new machine learning approach. Section 5 describes the data and the parameter settings used in this work. In Section 6, the analysis of the results and the sensitivity analysis are presented, whereas Section 7 summarizes the main conclusions and achievements of the investigation.Because of the rapid increase of using FRP materials as internal reinforcement for concrete structures, there are international efforts to develop design guidelines. Therefore, several design equations have been proposed for predicting the shear capacity of FRP-RC beams without stirrups with varying success. These design equations address the unique characteristics of FRP reinforcement affecting the shear behavior of flexural members. Most of the shear design equations incorporated in these codes and guidelines have focused on modifying existing shear design equations for steel-RC beams to account for the substantial differences between FRP and steel reinforcement. For example, JSCE, BISE [28], CNR DT 203/2006 [29], ISIS-M03-07 [30], Tottori and Wakui [31] apply a correction factor Ef/Esthat takes into account the difference in the elastic moduli between FRP, Ef, and steel reinforcement, Es. However, this modification factor Ef/Esis raised to different powers in these guidelines [32]. On the other hand, the modification proposed by ACI-440.1R-06 [33], CAN/ CSA-S806-02 [34], Razaqpur and Isgor [35] and El-Sayed et al. [36] only includes the FRP reinforcement axial rigidity EfAf. Some of the shear design equations for shear capacity of FRP-RC beams are summarized in Table 1. Note that all strength reduction design factors used in these shear design equations are set equal to one for comparison purposes.Few researchers have applied several AI methods for predicting the shear capacity of FRP-RC beams. Kara [37] presented a simple improved model to calculate the concrete shear capacity of FRP-RC slender beams without stirrups based on the gene expression programming (GEP) approach. Bashir and Ashour [32] investigated the feasibility of using artificial neural networks (ANNs) to predict the shear capacity of FRP-RC beams without any shear reinforcement. Nasrollahzadeh and Basiri [38] developed an AI-based method using fuzzy inference system (FIS) to predict the shear capacity of FRP-RC beams. Lee and Lee [39] presented a theoretical model based on an artificial neural network (ANN) for predicting the shear capacity of slender FRP-RC flexural members without stirrups. All the above mentioned investigations concluded that their proposed models could predict to a high level of accuracy the shear capacity of FRP-RC beams without any shear reinforcement.Biogeography science is defined as the study of the distribution of species and ecosystems over the surface of the earth, in both space and time [40–43]. The distribution of species across the surface of the earth usually depends on a combination of environmental reasons. In the natural world, species tend to explore more suitable environments. A good habitat, tend to have a large number of species, has a high suitability index (HSI) and vice versa. During the progress of evolution, habitats with a high HSI have a low species immigration rate because they are already nearly saturated with species. Over time, the habitats with high HSI will have more species, while those with low HIS come to have fewer. Inspired by this idea, Simon [21] proposed a new evolutionary algorithm named Biogeography-Based Optimization (BBO). Mathematically speaking, a habitat presents a possible solution for the optimization problem. BBO utilizes mathematical models to describe the biogeographical behavior using migration, mutation and the distribution of species [43]. In the following, the main components of BBO are explained.Migration is a probabilistic operator. The migration rates of each solution are used to modify existing solution by sharing features within the population. For each feature of a given solution yk, the immigration rate λkof ykdetermines the probability of immigration of current solution. If the solution ykis selected for immigration, then the emigrating solution yjis probabilistically chosen based on the emigration rate µj. Migration is written as [44]:yk(s)←yj(s)where s is a solution feature. Immigration and emigration rates are functions of the number of species in the habitat, such as the linear migration curves in Fig. 1.Mutation is a probabilistic operator that randomly modifies a solution feature. The purpose of mutation is to enhance the diversity of the population which helps to decrease the chances of getting trapped in local optima [44].Similar to other automatic programming algorithms, the proposed BBP aims at developing to a mathematical expression. This, basically, is an explicit relation between one or more inputs and an output using mathematical “symbols” functions, variables and constants. The process of programming is a subset of symbolic function identification and it differs from conventional regression in that it does not calculate the coefficients/functions. The way it finds equations is by carrying out an extensive, continuously improving guided search in an evolving search space.The proposed BBP continues the trend of dealing with the problem of representation in BBO by increasing the complexity of the structures undergoing adaptation. In particular, the structures undergoing adaptation in BBP are general, hierarchical computer programs of dynamically varying size and shape. The proposed BBP is based on mathematical models of biogeography describing natural ways of distributing species, i.e., how species migrate, how they arise and become extinct. The BBP serves to provide a platform with operators such as random generation, mutation and migration that produce, alter and select habitats in population. This is facilitated by storing expression in tree data structures in the computer memory. Tree structures are easy to swap parts of the program and append or remove parts, which are operations carried out by habitation operators. A habitat consists of one or more sub-habitats and the performance of sub-habitats determines the efficiency of the corresponding habitat. Each sub-habitat has mathematically an expression tree and the aggregation of sub-habitats constitute a habitat. Fig. 2illustrates tree structure of a sub-habitat and the corresponding habitat.The flowchart of BBP is shown in Fig. 3and the main steps of this proposed metaheuristic programming are explained in detail below.-Create initial population (P0): it consists of n initial habitats that are generated with a randomized selection procedure. Each habitat consists of one or more sub-habitats and presents a possible solution of the regression problem. Aggregation of sub-habitats by summation operator constructs habitat which has mathematically an expression tree consisting of variables, functions and constants.Evaluate the solutions: the goal of BBP is to find a habitat that performs well for all patterns in the database with low error. In the BBP, habitat suitability index (HSI) is used for evaluating each solution. In the proposed algorithm, the term HSI is the root mean squared error (RMSE) defined in Eq. (3) below, which must be minimized. Habitat with a high HSI has a low RMSE and tends to have a large number of species. RMSE minimization results in "better" expressions over the generations. The best expression is chosen as the expression with greatest HSI or least RMSE.Determination of emigration and immigration rates: the immigration rate λ is assigned to control habitat immigration. The maximum immigration rate in a single habitat (I) occurs when there are no species in this habitat. As the number of species in a habitat increases, it will become crowded and, consequently, fewer species would be able to survive in this habitat and the immigration will subsequently decrease. Emigration rate µ is another attribute of a habitat in BBP that controls habitat emigration. If there are no species in a habitat, its emigration is null. As the number of species increases, species are capable to leave their habitat in order to explore other and maybe better residences. The maximum emigration rate (E) occurs in a single habitat when containing the maximum number of species it can support.Create and evaluate new solutions using migration operator (P1): The migration operator is used to migrate species between two habitats according to their immigration and emigration rates. The migration from one habitat to another one is done by swapping a part of a sub-habitat of one habitat with a part of a sub-habitat of the other. The migration operator used for the BBP proceeds by the following steps:-Choose two habitats based on their immigration and emigration rates. The habitat with high HSI is more probable to be selected for emigration and the chance of habitat with low HSI being selected for immigration is high; indeed, the migration from a habitat with high HSI to a habitat with low HSI is more probable. The candidate habitats for emigration and immigration are named emigrated and immigrated habitats, respectively.Select separately two random sub-habitats from the emigrated and immigrated habitats.Choose separately two random subtrees from the above selected sub-habitats.Migrate the selected subtree from the chosen sub-habitat of the emigrated habitat to the selected subtree from the chosen sub-habitat of the immigrated habitat. The resulting tree is a new habitat that its depth should be checked.The process of migration operator is shown, using two arbitrary simple expressions as selected sub-habitats of emigrated and immigrated habitats, in Fig. 4. After the new habitat was created, its HSI is evaluated and saved in migrated population P1.Create and evaluate new solutions using mutation operator (P2): the mutation operator introduces random changes in the structures of the habitats in the population P0. In this regard, a random sub-habitat from one random habitat is selected and a random point within its tree structure is chosen. Then, mutation operator removes whatever is currently at the selected point and whatever is below the selected point and inserts a randomly generated subtree at that point. This operator is controlled by a parameter that specifies the maximum size of tree depth for the newly created subtree that is to be inserted. This process is shown in Fig. 5, where an arbitrary simple sub-habitat from a random selected habitat is mutated by replacing one of its subtrees with a random tree. After applying the mutation operator, the performance of the created habitat is evaluated and saved in mutated population P2.Greedy selection among P0, P1and P2and overwrite the n best solutions on P0:In this section, the populations P0, P1 and P2 are merged and the n best habitats based on greedy selection of habitats in the merged population are selected. Then, the old population P0 is replaced with a new population.Investigation of the stopping criteria:Termination is the criterion by which the BBP decides whether to continue searching or stop the search. Each of the enabled termination criterion is checked after each generation to see whether it is time to stop the process. Different types of stopping criteria may be implemented, for example generation number, time period, fitness threshold, the number of node evaluations, etc.The model's success in predicting the shear capacity of FRP-RC beams depends on comprehensiveness of the training data. Availability of large variety of experimental data was required to develop the relationship between the effective parameters on shear capacity and its measured properties. Based on the previous research studies, the basic effective parameters that affecting the shear capacity of FRP-RC beams are the width of web (bw), effective depth of beam (d), shear span to depth ratio (a/d), concrete compressive strength (fc′), longitudinal reinforcement ratio (ρf) and elastic modulus of FRP bars (Ef) [35,45–49]. An experimental database of 138 test specimens failed in shear was obtained from different previous investigations [31,36,45,47,49–65]. During the collection stage, specimens with shear span to depth ratios between 2.4 and 6.5 were included but deeper and slender beams were omitted from the database. In order to reduce the noise in the database collected, the output values of specimens with the same input values were averaged and included in database as a single entry. Of the 87 test specimens in the refined database, 77 were beams and the other 10 were one way slabs. All test specimens in the database have no transverse shear reinforcement and were simply supported tested under either one or two point loads acting symmetrically with respect to the centerline of the beam span as depicted schematically in Fig. 6. The limit values of input and output variables are listed in Table 2. Also, the complete list of data is given in Table A.1, where the name and the source of each specimen are referenced.In order to investigate the generalization capability of the BBP model, the experimental database is divided into two sets, namely training and testing data sets. The formulation is based on the training sets and is further tested by test set values to measure its generalization capability. The patterns used in test and training sets are randomly selected. However, the distribution of each influencing parameters across its range in training data set was manually examined to ensure that it covers a good spread within the range considered. Of the 87 specimens in database, 70 specimens were taken for training process and the remaining 17 specimens were used for testing of the proposed model.The scaling of the data samples is always recommended in system modeling. In this study, data samples were scaled in the range −1 and 1 using the following linear equation:(1)Xn=2(X−Xmin)Xmax−Xmin−1where Xmin, Xmax and Xndenote the minimum, maximum and scaled value of the X data sample, respectively. It should be noted that any new input data should be normalized before simulated by the BBP and the corresponding predicted values should be un-normalized before use.In order to evaluate the model results, it is important to define the criteria by which the performance of the model and its prediction accuracy are assessed. The best model was chosen on the basis of a multi-objective strategy as follows [66,67]:i.Selecting the simplest model, although this is not a predominant factor.Providing the best fitness value on the training data.Providing the best fitness value on the validation data.The first objective can be controlled by the user through the parameter settings (e.g., tree depth or the number of habitats). For the other two objectives, the following objective function (OBJ) is used as a measure of how well the model predicted output agrees with the experimentally measured output. The selection of the best BBP model is based on the minimization of the objective function (OBJ) below [68]:(2)OBJ=(No.Train−No.TestNo.Train+No.Test)RMSETrain+MAETrainRTrain+1+2No.TestNo.Train+No.Test×RMSETest+MAETestRTest+1where No.Train and No.Test are the number of training and testing data, respectively. RMSE, MAE and R are, respectively, the root mean squared error, mean absolute error and correlation coefficient and calculated using the following equations [68]:(3)RMSE=∑i=1n(hi2−ti2)n(4)MAE=∑i=1n|hi−ti|n(5)R=∑i=1n(hi−h¯i)(ti−t¯i)∑i=1n(hi−h¯i)2∑i=1n(ti−t¯i)2In which hiand tiare, respectively, actual and calculated outputs for ith output,h¯iandt¯iare the average of actual and predicted outputs, respectively, and n is the number of samples. The constructed objective function simultaneously takes into account the changes of R, RMSE and MAE. Higher R and lower RMSE, MAE values result in lowering OBJ, and hence indicate a more precise model. In addition, the above function considers the effects of different data divisions for the training and testing data sets [68]. Another statistical parameter, namely, mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) for training and testing data was also used as defined below:(6)MAPE=1n∑i=1n|hi−ti|ti×100Six input parameters, bw, d, a/d,fc′, ρfand Ef, were used to create the BBP model. The parameter selection affects the model generalization capacity of BBP. Several runs were conducted to come up with a parameterization of BBP that provided enough robustness and generalization for the prediction of shear capacity of FRP reinforced concrete elements. Table 3presents the parameter settings for the BBP algorithm. As shown in this table, four basic arithmetic operators (+, −, ×, /) and basic mathematical functions (log(|x|), |x|y, x2, x3, x4, x5,|x|,|x|3,|x|4and|x|5) were utilized to get the optimum BBP model. In this problem, each habitat is a nonlinear formula for predicting the shear capacity of FRP-RC beams which is stated according to the above defined functions. The number of habitats in the population, that BBP will evolve, is set by the population size. Indeed, each population consists of different candidate formulas for predicting the shear capacity of FRP-RC beams. A run will take longer with a larger population size as more number of candidate formulas should be evaluated. The maximum generation sets the stopping criteria of a run. The proper number of population and generation depends on the number of possible solutions and complexity of problem. Three levels were set for the population size. The habitat architectures of the models evolved by BBP include initial tree size, maximum tree size and the number of sub-habitats. The initial tree size parameter sets the size of the candidate shear capacity formula in the first population at the start of each run and the maximum tree size parameter determines its complexity in the evolved model during each run. The number of terms in the model is determined by the number of sub-habitats. Increasing the number of sub-habitats produces more complicated formula for shear capacity of FRP-RC beams and significantly increases the computational time. In the current modelling, three and two levels were considered for the maximum tree size and the number of sub-habitats, respectively. The addition linking function was used to link the mathematical terms encoded in each sub-habitat. Different combinations of the parameters are considered, namely three levels for the population size, three levels for the maximum tree size and two levels for the number of sub-habitats, giving a total of 18 different combinations. All of these combinations were tested and ten replications for each combination were carried out. Therefore, the overall number of BBP runs was equal to 18×10=180. Moreover, the total number of 540,000,000 candidate formulas for predicting the shear capacity of FRP-RC beams was evaluated. The success of the BBP algorithm usually increases with increasing the population size, maximum tree size and the number of sub-habitats. In this case, the complexity of the evolved functions and subsequently the shear capacity formula of FRP-RC beams increases and the speed of the algorithm decreases.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
An empirical formulation using the Biogeographical-Based Programming (BBP) algorithm for predicting the shear capacity of FRP-RC beams based on test results available in the literature has been developed. The BBP model uses the web width (bw), effective depth (d), shear span to depth ratio (a/d), concrete compressive strength (fc′), longitudinal FRP reinforcement ratio (ρf) and elastic modulus of FRP bars (Ef) as the main parameters affecting the shear capacity. Different BBP models were executed and the best BBP model was chosen for further investigation and qualitative study. The final BBP model has population, sub-habitat and maximum tree sizes of 500, 3 and 9, respectively. Overall, the performance of the BBP model showed a slightly better comparison with experimental results than the artificial neural network (ANN), Genetic expression programming (GEP) and existing shear design equations. This study has shown that the feasibility of the potential use of BBP model in predicting the shear capacity of FRP-RC beams. The proposed BBP algorithm has also correctly predicted the trend of different influencing parameters on the shear capacity of FRP-RC beams.Table A.1