@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Integration of computational fluid dynamics simulation and statistical factorial experimental design of thick-wall crude oil pipeline with heat loss

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
CFD with statistics was developed for flow simulation in a thick-wall pipeline.Crude oil temperature decreased along pipeline length and radius.Heat transfer coefficient and ambient temperature were the effect parameters.Increasing heat transfer coefficient decreases the wax appearance distance.Increasing ambient temperature increases the wax appearance distance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Thick-wall,Pipeline,Crude oil,Wax appearance distance,Experimental design,Computational fluid dynamics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The aim of this study was to explore the heat transfer behavior between convection and conduction in the thick wall crude oil pipeline with laminar unsteady state flow using integration of developed computational fluid dynamics model and statistical experimental design. The governing equations were employed to investigate the effects of wall thickness, wall thermal conductivity, surrounding heat transfer coefficient and ambient temperature on transport profile using statistical experimental design and to locate an origin point where wax precipitate in the pipeline (wax appearance distance) by using response surface methodology (RSM). A good agreement between the model and literature experimental data suggests that the proposed numerical scheme is suitable for simulating the transport profile in pipeline and predicting the phenomena for any other conditions. From the statistical analysis, it was found that, surrounding heat transfer coefficient and ambient temperature were the major effect parameters on the wax appearance distance.wall thickness/coded factor of wall thickness (−)pipe thermal conductivity/coded factor of pipe thermal conductivity (−)surrounding heat transfer coefficient/coded factor of surrounding heat transfer coefficient (−)ambient temperature/coded factor of ambient temperature (−)pipe diameter (m)heat transfer coefficient (kW/m2°C)inner wall heat transfer coefficient (kW/m2°C)outer wall heat transfer coefficient (kW/m2°C)thermal conductivity (kW/m°C)pipe length (m)inner wall radius (m)outer wall radius (m)heat resistance (m2°C/kW)source termtime (s)temperature (°C)x-velocity (m/s)y-velocity (m/s)x-directionwall thickness (m)y-directionwax appearance distance (m)dependent variabledensity (kg/m3)diffusion coefficientambientfluid/crude oil

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Transportation of crude oil by pipelines is the general process in petroleum industry. Generally, pipelines are made of various materials which have different ability to conduct heat. Consequently, the heat affects the transport properties of the crude oil leading to operational efficiency. The proper selection of materials for the pipeline brings the effective production system [1]. Stainless steel has the thermal conductivity of 15.1W/mK while copper has the very high thermal conductivity of 401.0W/mK [2]. This variety of thermal conductivity affects the performance of a heat exchanger between crude oil and surrounding outside the pipe [3]. In this study, the conjugated heat transfer coupling between wall convection and conduction were concerned [4]. The analysis of this problem was carried out to study the effect of parameters which related to thick-wall problem such as wall thickness, pipe thermal conductivity, surrounding heat transfer coefficient and ambient temperature on the hydrodynamics changing in transport profile inside the pipeline. All these parameters have an important role in designing the pipeline system.The heat and mass transfers of crude oil through pipelines are very complicated process because there are many factors which affect transport profile [5]. The knowledge in computational fluid dynamics (CFD) is therefore required for better understanding the flow behavior and for predicting the phenomena inside pipeline. Wang et al. [6] determined an optimized pigging frequency using experimental method and wax deposition model. Zhu et al. [7] investigated the thermal influential factors affecting the crude oil temperature in double pipelines system using the computational fluid dynamics methodology. However, in most of previous studies focusing on convective heat transfer, wall conduction was ignored because of the assumption of extremely thin wall. This may distort crude oil transport profile at the wall boundary condition. Thus, besides the heat convection, the heat conduction through the pipe wall should also be considered.The aim of this study was to develop the computational fluid dynamics model for investigating the effect of thick-wall pipeline on the transport profile using statistical experimental design. In the literature, the experimental results on integration of computational fluid dynamics simulation and statistical experimental design were limited. This analysis will be helpful for preventing and solving real problems which may emerge during the crude oil transportation such as precipitation of wax.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Computational fluid dynamics model was developed to investigate the effect of the parameters related to the thick-wall pipe (wall thickness, pipe thermal conductivity, surrounding heat transfer coefficient and ambient temperature) on the transport profile of crude oil inside pipeline. It is found that all the obtained flow patterns from the developed CFD simulation program were quite similar. These results had good agreement with the information in the previous literatures. The profile without thick-wall pipeline was different from the one with thick-wall pipeline which confirmed the importance of thick-wall condition. The influences of various parameters on transport profile were analyzed using statistical experimental design. The result showed that surrounding heat transfer coefficient (C), ambient temperature (D) and their interaction (CD) had significant effect on the wax appearance distance near the pipe wall while the parameters that affected on the wax appearance distance near the pipe center were surrounding heat transfer coefficient (C) and ambient temperature (D). In addition, the obtained mathematical model can be used for optimizing the system problem. To apply this knowledge in real situation, pipeline system should be carefully designed based on the prevention of the occurrence of wax inside the pipeline.