@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fracture properties of cement and alkali activated fly ash based concrete with application to segmental tunnel lining

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Cement and alkali activated fly ash based concrete is analyzed.Fracture properties of various compositions are investigated both experimentally and numerically.Primary attention is accorded to the influence of the amount of fly ash replacing cement on fracture energy.The influence of short synthetic fibers on mechanical properties is also studied.Artificial neural network is introduced to provide parameters of the constitutive model.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fly ash,Fiber reinforced concrete,Fracture energy,Finite element simulation,Artificial neural network,Inverse analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Several cement and alkali activated fly ash based concrete samples are examined in this paper with emphasis on their fracture properties. These are first obtained from an extensive experimental program. The measured loading curves are then compared with those derived numerically in the framework of an inverse approach. Here, the artificial neural network and the ATENA finite element code are combined to constitute the optimization driver that allows for a reliable determination of the modulus of elasticity, fracture energy, and tensile strength of individual concretes. A brief introduction to the numerical analysis of fiber reinforced specimens again in conjunction with inverse analysis is also provided.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Substituting an ordinary Portland cement by aluminosilicate materials such as fly ash in the production of concrete has been at the forefront of engineering interest for several decades [1,2]. A recent overview of potential applications is available in [3,4]. A considerable attention in particular has been devoted to the level of paste, see e.g. [5–7, to cite a few], to acquire a fundamental understanding about the evolution of individual material phases during the alkali-activation process. Therein, various micromechanical models combined with nanoindentation measurements were used to address this subject. On the contrary, large scale macroscopic laboratory tests are typically performed when studying the level of concrete [8,9]. This approach is adopted also in this study and extended by introducing a simulation phase to derive not directly measurable mechanical parameters such as the tensile strength [10].Since the proposed mixtures are expected to appear in the production of the segments of lining often used in hostile environment, we open the experimental part of this study by reporting in Section 3.1 on the current state of measurements of material degradation due to the activity of acid solutions. Section 3.2 then continues with mechanical testing under static conditions and concentrates on fracture properties of the proposed mixtures. Henceforth, to distinguish individual samples the word “mixture” is assumed in a broader sense as a reference to an associated concrete. While fracture properties play a central role in the modeling of quasi-brittle response of concrete, the judgment as to the practical applicability of a particular mixture in the tunnel design is driven by its compressive strength here required to exceed the value of class C50/60 concrete. Therefore, standard compressive tests were included in the experimental program.As already suggested, a simple test to directly measure the tensile strength of concrete to be used in numerical simulations is not available. However, this material property can be derived from an inverse approach by matching the laboratory measurements and the results found by reproducing the same test numerically. This approach has been used in the past to calibrate quite complex materials including composites [11] or constitutive models such as the modified cam-clay model used in geotechnical engineering [12] or microplane model for concrete [13]. Here, we proceed in the footsteps of Lehký et al. [14,10] and use the artificial neural network (ANN) as a tool to drive the associated optimization problem. Conveniently, the ATENA finite element program [15] is exploited to simulate the fracture test numerically. Details are provided in Section 4.Apart from proving sufficient durability the mixtures used for a tunnel lining should possess good fire resistance properties particularly with regard to spalling. It has been demonstrated that this unpleasant feature can be successfully treated by adding a relatively small volume fraction of short fibers into original mixtures [16,17]. Thus examining the influence of fiber reinforcement also on the mechanical behavior of fiber reinforced concrete seems reasonable. Though this is an ongoing research topic, some preliminary results related to numerical simulations and material parameters identification again with the help of ANN and ATENA code are discussed in Section 5.A concise summary of the presented work is finally given in Section 6.To introduce the subject we first present the list of all examined mixtures. For the sake of completeness, those already mentioned in our preliminary work [8,9] are also provided. As a reference mixture, in terms of the grading curve, see Table 1, and bonding components, we considered a standard cement based concrete (C) in the first column of Table 2, which by far exceeds the required compressive strength of 60MPa [8,9]. The remaining mixtures assumed either partial or total replacement of cement by fly ash.In particular, low-calcium fly ash coming from the Mělnı́k (FAM) and Opatovice (FAO) thermal electric power plants was used. Several groups of specimens with partial replacement of cement by fly ash were considered and denoted as FAC-30-M, FAC-70-M, FAC-30-O, FAC-70-O and FAC-80-O, where numbers represent the percentage of fly ash with respect to cement, M stands for the Mělnı́k and O for the Opatovice power plant, respectively. Specific compositions are listed in Table 2. As it is seen, no activation components were used for these mixtures. On the contrary, the last group denoted as FA-100-O assumed a total replacement of concrete by fly ash activated by strong alkaline liquids such as a mixture of NaOH pellets dissolved in tap water and sodium silicate in the form of water glass, see the last column in Table 2.To study the effect of fiber reinforcement, we limited our attention to standard concrete (C) samples only. These were modified by adding 0.5% of volume of synthetic fibers Forta-Ferro. This amounted to 4.5kg of fibers per 1m3 of the mixture. As demonstrated in Section 5, the numerical simulations of such composites can reproduce the laboratory tests rather well. These results are quite encouraging promoting further research towards FAC fiber reinforced systems in the future.This section summarizes the derivation of basic mechanical properties from laboratory measurements. The amount of material degradation at various stages of exposure to acid solution is linked here to the evolution of the dynamic modulus of elasticity. The three-point bending tests discussed next were performed to provide the standard fracture properties including the fracture energy and fracture toughness. These tests also allowed for back calculation of the modulus of elasticity and then independently for the compressive strength measured on cubic samples cut from the fractured specimens.This particular experiment serves to address a potential influence of a long term action of aggressive groundwater on mechanical properties of examined mixtures. Following the discussion with experts in tunnel construction we chose a sulfate solution as the decisive element in evaluating the resistivity of tunnel lining. A dynamic modulus of elasticity is adopted here to verify the potential material degradation. The measurements were carried out with the help of a non-destructive ultrasound method on cubic 150×150×150mm specimens. The MATEST Ultrasonic tester (palmer “High Technology” with microprocessor for combined ultrasonic and rebound hammer data acquisition and processing C372N) was employed to determine the time of wave propagation. The dynamic modulus of elasticity EDYNthen follows from(1)EDYN=ρLT2k2,where ρ is the bulk weight of the material, L and T represent the length of a measuring base and an average time of wave propagation, respectively, and k is the dimensionless coefficient depending on the relation of L and T attaining the value of either 1 or 1.0541.Since this is an ongoing experiment, we report only the results collected in a relatively short period of 17months for concrete specimens and 13months for alkali activated fly ash based mixtures. Table 3lists the actual values of dynamic moduli for a particular period of time. Note that the initial value corresponds to dry conditions. This value typically increases upon soaking the specimen into a liquid solution, which explains the initial increase of this value measured after 4 and 7months, respectively. An onset of degradation process, although at a very slow rate, can be observed when comparing the initial values with those corresponding to time period of 17 (C, FAC-30-M specimens) and 13 (FA-100-O specimens) months. Taking the change of EDYNin water as a reference value equal to zero, we may evaluate the influence of aggressive solution upon plotting the change of EDYNfor a given solution with respect to this reference value. The results appear in Fig. 1.This part of the experimental program was executed at the Brno University of Technology. Each mixture, recall Table 2, was represented by a set of three specimens having dimensions of 100×100×400mm with a notch depth equal approximately to the one third of the specimen height, see Fig. 6a. All specimens were subjected to a three-point bending test. The Heckert FPZ 100/1 loading machine was used to load the specimens at the age of 28days in a displacement-controlled loading regime. A sufficiently low loading rate was applied to comply with the expected static loading conditions. The experimental set-up is shown in Fig. 2a. The resulting load–deflection diagrams (F–v) are plotted for the selected specimens in Fig. 2b. These were constructed from the data collected by the HBSM SPIDER 8 measuring device and corrected for the descending part of a loading diagram to account for the potential loss of stability, see [18] for further details. The F–v curves were first explored, see the following paragraphs, to extract the required fracture properties and subsequently utilized in Section 4 in the identification part of this study.As presented in [19] the effective critical stress intensity factorKICeffdetermined for a geometry dependent effective crack length aefffrom the effective crack model can be used to identify the onset of unstable fracture. For the three point bending test it follows from(2)KICeff=6MmaxaeffY1(aeff/W)Y2(aeff/W,S/W)/(BW2),where Mmaxis the maximum moment at the mid span, and S, W, B are the support distance (equal to 300mm for our particular case, see Fig. 6a), and height and width of the specimen, respectively. Specific forms of the polynomial functions Y1 and Y2 are available, e.g. in [19, Chapter 6]. Some improvements for non-standard specimen dimensions falling out of the recommended range, supported by an extensive parametric studies, can be found in [20]. The results are summarized in Table 4.The term COV in Table 4 stands for the coefficient of variation and RV represents the relative value taken with respect to sample FAC-30-M. Clearly, the samples with a larger amount of fly ash do not perform particularly well in comparison to the reference mixture FAC-30-M, which was found to have properties close to mixture C in Table 2, see [8,9].Fracture energy is the material property playing a central role in numerical simulations of quasi-brittle materials. Given the loading curve, it follows from the formula provided by RILEM as(3)GF=(WF+mgvmax)/Alig,where Aligis the projected fracture area, mg is the specimen weight, vmaxis the maximum vertical deflection at failure and WFrepresents the area under the F–v loading curve, see Fig. 2b. In the present study it was evaluated using a simple trapezoidal rule in the form(4)WF=∑i=1NFiΔvi,where Δviis the increment of maximum vertical deflection between two recorded measurements i−1 and i, Fiis the corresponding average force and N is the total number of measurements. Since having only a minor effect on the final value, the second term in the brackets of Eq. (3) was neglected.From the fracture resistance point of view, the results listed in Table 5confirm a decreasing trend of the performance of individual mixtures with an increasing amount of fly ash, compare the last columns in Tables 4 and 5.The initial “elastic” range of the loading curve can be used to estimate also the elastic Young modulus. To that end, the following formula can be adopted, see [19, Chapter 6](5)E=Fi4BviSW1+5qS8Fi+WS22.70+1.35qSFi-0.84WS3+9Fi2Bvi1+qS2FiSW2F1(a0/W),where q is the specimen self-weight per unit length, a0 is the initial crack length (Fi, vi) are the corresponding pairs of values from the elastic range of the loading curve, and(6)F1(a0/W)=∫0a0/WxY2(x)dx.The geometry function Y(x) for the three-point bending test is available, e.g. in [19, Chapter 2].Alternatively, the Young modulus can be found directly from bending stiffness by averaging several values pertinent to the selected interval in the elastic range of the loading curve. The corresponding results are presented in Table 6.Finally, standard compression tests were carried out to acquire the compressive strength of individual mixtures. The tested cubic specimens having dimensions 100×100×100 were cut from undamaged remainders of the fractured specimens. This ensured that the same material compositions as used in the fracture tests were examined. The results stored in Table 7indicate that all mixtures with high (above 70%) volume of fly ash do not meet the required compressive strength.The inability of alkali-activated mixtures (FA-100-O) to reach this value can be attributed to the insufficient curing temperature of about 40–45°C. Typically, the curing temperature of such composites amounts to about 65–80°C to sufficiently accelerate the hydration process. However, such conditions would create an insuperable obstacle for mass production. As for the FAC-70(80)-M(O) samples, we draw the reader’s attention to Fig. 3showing the resulting fracture surfaces. In particular, a relatively large porosity evident in Fig. 3c and d can be hold responsible not only for the low compressive strength, but also for a generally worse performance in comparison to the reference mixture plotted as a compact specimen in Fig. 3a. Further to this subject, smaller values of fracture properties, being in accord with a small ultimate strength, of alkali activated fly ash based specimens (FA-100-O) can be blamed on an uneven distribution of stone aggregates within the sample as seen in Fig. 3b. This is primarily attributed to non-optimal composition, in particular the amount of water, which was kept comparable to other mixtures. Modifications are currently under way to avoid this undesirable feature.This section offers the possibility of estimating the material parameters from fracture-mechanics tests by matching the experimentally measured and numerically derived loading curves.As mentioned in the introductory part, the ATENA finite element code [15] was used to simulate the three-point bending test numerically. A 3D Non Linear Cementitious 2 material model was selected to govern the gradual evolution of localized damage. The model is formulated in the total format assuming additive decomposition of small strains and the initial isotropy of a material. The local constitutive equation then reads(7)σijn=σijn-1+DijklΔεkl-Δεklp-Δεklf,(8)εij=εije+εijp+εijf,where n and n−1 represent two successive iterations, Dijklstands for the elastic stiffness tensor and the total strain tensor εijcan be split into elasticεije, plasticεijpand fracturingεijfparts. The latter two terms in Eq. (8) are linked to the adopted yield condition. In particular, the tensile behavior is governed by the Rankine-type criterion with exponential softening, see Figs. 4b and 5a, written as(9)FiR=σii-fi,t=0,where fi,trepresents the tensile strength in the ith-direction. In compression the Menétrey–Willam yield surface with hardening and softening phases is used, see Figs. 4a and 5b. This function attains the form(10)FMW=3Jfc2+mJfcr(θ,e)+3σm3fc-c=0,m=fc2-ft2fcftee+1,r(θ,e)=4(1-e2)cos2θ+(2e-1)22(1-e2)cosθ+(2e-1)[4(1-e2)cos2θ+5e2-4e]12,whereσm,J=J2,θare the mean stress, square root of the second invariant of the deviatoric stress and Lode’s angle, respectively, fc, ftstand for the compressive and tensile strength, and parameter e∈〈0.5,1〉 defines the roundness of the failure surface. Two-dimensional projections of the two criteria are displayed in Fig. 4.The fracture model employs the orthotropic smeared crack formulation and the fixed crack model with the mesh adjusted softening modulus both in tension and compression as plotted in Fig. 5. This model is defined on the basis of characteristic element dimensions in tension and compression to ensure the objectivity in the strain-softening regime. Further details are available in [15].Fig. 6shows various finite element meshes adopted in this analysis. The model dimensions and the type and location of supports complies with the actual tested sample displayed in Fig. 6a. The analysis was performed under plane stress conditions.To reproduce the laboratory test numerically is one particular step in the identification process, which can be formulated as a certain minimization problem in the form(11)x=argminxF(x),where the vectorx={E, ft, GF}Tlists the variables subject to identification. These were selected on the basis of sensitivity analysis [21]. Function F(x) is the objective function defined in terms of pairs of valuesV¯(Fi,vi)found experimentally, recall Section 3.2, and V(Fi, vi) derived from numerical simulations. Standard least square error type of the objective function F(x) is often used(12)F(x)=∑i=1N(V¯(Fi,vi)-V(Fi,vi))2,where N is the total number of points selected from a given loading curve.A vast number of solution strategies can be found in the literature to solve Eq. (11). These usually arise from stochastic optimization algorithms exploiting genetic algorithms, simulated annealing methods or their combination, see e.g. [22] for further discussion. Herein, we report on the approach formulated on the basis of artificial neural network (ANN).Identification was carried out using the FraMePID-3PB software developed in order to automate the time consuming process of an ANN-based inverse analysis. The whole analysis is based on a standardized fracture test of a central notch beam specimen in a three-point bending configuration. The cornerstone of the method is an artificial neural network which transfers the input data obtained from the fracture test to the desired material parameters. For theoretical details on the ANN-based inverse analysis, as these go beyond the present scope, we refer the interested reader to [23,14]. The FraMePID-3PB software itself is described in depth in [24] as part of this issue. Graphical illustration of the presented test within the FraMePID-3PB environment is available in Fig. 7showing also the basic features of the adopted constitutive model discussed previously.The implemented ANN is of a feed-forward multilayer type. The network consisted of 3 inputs, one hidden layer having 5 neurons with a non-linear transfer function (hyperbolic tangent) and an output layer having 3 neurons with a linear transfer function, see Fig. 8. Each of the output neurons corresponds to one of the identified parameter. The size of training set was set to 100 samples generated using the Latin Hypercube Sampling method [25]. To train ANN Levenberg–Marquardt optimization method [26] and genetic algorithms were used. Once ANN was trained the experimental response was used to obtain identified parameters. With this set of parameters a numerical analysis was carried out and the resulting response was compared with the experimental one. The resulting loading curves that correspond to the identified parameters are labeled with a star symbol in Fig. 9.Note that apart from the identified parameters the selected constitutive model required inputting the material specific weight and its compressive strength. As for the former one, all mixtures showed a relatively low variability promoting a single value of 23kN/m3 to be used in all calculations. The latter one was adopted from Table 7. Nevertheless, this type of experiment is almost insensitive to the actual value of the compressive strength so that the default value offered by the program is equally applicable if no measurements are available.The resulting values of the optimized parametersx={E, ft, GF}Ttogether with their statistics are summarized in Tables 8–10. Their evaluation in the light of experimental measurements is available in Table 11. Clearly, the difference between the measured and calculated values is less than 10% for a majority of examined mixtures. Note that these parameters were not found from a direct comparison (one by one match), but from the match of macroscopic response represented here by the loading curves. Thus why bother with identification analysis once the experimental results are available? To answer this question, we would like to recall complications associated with laboratory measurements of this quantity, which is typically estimated from the measurements of strength in transverse tension. The results reported in [8] showed that the two quantities may differ by more than 25%.It is doubtless the finite element mesh used in the analyses encountering softening and localization of inelastic strain plays a significant role in the response prediction. In the present study the mesh plotted in Fig. 6b was used in the identification analysis. The corresponding distributions of the localized damage obtained slightly after passing the peak load and at the final failure appear in Fig. 10a and b. Suppose that a different mesh, for example the one in Fig. 6c labeled as Mesh-1, is used in reproducing the laboratory experiment. Observe that this mesh, though unstructured but still fine enough with respect to large scale practical applications, produces a rather distributed pattern of cracks, see Fig. 10c, which projects into much stiffer response displayed in Fig. 11for two selected mixtures. Further mesh refinement, rendering again a more or less regular mesh in the failure region, Mesh-2 in Fig. 6d, yields the crack pattern localized again into a single row of elements as evident in Fig. 10d and consequently recovering the response provided by the original Mesh-ANN, see Fig. 11.This pathological dependence of the structural response on the finite element mesh, though attempted to be removed by various non-local formulations [27,28], gradient plasticity formulations [29] or mesh adjusted softening modulus as implemented in the ATENA code, is known and cannot be completely avoided. This is not the issue of the material identification problem being concern with a material rather than a structural response, but should certainly be taken into account when performing a large scale structural analysis where it is reasonable to expect relatively coarse meshes. On the other hand, one may object that a different set of parameters might be obtained with a different mesh while still matching the loading curves. However, this is a perfect example that any numerical simulations should be supported, if possible, by independent laboratory measurements as already suggested by Drucker [30] by saying: “…Theory awaits experiment and experiment awaits theory in wide variety of fields. Often two must go hand in hand if significant progress is to be made…”.A positive impact of short fiber reinforcements on concrete response particularly in fire resistant applications is well known. A numerical simulation of these composites is, however, not an easy task as a proper material model for a fiber reinforced concrete, taking into account all possible failure mechanisms including fiber pull-out, is not generally available in commercial codes. If, on the other hand, we are interested in the macroscopic response only, it appears plausible to exercise the CCSmeardReinf material model implemented in the ATENA software to represent the smeared reinforcement. Such a model, schematically plotted in Fig. 12b, requires imputing the elastic modulus, yield stress, orientation and volume fraction of fibers. Since assuming a random distribution of fibers a quasi-isotropic lay-up of [0/90/±45°] was considered with one fourth of the total volume fraction of fibers assigned to each fictitious ply.In our preliminary study presented in [9] a trial an error method was used to identify the model parameters. Therein, the constitutive model was simplified assuming an elastic-rigid plastic model for fibers (σy=σt). The results replotted in Fig. 13a correspond to data sets presented in the first two columns in Table 12. They are linked to the experimental program carried out at the Klokner Institute in Prague. While the same type of experiment (3PB) was considered, the experimental set-up as well as the sample dimensions were different selected to comply with the general recommendations as to the size of the largest aggregate provided by [31], recall Table 1, see also Fig. 12a and e. It was suggested that a reasonably close fit can be obtained when keeping the Young modulus and tensile strength relatively close to the experimentally derived data and that the analysis is quite insensitive to the modulus of elasticity of fibers.The ability of the model to represent the randomly distributed fibers rather well promoted our next step towards a rigorous material identification through the solution of an inverse problem outlined in detail in the previous section. The following design variables were considered(13)x={E,ft,GF,σy,σt}T,and their optimal values can be found in the third column of Table 12. With these data the match between the experimental and numerical response shown in Fig. 13b is almost faultless. These distributions are in a accord with a rather distributed pattern of cracks shown in Fig. 12c and d.Note that the high value of the Young modulus is associated with a relatively high rate of loading applied during the three-point bending test [8]. The fracture energy GF, on the other hand, assigned to concrete is less than one third of the actual value [17] and should be considered, similar to fiber yield stresses σy, σt, as a model parameter of the composite system not determined independently from samples free of the fiber reinforcement.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The present contribution summarizes the experimental part of the project concerned with the modeling of TBM based tunneling in densely populated areas. Emphases were given to the experimental investigation of several cement and alkali activated fly ash based concrete mixtures. As expected both mixtures with a 30% replacement of cement by fly ash complied with the strength requirements pertinent to tunnel lining. If compared with the studies carried out in [8,9] they performed nearly identically to cement only specimens, mixture C. Unfortunately, the remaining mixtures with a considerably higher volume of fly ash failed to meet these requirements regardless of the type of fly ash.If concentrating on FAC-70-M(O) samples their fracture properties and tensile strength were found around 60% and 70% of the reference mixture, respectively. The compressive strength on the other hand just slightly exceeded 40% of the reference mixture, which corresponds to concrete class C25/30. From the fracture properties point of view the these samples perform mildly better. One possible explanation offers a generally poor quality of the resulting samples as observed from the images of surfaces of fractured samples. Whether improvements in this direction are possible or not is the question of technological processes and chemistry, which goes beyond the present scope of our investigation. Nevertheless, to see that experimenting with a higher volume of fly ash is not hopeless we refer to [9] suggesting improvements with time of curing owing to the ongoing pozzolanic reaction even without alkaline activators.With principal attention paid to the specific fracture energy we attempted to confirm the experimental measurements by an independent numerical simulation of a three-point bending test employing the ATENA finite element code. An artificial neural network method was successfully applied to identify the basic material parameters of concrete needed in most available constitutive models. In the light of an ongoing independent study we confirm the reliability of the experimentally derived specific fracture energies to be adopted as a material parameter in these constitutive models when performing a full scale structural analysis. Encouraging are also the results related to the analysis of fiber-reinforced concrete. To see how the fiber reinforcements influence the mechanical properties of fly ash based concrete will be the subject of our future research.