@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Computational modeling of passenger amphibian aircraft Be-200 cabin interior

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper examines issues regarding computational modeling of multipurpose passenger amphibian aircraft Be-200 cabin interior.Objects interior is designed on the basis of ergonomic principles.For cabin of different variant, the scenes of realistic rendering are introduced.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Aircraft cabin layout,Cabin ergonomics,Cabin interior modeling,Passenger chair,Objects shading,Cabin rendering,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper examines issues regarding computational modeling of multipurpose passenger amphibian aircraft Be-200 cabin interior. Here different concepts of cabin layout are introduced: economy variant; comfortable layout; with coupe-type seating; corporate variant with berths. Objects interior is designed on the basis of ergonomic principles. For cabin computational modeling the 3ds Max graphic system is used. Objects modeling is carried out by means of Spline Extrude, Polygon Extrude methods. In course of scenes shading, the materials assignment is performed at the level of subobjects. Scenes of realistic rendering of various aircraft cabin layouts are introduced.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In countries with continuous waters the hydroaviation can make a good figure. In modern economic conditions the development of civil hydroaviation becomes prospective. In spite of world wars the development of civil aircraft industry continued throughout XX century. During this time aircraft design was improving, the necessity to increase passenger capacity was growing, ferry time was reducing. With relation to fuselages design the main trends of shape forming were developed already in 60th of XX century. Since that time fuselage shape and contours remained the same in general. Therefore at the present time works regarding fuel consumption, cabin noise, aircraft structures weight reduction are carried out.In Russia the main developer of hydroaviation is a Beriev Aircraft Company, Taganrog. In 1990, the Beriev Aircraft Company started the amphibian aircraft Be-200 designing (Fig. 1) [1]. Initially the project was introduced in 1991during Aeroshow in Paris.Features of amphibian aircraft Be-200 3D computational modeling were examined in papers [2,3]. In the paper [3] the process of the said aircraft phase modeling is described, variants of developed model rendering is introduced (Fig. 2). This paper is concerned with passenger amphibian aircraft Be-200 cabin layout and computational modeling. To date, Be-200 passenger version offered by the manufacturer is at the design stage [1]. The authors of this paper propose new original concepts of the passenger cabin layout intended to satisfy different demands.Aircraft cabin design issues remains important for civil aviation. Some aspects of cabin design and passengers comfort during flight are described in papers [4,5]. In paper [6] the future passenger aircraft cabins design concepts are reviewed. Different issues of aircraft cabin optimal layout on the basis of current design specifications are described.Rather detailed description of these issues in paper [7] should be noted. This book is concerned with fuselage configurations, their advantages and disadvantages. Practical recommendations regarding cabin designing based on fuselage structure and ergonomic norms are introduced.Inner space designing of any type of transport starts with tasks definition: purpose of development and operation conditions. Thereon hangs general architecture of the future project. When designing passenger transport, there is a number of key points: organization of passenger seats, lavatory, galley and cargo compartment availability and configuration [8]. In this case volume and overall dimension is limited but sufficient for comfort use. Ergonomic requirements to passenger chairs, lavatories and other objects should be taken into account.Amphibian aircraft Be-200 has the following versions: firefighting, passenger, cargo [1]. Wing span of amphibian aircraft Be-200 is 32.78m, length 32.05m, height 8.9m, fuselage maximum diameter 2.86m, crew 2 persons.In our case the task is to convert the current structure of amphibian aircraft Be-200 into variant of comfortable passenger cabin. For this purpose it is necessary to organize space meeting all necessary requirements both aesthetical and practical as well. Materials hygienic properties used in decoration also should be taken into account. In-flight injury prevention depends on correct ergonomics.We will start aircraft cabin designing from development of layout diagram which is defined upon the task assigned. The suggested commercial variant of the passenger aircraft has a capacity for 72 passengers and 4 crew members [9]. This variant of cabin provides maximum number of passenger seats without loss of comfort for any particular passenger (Fig. 3). It should be noted that this layout of the passenger cabin was developed by the manufacturer, and yet this design has not been implemented.For this layout diagram, there are several possible variants of passenger chairs organization in cabin: standard and maximum commodious. In this case, chairs are forward-facing, in two rows with aisle between them (Fig. 4).For coupe layout diagram the chairs are located facing each other with folding table possibility (Fig. 5). Number of passengers – 56, crew and servitorial staff – 4 (Fig. 6).Making comparison with railway transport the variant of cabin commercial layout of inhenced comfort can be noted. It provides passengers accommodation in individual berths with minimum set of equipment required: sleeping place, compartments for passenger cabin baggage, multimedia equipment (TV, Wi-Fi).A more comfortable layout version that accommodates a less number of passengers but provides higher comfort is proposed for review below. This layout stipulates the location of seats in one row along the aircraft sides (Fig. 7).This layout solution allows the accommodation of three lavatory units, one for the crew, and two for the passengers, mini galley-unit, and a bar. The number of passengers to be accommodated amounts to 22, plus three crew members, including a flight attendant. Fig. 8shows the fuselage cross-section and a passenger seat configuration to give an idea about the cabin dimensions.Enlargement of the seat dimensions allows location of two rows of seats with a comfortable aisle between them. Together with the enlargement of transverse distance, it is proposed to increase the longitudinal pitch between the seats in order to provide additional comfort (Fig. 8). The distance between the seats enables transformation of every seat into a comfortable sleeper seat. Such cabin layout allows accommodation of individual ventilation and temperature control panels and of a multimedia unit for headset connection.Besides passenger variant the corporate variant with VIP-cabin providing the availability of separate apartments is possible. This layout includes a separate lavatory along with shower cabin, comfortable and wide bed, and a room for meetings as well. This variant can be manufactured both for businessmen and for top public officials (Fig. 9).For fuselage and cabin realistic model creation, we will use layout diagrams, section views, and cross-sectional views of the future hull developed earlier. 3D computational modeling of the cabin will be created with the help of 3ds Max graphic system. 3ds Max graphic system is an universal tool of modeling and alongside with many other 3D systems enables to develop projects of any complexity [10]. In our case we will create fuselage lines on the basis of splines extrusion method Spline Extrude (Fig. 10).For detailed elaboration, the cabin main elements are to be created separately from the whole scene. Modeled elements are arranged over cabin by means of duplicating. All cabin elements are created the same way: compartments for passenger cabin baggage, stationary lighting units and gasper fans (Fig. 11).During flight, chair is very important for a passenger. It is created on the basis of ergonomics and regulatory requirements. It is more often when comfort is the most important factor during definite type of transport choosing. Sometimes passengers spent two thirds of day traveling, and in this case chair comfort becomes not mere the design result but the reason of spine misery. For passenger chair modeling the Polygon Extrude method is used.In Fig. 12chair modeling successive steps are shown. This paper covers several versions of a passenger chair configuration subject to the cabin layout comfort level. Fig. 12 represents successive steps of a chair modeling for the cabin version with face-to-face seats arrangement. Further chair model is elaborated and improved, and at final stage it is smoothed with modifier Smooth (Fig. 13).Before final rendering of the scene it is necessary to prepare objects for shading, create corresponding texture and material. For more detailed shading we divide chair model into component parts by means of command Element (Fig. 13). Further we create material for chair upholstery, assign it to corresponding elements of the model. As for style the chair upholstery consists of two colors. Bottom, back and head cushion are alike in color, and the rest parts are of another color (Fig. 14).For correct mapping of upholstery texture we apply modifier UVW Map. We apply this modifier in mode Box, that enables to stretch and compress texture in three planes. We carry out the similar actions with the second chair and further we need to multiply and arrange them over cabin.Fig. 15shows a passenger chair configuration for a comfortable cabin layout. The upholstery of this chair combines two different materials, whose appropriation is made at the elements level.At the next stage, we distribute passenger chairs all over cabin along longitudinal axis in accordance with layout diagram. For this purpose the graphic system 3ds Max has a convenient command Array. This command enables to assign offset value of the next copies relative to each other in all three planes simultaneously. We define optimal distance between chairs in accordance with layout drawings selected. Further we assign materials to the rest objects of aircraft cabin interior.When creating realistic model, lighting is a rather important detail. For lighting, usually natural or artificial light sources are used. In graphic system 3ds Max there are some rendering methods. However, external rendering module V-Ray creates reasonably realistic renderings. It is based on indirect light method when objects are illuminated diffusely with reflected light. In Figs. 16 and 17conceptual rendering of amphibian aircraft Be-200 different cabin variants are presented: coupe-type configuration and configuration of enhanced comfort with separate berths.On Fig. 18realistic rendering scenes of economic variant of amphibian aircraft Be-200 passenger cabin layout are shown.Fig. 19represents the realistic rendering scenes of Be-200 amphibian passenger cabin comfortable layout (based on the scheme in Fig. 7).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
