@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimization design of corrugated beam guardrail based on RBF-MQ surrogate model and collision safety consideration

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Multiobjective optimization design was made for two corrugated beam guardrails.RBF surrogate model based on collision safety consideration was used for regression analysis.Comparative studies were made between W-beam guardrail and Thrie-beam guardrail.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Corrugated beam guardrail,Collision,Crashworthiness,Radial basis function,Multiobjective optimization,Highway,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
As the main safety facility on the highway, a guardrail system is very essential for the highway traffics safety. In this paper, the Finite Element (FE) models of the vehicle and the corrugated beam guardrail system were created. Two types of widely used corrugated beam semi-rigid guardrails were simulated, which were the W-beam guardrail and the Thrie-beam guardrail. The collision between the corrugated beam guardrail systems and the vehicle body was analyzed. In the collision process, the snagging effect of the post to the vehicle body was also concerned. Under the considerations of the collision safety and the mechanism of the snagging effect, the multiobjective optimization problem was defined with dimensional sizes of guardrails to be the design variables. And the radial basis function (RBF) was applied to construct the regression models of the analytical objective, which increased the accuracy of fitting. The Pareto set and the optimal solution were obtained. After the optimization design, the W-beam guardrail and Thrie-beam guardrail were both greatly improved, that increased the collision safety between the corrugated beam guardrail and the vehicle body. This kind of analytical method can also be used for the crashworthiness optimization between any other cars and guardrails.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As we know, traffic accidents that happened on the highway caused huge economic losses and casualties every year. The guardrail is a main traffic safety facility on the highway and it is closely related to the road traffic safety. For one thing, it can absorb part of the impact energy to reduce the peak acceleration of the crash; for another, it can redirect impacting errant vehicles [1]. Therefore, it is greatly significant to optimize the guardrail system under the collision safety consideration.In some countries, the highway facility was developed very early. At the beginning of the development of the facility, the collision safety had not been considered during the design process of a guardrail system. The United States is the pioneer to study the guardrails. Since 1920, US has established the large-scale real car crash test sites in many states, has accumulated a series of information and experimental data, and has developed a series of norms and standards based on the relevant theoretical analysis and experimental studies [2]. American Road Federation, related universities, research institutions and government departments conducted the “National Cooperative Highway Research Program”, which listed the level, evaluation indexes and test procedures of the guardrails [3]. “Guide for Selecting, Locating and Designing for Traffic Barriers” and the second edition of “Roadside Design Guide” were also published by American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO), which has become the standardized documents for the design of the highway guardrails in the United States [4]. In Japan, studies about guardrails were commenced in 1950s. And then, outlines of guardrails clearly defined the applications range, performance requirements, structural design, installation and construction of the guardrails [5]. Britain, Italy and other countries carried out relevant works later. Nowadays, the guardrail systems have been widely applied in many countries [6]. In China, research institute of highway ministry of communications has promulgated “Thrie-beam Guardrail for Highway” and “The Evaluation Specification for Highway Safety Barrier” [7] under the collision safety.In addition, Elvik et al. [8] studied the effectiveness of the rigid and semi-rigid guardrails and other road safety facilities so as to improve the road safety based on the actual statistical data, and then, gave some suggestions on how to modify these safety facilities. Ray et al. [9] studied the connection method between the panels of W-beam guardrail so as to reduce the separation of the guardrail parts in the collision process. Vesenjak and Ren [10] discussed the various blockout structures of the beam guardrails, such as a hexagonal shape, U shape, D shape and Z shape based on simulations, and found that the hexagonal blockout had obvious advantages in energy absorption. Borovinšk et al. [11] carried out a comparative study on three derivative structures of the beam guardrails, and found that the beam guardrail had a better guiding performance when adding a steel bar to the post at the bottom of the blockout. Reid and Faller et al. [12,13] made the conclusion that the height of a guardrail greatly influenced its collision safety based on a lot of research results. Huang et al. [14] studied the bolted performance between the posts and panels of the beam guardrail and the friction coefficient between the vehicle and guardrail. Du et al. [15] used scale model test method to analyze the response characteristics and optimized the structure of the beam guardrail. Lei [16] put forward that the semi-rigid guardrail could be studied as a coupling system together with the vehicle. Ibitoye et al. [17] described a three-dimensional computer simulation of the kinematics impact of motorcycle and dummy rider with W-beam guardrail inclined at angles of 45° and 90° toward the initial direction of traveling. Zhang and Hu [18] discussed the importance of the soil behavior during a car-guardrail impact event and raised an effective method to investigate the soil behavior during impact.In conclusion, some results of the beam guardrail system study have been obtained. However, the researches on the optimization design of beam guardrail usually rely on the design experience of the researchers and the data of the real car crash test. There is seldom a systematical optimization method which is widely used to optimize the beam guardrail system. This paper aims to optimize the W-beam and Thrie-beam guardrails by using the RBF surrogate model under the collision safety consideration between the vehicle and the corrugated beam guardrail system.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper firstly created the coupled dynamic FE model of the vehicle and corrugated beam guardrail system, and simulated the collision between the car and the corrugated beam guardrail. Two kinds of widely used corrugated guardrails were considered, which were the W-beam and the Thrie-beam guardrail. It was found that the post had a snagging effect on the car wheel during the collision, which made the car deform seriously. The peak centroidal resultant acceleration of the car body in the collision model of the W-beam guardrail is 54.35g, while that is 49.14g in the collision model of the Thrie-beam guardrai. The maximum lateral displacement of the W-beam guardrail is 1028mm, while that is 778mm for Thrie-beam guardrail. However, the original performance of the W-beam guardrail and Thrie-beam guardrail could not meet the collision safety requirements and need to be optimized and improved.Based on the mechanism of snagging effect, the distance between any two posts and the thickness of the panel were selected to be the design variables in the optimization process for the W-beam guardrail. And the thickness of the post and the panel were selected to be the design variables in the optimization process for the Thrie-beam guardrail. The centroidal resultant acceleration of the car body and the lateral displacement of the corrugated beam guardrail panel were defined to be the objective functions. And the multiobjective optimization problem of the W-beam guardrail and the Thrie-beam guardrail were mathematically defined by using the linear weighted average method. The RBF-MQ approximation models were constructed based on the design sampling points. After that, the Pareto sets for the two multiobjective optimization problems were obtained via MIGA.For the optimal W-beam guardrail and the optimal Thrie-beam guardrail, the snagging effect did not occur. The deformation and damage were slight on the car body. The peak centroidal resultant acceleration of the car body in the collision between the optimal W-beam guardrail and the optimal Thrie-beam guardrail are respectively 19.02g and 13.49g. The car returns to the normal driving direction and the exit angle of the car are respectively 9.3° and 8.6° after crashing the optimal W-beam guardrail and the optimal Thrie-beam guardrail. The optimal results have improved the collision safety between the car and the guardrails. The maximum lateral displacement of the optimal W-beam guardrail is 776.69mm, while that is 430.4mm for the Thrie-beam guardrail. Therefore, it can be concluded that the overall performance of the optimal W-beam guardrail and the optimal Thrie-beam guardrail are greatly improved. Meanwhile, the analytical method, based on the surrogate model technology and finite element simulations, can also be used for the crashworthiness optimization between any other cars and guardrails under other loading conditions.