@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Java application for springback analysis of composite plates

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Analytical model of springback phenomenon was developed.Model was programmed in Matlab and then transformed to Java with GUI.Comparison of the predicted results with measured data shows good agreement.Developed software was distributed to the manufacturer of the composite parts.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Analytical solution,Java application,Composite,Thermoplastic matrix,Fabrics,Springback phenomenon,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The use of hi-tech thermoplastic matrices (e.g. PEKK, PEEK or PPS) in carbon fiber-reinforced composites is growing, mainly in the aircraft industry. The manufacturing process is carried out at higher temperatures, which leads to residual stresses and dimensional changes of the manufactured part. Our work is focused on making an analytical prediction of the springback angle of C/PPS laminate with textile reinforcement. Better prediction will make the manufacturing tool more precise. Our analytical model took into account the temperature change, the moisture change and resin shrinkage during the cure cycle (which is crucial for semi-crystalline matrices). The analytical model is based on classical lamination theory (CLT) and an equation for through thickness characteristics. The description of the model was written in Matlab code, which was subsequently transformed into Java with GUI for easier input of the characteristics of the composite (lay-up, materials, angle of the layer, radii, volumetric fiber fraction and characteristics of the textile reinforcement-number of threads in warp and weft direction, thickness, type of weave, etc.) The results from our program were compared with the results measured by the manufacturer, and good agreement was achieved.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Thermoplastic materials have significant advantages during fabrication and allow the application of optimized metalworking technology (stamping). However, the high temperature at which the thermoplastic composite must be processed implies that there will more significant thermally induced stresses and distortions in the finished product. For this reason, the dimensional changes (i.e. springback, warpage, etc.) need to be predicted in order to make the final part more precise. Changes in the dimensions of the composite are related to many parameters: part angles, thicknesses, lay-ups, flange length, and also tool materials, tool surface or cure cycles [1]. When an L-shaped (or U-shaped, see Fig. 1) composite in the shape of L (or U) section is extracted from the mold after it has been cooled down to room temperature, the change in the angle of the part can be observed. Tool angles have to be modified to deal with this problem. The design of the tool is based either on either the “rules of thumb” from past experience, or on a trial-and-error approach. For angular parts, the compensation is normally between 1° and 3°. The most common problem that is found, using a standard factor, is that the springback may vary with the lay-up, material, cure temperature, etc. Therefore, what worked once does not necessarily work next time.Springback is the angular change in a composite which occurs after the laminated part is released from the mold and cools down. This effect is influenced by many parameters, which have been mentioned above. The main causes used in analytical computation are thermal expansion in the laminate, shrinkage of the resin during the curing process (this effect is relevant only in semi-crystalline matrices which change from amorphous to crystalline phase during the cure cycle), and moisture absorption.The total change in angle can be written as(1)Δγ=Δγt+Δγh+Δγc=γεyt-εzt1+εzt+γεyh-εzh1+εzh+γεyc-εzc1+εzcwhere Δγtis the change in the angle due to temperature, Δγhis the change in the angle due to the hygroscopic effect and Δγcis the change in the angle due to shrinkage effect during the cure cycle. Strains (from temperature, moisture absorption and shrinkage-superscripts t, h and c) marked with y subscripts stand for longitudinal directions and coefficients marked with z stand for transversal (through thickness) direction [4]. The strains can be computed using equations based on CLT combined with equations for the through thickness characteristics [2]. The final equations are(2)NxthcNythcNxythcMxthcMythcMxythc=A11A12A16B11B12B16A12A22A26B12B22B26A16A26A66B16B26B66B11B12B16D11D12D16B12B22B26D21D22D26B16B26B66D16D26D66εx0,thcεy0,thcγxy0,thcκxthcκythcκxythcwhere Aij, Bijand Dijare the generally known elements of membrane stiffness, bending-extension coupling stiffness and bending stiffness matrices, and quantitiesNithc,Mithcare defined by the equations(3)Nithc=∫Qijεjthcdz(4)Mithc=∫Qijεjthczdzwith the fact that integration boundaries are from −H/2 to H/2.NithcandMithchave the same dimension as Niand Miand they are called the resultants of the thermo-hygro-crystallic unit internal forces and moments andεij0,thcandκijthcare strains and curvatures. Q is the 2D plane stress matrix in the L, T coordinate system (see Fig. 1).The through thickness strain can be computed as(5)εzthc=ΔHthcHwhere H is the total thickness of the composite part and ΔHthcis the change in the thickness due to the thermo-hygro-crystallic effect(6)ΔHthc=ΔHt+ΔHh+ΔHcThe thermal, hygral and crystallic thickness change can be computed as(7)ΔHt=∑k=1N[S12S23S36][Tq]kzk-zk-1[Q‾]kεx0εy0γxy0-ΔTαxαyαxyk+zk2-zk-122[Q‾]kκxκyκxy+zk-zk-1(ΔT(α3)k)(8)ΔHh=∑k=1N[S12S23S36][Tq]kzk-zk-1[Q‾]kεx0εy0γxy0-Δcβxβyβxyk+zk2-zk-122[Q‾]kκxκyκxy+(zk-zk-1)(Δc(β3)k)(9)ΔHc=∑k=1N=[S12S23S36][Tq]kzk-zk-1[Q‾]kεx0εy0γxy0-ΦxΦyΦxyk+zk2-zk-122[Q‾]kκxκyκxy+(zk-zk-1)((Φ3)k)where N is the number of layers, Sijare elements of the compliance matrix, Tqis the transformation matrix, z is a coordinate of the layer,Q‾is the 2D plane stress matrix in the x, y coordinate system (see Fig. 1), ΔT is change in temperature, Δc is change in moisture, αijis the coefficient of thermal expansion, βijis the coefficient of moisture absorption and Φijis the coefficient of chemical shrinkage during recrystallization.For parts with single curvature (which are analyzed in our case) there is a modification of Eq. (2)(10)κythc⇒κythc+1Ryεythc-εzthcwhere Ryis the radius of the analyzed part in the y direction.Because of the regular structure of the woven composite, the thermo-elastic properties of the whole composite are similar to the properties of the typical element. In order to calculate these properties we have to know.•the mass of the fabric M (g/m2),the number of threads n (1/cm),the thickness of the fabric h (mm),the warp and weft materials and geometry,the type of weave.The most common weave types are: plain weave, twill weave and satin weave (see Fig. 2). In each type of weave there is an area that is regularly repeated. After analyzing this area we obtain three types of elements which characterize the weave (see Fig. 3). The dimensions of the element are described in Eqs. (13)–(16).Element I has both fibers undulated (typical for plain weave), element II has both fibers straight and element III has at least one fiber curved. It can be shown that twill weave and satin weave can be composed from elements I and II [1]. Element I is the basic type, because the other are special cases of it. In order to calculate the properties of element I we have to accept some presumptions.•the whole thickness of the element is the sum of the fabric thickness and the matrix thickness,the weave of the fabric is tight,the curvature of the fibers is regular (sinusoidal) and the fibers are prismatic,the fibers in the cross-section are distributed equally,the matrix and fibers are linearly elastic, the matrix is isotropic, the fibers are transversally isotropic,the temperature is the same throughout the volume, and there are no residual stresses,there are no other components and defects in the composite apart from the fiber and the matrix.The effective characteristics of the element can be written as(11)Sij=12Ω∫-ΩΩSij(ω)dωwhere Sijare the elements of the compliance matrix and ω is the maximum value of, which is the undulation angle of the warp (or weft) threads, and it depends on the thickness and the height of the threads [1](12)Ω1=arctanπh22t2where t2 is the width of the weft threads and h2 is the thickness of the weft threads (subscript 1 stands for the warp direction, subscript 2 stands for the weft direction)(13)t2=100ny(14)h2=h-h1where nyis the number of weft threads (the value 100 in the numerator of the fraction stands for 100mm-because the material sheet gives the number of threads per 10cm and our model work with the number of threads per 1cm), h is the total thickness of the fabric and h1 is the thickness of the warp threads(15)h1=ξt2ht1+ξt2where ξ is the ratio of the cross-section fiber areas of the warp and weft thread (ξ=1 when the number of warp and weft threads is the same), and t1 is the width of the warp threads.(16)t1=100nxwhere nxis the number of warp threads. Since we are focusing just on the influence of the angle, we can assume that the matrix thickness h3 is constant (h3=0).It can be shown, that the behavior of a composite made from twill or satin lies between the extreme cases-elements I and II. This means that the compliance matrixS‾is the mean value of the characteristics of element I and II (SIand SII)(17)S‾=iSI+jSIIi+jwhere i and j are the numbers of elements of type I and elements of type II, respectively.The representation of the weave geometry [1] is for a warp thread (superscript 1) with orientation angle θ=0. After integration of (1) and replacement by the goniometric functions with the first terms of their Taylor series, we obtain the effective characteristics for the warp layer(18)1Ex=EL1+Ω23ELGLT-2(1+νLT)(19)1Ey=ET(20)1νyx=νTL+νTT′-νTLΩ23(21)1Gxy=GLT1+Ω23GLTGTT′-1(22)1αx=αL+Ω23(αT-αL)(23)1αy=αT(24)1Ez=ET1+Ω23ETGLT-2(1+νTL)(25)1Gxz=GLTGLTEL(1+2νLT)+GLTET-14Ω23+1(26)1Gyz=GTT′1+Ω23GTT′GLT-1(27)1νyz=νTT′+νTL-νTT′Ω23(28)1νxz=ExνLTEL-1EL+1ET+2νLTEL-1GLTΩ23(29)1αz=αT+Ω23(αL-αT)where 1E, 1G, 1ν, and 1α are the Young modulus, the shear modulus, the Poisson ratio and the coefficient of thermal expansion and subscripts x, y and z are related to the coordinate system according to Fig. 1. These effective characteristics are computed from the values of the characteristics for straight fibers (where subscripts L, T and T′ stand for longitudinal, transverse and through thickness directions) and is the undulation angle of the warp. Similarly we can express characteristics for the weft threads (superscript 2), i.e. θ=90. For several angles of orientation θ≠(0,90) the elastic characteristics are computed from the relation(30)S=1Ex-νxyEx-νzxEz000-νxyEx1Ey-νzyEz000-νxzEx-νyzEy1Ez0000001GTT′0000001GLT′0000001GLTand the elements of the compliance matrix are computed from the well known transformation relations [2]. These properties are used for computing the effective thermo-elastic characteristic by classical lamination theory (CLT) and equations for through thickness characteristics for the composite plate of the given lay-up (see [2] for details).The difference between the straight fibers and the undulated fibers lies in the value of angle Ω (which is equal to 0 for straight fibers). So when the value Ω=0 is put into Eqs. (18)–(29), we obtain values for the thermo-elastic characteristics of a unidirectional composite plate with straight fibers. Knowing the fiber volume fractions (Vf), we can calculate the basic thermo-elastic constants according to [3](31)EL=VfEfL+(1-Vf)Em(32)ET=Em1-Vf1-EmEfT(33)ET′=ET(34)GLT=Gm1-Vf1-GmGf12(35)GTT′=Gm1-Vf1-GmGf23(36)GLT′=GLT(37)νLT=Vfνf+(1-Vf)νm(38)νTT′=ETGTT′-1(39)νLT′=νLT(40)αL=VfαfLEfL+(1-Vf)αmEmVfEfL+(1-Vf)Em(41)αT=αfTVf+(1-Vf)1+VfνmEmELαm(42)αT′=αTwhere subscripts L, T and T stand for longitudinal, transverse and through thickness direction and f and m stand for fiber and matrix.Java is a platform-independent programming language [5] that can be compiled into a binary executable, which is also platform-independent. As the Java virtual machine needed for executing such a binary exists for all major operating systems, our application is also available for all major operating systems. A program with a GUI was developed in NetBeans IDE 7.2 with the use of the Java JAMA package for matrix operations. The flowchart of our application is shown in Fig. 4.The program GUI is divided into five panels, which can be controlled by using the sheets buttons at the top (see Fig. 5). The first two sheets from the left the input sheets (Computational model and Material and Lay-up). the rest are used for data output (Computation, Composite and Results).In this sheet, the user chooses between the computational model for straight fibers (Fig. 5) or for undulated fibers, which are typical for composites with fabric reinforcement (Fig. 5) and direct input of the elements of compliance matrix S (entering the engineering constants), thickness of the layer, angle of the layer and thermal coefficient vector, the moisture absorption vector and the shrinkage vector (e.g. data obtained experimentally). The last option is the most complex one. The user can input different data for each layer (in the case of hybrid composites or layers with a different volumetric fiber fraction).The user also enters the geometrical data (in the case of a flat plate or a plate, a single or double curvature and part angle), the thermal load (initial and final temperature) and the moisture load (initial and final moisture) in the first sheet.In this sheet, the user chooses the material (when choosing the straight model or the undulated fibers model from the Computational model sheet) and composes the lay-up (see Fig. 6).The sheet is divided into twelve columns. The first column presents the Number of the layer (by button Add layer the user can add more layers). The second and third columns present Fiber and Matrix (the user chooses from the database of fibers and matrices which are implemented in the program-ARAM, HMC, HSC, GLASS and T600 for the fibers and PPS, PEEK, PEKK, EPX, FNL, AL and PLE for the matrices). The fiber and the matrix can be different in each layer (in the case of hybrid composites). The fourth column stands for the Volumetric fiber content (the user writes a value between 0% and 100%). This value can be different in each layer (in the case of a volumetric fiber content gradient). The fourth column presents the Thickness of the layer (the user writes the thickness value in mm). The fifth column presents the Angle of the fibers (the user writes an angle value between 0 and 90). These five columns have to be filled when choosing the Straight fibers material model (see Eqs. (31)–(42)) in the first sheet Computational model.The sixth and seventh columns are for the Number of threads in x direction (warp) and in y direction (weft). The user writes the value for the Number of threads per 1cm-in the material sheet, the Number of threads may be written per 10cm, and the user has to recalculate it correctly). The eighth column presents the Ratio of the areas of the fibers (which is 1 when there are the same number of threads in the warp direction and in the weft direction). The ninth and tenth columns present the number of type I and type II elements (see Fig. 3). Element I is the typical element for a plain weave, and element number II is the typical element for the straight fibers model. In the case of plain weave, the number of type I and type II elements is equal (=1). In the case of twill weave, the number of type I elements is 1 and the number of type II elements is 2. In the case of satin weave, the number of type I elements is 1 and the number of type II elements depends on the type of satin (for 5H satin the number is 4, for 4H satin the number is 3, etc.) The last column presents the fabric thickness (the fabric is made from 0/90 fibers in plain, twill, satin or some other kind of weave. All columns have to be filled when choosing the Undulated fibers material model (see Eqs. (11)–(29)). This model decomposes the fabric into two layers of 0 and 90 with the respect to the fiber undulation, but the thickness of the fabric has to be written for the whole fabric to each decomposed layer).The next option for inputting the material data (for fiber and matrix) is to input it directly from a .csv (coma separated values) file. In this file, the user defines the material properties. In the Fiber column, we can write material “userf1” (or “userf2” or “userf3”, depending on how many fibers we defines in the .csv file-the maximum is 3 fibers). The same procedure is followed in the Matrix column. Here, the user writes the material as “userm1” (or “userm2” or “userm3”). The sequence of thermo-elastic characteristics in the .csv file of a fiber is: EfL, EfT, Gf12 (all in MPa), νf, αfL, Gf23 (MPa), αfT, Φfand βf. The sequence of matrix file variables is: Em, Gm(all in MPa), νm, αm, Φmand βm. All variables have to be filled in. If the user does not want to consider some material property (e.g. shrinkage or moisture absorption coefficient) it is necessary to enter a zero value in place of the real value.For the solution of the written lay-up, the user has to click on the Solve button.In this sheet, the user can check the values of the S matrix and the thermal coefficient vector, the moisture absorption vector and the shrinkage vector in each layer by clicking on the Layer No button. For details of the computation, see Eq. (30).The user can check the stiffness matrix values (A, B, B, D matrix) and the effective engineering constants for the whole composite (Ex, Ey, Gxy, νxy), the force and moment resultants and strains and curvatures according to the moisture effect, the recrystallization effect and the temperature effect (see Eqs. (2)–(10)).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
