@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Application of multiscale elastic homogenization based on nanoindentation for high performance concrete

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Simple but verified two-step homogenization for predicting elastic properties of HPC.Application of the methodology to highly heterogeneous cementitious material.Reducing experimental demands by using local measurements by nanoindentation.Identification of micromechanically distinct phase properties by statistical deconvolution.Verification of model prediction by macroscopic tests (elastic modulus measurements).

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multiscale modeling,Homogenization,Mori–Tanaka,FFT,Elasticity,High performance concrete,Nanoindentation,Statistical deconvolution,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The paper aims at developing a simple two-step homogenization scheme for prediction of elastic properties of a high performance concrete (HPC) in which microstructural heterogeneities are distinguished with the help of nanoindentation. The main components of the analyzed material include blended cement, fly-ash and fine aggregate. The material heterogeneity appears on several length scales as well as porosity that is accounted for in the model. Grid nanoindentation is applied as a fundamental source of elastic properties of individual microstructural phases in which subsequent statistical evaluation and deconvolution of phase properties are employed. The multilevel porosity is evaluated from combined sources, namely mercury intrusion porosimetry and optical image analyses. Micromechanical data serve as input parameters for analytical (Mori–Tanaka) and numerical FFT-based elastic homogenizations at microscale. Both schemes give similar results and justify the isotropic character of the material. The elastic stiffness matrices are derived from individual phase properties and directly from the grid nanoindentation data with very good agreement. The second material level, which accounts for large air porosity and aggregate, is treated with analytical homogenization to predict the overall composite properties. The results are compared with macroscopic experimental measurements received from static and dynamic tests. Also here, good agreement was achieved within the experimental error, which includes microscale phase interactions in a very dense heterogeneous composite matrix. The methodology applied in this paper gives promising results for the better prediction of HPC elastic properties and for further reduction of expensive experimental works that must be, otherwise, performed on macroscopic level.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nowadays, homogenization of mechanical properties of multiphase materials is widely applied to classical composites with distinct inclusions and with well-defined geometry of the phases. However, application of such approaches to heterogeneous materials still faces obstacles in the form of unclear separation of individual phases, uneasy assessment of the phase properties (e.g. elastic stiffness tensor), phase volume fractions and other geometrical descriptors. To overcome these difficulties, the material heterogeneity is divided into levels assigned with a characteristic length and multiscale model is built. Different experimental techniques are applicable on individual levels to assess geometrical and mechanical characteristics depending on the phases’ size. Macroscale material properties can be handled with conventional techniques like optical microscopy and loading jacks. On the other hand, microscale testing requires more advanced methods, such as electron microscopy, micro-CT, nanoindentation and others.In this paper, we apply several homogenization procedures to highly heterogeneous cementitious composite, namely to high performance concrete. In general, cementitious composites including various types of concretes and mortars represent the most used building materials. To a certain extent, and often with a trace of hope, concrete and mortar mixtures can be considered as a single phase, i.e. homogeneous material, on macroscale. However, this classification may change according to the level of observation (micro, meso and macroscopic level). With the scope of this definition, cementitious composites are the typical representatives of multiscale materials, since they can be treated as homogeneous in the macroscopic level (cm∼m scale) and as heterogeneous in a finer level of observation (nm–cm scale).Heterogeneity at the lower level comes from both the chemical reactions (e.g. hydration process [1,2]) and the mechanical mixing of non-reactive components (e.g. aggregate particles [3,4]). Further, transition zones between the phases and also porosity are present at each scale of the composite; therefore, the application of the multiscale analysis is substantial.The multiscale analysis involves the following steps: (i) separation of the levels; (ii) morphological observations and separation of mechanically different phases (both tasks can be merged if special approaches like statistical deconvolution of nanoindentation data are used, as in this paper); (iii) assessment of mechanical properties of individual phases; and (iv) upscaling of phase properties to the upper level [5,6].The microstructure observation and determination of phases can be performed, e.g. by analysis of images obtained from optical microscopy, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) or atomic force microscopy (AFM) or a combination of these. Several researchers [4,6–9] have been using successfully these techniques to obtain morphological and chemical parameters of individual material phases, and equally as in this paper, the microstructure analysis has often been supplemented by porosity measurements (e.g. mercury intrusion porosimetry) and/or image analysis.The micromechanical analysis of individual material phases (nm–μm scale) can be obtained exclusively by the nanoindentation technique which is used for assessing the mechanical properties of small volumes at nano and micro level. The principle of nanoindentation lies in forcing a very small tip (typically diamond) to the material surface while the changes in the applied load and the penetration depth are measured simultaneously [10]. By using this technique, material properties, such as elastic modulus, hardness, plastic or viscous parameters, can be obtained from experimental readings for a given material volume [10–12].The macrolevel analysis is performed by different types of standardized macroscopic tests (e.g. by the static compression, tension or bending and/or by dynamic tests) in which the overall material properties are obtained on large specimens (cm–m scale).Transition between the micro and macro levels can be treated with a micromechanical approach that separates the levels by defining a characteristic scale and related representative volume elements (RVE) for each of the levels [13]. The response of the micromechanically heterogeneous RVE can be averaged through different homogenization techniques that aim at replacing the microscopically inhomogeneous strains and stresses by their fictitious homogeneous (effective) counterparts [13–15].A significant group of analytical methods is based on the classical Eshelby’s solution of ellipsoidal inclusions embedded in an infinite matrix [14], namely the Mori–Tanaka method, the self-consistent scheme and others [13]. Numerical homogenizations can include finite element computations or fast Fourier transformation [15–17].Among the analytical homogenization schemes, the Mori–Tanaka method is used frequently for its simplicity and wide applicability in terms of the concentration range of the multiple phases that are involved. Its performance was also justified by some researchers when used for cementitious composites [5,6,18].In this paper, a proposed methodology that is based on the combination of the above mentioned techniques and approaches has been applied to determine macroscale elastic properties of a high performance concrete (HPC) based on nanoindentation mechanical tests.The high performance concrete analyzed further in this paper composes of heterogeneous cementitious matrix (based on blended cement and fly-ash), plasticizing admixture and different sizes of aggregates. Intrinsic porosity appears on a broad range of scales in this composite (nm–mm).Before proceeding with the application of homogenization methods, it was necessary to divide the analyzed composite into characteristic levels. In the present study, the microstructure of the analyzed composites was separated into two levels, namely the matrix level (Level I) and the mortar level (Level II).The Level I was characterized by all the matrix phases having characteristic dimensions less than d≈10μm, i.e. hydration products, clinker and fly-ash. Due to small dimensions of the phases at this level, mechanical properties are accessible by nanoindentation. If massive grid indentation is applied [19,20], then not only intrinsic phase properties but also their volume fractions can be obtained. The RVE size of this level, which also corresponds to the indentation grid size, is of ≈100μm; hence, the scale separability condition [13,21], i.e.(1)h≪d≪L,holds, where h is the indent size (which determines the tested material volume), d the characteristic inclusion size, and L is the RVE size. The situation is further presented in Fig. 5.The homogenization corresponds to a technique used to upscale the mechanical properties from the microscale to the upper level to find the effective properties of the RVE. In this paper, the elastic homogenization was performed by means of the analytical Mori–Tanaka scheme [22]. This scheme describes a composite by a morphologically prevailing matrix (the reference medium) reinforced by distinct non-continuous spherical inclusions. Both matrix and inclusions are assumed to be elastically isotropic. Due to its simplicity and wide range of applicability, it was successfully used also for cementitious materials [18,21]. In the Mori–Tanaka method, the homogenized bulk and shear moduli of a r-phase composite are assessed based on the following relations(2)khom=∑rfr·kr(1+α0·(kr/k0-1))-1∑rfr(1+α0·(kr/k0-1))-1,(3)μhom=∑rfr·μr(1+β0·(μr/μ0-1))-1∑rfr(1+β0·(μr/μ0-1))-1,(4)α0=3·k03·k0+4·μ0,(5)β0=6·k0+12·μ015·k0+20·μ0,where the subscript 0 and r corresponds to the reference medium and to a particular inclusion respectively. Thus, k0 and μ0 are the bulk and shear moduli of the reference medium, while krand μrrefer to the inclusion phases. These values are the input to the equations that define the homogenized elastic modulus. Further, the bulk and shear moduli can be recomputed to the elastic modulus and the Poisson’s ratio as follows(6)Ehom=9·khom·μhom3·khom+μhom,(7)νhom=3·khom-2·μhom6·khom+2·μhom.The problem of finding strains and stresses in the microscopically inhomogeneous RVE can be solved by several numerical techniques, e.g. with finite element method. The numerical scheme used in this paper solves the problem of finding the effective elasticity tensor with a periodically repeating RVE by using discretization of an integral Lippmann–Schwinger equation that decomposes the local strain into homogeneous (macroscopic) and fluctuation parts as(8)∊(x)+∫ΩΓ0(x-y):(L(y)-L0):∊(y)dy=∊0,where ∊ is the symmetric second order strain tensor, L the fourth order tensor of elastic stiffness at individual locations x or y, ∊0 the prescribed macroscopic strain and Γ0 the periodic Green’s operator associated with the reference elasticity tensor L0, which is a parameter of the method proposed by Moulinec and Suquet [17].The problem is further discretized using trigonometric collocation method [23], which leads to the assemblage of a non-symmetrical linear system of equations. The system can be resolved e.g. by the conjugate gradient method as proposed by Zeman et al. [15]. Elastic constants received from grid nanoindentation have been used as input parameters for this FFT homogenization with the assumption of plane strain conditions.The resulting homogenized elastic stiffness matrix is positive definite, symmetric but generally anisotropic. The differences in stiffness matrices obtained from the methods can be characterized by some suitable norms [5]. The analytical Mori–Tanaka scheme assumes material isotropy. If we further assume (in agreement with the FFT method) plane strain conditions, then the analytically computed stiffness matrix (in the Mandel’s notation) is given by(9)LeffA=Ehom(1+νhom)(1-2νhom)1-νhomν0ν1-νhom0001-2νhom,where Ehomand νhomare the homogenized (Mori–Tanaka) elastic modulus and Poisson’s ratio, respectively, see Eqs. (6) and (7).The difference between this analytical solution and the numerical one, which is denoted as LeffFFT, can be evaluated based on the error norm that follows(10)δ=LeffFFT-LeffA∷LeffFFT-LeffALeffFFT∷LeffFFTBoth methods have certain advantages and some drawbacks. Although the Mori–Tanaka method uses simplified morphological assumptions and assumes an isotropic distribution of phases, it is fast and applicable to a wide range of solutions. The FFT method, on the other hand, is more general. It takes possible anisotropy into account and its precision depends only on the density of discretization (grid) points. The grid points of the FFT solution may coincide with the indentation matrix, which provides a perfect link between the methods. The density of the points used in nanoindentation is usually sufficient for providing good accuracy if the stiffness contrast between the phases is not very large. Nevertheless, it might be uneasy to achieve sufficient grid density for cases with a very high stiffness contrast of the phases (e.g. in case of air inclusions). Both methods are well applicable for the matrix level as shown later in this paper.In this section, the details on tests performed with a high-performance composite at different levels of observation are presented. The tests were carried out with one mortar mixture denoted as HPC1. The mixture was produced with cement CEM II/A-S 52.5N, high-range water reducing admixture (Stachement 2000) and fly-ash from the brown coal power plant Ledvice, in Czech Republic. In addition, a composition of two fine quartz sands, namely S1 and S2, with different grain size limits were used as aggregates. These are composed by SiO2 (99.2%) and Fe2O3 (0.04%). The aggregate composition included 50vol.% of S1 (with the grain size range varying from 0.63mm to 1.25mm) and 50vol.% of S2 (with the grain size range varying from 0.10mm to 0.63mm). The composition of HPC1 (in mass and volume) is listed in Table 1. The initial consistency of the mortar, which was determined through the standard flow-table test without applying strokes, was of 240±10mm.For the measurement at microscale level, a cylindrical sample of 30mm in diameter was prepared and nanoindentation testing was performed. After casting, the specimens were sealed with plastic foil and kept in the mold for 24h. Next, they were demolded and stored in water for 20days until the tests were performed. The cylindrical specimens for testing were cut out from the middle section of a larger volume by using a precision diamond saw. After drying, the surfaces were grinded by SiC papers with grit of #2000 and #4000, polished by cloth with 0.25μm diamond spray, and cleaned by washing in alcohol and ultrasonic bathing. The resulting surface roughness was checked with AFM to be less than 60nm on 20×20μm area and less than 20nm on 5×5μm area.The nanoindentation measurements were carried out in the CSM Nanohardness tester® machine. The three-sided pyramidal indenter tip (Berkovich) was used to perform several massive grids of 16×18=288 indents in each with the mutual indent’s distance of 8μm (Fig. 2). Even if the indentation locations were carefully selected by a high magnification optical microscope prior to testing to ensure that they lie away from large aggregates, part of the grids lay at the place of increased roughness (caused mainly by mechanical effects during polishing) in some cases. If this was the case, such indents were not considered in final evaluation. The total number of relevant indents reached ≈550 which provided sufficiently large statistical amount of data. The statistical representativeness of the data was also checked successively on datasets consisting of different number of points. It was found that the distribution of elastic stiffness does not fluctuate significantly for datasets containing more than ≈280 indents. Thus, the microstructure at the selected locations composed of all the cementitious matrix phases in a sufficient content.Hence, the dimension ≈100μm was considered as a RVE on the matrix level (Level I). The individual indent size, represented by the depth of penetration h, was chosen to be h≈200nm so that the affected volume under the indenter, which can be estimated as 3×h≈600nm [21], was smaller than the characteristic sizes of inclusions to avoid significant phase interactions; therefore, the scale separability condition, detailed in Eq. (1), is verified.Notice, however, that the complete exclusion of phase interactions can hardly be achieved because the dense matrix of a high performance composite is composed of several phases of different stiffness. Due to surface roughness, which cannot be further decreased by mechanical way [24], the indent size must be kept in the order of hundreds of nm. The indent size within the range of 100–300nm suits well the concept of grid indentation on cement pastes [21]. It can be assumed that hard clinker or fly-ash particles (of maximum ≈60μm size) in larger volumes can also cause stiffening of less stiff phases like C–S–H gels during indentation. The error incorporated into the measurements can be roughly quantified by FEM computation as 13–25% [25]. Similar errors are incorporated into measurement of stiff inclusions surrounded by a compliant matrix; nonetheless, their content is smaller therefore their influence also decreases. The sources of errors presented in this paragraph are naturally included in nanoindentation measurements and should be taken into account when comparing the upscale results and those obtained from macroscale measurements.The nanoindentation loading regime contained loading at 12mN/min, holding for 10s and unloading at 12mN/min (Fig. 2b). The holding period of 10s was added to minimize creep effects on the elastic unloading [26]. The elastic modulus of the analyzed phase was determined according to the methodology proposed by Oliver and Pharr [11]. The analysis is based on an analytical solution for a cone punched into the elastic isotropic half-space and uses the following equations to define the indentation (reduced) modulus(11)Er=12βπAS,(12)S=dPdhh=hmax,where S is the contact stiffness assessed as a slope of the unloading branch at the maximum depth hmaxand the peak load, see Eq. (12), Acthe projected contact area at the peak load, and β the geometrical correction factor introduced to correct the non-symmetrical indenter shape. In particular, β=1.034 for the Berkovich tip. The effect of non-rigid indenter can be accounted for by the relation(13)1Er=1-ν2E+1-νi2Ei,where E and ν corresponds to the Young’s elastic modulus and the Poisson’s ratio of the tested materials, respectively, while Eiand νiare the parameters of the indenter (Ei=1141GPa and ν=0.07 for diamond).Another material quantity, the hardness H, representing the mean contact pressure under the indenter can be readily obtained from load–deflection indentation curves as(14)H=PA.The results of elastic properties received from different phases by nanoindentation are treated with the help of statistical analysis since it is not possible to distinguish mechanically dissimilar phases just by optical or SEM analyses [20]. Therefore, statistical deconvolution [4,21] of elastic modulus histograms was applied to determine the individual phase properties from the overall frequency plot assembled from all relevant measurements. The method seeks parameters of n Gauss distributions in an experimental probability density function (PDF), see Fig. 3. The theoretical PDF is given by the following sum of r distributions as(15)C(x)=∑r=1nfr12πsr2exp-(x-μr)22sr2,where x is the approximated quantity (i.e. elastic modulus or hardness in our case), frthe rth phase volume fraction, μrand srthe mean value and standard deviation, respectively, of the rth phase.In the deconvolution, a minimization procedure based on the quadratic deviations between experimentally measured and theoretically computed (see Eq. (15)) overall PDFs is calculated to find the best fit [4,5,20].In the present work, the number of searched phases was fixed to four based on the number of characteristic peaks in the PDF. The dominant phases in the PDF need not necessarily to correlate with the chemically distinct phases, and they are further considered as mechanically distinct phases in the homogenization procedure (see the discussion in Section 5.2).The mechanical properties of HPC1 were investigated through static and dynamic tests. The former corresponds to a standard measurement of modulus of elasticity, which also allows for measuring the compressive strength on the macrolevel. The later, on the other hand, is a non-destructive test that allows for obtaining macroscopic elastic modulus and the Poisson’s ratio. In both static and dynamic tests, prismatic specimens with 40×40×160mm (height×width×length) were used for the evaluation of the elastic modulus. The specimens were handled in the same way than the specimens that were used in the microscale measurements. Prior to testing, the top and bottom ends of the specimens were polished to obtain flat parallel surfaces.For the static test, the load was measured by a beam load cell (MTS 100kN) attached to the electromechanical actuator. To measure the displacement of the specimens, the test apparatus included two axial extensometers with gauge length of 25mm and 50mm. The extensometers were located on the lateral surfaces of the samples and the centric loading was checked at the beginning of each test. In total, four loading cycles (Fig. 1a) were performed on each sample to exclude the initial inelasticity. The elastic modulus was computed from the linear part of the last cycle in the stress–strain curve as depicted in Fig. 1b. During the last cycle, the loading continued until the ultimate load was reached, and the uniaxial compressive strength was computed based on the obtained value.For the dynamic test, the impulse excitation method was used. This method is based on the measurement of the fundamental resonant frequencies for longitudinal, transversal, or torsional vibrations of the specimen. In all cases, the prismatic specimen was excited by an impact hammer on one end, at which the impact force was recorded, and the acceleration resultant from the impact was recorded on the opposite end of the specimen. The vibration modes were excited with supports located in the respective nodal positions, i.e. at the midspan for both longitudinal and torsional modes. The signals were analyzed in a frequency domain, and the frequency response function was evaluated after the fast Fourier transformation. Then, the fundamental resonant frequency was determined. The elastic modulus was evaluated from the equation for longitudinal vibration of the beam with continuously distributed mass with free-free boundary condition, i.e.(16)E=4lmfl2bt,where l is the length of the specimen, m the mass of the specimen, flthe fundamental longitudinal resonant frequency of the specimen, b and t the width and the height of the specimen respectively. The dynamic shear modulus G can be determined by(17)G=4lmfl2btB1+A,where ftis the fundamental torsional resonant frequency of the specimen, A an empirical correction factor dependent on the width-to-height ratio of the specimen defined in [27] and B is computed by(18)B=b/t+b/t4(t/b)-2.52(t/b)2+0.21(t/b)6,The Poisson’s ratio can be then calculated through(19)ν=E2G-1.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
It was shown in the paper that the proposed methodology allows for an easy and realistic assessment of elastic stiffness of high performance concrete based on simple two-scale homogenization, nanoindentation results and porosimetry. The strength of the methodology lies in the combination of reliable experimental and numerical techniques that are not demanding in terms of computational and experimental time and costs but can effectively reach the given goal. The techniques are general enough to accommodate for a change in material composition in connection with possible optimization.Also, it was shown that nanoindentation can serve as valuable tool for accessing either individual phase properties (needed by analytical homogenization schemes) or as a source for grid data (required by numerical methods, as FFT). Both approaches perform equally well for the case of isotropically distributed phases within the material microstructure. The difference between the stiffness matrices received from these methods was only 4.3%.The upper model level was handled with the analytical Mori–Tanaka scheme, which allowed for simple incorporation of non-reactive aggregate phases as well as of air voids. The comparison with macroscopic measurements (both static and dynamic moduli) showed good agreement. The ≈14% error is caused likely by the phase interactions within the dense cementitious matrix and is already included in nanoindentation results.The proposed methodology offers a cost-effective tool for virtual testing of the macroscale mechanical performance of HPC, which includes a mix of different chemical and mechanical phases at microscale. The simplicity of the two-level model has a high potential to be attractive to concrete industry and it can help reduce the total volume of macroscopic experimental work spent to analyze various cementitious mixtures.