@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Transient hydrodynamic analysis of the transition process of bulb hydraulic turbine

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Dynamic mesh was applied to simulate transition process of bulb hydraulic turbine.Established parameters describing the dynamic characteristics of the bulb turbine.Revealed the variations of pressure and flow in the transition process.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Rotating machinery,Dynamic mesh,Transition process,Transient flow,Dynamic characteristics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a semi-implicit method for solving pressure coupled equations used to calculate the flow field, and dynamic mesh were employed to simulate the three-dimensional dynamic turbulent flow of whole flow channels, in start transition process and runaway transition process of bulb hydraulic turbine. In above processes, the transition process of pressure field and flow field were realistically modeled and simulated, which reflects the influence of water flow state, after passing through guide vanes on the inflow of the runner blades, and reveals the flow field variations in the transition process. The numerical results show that: during the start transition process, with the increase of guide vane opening, the flow circulation produced by water flowing through the guide vanes becomes smaller; therefore, the rotational acceleration of the runner decreases and the rotational speed value reduces. In the runaway transition process, the hydraulic turbine operating with load has a sudden load rejection and then, the hydraulic turbine rotational speed is rising with the guide vane closing, leading to pressure pulsations and severe vortex phenomenon, which will cause significant vibrations of swings.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Bulb hydraulic turbine is a kind of rotating machinery converting hydro energy to kinetic energy. Although bulb hydraulic turbine is used more widely in the development and utilization of hydropower, and is changed to the high-capacity, high specific speed and high efficiency direction, meanwhile its stability remains a problem to be solved.In the research of hydraulic turbine, fluid dynamics technology has two main applications: the first application is the calculation of the steady flow field in the flow components of the hydraulic turbine. It is mainly used to analyze the flow regimes of each flow channel in the flow field and study the hydraulic losses of each parts, the pressure distribution on the blades surface and its optimization design; secondly, it is used to calculate the unsteady flow field inside the hydraulic turbine, i.e. the instantaneous flow regime of each flow channel, the hydraulic vibrations and the pressure pulsations caused by various factors of instability in each flow channel. Malcevic and Ghattas [1] presented a novel method for simulation of flows with dynamic interfaces based on a Lagrangian flow formulation and dynamic finite element meshes. In the paper by Liu et al. [2], a three-dimensional unsteady turbulent flow is simulated through the whole flow channel of three Gorge Francis hydraulic turbine. The pressure pulsations are predicted at positions in the draft tube, in front of runner, wicket gate, stay vane, and at the inlet of spiral case. Based on CFD code, Zhao et al.[3] used RNG k-ε turbulence model to study the inner flow in labyrinth sealing of hydraulic turbine. The flow structure in the seal is obtained, which shows the property of resistance enhancement of labyrinth sealing by turbulence. In the paper by Gao et al. [4], 3-D numerical calculations are performed for flow within the integral flow path of the prototype hydraulic turbine of the Three Gorges Project. The numerical method is proposed based on Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes equations. The RNG k-ε turbulence model with finite volume algorithm is employed in curvilinear body-fitted coordinate systems. In the paper by Zhang et al. [5], a three-dimensional unsteady turbulent flow in axial-flow pumps was simulated based on Navier–Stoke solver embedded with k-ε RNG turbulence model and SIMPLEC algorithm. In the paper by Qian et al. [6], three-dimensional unsteady turbulent flow in the entire flow channel of a model Francis turbine was investigated by a k-ε turbulence model. The validity of the mathematical model is verified by experimental data. Li et al. [7] established a full three-dimensional inverse problem calculation mode of the bulb turbine unit blades and the guide vanes matched with the blades. The calculation mode established the matching relationship between the blades and guide vanes by being given the velocity moment distribution at the guide vanes outlet side and the blades inlet side. In the paper by Zhang et al. [8], CFD methods for unsteady flow simulation are reviewed, including moving grid generation techniques and unsteady numerical methods. Based on the topology of computational grids, two types of unsteady numerical methods are discussed, e.g. the methods based on structured grids and unstructured/hybrid grids, respectively. Their advantages and drawbacks are analyzed with regard to efficiency, robustness for complex geometries and other features. In the paper by Pope et al. [9], unsteady 3-D CFD simulations was conducted on a multi-bladed vertical axis rotor. As a flow instability, rotating stall was conducted on a pump-turbine by Widmer et al. [10] Wang et al. [11] simulated the internal flow fields and external characteristics at turbine braking condition by the SST k-ω model and SIMPLEC algorithms. Compared with the experimental data, the simulation results were examined. Pang et al. [12] based on the CFD numerical model established, quantitative analysis on the vibration performance of Karman vortex shedding is achieved by using the software FLUENT. In the paper by McTavish et al. [13], an assessment of the performance of a novel vertical axis wind turbine was conducted using RANS CFD simulations. Huang et al. [14] established the coupling computation model between the flow channel transient flow and the three-dimensional flow inside the unit, and successfully realized the calculation of the power station load rejection with this model. In the paper by Trivedi et al. [15], investigations of a Francis model during an emergency shutdown with transition into total load rejection and steady-state measurements under runaway operating conditions were performed.The transition process of bulb hydraulic turbine refers to the transient process that the bulb hydraulic turbine changes from one working state to another working state, including start transition, stop transition, sudden load increasing transition, sudden load shedding transition, sudden load rejection transition, emergency stop transition, runaway transition, runaway exit transition, generator phase modulation transition, and etc. [16] . A transition process lasts shortly. However, due to substantial changes of working parameters, the dynamic load caused by flow inertia and hydraulic turbine movement greatly affects the safe and stable operation of the entire power system. Moreover, as the courses of the transition processes are different, the hydraulic turbine dynamics problems that may occur are not the same. The course analysis of the transition process of bulb hydraulic turbine is particularly important.Based on previous studies, this paper mainly analyzed the start transition process and the runaway transition process of the bulb hydraulic turbine. A fine mathematical model of the whole flow channels in the bulb hydraulic turbine was established and analyzed in details with dynamic mesh.In the transition process of bulb hydraulic turbine, algebraic difference between hydro-dynamic moment acting on rotating wheel (MH) and motor torque (Mf), determines the movement state and law of the rotating parts of the hydraulic unit.(1)MH−Mf=JdωHdtwhere, J is moment of inertial of the rotational system; ω is angular velocity.Hydro-dynamic moment equation of bulb hydraulic turbine:(2)MH=ρQH(vuH1r1−vuH2r2)−∫∫∫Ω∂vuHr∂tdWwhere, ρ is density; QH is dynamic flow; vuH1 and vuH2 are the circle of dynamic absolute velocity of inlet and outlet on the rotating wheel; r1 and r2 are the radius of inlet and outlet on the rotating wheel; vuHr is dynamic velocity moment; t is time; Ω is body area in rotating wheel; dW is volume of the micro unit of water.Dynamic axial hydraulic thrust equation of bulb hydraulic turbine:(3)SZH=(pH1−pH2)F−ρ∫∫∫Ω∂vZHr∂tdWwhere, pH1 and pH2 are hydrodynamic pressures at inlet and outlet of the rotating wheel;vZH is dynamic absolute velocity in y direction.Pressure correction theory is the semi-implicit method for solving the pressure coupled equations. This equation was proposed by Patankar and Spalding in 1972 [17], and is one of the main numerical methods for solving incompressible flow field. The fundamental principle of the equation is based on the fact that, in the process from guessing to correcting, the calculation of the pressure field, based on staggered grid, is used to solve the momentum equations. First, a pressure field to solve the momentum equation is assumed, so as to get the velocity and the pressure correction equation, from which a pressure correction value will be derived. Second, according to the corrected pressure field, a new velocity field will be solved. Finally, a velocity field convergence checking scheme will be performed. If it converges, the obtained corrected pressure value will be used to form a new pressure field. Otherwise the calculation will be repeated until a convergence is achieved.Dynamic mesh model is used to simulate the fluid flow, where the shape of computational domain shape changes with time due to the movement of computational domain boundary. If the boundary motion law and motion state are known, it is an active dynamic mesh. Otherwise the movement is determined by the flow characteristics, when it is a passive dynamic mesh.Unstructured dynamic mesh technique is the key to solve the rotary coupling problem under the unstructured mesh framework. According to the rigor degree and the deformation amount of the boundary movement, unstructured mesh can be achieved by method of mesh deformation, method combining layer advancing and mesh deformation partition or deformation plus local or whole mesh reconstruction method [18]. Here, the unstructured mesh reconstruction (static-regrinding) generation technique, means regenerating the mesh at each time step, which has a simple concept and can be applied for large deformation or large displacement problems. Because of the interpolation in each step to reconstruct the mesh, an interpolation error is inevitably introduced, and the interpolation relation between time layers needs to be regained. Thus, the amount of computation time increases. Grvber and Carstens [19] used this technique to solve the forced vibration problem of a turbine engine blades. Schulze [20] applied it to deal with the air elastic problem of the wing movement.In this paper, in the analysis of the unsteady flow field in the runaway transition process of the bulb hydraulic turbine, the active mesh method was applied as the boundary motion state is known, in the analysis of unsteady flow field in the start transition process of the bulb hydraulic turbine, as the boundary motion law is unknown, the active mesh method, the unstructured mesh reconstruction generation technique, were employed.The bulb hydraulic turbine is composed of four parts: bulb turbine body, tube-type seat, guide vanes and runner. The computational domain of flow field analysis in the transition process includes the whole flow channels from the hydraulic turbine entrance to the draft tube outlet, involving the inlet flow channel, the water guide, the runner chamber, and the draft tube (Fig. 1). Because the computational domain achieves the data exchange of the connecting surfaces by defining the interfaces. The flow fields at the stay vanes area and the guide vanes area of the bulb hydraulic turbine change violently, so it is necessary to divide the fine hexahedral meshes. All computational domain mesh model has a total of 3,325,110 elements and a total of 2,742,835 nodes (Fig. 2).The correlative parameters of bulb hydraulic turbine are as follows (Table 1):As the flow regime within the hydraulic turbine flow channel is turbulent, the RNG k-ε model is used for calculation. The semi-implicit method solving the pressure coupled equations is used for solving the incompressible fluid N–S equation; For the near wall region, a wall function method is used to solve it; the runner chamber fluid region is applied the dynamic mesh model.When the bulb hydraulic turbine is working in the transition process, both the flow velocity v and pressure p of the hydraulic system are functions of time, and are affected by the basic parameters and the status parameter variation of the bulb hydraulic turbine and the hydraulic system. Therefore the unstable flow problems should be considered when we study the problems in the transition process of the bulb hydraulic turbine [12].Fig. 3shows the inlet sketch of the bulb hydraulic turbine group connected with reservoir, where the valve at the ending point A of the inlet pipe is closedThe initial time t of the transition process is see to be 0; at the pipe ends, the static total head E0 and the location head H0 are respectively as follows:(4)E0=z0+p0ρg+v022g=z10+p10ρg+v1022g−hf0=E1−hf0(5)H0=z0+p0ρg=z10+p10ρg+v102−v022g−h10=E1−(h10+v022g)where, E1 is the total head at the pipe starting point B, and can be always regarded as a constant in the transition process; hf0 is the hydraulic losses of the pipeline length of L under stable condition, when t = 0; the subscript “10” indicates the initial value of the pipeline starting point B .The formulas (4) and (5) are substituted into the equations of motion, then the variation between a transient total head at the pipe end and its initial value and the variation between a transient location head at the pipe end and its initial value can be obtained.(6)E−E0=−1gdQdt∫0LdxA+(h10−h1)(7)H−H0=−1gdQdt∫0LdxA+(h10+v022g)−(h1+v22g)Formula (7) shows the pressure variation from 0 to any time t. If the variations of the hydraulic losses and the velocity head at the pipe end from 0 to any time t is ignored, then formula (7) can be written as(8)HH−H0=−1gdQHdt∫0LdxAwhere, QH is dynamic flow; HH is dynamic value of location head at the pipe end.At the pipe end, the relative value of the pressure changes is expressed as(9)ξ=HH−H0H0Substitute formula (8) into the above equation, then obtain(10)ξ=−1gH0dQHdt∫0LdxA=−TwdqHdtwhere, qHis the dynamic relative flow qH= QH/Q0TW is Flow acceleration time constant of pipes,(11)Tw=Q0∫0LdxAgH0=Lv0gH0when qH = qH(t), we can getξ=ξ(t), the change law of water pressure at the inlet pipe end.The start transition process of bulb hydraulic turbine begins from the shutdown state: the gate is open, the guide vane opening is 0, and the runner blades opening is at the initial angle. During the guide vane being opened, when the water torque is greater than the unit static friction torque, the runner starts to rotate; when the guide vane opening and the runner blade opening reach a certain degree, that means the guide vanes and the runner blades are combined together to work, the rotational speed of the bulb hydraulic turbine rises to the rated speed under the water torque. Main problems to be analyzed in this process are: through the combination curve between the guide vanes and runner blades, to seek the best fit relationship between the guide vane and runner blades so that the unit starts quickly, smoothly and reliably.In this paper, the guide vanes opening of 20°, 30°, 40° and 50° are selected, while the runner blades opening is kept constant to be 32°. For convenience to display, this paper define the combination between the guide vane opening of 20° and the runner blades opening of 32° as condition 1; define the combination between the guide vane opening of 30° and the runner blades opening of 32° as condition 2; define the combination between the guide vane opening of 40° and the runner blades opening of 32° as condition 3; define the combination between the guide vane opening of 50° and the runner blades opening of 32° as condition 4. In addition to the differences of guide vane openings under above conditions, the structural parameters and the calculation parameters are the same. The paper get the speed versus time curve of the runner blades under each condition:From Fig. 4we can know that, in the start transition process of the hydraulic turbine, when the runner blades opening is the start opening, with the guide vane opening becomes larger, the flow circulation produced by water flow through the guide vanes becomes smaller, and the thrust to the runner blades becomes smaller which causes the water torque smaller; and therefore, the rotational acceleration and the maximum speed tending to stabilized the runner decreases.Although doing experiments and tests to the flow field in the hydraulic turbine are very difficult, but you can get a detailed internal flow field status of hydraulic turbine by simulation. Fig. 5shows the motion patterns of guide vanes and runner regions of the hydraulic turbine, and the pressure clouds on the back surfaces of guide vanes and runner blades.Fig. 5 shows that the flow direction changes after running through the guide vanes and forms flow circulation at the entrance of the runner, which generates a torque to keep rotate the hydraulic turbine runner rotating. With the increase of the guide vane opening, the degree of change of the flow direction becomes smaller, forming different flow circulation which produces different torques. Because the flow direction suddenly changes from axial direction to radial direction, the radial pressure of the guide vanes has larger change and the pressure at the positive side and the top of the guide vanes increase. With the guide vane opening angle increasing, the resistance of guide vanes to the flow becomes smaller and the flow rate through the guide vanes decreases; and then the maximum pressure at the guide vanes and the runner blades gradually decreases: at the moment 2s, the maximum pressure is 169,000 Pa under condition 1, the maximum pressure is 77,100 Pa under condition 2, the maximum pressure is 53,700 Pa under condition 3, the maximum pressure is 35,300 Pa under condition 4. Also, in the start transition process of the hydraulic turbine, the pressure at the pressure surface of the blades near the top of the runner, and the pressure at the inlet side of the runner are larger, the changes of pressure at the suction surface and the pressure at the pressure surface are roughly the same.When hydraulic turbine works under a normal load, the speed remains constant. Due to a sudden load rejection, the unit is disconnected from the power system, while the guide vanes also fails to be closed. As a result, the unit speed will increase rapidly under the action of hydraulic torque until it reaches the runaway speed of the hydraulic turbine under the working head and the current guide vane opening. Sustained high speed will cause severe damages to the unit, and it may excite the natural frequency of the unit. Therefore, the analysis of the runaway transition process of bulb hydraulic turbine is of great significance to the stability and security of the hydraulic turbine work.In this paper, some typical moments are selected for the flow field analysis: at 0.8 s under the rated condition, at 1.8 s under transition condition and at 2.2 s under runaway condition (Fig. 6).From Fig. 6 we know that, at 0.8 s, the hydraulic turbine works stably at the rated speed and the flow regime inside the flow field is smooth, although there is a considerable vortex at the runner outlet which is a normal phenomenon; When the unit is disconnected from the power system, the unit speed will increase rapidly under the action of hydraulic torque. The motion pattern at 1.8 s shows the flow at the guide vanes is quite unstable, and a reflux appears at the runner entrance and impacts with the coming flow; at the outlet of the runner the vortex phenomenon is obvious, and the dynamic pressure of the runner blades surges, mainly at the edge of the blades; When the hydraulic turbine speed reaches the runaway speed, unstable flow at the guide vanes, and reflux at the runner entrance, vortex at the draft tube and other phenomenon are more serious; at this moment the maximum speed near the runner reaches 114 m/s and the maximum dynamic pressure of the blades reaches 7,250,000 Pa.Fig. 7shows that: when the hydraulic turbine runs stably at rated speed, the flow regime in the flow channel is smooth and the total pressure of the hydraulic turbine machine is relatively stable, basically between 240,000–300,000 Pa; when there is a sudden load rejection, the unit disconnected from the power system and the runner speed increase, and then the total pressure of the hydraulic turbine machine increases. This process is relatively stable; when the runner speed reaches the runaway speed under the working head and the current guide vane opening, the total pressure of the hydraulic turbine machine nearly reaches 7,000,000 Pa; when the runner runs at runaway speed, the total pressure of the hydraulic turbine machine has greatly improved and pressure pulsations are generated, with large fluctuations. If the pressure pulsation frequency is close to the natural frequency of the hydraulic turbine machine or the component natural frequency, it will cause resonance of the units which has a greater impact on the stability and security of the hydraulic turbine.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
It can draw the following conclusions based on analysis:(1)In the start transition process of the bulb turbine, because the flow direction suddenly changes from axial direction to radial direction, the radial pressure of the guide vanes has larger change and the pressure at the positive side and the top of the guide vanes increase. With the guide vane opening becoming larger, the flow circulation produced by water flow through the guide vanes reduces, and the thrust force to the runner blades becomes smaller which causes the reduction of the water torque. Therefore, the rotational acceleration decreases, without excessive oscillation, accompanied by the reduction of rotational speed value reached in the same time period.The hydraulic turbine with a load operation has a sudden load rejection so that the guide vanes cannot instantaneously shut down, which makes that: in the course of the guide vane closing, the hydraulic turbine rotational speed is rising and the pressure is rising with pressure pulsations; the flow lines become no more smooth and reflux appears at the runner entrance; the vortex phenomenon at the guide vanes and the draft tube are very serious, causing significant swing and vibration of bulb hydraulic turbine, even resulting in a collision between the rotating part and the fixed part.