@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automatic hierarchical mid-surface abstraction of thin-walled model based on rib decomposition

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A hierarchical semantic structure is designed for mid-surface model abstraction.An efficient rib recognition method is proposed by using face group pairs.A hybrid method is proposed to handle thin-walled model with complex geometry.An efficient reuse method to reuse the resultant mid-surface model.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mid-surface,Hierarchical structure,Dimension reduction,Rib feature recognition,Model decomposition,Reuse,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Model simplification is imperative in the process of computer aided design (CAD) and computer aided engineering (CAE) integration. Mid-surface abstraction is the most effective method to simplify the thin-walled models. Many previous research efforts have been focused on the mid-surface abstraction, including the model decomposition based methods, Medial Axis Transform (MAT) based methods and Chordal Axis Transform (CAT) based methods. However, complex thin-walled models cannot be handled well due to the fact that there are some problems including low geometrical precision, poor topological structure, etc., in the above resultant mid-surface models. Especially, these methods are hard to be reused to generate the mid-surface model efficiently. Therefore, a hierarchical semantic mid-surface abstraction method is proposed for the thin-walled model based on rib feature decomposition in this paper. Firstly, a new hierarchical semantic structure is defined and applied on both the thin-walled models and mid-surface models. After that, the model decomposition is conducted based on the identified rib features and the hierarchical semantic information is obtained at the same time. Then, the offset operation and discretization based methods are used to obtain the mid-surface patch for each sub region with different semantic structure respectively. Finally, the mid-surface model with hierarchical semantic information is generated by stitching all discrete patches. Moreover, the above model can be reused to facilitate the rapid mid-surface abstraction of the changed model based on its hierarchical semantic structure. Several examples are given to demonstrate the outperformance of the proposed method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The thin-walled model refers to the model whose thickness is much smaller than of its size in the other two dimensions (i.e. length and width). It has been widely used in the design of complex products, such as aircraft structural parts, cover parts of the automobile and injection models. From the perspective of product design, the thin-walled model has the following characteristics: (1) The geometry of the main surface is complex. A large number of free-form surfaces are involved which leads to a higher geometric complexity. (2) The topological structure is complex. Generally, a large number of complex ribs are created on the thin-walled model to enhance its structural stiffness to satisfy the requirements of low weight and high stiffness. However, these rib features greatly increases the structural complexity of the model. (3) The design process often begins with the main surface and is then followed by the ribs.From the prospective of product analysis, model simplification is needed to improve the efficiency of Finite Element Analysis (FEA) due to the fact that with the increase of the complexity of the thin-walled model, the analysis cost is multiplied. For thin-walled models, the most effective simplification method is dimensional reduction [1]. Many previous research efforts have been focused on this field, which can be broadly divided into three categories: the Medial Axis Transformation (MAT) based methods, model decomposition based methods and the Chordal Axis Transformation (CAT) based methods. Some research results have been applied in the business software, like NX UGS or CATIA. However, there are still some deficiencies in dealing with the mid-surface abstraction of complex thin-walled models, such as the generation efficiency, geometric accuracy, topology effectiveness, applicability and reusability of the mid-surface model. Based on the analysis of previous methods, the thin-walled models are mostly handled from a macro perspective without making use of the above-mentioned characteristics of thin-walled models. In this study, an automated hierarchical mid-surface abstraction method is proposed based on rib decomposition. Here, the connection semantics and the hierarchical semantics of thin-walled models is utilized to overcome the above-mentioned deficiencies.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the related work. Section 3 describes the research motivation and method overview. Then the definition of hierarchical structure is given in Section 4. The rib feature recognition and a new model decomposition method based on Euler operation are proposed in Section 5 and Section 6 respectively. Section 7 presents a hybrid abstraction method to abstract mid-surface model. Section 8 describes the reusability of mid-surface based on the proposed method. Several experiments are conducted to demonstrate the outperformance of the proposed method in Section 9. Finally, the conclusions and some discussions are given in Section 10.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
