@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A cyberbased Data-Enabled Design framework for high-rise buildings driven by synchronously measured surface pressures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An on-line Data-Enabled Design framework for high-rise buildings is proposed.The model is pressure database driven with time a domain computational framework.All calculations are carried on the server guaranteeing maximum efficiency.Interaction with the model is achieved through intuitive web-based interfaces.The practicality of the proposed cyberbased framework is shown through examples.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wind loads,High-rise building,Synchronous pressure measurements,High frequency base balance,Aerodynamics,Building design,Structural response,Building codes,Information technology (IT),Cyberinfrastructure (CI),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study presents a new Data-Enabled Design Model for high-rise buildings driven by pressure datasets, DEDM-HRP, which seamlessly combines synchronous pressure measurement databases with a rigorous computational framework to offer convenient estimation of wind load effects on high-rise buildings for their preliminary design. To respond to the need for practical applications, DEDM-HRP employs a web-based on-the-fly framework designed with user-friendly/intuitive web interfaces for the assessment of wind-induced responses as well as equivalent static wind loads in the three principal response directions, for any incident wind angle of interest, with minimum added complications or requirements of knowledge of comprehensive background theories for its use.Architectural Institute of JapanAmerican Society of Civil EngineeringData-Enabled DesignData-Enabled Design Module for High-Rise buildings driven by Pressure datasetsEquivalent Static Wind LoadHigh Frequency Base BalanceNatHaz Aerodynamic Loads DatabaseSynchronous Pressure MeasurementTokyo Polytechnic Universityx and y coordinates of the point on the top floor where the acceleration is to be estimated (Fig. 1)x and y distances of the design column, respectively (Fig. 1)x and y coordinates of the point on the top floor where the displacement is to be estimatedx and y components of the eccentricity of the mass center at the ith floor, respectively (Fig. 1)inter-story drift responses in the x and y directions at the ith floor, respectivelyacceleration responses in the x and y directions at point p, respectivelynumber of building storiesresponse directions (Fig. 1)mean loading sub-vector in the s directionzero mean aerodynamic loading sub-vector in the s directionmass and inertia sub-matrices, respectivelydamping and stiffness sub-matrices in the sl direction, respectivelydisplacement, velocity, and acceleration response sub-vectors in the s direction, respectivelynumber of modes kept in the model truncationjth generalized mass, force, damping ratio, circular frequency, mode shape sub-matrix in the s direction, respectivelyjth generalized displacement, velocity, and acceleration response, as well as standard deviation of the resonant modal response, respectivelyjth modal participation coefficient for Ra generic response parameter, e.g., base moments, shears and displacements, etc.mean and standard deviation of the response process R as well as the standard deviation of its derivative, respectivelypeak factor, background peak factor and resonant peak factor, respectivelyHermite model coefficientsskewness and excess kurtosis, respectivelyEuler’s constantzero crossing rateobservation period in secondsbackground and resonant base moment/torque, respectivelyweighting factors with respect to Mband Mr, respectivelycovariance of the aerodynamic loads acting in the s directions direction gust loading envelope and inertial ESWL, respectivelys direction background, resonant and total ESWLs, respectivelywind directionmean wind speed profilebuilding heightmean wind speed at the building height Hpower law exponent of the mean wind velocity profilebuilding width and depth, respectivelyair and building bulk densitydrag coefficient

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Globally, high-rise buildings are becoming an ever more desirable venue for both businesses as well as residences. This has brought about trends toward structures with increasing heights, complex profiles and lighter more slender construction, all of which has increased their sensitivity to the action of wind. Although most international wind standards offer provisions for calculating wind load effects on tall buildings, they generally rely on simplified methodologies and formats. Indeed, most standards primarily focus on the estimation of alongwind load effects through the adoption of a quasi-steady gust loading factor approach (e.g., [1–6]). The codes and standards that do consider response directions other than alongwind, i.e. the acrosswind and torsional directions, generally do so in a limited and empirical manner (e.g., [7–9]). Due to this limitation, wind tunnel experiments are generally necessary for appropriately estimating the response of wind excited structures. For tall buildings, the two most important experimental techniques to this end are the high frequency base balance (HFBB) approach (e.g., [10–13]) and the synchronous pressure measurement (SPM) approach (e.g., [14,15]). The HFBB technique consists in measuring the base forces/moments on rigid models in wind tunnel tests and therefore, after appropriate scaling, allows to conveniently quantify the fundamental generalized wind forces acting on tall buildings that exhibit uncoupled linear fundamental translational mode shapes and constant first torsional mode shape. To account for non-ideal fundamental mode shapes, corrections are in general required that can either be based on empirical relationships/analytical formulations (e.g., [13,16–21]) or, more recently, on probabilistic models [22,23] to be included in appropriate reliability frameworks (e.g. [24,25]), that allow the propagation of the inevitable uncertainties generated by non-ideal fundamental modes [26] to the response. The SPM technique, on the other hand, is based on synchronously measuring the pressure field in wind tunnel tests on rigid building models equipped with a number of pressure taps distributed over the model’s surface [27,28]. The advantage of this method compared to the HFBB is the possibility of directly assessing the local and global aerodynamic loads acting on the structure. This allows for the direct estimation of any number of coupled and non-linear generalized forces (e.g., [29,30]). The only drawback of this approach compared to the HFBB technique is the considerably larger amount of data associated with the measurements and the higher costs of the experimental setup.The central role played by these experimental procedures during the wind response estimation of structures has led to the establishment of aerodynamic databases of HFBB or SPM measurements for a variety of building geometries. Some examples of such databases are the NatHaz HFBB aerodynamic loads database (NALD) ver. 1.0 [31] for tall buildings, the SPM database of the National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) for gable-roofed low-rise buildings [32–36] and the Tokyo Polytechnic University (TPU) database of SPM measurements for low-rise and high-rise buildings [37]. The development of analysis/design procedures driven by these databases has spawned a promising analysis/design methodology, generally termed Data-Enabled Design (DED), which offers convenient fusing of experimental datasets with up-to-date computational analysis/design schemes. Recognizing the usefulness of the DED approach, ASCE 7 has begun to suggest this methodology as a supplemental procedure, e.g. ASCE 7-05 indicates NALD ver. 1.0 for providing guidance at the preliminary design stages of tall buildings, and, more recently, the NIST aerodynamic database has been included in the ASCE 7-10 Commentary. However, such procedures are often difficult to use unless the end-users are familiar with the treatment and management of the numerous wind tunnel datasets that often necessitate the knowledge of comprehensive background theories for correct interpretation. A possible way to address this difficulty is through the introduction of information-/web-based technologies. Indeed, these technologies have begun to emerge as a promising means for solving traditional challenges concerning the user-friendly and efficient interaction with data intensive civil engineering problems such as structural health monitoring (e.g., [38–41]) and construction management (e.g., [42–44]). These approaches are likely to become ever more poignant due to the explosion in network-enabled devices such as desktop/laptop computers, smartphones and tablets, therefore making world-wide-web based technologies/interfaces an important root for facilitating active interaction of geographically dispersed researchers/engineers. Concerning the DED of high-rise buildings, this approach has been explored during the development of the HFBB database-driven analysis/design framework NALD ver. 2.0 [29,45] which is a fully web-based preliminary design tool, publicly available at http://aerodata.ce.nd.edu or https://vortex-winds.org. However, at present, no such on-line on-the-fly analysis/design framework exists for SPM databases. Indeed, while the concept of analysis/design frameworks that use SPM datasets coupled with time domain dynamic response analysis has been proposed in recent years [46–48], these are strictly off-line procedures that require not only the download of the source codes, but also that the user provide, in an appropriate format, the SPM dataset to be used during the response analysis as well as large amounts of information pertaining to the influence coefficients of the numerous design sections of typical tall buildings.The aim of this paper is to define an alternative on-line on-the-fly SPM- and time domain-centered preliminary design model that overcomes the aforementioned limitations. To this end, this paper introduces a cyberbased Data-Enabled Design Model for High-Rise buildings driven by Pressure datasets (DEDM-HRP) with the help of information technology (IT) for obtaining better estimates of wind load effects in lieu of code-specified or complicated off-line procedures. In particular the framework is entirely web-based, allowing the user to interact with the computational model through a limited number of web-based input and output interfaces. It currently hosts the SPM database developed at the Tokyo Polytechnic University (TPU), Japan [37] but can be readily expanded to host multiple SPM databases. By using a combination of front-end and back-end architecture, all computations are carried out on powerful remote servers allowing detailed SMP-driven time domain-based response estimations to be made available to the user in a matter of seconds, independently of the computational capability of the user’s device. By incorporating in the framework the assessment of equivalent static wind loads (ESWLs) [49] for the three principal response directions, a means for the preliminary design of the members is provided that avoids the need of inputting member level influence coefficients.The global behavior of tall buildings can be modeled through a lumped mass equivalent dynamic system where each floor is considered rigid in its plane with motion fully described by three degrees of freedom (i.e. x and y displacement, relative to the ground, and θ-rotation about the center of mass of each floor). Under these assumptions the dynamic equilibrium of an N-story building is given by:(1)M000M000IU¨x(t)U¨y(t)U¨θ(t)+CxxCxyCxθCxyTCyyCyθCxθTCyθTCθθU̇x(t)U̇y(t)U̇θ(t)+KxxKxyKxθKxyTKyyKyθKxθTKyθTKθθUx(t)Uy(t)Uθ(t)=Fx(t)Fy(t)Fθ(t)where Ux, Uyand Uθare the response sub-vectors; M is the diagonal mass sub-matrix while I is the sub-matrix of mass moment of inertias of the floor diaphragms; Kxx, Kyy, Kθθ, Kxy, Kxθ,Kyθand Cxx, Cyy, Cθθ, Cxy, Cxθ,Cyθare the sub-matrixes of the stiffness and damping of the building respectively; while Fx(t), Fy(t) and Fθ(t) are the fluctuating floor load vectors acting in the x, y and θ directions. In DEDM-HRP, the vectors Fx(t), Fy(t) and Fθ(t) are estimated from the instantaneous vertical interpolation and appropriate scaling of the model scale sectional forces obtained from pre-integration of the pressure data derived from SPM datasets. In particular, the time/frequency scaling is achieved by respecting the similitude on reduced frequency. The response in the centers of mass of each floor allow the inter-story drift responses dix(t) and diy(t) between the ith and (i−1)th floor of a column line located at drxand dryfrom the z-axis of the global reference system (Fig. 1) to be estimated from:(2)dix(t)=(Uxi(t)-(dry+eiy)Uθi(t))-(Uxi-1(t)-(dry+ei-1y)Uθi-1(t))diy(t)=(Uyi(t)+(drx+eix)Uθi(t))-(Uyi-1(t)+(drx+ei-1x)Uθi-1(t))where eixand eiyare the x and y distances defining the eccentricities of the mass centers of each floor with respect to the global reference system (Fig. 1). Similarly the acceleration in the x and y directions for a point p located on the top floor of the building may be estimated through:(3)apx(t)=U¨xN(t)-(Δax+eNx)U¨θN(t)apy(t)=U¨yN(t)+(Δay+eNy)U¨θN(t)where Δaxand Δayare the x and y distances of the point of interest at the top floor (Fig. 1).The equations of motion given in Eq. (1) can be solved through modal analysis. In particular if classical damping is considered, then the equations of motion may be transformed into a set of j=1,2,…,n uncoupled equations:(4)mj[q¨j(t)+2ζjωjq̇j(t)+ωj2qj(t)]=Qj(t)where qjis the jth generalized displacement, ξjand ωjare the generalized damping ratio and circular frequency, Qj(t) is the generalized force while mjis the generalized mass given respectively by:(5)Qj(t)=ΦjxTFx(t)+ΦjyTFy(t)+ΦjθTFθ(t)(6)mj=ΦjxTMΦjx+ΦjyTMΦjy+ΦjθTIΦjθwhere Φjsdenotes the jth mode shape sub-vector for s=x, y, θ. To efficiently and accurately estimate the modal responses,qj(t),q̇j(t)andq¨j(t), direct integration through schemes based on digital filters [50–52] may be employed. The time history of a generic response parameter R(t), e.g. base moments, shears and displacements, is then given by:(7)R(t)=∑j=1nΓjqj(t)where Γjis the jth modal participation coefficient for R[49]. Because DEDM-HRP is based on a modal description of the response, the only quantities that are needed for the mechanical characterization of the structure are the mode shapes and their associated natural frequencies and modal damping ratios, plus information concerning the mass distribution. This obviously implies that the mean and background contribution to the generic response parameter R will also be estimated within this modal framework with the exception of the base shear and moments whose mean and background components are directly estimated from the particular SPM dataset being considered.The expected peak of a generic response R may be written asRˆ=μR+gσR, where μRand σRare the mean and standard deviation of the response process while g is the peak factor. By taking advantage of the availability of the response process time histories R(t) a potentially non-Gaussian peak factor can be considered by adopting the Hermite model [52,53] given by:(8)g=κβ+γβ+h3β2+(2γ-1)+1.98β2+h4β3+3β(γ-1)+3βπ26-γ-γ2+5.44β3where h3, h4 and κ are the Hermite model coefficients, γ is Euler’s constant whileβ=2ln(ν0T)withν0=(1/2π)(σṘ/σR)the zero crossing rate where T is the observation period andσṘis the standard deviation of the derivative process. The availability of R(t) would allow the peak factor to be estimated directly from the observed peaks. However, because estimates obtained from the Hermite model are based on the entire information contained in the time series, they will in general be more stable than estimates based on the observed peaks. This is especially true considering the fact that it is customary in wind engineering to invoke the assumption of ergodicity, therefore it is rare to have more than a single realization of the response process. A satisfying property of the Hermite model of Eq. (8) is that it reduces to the conventional peak factor for Gaussian processes. In using Eq. (8) the Hermite coefficients h3, h4 and κ need to be estimated. For applications to wind excited tall buildings, the case of excess kurtosis (γ4>3) is of interest as it produces heavier tails than a Gaussian distribution would therefore leading to possible underestimation of the expected peaks if a Gaussian assumption is made. For this reason the models proposed in [52] are adopted for estimating h3 and h4 in DEDM-HRP while the case of γ4<3, i.e. lighter distribution tails compared to the Gaussian case, is neglected in favor of safety by simply taking γ4=3.DEDM-HRP also provides ESWLs in the x and y directions, as well as the torsional direction for any incident wind angle of interest. These loads are based on the model described in [49] while considering the base moments/torques as critical response parameters. In particular the background ESWLs are determined through the gust loading envelope defined as:(9)Febs′=gbdiag[CFs](s=x,y,θ)whereCFsis the covariance of the external loads acting in the sth direction, gbis the peak factor of the sth direction background base moment. From the knowledge of the envelope defined in Eq. (9), the following loads can be defined:(10)FeMbs=WMbs′Febs′(s=x,y,θ)whereWMbs′are weighting factors, with respect to the background base moment/torque Mb, as defined in [49]. The resonant ESWLs are determined in terms of the modal inertial load:(11)Fejrs=grωj2MsΦjsσqjr(s=x,y,θ)whereσqjris the standard deviation of the jth resonant modal displacement response, Msis the mass sub-matrix equal to M for s=x and y and I for s=θ while gris the resonant peak factor of the base moment response under consideration. The modal inertial loads of Eq. (11) allow the following resonant loads, for n contributing modes, to be defined:(12)FeMrs=∑j=1nWjMrFejrs(s=x,y,θ)whereWjMrare the resonant base moment/torque, Mr, modal weighting factors [49]. The combination of the background and resonant loads define the following total dynamic loads:(13)FeMs=FeMbs+FeMrs(s=x,y,θ)The complete loading is then given by the sumF¯s±FeMswhereF¯sis the mean loading sub-vector in the s direction. It should be observed that the ESWLs so defined include a full background representation (the modal framework is used only during the estimation of the resonant response contribution) and can consider any number of coupled non-linear modes.To address the need for practical applications, the DEDM-HRP framework was also implemented as a web-based on-line on-the-fly analysis/design framework designed with user-friendly/intuitive web interfaces. It is essentially operated by an Apache web server [54] with front-end and back-end processes, a schematic diagram of which is shown in Fig. 2. The front-end process includes user-friendly interfaces that allow for both the selection of a desired analysis/design model through a set of user inputs, as shown in Fig. 3(user interface with input values pertaining to the design example of the next section). Since the interfaces are implemented in a standard web style using a combination of typical web languages such as HTML, JavaScript and PHP, any Internet-ready device with a web browser (Internet Explorer, Firefox, Chrome, Safari, Opera, etc.) can access and utilize the DEDM-HRP e-module without the need of any special software installation. For the construction of dynamic web interfaces, the proposed computational model also utilized jQuery API (application programming interface), which is a fast, small, and feature-rich JavaScript library [55]. On the other hand, the back-end processes are server-side operations that involve manipulation of the user’s inputs, database query and data analysis/design. The PHP language, which is a popular server-side script language used for web implementations, was employed to manipulate user inputs for various back-end processes. This data manipulation module controls overall back-end processing. If the user presses the “Run” button at the input interface after filling out all input fields (Fig. 3), the inputs are transmitted to the manipulation module coded in PHP. It firstly carries out simple error checks, then proceeds to query local or remote database(s) with the aim of selecting the appropriate dataset on the basis of parameters such as building dimension and terrain conditions, input by the user. The database(s) can be a set of experimental data files or a pre-conditioned database using a database management system (DBMS), e.g., MySQL [56], or a combination of both. Note that in this study the raw pressure data obtained by a series of wind tunnel tests are pre-calculated to obtain sectional forces and stored inside the server to maximize the efficiency of the on-line computations. However, it would be possible to introduce an additional on-line calculation module to convert raw pressure datasets into sectional forces, illustrated by a dotted box in Fig. 2. After the database query and the selection of the sectional forces, the manipulation module generates an input file to execute the main analysis/design module. To facilitate the implementation process and provide a sufficient level of flexibility for possible upgrades in the future, MATLAB [57] was selected to be the main computational engine for the DEDM-HRP akin to NALD v. 2.0 [29,45]. Although the computational speed of MATLAB is known to be slower than other programming languages such as FORTRAN or C/C++, MATLAB offers some additional advantages such as abundant built-in functions for special computations and more sophisticated numerical schemes, easy programming and modifications of the main codes without compiling, and graphical representation. Finally, the computed results, saved files and important plots are collected at the manipulation module, which then communicates with the results interface for displaying the outputs. From a front-end process viewpoint, the user will automatically see the results interface after all back-end computations are completed. This web-enabled workflow of DEDM-HRP, shown in Fig. 2, offers a simple but flexible computational framework, thus it can be easily applied to other research areas therefore fusing data processing, database management and on-line on-the-fly computation altogether.DEDM-HRP currently hosts an aerodynamic database compiled at the Tokyo Polytechnic University, Japan (referred to simply as the TPU database) for a variety of building configurations of different width (B), depth (D) and height (H) ratios (B:D:H ratios), tested for various incident wind directions [37]. The database comprises a total of 394 test cases, derived for 3 square/rectangular cross-sectional shapes, 4–5 model heights, 1–2 exposure categories and 11–21 incident wind directions with 5° increments as shown in Table 1. Owing to the symmetric nature of square and rectangular cross-sections with respect to two orthogonal axes (i.e., x and y axes of Fig. 1), the wind directions considered during each model test obviously cover any incident wind direction of interest between 0° and 360° with 5° increments. The number of pressure taps used in the test models was between 100 and 500 depending on the model dimension. The wind profile during the wind tunnel experiments was assumed to follow a power law format:(14)U(z)=UHzHαwhere U(z) is the mean wind speed at height z, UHis the mean wind speed at the building height H while α is the power law exponent of the mean wind velocity profile. Two terrain conditions are employed in the TPU database corresponding to urban/suburban terrain (α=0.25) and open terrain (α=0.167), which are close to Exposure B and C as defined by ASCE 7-10 [58] and Exposure IV and II as defined by the AIJ standard [7]. To ensure that DEDM-HRP has a rapid execution time, these raw pressure datasets are reduced and stored as sets of model scale sectional forces. Through instantaneous vertical interpolation and opportune scaling, the sectional forces are transformed into sets of floor load time histories driving the equations of motion outlined in Eq. (1).The initial part of the input interface (Fig. 3) allows for the selection of the pressure dataset, and so model sectional force set, by identifying the B:D:H ratio of the wind tunnel model. It should be observed that if the ratio does not coincide with that of the input building dimensions DEDM-HRP will respect dimensional similitude in the vertical direction. Other input possibilities offered by the interface allow for defining exposures, averaging time for response estimation (in particular a 10-min or a 1-h averaging time can be selected as these are the typical values adopted in most international codes and standards [59]), number of floors, building bulk density, and natural frequencies and modal damping ratios of the modes to be considered in the response analysis. In particular, concerning the modal information, two input options are available. The first assumes the response described by uncoupled power law mode shapes in three primary directions (x, y, and θ of Fig. 1). These may be input by directly assigning the mode exponents for each direction together with the associated frequencies and damping ratios as shown in Fig. 4(a). Alternatively, any number of uncoupled/coupled mode shapes can be directly input, with respect to the reference center of the building, together with their associated frequencies and damping ratios input as comma/space separated strings as shown in Fig. 4(b). In general, the mass centers of each floor will not coincide with the origin of the reference system. To account for this, DEDM-HRP allows the user to specify the location of the mass centers with respect to the origin of the reference system (exand ey). It should be observed that while the theoretical framework is not limited to constant eccentricities over the height of the building, at present the interface only considers this possibility. This limitation will be eliminated in future versions of DEDM-HRP. In addition, DEDM-HRP also considers habitability design for ensuring human comfort levels through the assessment of the acceleration response in any point of the top floor (identified by the inputs Δaxand Δay) for wind speeds of shorter return periods than those typically used for survivability/ultimate design or serviceability-cladding design, e.g. between 1 and 10years depending on the international code or standard under consideration (e.g., [59]). Following the design philosophy suggested by the ASCE 7-10 [58], the user interface of DEDM-HRP provides three input forms for assigning the mean wind speeds (m/s) at the building top for survivability/ultimate, serviceability-cladding and serviceability–habitability design respectively (Fig. 3). In particular, considering the serviceability-cladding design, the user can indicate the location of the column line for which the inter-story drift ratio is desired by inputting drxand dry(Fig. 1) as well as where the displacement response is desired through Δdxand Δdy. A final input option consists in choosing whether to consider possible non-Gaussian effects in the calculation of the peak responses by invoking the Hermite model of Section 2.2. By running a completed user interface, the e-module internally performs the response analysis following the time domain-based framework outlined in Section 2 based on the user’s inputs, at the completion of which the user is taken to the results interface. Note that several links containing helpful guidelines are also provided to the user to minimize unexpected input errors.Fig. 5shows the results interface (please note that the plots of the interface have been included as separate figures here for ease of illustration) obtained for the design example of the next section (illustrated in Fig. 6). As can be seen from the figure, the initial part of the results interface gives a summary of the input variables together with a plot of the fundamental mode shapes (Fig. 7). This summary portion of the interface also includes a web link that allows the user to visit the TPU database webpage where information such as contours of statistical moments of the local wind pressure coefficients and time histories of the wind pressure coefficients are available. The summary portion of the results interface is followed by a number of plots reporting the principal response/analysis quantities. In particular, the interface shows plots over all wind directions of the maximum base shear/moments calculated for the input survivability/ultimate wind speed, lateral top floor displacements at (Δdx,Δdy) for the input serviceability wind speed, and top floor accelerations at (Δax,Δay) for the input habitability wind speed (Fig. 8). Plots of the inter-story drift ratios over the building height of the user input column line, (drx,dry), are also provided for the incident wind directions β=0° and β=90° (Fig. 9). A final set of plots provides the mean, background, resonant and total components of the ESWLs associated with the x, y and z base moments for the wind directions β=0° and β=90° (Fig. 10shows the corresponding plot for the x direction base bending moment and β=0°). Finally, an option to download these and other analysis results in the form of a MATLAB .mat file is provided at the bottom of the results interface (Fig. 5). Note that although only a limited number of analysis/design results are displayed in the result interface, the output file includes a full set of information such as modal force time histories, inter-story drift ratios for all wind directions, ESWLs for all wind directions as well as negative peaks, therefore allowing for additional analysis/design beyond the illustrated outputs of DEDM-HRP. Note that the ESWLs for the wind directions β=0° and β=90° are also provided as separate ASCII files for easy application with a structural analysis software, e.g. SAP2000. It should be observed that all outputs of DEDM-HRP are in terms of the global reference system, i.e. the x, y and θ directions. This limits the directions in which the drifts and accelerations are calculated. This limitation will be removed in future versions of DEDM-HRP by allowing the user to input the orientation of the global reference system.To illustrate the implementation of the DEDM-HRP as a design tool, the example structure presented in [53] is taken as a case study, the wind induced response of which is desired. The structure consists of a 45-story rectangular building with an offset core (Fig. 6a). The columns consist of steel box sections with mid-line diameter equal to 0.6m with a web thickness of 0.03m and are grouped in plan as indicated in Fig. 6b (C1–C18). The beams, B1 to B6, are grouped in plan as indicated in Fig. 6b and are W24×176 AISC steel profiles. The diagonal bracings are also W24×176 steel profiles. The floor systems are considered rigid in their plane with an area density of 380kg/m2. Due to the offset core, the building is characterized by lateral-torsional coupling between its fundamental modes as shown in Fig. 7, which also highlights how the fundamental modes are non-linear, i.e. the their components are non-linear functions of the vertical coordinate. The structure is also characterized by a certain eccentricity of the mass centers with respect to the geometric center of each floor given by ex=0m while ey=0.785m. Other input characteristics of the structure are: bulk density (floors plus structural system) ρB=120kg/m3; natural frequencies of the fundamental modes f1=0.163Hz, f2=0.189Hz and f3=0.294Hz; modal damping ratios of the fundamental modes ζ1=ζ2=ζ3=0.015 (Fig. 4b). Of interest in this example is the estimation of the displacement response at the geometric center of the structure,(Δdx=0,Δdy=0), while the top floor acceleration is desired for the corner located at(Δax=-18,Δay=-36)which also identifies the column line of interest, i.e.(drx=-18,dry=-36). In order to use DEDM-HRP to estimate the coupled lateral-torsional response of the structure described above, the mode shapes of Fig. 7, obtained from the finite element model of the structure, were directly input with respect to the reference system (Fig. 4b). The B:D:H ratio of the building is 2:1:5, which corresponds to one of the available B:D:H ratios included in the DEDM-HRP database (Fig. 3).The building is considered, for illustration purposes, to be located near the Boston area of the USA (corresponding to urban/suburban terrain) for which the reference 700-, 50- and 10-year 3-s gust wind speed at 10m are 58m/s, 45m/s and 36m/s respectively [58]. These wind speeds correspond to mean hourly wind speeds at the building top (averaging time of interest for this example is 1-h) of 53.76m/s, 41.37m/s and 33.37m/s for the ultimate (category II building), serviceability and habitability design respectively [58]. By running the DEDM-HRP e-module while choosing a non-Gaussian peak factor, the response shown in Figs. 7–9, and previously illustrated, are obtained. In particular, these results are generated in a matter of seconds and can be easily updated during the design process. This is of practical use, as during the design process many changes to the structural system are likely to take place. Using DEDM-HRP, not only can the dynamic response estimation of the structure be updated, but the ultimate limit state ESWLs can also be updated ensuring that the members are designed safely. Also, the availability of the responses for all wind directions allows for the effect of wind direction on the load effects to be investigated. For example, by inspecting the base shear and moment response (Fig. 8), it could be decided that the wind direction β=15° should also be considered during the design of the members, i.e. ultimate ESWLs for this wind direction should be included in the design of the system. Finally, it is interesting to observe from Fig. 9 how the inclusion of non-Gaussian effects during the response estimation would seem to be appropriate for this system and pressure dataset. Indeed, Fig. 9 clearly shows how a significant underestimate of the inter-story drift ratio response of the column line would be obtained if a Gaussian peak factor was considered in the analysis. This difference would seem particularly important for the x direction response of the column line for wind blowing parallel to the y axis (Fig. 9b) where differences of over 30% in the expected peak values are seen. The root of this difference lays in the often high excess kurtosis seen for this response parameter. Indeed, taking for illustrative purposes the 20th floor inter-story drift response (the time history of which is shown in Fig. 11a), the kurtosis is γ4=3.975 which would seem to indicate a certain non-Gaussianity in this response parameter (for completeness the skewness is γ3=−0.034). The fitted probability density function (pdf) of the Hermite model is shown in Fig. 11b and compared to the fitted Gaussian model as well as the histogram of the response. From Fig. 11b, it would seem that the Hermite model follows the data somewhat better than the Gaussian model, especially in the tail region. Having said this, it should be observed that the purpose of including a possibly non-Gaussian peak factor in DEDM-HRP is simply to allow the data to drive the procedure. The question of whether the data should or should not be indicating this trend is an entirely different matter and is left to the discretion of the user. For instance, if the high value of the kurtosis seen for the inter-story drift response reported here is considered as a consequence of an insufficient record length, the user of DEDM-HRP has the option of simply considering a Gaussian peak factor independently of what the data may be suggesting.To compare DEDM-HRP to other commonly adopted response estimation methods, a comparative study using a tall building example was carried out considering the following two main response estimation methodologies: (a) code prescribed procedures, in particular the ASCE 7 [58] standard and the AIJ [7] standard; (b) HFBB database approaches. Concerning this data-driven response estimation methodology, two experimental databases were considered. The first was the NatHaz database from the NatHaz modeling laboratory of the University of Notre Dame, which is used in the NALD e-module [29,31,45], while the other was the Tamkang database from the Wind Engineering Research Center (WERC) of Tamkang University Taiwan [60,61]. The estimation of the structural response using HFBB databases was performed using the base moment-centered 3-D gust loading factor approach of NALD [6,29,31] which will be simply referred to as the NALD procedure hereafter. This approach directly utilizes information, such as the non-dimensional spectra and the root mean square coefficients, of the experimentally measured HFBB base moments/torque. For completeness, the theoretical background of the procedure is briefly described in Appendix A.The key area of the comparison concerns the un-factored survivability design requirements such as base shear/moment and displacement responses, and the serviceability, in terms of habitability, design requirements, i.e. acceleration responses in the alongwind and acrosswind directions while considering a single incident wind direction given by β=0°. To make the comparison, an example building with the following characteristics was considered: building width B=40m; building depth D=40m; building height H=200m (therefore the dimensional ratio B:D:H is 1:1:5); natural frequencies in the alongwind and acrosswind directions fx=fy=0.2Hz; building bulk density ρB=180kg/m3; damping ratio ζ=0.01 for both directions; number of floors=50 (interstory height=4m); air density ρA=1.22kg/m3; drag force coefficient CD=1.3; linear mode shapes for both translational directions are assumed; two exposures are considered corresponding to urban/suburban terrain (ASCE 7-B and AIJ-IV) and open terrain (ASCE-C and AIJ-II). For reference, a list of power law exponents (α in Eq. (14)) for the standards and databases used in this example are shown in Table 2. It should be observed that the comparison is only made for the fundamental uncoupled translational response at the geometric center of the building, therefore the DEDM-HRP response does not depend on the choice of input variables concerning the torsional response of the structure. In ASCE 7, the basic wind speed is defined as the 3-s gust while 1-h mean wind speeds are considered during the estimation of responses. In contrast the AIJ standard employs a 10-min averaging time for both the basic wind speed and response estimation. Table 3shows the mean wind speeds at the building top used in this example. Note that this study is not intended as a comparison between two standards. For reference, such a code comparison can be found in [62].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
