@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#


@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A natural consequence of the extended use of CAD systems for the design and production of any kind of vessel is its use in Virtual Reality environments.Virtual Reality is extended in every industry, in every sector, at any level.This paper describes different efficient uses of Virtual Reality in the shipbuilding industry, taking in consideration all the agents involved.A solution of Virtual Reality needs to be composed of the following components: a system display, helmet, a motion tracking system, computer, infrastructure and the software.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Virtual Reality,Shipbuilding,Software,Technology,Ship design,Computer aided design,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A natural consequence of the extended use of CAD systems for the design and production of any kind of vessel is its use in Virtual Reality environments, mainly because now it has become an accessible technology. Virtual Reality is extended in every industry, in every sector, at any level. Important improvements both in software and hardware have had an important impact in its use in the shipbuilding industry, where it is necessary to handle complex ship 3D models with huge amount of data. So, efficiency is the base condition in the Virtual Reality navigation around a vessel. To enhance it, there are three important factors that play a fundamental role. The first one is having an appropriate CAD system with all the information of the ship in a single data base. The second important issue is to have a viewer, which is a tool that allows the management of the 3D model to be used in Virtual Reality environments. No need to say that a good integration between the viewer and the CAD system will be translated into more functionality and better performance. Finally, the third important player is hardware, which makes possibility the Virtual Reality navigation in many different environments.This paper describes first of all different efficient uses of Virtual Reality in the shipbuilding industry, taking in consideration all the agents involved and describing in particular the advantages for any of them. Regarding the software requirements, it will be described in particular the new FVIEWER, developed by SENER for the Virtual Reality navigation and design review and based on the FORAN system. From the hardware side, it will be described some of the most relevant and feasible applications of the Virtual Reality, taking in consideration potential uses and accessible technology in the market. The future of the Virtual Reality in shipbuilding will be explained after that.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Virtual Reality is defined, in any encyclopaedia, as a computer-simulated environment that can simulate physical presence in places in the real world or imagined worlds. Virtual reality can recreate sensory experiences. Most current virtual reality environments are primarily visual experiences, displayed either on a computer screen or through special stereoscopic displays, but some simulations include additional sensory information, such as sound through speakers or headphones.FVIEWER VR is the new Virtual Reality and design review module developed by SENER that contains all the functionality of the module FVIEWER and add the possibility of tracking. It is fully integrated in the FORAN environment. FVIEWER gives the user the possibility to review the ship 3D model, walk through it in real time, interrogate it about properties and attributes, detect collisions, and make annotations and measure clearances and distances. Being developed in native 64 bits thus allowing the use of more than 4 GB RAM, and taking advantage of the latest graphic cards capabilities, FVIEWER can handle in an efficient way huge amount of data.FVIEWER, with an intuitive and modern user interface, incorporates new scene navigations tools and other features to enhance the user navigation. The viewing control in FVIEWER is performed by direct mouse or joystick manipulation. Other capabilities are:•The design tree information is displayed in the main window for object selection and to see information about the model and annotations. Selection of components is done by different criteria.Operation with groups of selected items.Possibility to check the ergonomic of the design by importing in the scene human models.Information about references available, such as frame system, and significant points.Query of object attributes.Measurement by selection in the scene, surface on objects or significant points for exact positions.Addition of notes.Clipping planes.Advanced searching tools.Advanced algorithms are included, allowing detection of collisions indicated by color highlighting and sound notification.A path editor is available, making possible to assign paths to objects and also for the camera, thus allowing of checking removal routes, escape routes and design inconsistencies.An overview map following the actual position of the camera allows the user to know the relative position inside the model, and to easily and quickly change it by selecting a new position in the map.Stereoscopic vision: The stereoscopic vision requires a quad-buffer enabled graphic card such as the NVIDIA® Quadro® series. Stereo may be used with NVIDIA 3D Vision compatible screens and projectors.Object texturing: An object or part of an object may be assigned a texture image (PNG image file).Full screen mode: All the short-cut keys, selection, popup menus and navigation modes are available when navigating in full-screen.Tracking: Tracking of head coordinates for immersive Virtual Reality with use of wand for navigation and model interaction.FVIEWER incorporates a new file format v3D generated by merging information from p3D files, which makes easier to handle big scenes.In addition, the module uses some techniques for improving the performance, such as occlusion culling to speed up the rendering of large scenes by omitting hidden objects from the graphics pipeline that geometry hidden behind other geometry is not sent to the graphics pipeline, and incorporates better visualization capabilities without performance penalty.A quick examination of shipbuilding magazines over the last five years will reveal that there has been much talk about the application of 3D models and applications of Virtual Reality. This all presupposes the existence of a digital prototype, in other words, a digital or virtual mock-up of a ship. The concept behind using digital prototypes is to do as much work, analysis, and communication as possible within a 3D digital environment, rather than in the physical world. This involves using computer simulations more than physical models and viewing videos and fly-through, rather than interpreting paper drawings. The concept of digital prototyping goes beyond simply creating product designs in 3D. Having digital prototypes on a screen of the engineers in their office is one thing but getting the 3D model down onto the shop floor, extends the concept even further. This goes beyond than simply having production workers viewing the design. It involves production department utilizing the CAD model on a day to day basis.Most of CAD suppliers are developing the Virtual Reality concept in order to achieve future success. For example, some of them are promoting the use of the shop floor 3D concept as a logical extension of its digital prototyping tools used in their programs. There are still limitations on the number of parts that the software can handle. Only limited strides have been taken in the direction of shop floor 3D at even the most progressive shipbuilding companies.Another way where the CAD companies want to improve the Virtual Reality tools is using tablets. Showing complete build sequences, via 3D animations in tablets, would dramatically aid in communication compared to simply viewing static models. The use of tablets would also allow mobile shipyard workers to bring the digital prototyping experience with them, further enhancing productivity. It is true that due to the size and complexity of 3D CAD models used in shipbuilding, there are current limitations imposed by the software and hardware that affect the viability of this approach.PLM tools are used for configuration management of the digital mock-up. The Virtual Reality applied to PLM will bring together the product, tooling and production line around a single database. The totality of processes and data necessary for the different functions will be included. As well as integrating the different skill areas, this Virtual Reality applied to PLM could be used to apply the design-to-build concept and enable complete product lifecycle management. Industrialization process must be optimized. The Virtual Reality applied to PLM could also be used to simulate production processes and maintenance operations. Finally, Virtual Reality applied to PLM will achieve ever greater degrees of optimization: automatically produce instructions and documentation and follow project progress, reviewing the mock-up in Virtual Reality.Shipbuilding industry is affected by a global and extremely competitive environment. All processes and systems have to be adapted to this challenging scenario, making special efforts in innovation and applying the most advanced technology available in the market. The Virtual Reality application to shipbuilding is not new, but it is more extended now thanks to the important improvements in software and hardware. From a user point of view, it is possible now to find a wide range of solutions to meet the most demanding requirements, to achieve measurable results, in terms of efficiency and costs.The ship 3D model is the core to all tasks related to ship design and manufacturing.It is the starting point of a series of thousands of tasks that are absolutely based on the coherence of the model. As an added value, CAD suppliers develop smart tools to use this model in realistic navigations in Virtual Reality environments with multiple purposes. Some of the most important uses of Virtual Reality in shipbuilding are described in the following paragraphs.Maybe the engineering department of a shipyard is where is more extended the use of this kind of solutions. And production department is maybe where it should be extended because is where there are the most costly errors. They are not usually working with a Virtual Reality solution but now it is starting to be clear that it is very useful to check the model, to avoid errors and inconsistencies but also to improve the tasks of production.So, the first and most important use of Virtual Reality is for avoiding errors. The possibility of viewing the ship 3D model as much realistic as possible is really effective to find out errors, in all stages of the design. From early design stages, to manufacturing and production phases, it is possible to use it to check all the elements, to see inconsistencies, to prevent interferences and collisions, to query about properties and attributes and to study different design alternatives and changes dynamically. In addition, the user and model interaction has become much more realistic with the implementation of tracking devices which give the sense of being inside the model, walking and moving on it, touching it.Viewers allow an easy navigation and a fast-movement. Different modes of visualization, search and query options, inclusion of annotations and measurement of distances are important and useful capabilities. Ergonomic aspects in the design can be studied and checked better having a Virtual Reality solution, with the possibility to include dummies. It is possible also the collision detection, to check interferences and the insertion of annotations.Simulation is another important area of application of Virtual Reality in ship design, engineering and production. It is being applied in the study of many tasks with different purposes, from the study of escape routes to the simulation of dismantling for maintenance of equipments. The help in the study of critical assembly tasks and how the surrounding elements are affected is relevant too.No need to say that the use of Virtual Reality for the control of the design is very useful, just to see the progress of the project. And more, once it is being built, the comparison between the model and the real ship is necessary and Virtual Reality can help to find out errors that need to be solved as soon as possible eliminating further unnecessary costs.On the other hand, it is very common that the ship design and engineering and also the manufacturing is divided in different blocks that are subcontracted to different design offices, subcontractors and shipyards. The shipyard receives all the information of the ship and needs to supervise that everything is correct. Having a Virtual Reality tool that allows the integration of all the information in a simple way makes possible to have a single model, which is much more effective than having many different models. In Fig. 1it is showed an example of operation checking in a cylindrical screen.Benefits of using Virtual Reality for marketing and commercial purposes are evident. That is why Virtual Reality tools are having a great reception in sales and marketing activities. Thanks to the wide range of possibilities available in the market, from small and portable solutions to big and on-demand solutions, the present and future applications of Virtual Reality is higher than we can imagine.From the marketing point of view, the possibility to present a ship 3D model with the higher level of detail in an immersive Virtual Reality experience adds incalculable value to the sales activity. Many shipyards are already taking advantage of this technology, not only in their facilities but also in fairs and exhibitions thanks to the portable solutions that will be described later.Shipyard management play the role of ensuring that the commitments made to the clients are fulfilled. The project needs to be accurate, with the highest quality level and in accordance with estimations to ensure customer satisfaction. To achieve it, it is very important to have a clear idea about the progress of the project and also about changes that can affect further requirements, schedules and costs. Having the opportunity to check the Virtual Reality model from early design stages is a great advantage and allows a friendly checking, quick evaluation of alternatives and fast decision-making. At the end, the great impact in cost reduction is possible thanks to the early error detection, being much more expensive the modifications in manufacturing and production stages.The presentation of the progress of the ship project to ship-owners is another important use of Virtual Reality, adding the value of being very easy to conceive the project in a very realistic and intuitive way. This has become a great advantage in comparison with conventional presentations. In fact Virtual Reality can substitute the old scale ship models that are expensive and with short level of detail. The capabilities to present the information available in the Virtual Reality solutions are as big as the user’s ability, because now it is possible to provide realistic finishes and all the level of detail required. Ship-owners can also check and monitor the progress of the model and also to promote design alternatives less cost-effective than in further stages.Military shipbuilding industry is affected by the most demanding requirements both in the design and production stages. It is true that this kind of naval projects, both in submarines and in surface ships, are lengthy and complex although they have more human resources. But, at the end, the project needs to comply with the strictest rules and also with the budgets imposed by the ministries. This is not an easy task, and that is why all the help in the control and supervision of the process is really welcome. Is in this area of shipbuilding where Virtual Reality solutions have been well received time ago. The application of the most advanced technologies usually starts in ambitious programmes with major innovations and budgets. That is the case of application of Virtual Reality in shipbuilding, because we cannot forget that having an appropriate Virtual Reality solution is costly, and that long-term military projects are those that a priori have a larger budget to afford them.Other important use around the naval shipbuilding is in the side of the Army. The use of Virtual Reality is an advantage for the crew training. In submarines this can be particularly interesting for the lack of space. Simulation is the other important activity, since there is really difficult to enhance some kind of operations inside a submarine but also in a surface ship. The help of Virtual Reality to simulate operations and dismantling and maintenance tasks is unquestionable. Here there is a great area of improvement.From another point of view, there are still some drawbacks to mention around the use of this kind of technology in shipbuilding. The most important one is the price, because although there are cheaper devices available in the market, the true is that the hardware is expensive, and it is necessary to add the costs of the software, the implementation, the conditioning of the room, the training, etc.Another important drawback is that there is necessary to have a good ship 3D model of the ships. Sometimes this is not possible, because there are multiple CAD systems applied in the same project, with the difficult of having just one model of the ship with all the information. To avoid this situation it is much better to develop the whole project in the same CAD, or at least to have the necessary tools to integrate the information in a viewer compatible to all of them, which sometimes it is a very difficult task.Finally, the ergonomic aspect of the solution is important too. The use of 3D glasses for a long time is annoying for the eyes, and the standing position looking to a screen without any light could be unpleasant if used too often.As it has been mentioned before, the software is one of the key factors to consider in the efficient use of a Virtual Reality solution. SENER has developed a state-of-the-art solution for the Virtual Reality navigation and design review, called FVIEWER, the second generation application that improves and replaced the VISUAL 3D application in FORAN[3]. The new application offers real-time walkthrough for ship model review and it can be used both on a normal workstation and with high-end hardware specially made for immersive Virtual Reality environments.The important advantages of using FVIEWER as a Virtual Reality solution are based on both its technology and functionality, as it is described in detail below.FVIEWER implements the graphic using OpenGL which is the most widely adopted graphics standard for high performance applications. Several additional techniques are employed to speed up the rendering of big scenes which makes it possible to visualize an entire ship using the adequate hardware. The geometry is organized in KD-trees (space-partitioning data structures for organizing the geometry in the space) which make fast occlusion culling possible. The occlusion culling consists of filtering out the objects that are entirely hidden behind other opaque objects from the graphic pipeline significantly reducing the number of polygons processed by the GPU. OpenGL shaders are employed to pass part of the graphic rendering calculations directly to the GPU. These techniques together with the use of native 64 bits application architecture makes it possible to handle a great quantity of geometry real-time, in fact on a normal workstation it may even be possible to visualize an entire ship. For example, using clipping planes, see Fig. 2, it is possible to visualize inner parts of the ship easily.FVIEWER facilitates the navigation in the model by offering several manners to move around. For beginners the navigation is made easy by limiting the movement to a plane while more advanced users may take advantage of navigation functions like moving using inertial speed, inspection mode, orbiting camera around a defined center and others.The overview maps show small images of the model in two different projections with a symbol which indicates the camera position and orientation. The use of the maps simplifies to see where the camera is located in the scene and to move to a determined location by selecting a new position in the maps. Camera bookmarks may be used to store named camera position for rapid positioning.Items obstructing the review may be easily moved by dragging them to new temporary positions or by making them invisible or transparent. Clip planes are available for quick occlusion of parts of the model by clipping out portions.All the objects in the scene are available for selection and interrogation to obtain model information. A tree structure view displays the design structure and the build strategy defined in the product model, and may be used for object selection, interrogation and moving the camera to an object or an interim product. Distance and angle measuring is easily available by selecting geometrical points or exact reference points defined in the product model. The ship frame may be displayed to act as a quick visual reference for the location.A query by example search tool makes it easy to look up items in a big model by specifying the object identification or by attributes.The appearance of the model may be enhanced by changing the object color, texture and transparency. Light sources can be applied and modified to give a more realistic presentation of the model. The lights are specified by color, attenuation and the position which may be a fixed point or attached to the camera.Review comments are attached to the model as annotations while objects with attached information may be highlighted to easily identify them in the model. An annotation manager makes all the attached information accessible together with the product model identification for the objects. The annotation information can be exported for processing in other applications.Dummies may be used to carry out an ergonomic check of the design. Any number of dummies can be added with different statures, postures and orientations. When placing them in the model the system automatically detects and warns the user about interferences between the dummy and the model objects. Clashes are indicated both audible and visually by marking the interferences with a different color. In Fig. 3it is possible to see an ergonomic check of the design using dummies and the interferences are marked in red.The definition of paths can be used for both camera and objects. The camera path is a feature which offers recording of the navigation (camera movement) in the model. The recorded paths can be reproduced and modified in the path editor which makes it a valuable tool for presentations and design reviews.Object path is the tool for simulation of the mounting and dismounting of equipment in the ship. The path specifies the object movement and orientation. The reproduction of the object paths is used for visual verification and includes notification of clashes between the object moved and the rest of the model.FORAN Virtual Reality and design review solution offers support for stereoscopic 3D displays which enhances the illusion of depth in the image. This feature is available on any workstation with a graphic card supporting OpenGL 3D and with a 3D ready monitor.To give the user a sensation of being inside the model a powerwall is an attractive solution. The wall projects the image in 3D on a big screen and a head tracking device registers the movement of the user. The users head position and orientation is used to calculate the camera which gives the user a sensation of moving around inside the model. A wand device is used to replace the keyboard and mouse and handles functions as navigation, object interrogation, measuring, moving object and clip planes.A 3D Head Mounted Display (HMD) together with tracking is another solution which gives the user an even more realistic sensation of moving inside the model. The head-mounted displays are used with tracking sensors that allow changes of angle and orientation to be recorded. The tracking data is used to generate the appropriate projection for the angle-of-look at the particular time. This allows the user to look around in a Virtual Reality environment simply by moving the head without the need for a separate controller to change the angle of the imagery. When a HMD is used, the screen cursor is replaced by a virtual hand controlled by the wand, the hand is used to handle the user interaction.As it was mentioned before, shipbuilding industry is taking advantage of the benefits of using Virtual Reality. There are in the market many applications where it is possible to navigate through the 3D model of the ship in a Virtual Reality experience. Depending on the different working environments and the specific shipbuilding Virtual Reality applications, different hardware solutions are available in the market. Some of the most relevant will be described in Fig. 4, below [2].The most common use within the applications of Virtual Reality is a room with a screen where multiple viewers with their glasses can review the 3D model. These rooms are equipped with a large high-resolution display wall (powerwall) used for projecting large computer generated 3D images. Powerwall is a 3D immersive display that is used to present and interact with a wide variety of media and content. The main advantage of these flat screen visualization walls is the amplitude of the field of vision, providing an excellent sense of immersion as the 3D objects are displayed close to life size.Most part of the applications of the Virtual Reality to shipbuilding can be carried out in a common Virtual Reality room. The engineering design review, navigation through the 3D model, analysis and inspections, can done by a group of people working in the same environment. Another important application is focused toward supporting business development, where this installation can be used in marketing and commercial presentations to potential customers, ship-owners or management teams, where live navigations around the ship 3D model, videos or even shipyard facilities may be displayed.These rooms have to be dimensioned according to certain parameters: the maximum required capacity of people that will participate in a working session; the desired size of the screen; and the consideration of the use of rear projection. These are all factors that will dictate the size requirements of such candidate rooms.The screen size and aspect ratio are important factors to consider for the selection of a projector or projectors, being the technical specifications required in order to display the 3D images at highest quality. In case of using a rear projection, an extra space is required at the back of the screen. The length of this space is relative to the size of screen and the lens fitted to the projector. This length can be reduced by using a solution with a mirror. The main advantages of rear projection are the clearing of space in front of the screen to allow users a more freedom to move, and also to avoid the possibility of shadows being cast by the users onto the images they are viewing.The most common components required in a Virtual Reality room are described below.There are two different modes of 3D viewer technology called active and passive. Active viewers have displays in the glasses which interact with the images. An alternative to active glasses is the passive approach or ZScreen, which is a special kind of liquid crystal polarization modulator and requires the installation of a silver screen. The ZScreen is placed in front of the projector lens like a sheet-polarizing filter. The device changes the characteristic of polarized light and switches between left and right handed polarized light at the set field rate. This will be described later in the projector and glasses description.In most cases this is a flexible rear projection surface that can be available in either fixed frame or retractable models. There are different standard sizes and used to be tailored to specific room requirements. They are made of a special fabric that is designed to optimize stereoscopic view. The fabric employs special metallic elements, formulated to preserve light polarization. The high gain and high contrast of the fabric compensate the loss of quality in case of using polarization filters. Virtual Reality provides the user with a complete tool, see Fig. 5, for design review of the 3D model in all design stages checking progress of the project.There are a wide range of advanced 3D visualization projectors available offering different illumination platforms, such as LED or Xenon. The main features of them are maximum image quality, best resolution, solid reliability, excellent brightness capability, color and brightness uniformity and multi-channel capability. Due to the high resolution used, the projected 3D images maintain fidelity even at very close viewing distances. The decision on projection method, active or passive, will dictate the type of projector and the glasses that will be required.Some projectors use DLP technology with the following advantages: highest definition and wide resolution, filter free design, lamp free design, quality colors, low cost maintenance and highest readability. The use of multiple projectors for a single display wall creates large, bright, detailed and truly eye-catching images. However, where the projected images overlap, there is often a visible band across the display. The appearance of banding effect can be eliminated using blending software or hardware devices.Depending on having active or passive technologies, different glasses are needed. Active eyewear devices are wireless battery-powered glasses with liquid crystal shutters that are run in synchrony with the video field rate. Synchronization information is communicated to the glasses by means of an infrared (IR) emitter. Passive glasses are cheaper and simple.The possibility to add a motion tracking system is the most effective way to improve interaction with the information in case of working with complex 3D objects or data sets in an immersive environment. Motion tracking is achieved via special devices that can track a user head movements.They consist of a head tracker that attaches to the stereo glasses and a tracked wand that incorporates buttons and a joystick for interaction with the content. These devices are available in wired and wireless versions with a convenient rechargeable docking station.Head tracking allows the user’s perspective viewpoint to be communicated to the application software, which gives the ability to walk in and around simulated objects for a very convincing and viewer-oriented experience. Tracking systems may use different technologies: mechanical, optical, magnetic, acoustic or inertial.Head/helmet mounted displays are used to insert the user into a virtual environment in a realistic 360° immersive experience.In order to manage the vast quantity of information such as large 3D ship models, a computer with the optimum specification is required. In these immersive solutions, workstations are used tailored to get the most out of the processor, memory, graphics, operating system and software technology. In order to process tasks faster, quad or six-core processors are normally used.The most important component in this kind of computer is the graphic card. Professional GPUs are the professional graphics solution of choice for the majority of Virtual 3D applications. High level GPUs can process more than one billion triangles per second – completely outperforming all real-world professional 3D solutions.Many corporate videos have music and audio and therefore the installation of a digital audio system is required. Virtual Reality rooms can be equipped with high fidelity speaker systems.The final requirement it the preparation of the visualization room itself. The floor should be covered using a gray or black carpet so as to avoid reflected light interfering with the projected display. The walls and ceiling should be painted in matt black so as to reduce the ambient light and allow the participants to focus on the screen clearly. Sound insulation should be considered also.All companies have rooms that are available to conduct meetings. These spaces are also used in the presentations of projects, shipyard facilities or for technical sessions. They are often equipped with media displays such as conventional projectors and LED or plasma monitors.Meeting rooms can be upgraded to professional high grade 3D projectors or to the latest large format 3D monitors. 3D monitors give viewers a real experience that cannot be achieved through standard definition or simple high-definition monitor sets. 3D monitors and 3D projectors allow viewers to observe corporate videos and CAD presentations in 3D simply by wearing a special pair of compatible 3D glasses. Tracking solutions for portable systems also exist and their components can be quickly mounted around a display frame for quick and easy use.Designers use workstations that have advanced CAD software applications. These computers are fitted with high performance processors and graphic cards and normally TFT monitors in the size range of about 22″. This is the common screen size for designers in shipbuilding. With the use of software applications where stereoscopic viewing can be activated, the standard monitor could be replaced by a 3D monitor and 3D glasses.There are compact Virtual Reality technology devices, apart from 3D monitors, TVs and projectors, available in today’s markets that are very useful for application at exhibitions and events. Some of these devices are:•3D Laptops.3D Pico projectors.A wide range of new laptops are equipped with specialized screens and software that add a third dimension to corporate videos and stereoscopic software. nVidia’s 3D Vision, is the technology solution employed in many of these laptops. They can provide an immersive 3D experience, and indicate the exciting potential of these future virtual products and applications taking advantage of the small size and weight of this solution.There are ultra-portable and compact projectors that can be used anytime, anywhere. These are easily connected to video-out ports of countless devices. The main features of these projectors are the long lasting solid state LED illumination, amazing picture quality and DLP Pico chipset technology.Virtual Reality technology is going to be evolved for the purpose of providing virtual experience to users. Not only do they reproduce a real-world experience in a virtual space, Virtual Reality systems could also provide, in future, virtual experiences that are impossible to reproduce in real life. In some cases, experiences in virtual spaces appear to work even better than in real-world situations in terms of safety and cost [1].The future applications of Virtual Reality to shipbuilding and the technology progression will be analyzed in the following paragraphs.The Virtual Reality is a tool to evaluate, analyze, simulate and visualize the design/model in advance on a secure and interdisciplinary basis to take necessary decisions (see Fig. 6, as an example of how easy is to check 3D model error). This solution could be improved to be used for more purposes: for reviewing projects, examining and demonstrating content, searching for ground-breaking solutions, etc. All depicted in a one–one scale model, which will be a tremendous aid for engineering work. Through this system, the 3D environment could be watched by users in full-size, giving them an accurate idea of the model dimensions, the real feelings it will produce or the ergonomics of a system. As example, Fig. 6 where it is possible to visualize any part of the ship, using clipping planes.Shipbuilding industry is known to be one of the most labour-intensive industries and requires skilled workers. Hundreds of people in a shipyard work together with different specialties including welding, painting, heating, piping, and so on. While most of the jobs in the shipbuilding industry involve hard and difficult work, there some tasks that create a continuous demand on human resources since many workers resign due to the poor working environment, for example, workers are exposed to noxious gasses and heat produced in paint and welding processes. In these tasks, the Virtual Reality could help simulating the virtual environment in as real a manner as possible, providing additional information for training, such as virtual motion guides could improve the proposed training system. With such features, it would be much easier for trainees to correct their faults and practice in a more standardized way.The use of modern digital design and evaluation tools is indispensable to take safe predictions about the future characteristics of a ship. The evaluation about how certain engineering and design changes impact the overall ship can be done with the help of modern simulation and visualization technologies, much easier and faster than before. For this reason one of the main task in the future, for the shipbuilding software developers is to improve the Virtual Reality tools.There are important challenges in the ship design and production around the Virtual Reality application. This is especially true when dealing with heterogeneous data structures (multiple, discrete authoring systems). Also the high collaboration and discussion efforts in the construction and detail design stage (especially for distributed, collaborative projects) and the high degree of interaction between supplier and customer during the development and production phase (triggered by the time and cost pressures in the design and production and the often very complex systems and equipment) are another important issues to be considered.Painting and welding jobs in the shipbuilding industry require a continuous supplement of human resources since many workers leave due to the poor working environment. While painting and welding are known to be difficult jobs, they are also ones of the most important processes in ship construction. Not only affecting the construction schedule, these processes are also directly related to the quality of the ship under construction. So it is particularly important to train workers so that they can paint evenly on large surfaces with a uniform thickness and they can weld properly too.The Virtual Reality greatly simplifies the planning and re-planning process, making it easy to create a good production plan and keep it current. This simulation model of the shipyard production process captures both the essential physical shipbuilding activities and the essential management decision-making activities that support the physical production processes.The Virtual Reality could identify the overall shipyard facility and manpower resources and the construction tasks required to build a ship. The Virtual Reality will interact to calculate the specific allocation of resources over time necessary to produce the ship. The Virtual Reality will provide both schedule and resource use. The Virtual Reality can also help to quantify the cost and schedule impact of delay and disruption as well as assist in identifying the most effective management actions to overcome such problems.Nowadays simulators only can handle simple object movements. In the future it will be possible to do complex consecutive movements with, for example, equipments, topological movements, dismounting elements, advance information displayed and connexion to a Product LifeCycle Management (PLM).A Virtual Reality navigation tool could involves superimposing a 3D virtual model on a user’s real-time, natural perception of reality. The Virtual Reality concept is designed to enrich perception of the real world by adding virtual elements that are not normally perceptible. The Virtual Reality system would moreover, improve management of bridge crew stress in conditions of reduced visibility, fog, poor visibility, darkness, etc.Training, as it is mentioned before, is one of the representative application fields of Virtual Reality technology where users can have virtual experience in a training task and working environment. Widely used in the medical and military fields, Virtual Reality-based training systems are also useful in industrial fields, such as the aerospace industry, since they show superiority over real training environments in terms of accessibility, safety, and cost.Progression is running very fast in hardware Virtual Reality applications. One the most representative applications in this field are the immersive displays. There are two main types of immersive displays widely used in Virtual Reality systems for providing high-level spatial presence: CAVE display and HMD. CAVE displays utilize a number of large projection screens forming a cubical room to cover the whole view of the user. On the other hand, an HMD is worn by the user, and the display screen is attached to the user’s head, following the user’s view. By tracking the user’s head motion, an omni-directional view of a virtual scene can be provided to the user by updating the virtual scene image according to the user’s view direction.The future is a six-walled Cave Automatic Virtual Environment (CAVE) equipped with six projectors, designed for a complete immersion of the user in the simulation. The viewer is surrounded by six walls (front, left, right and back side, floor and ceiling) so that they can experience a true feeling of realism and of touching objects which seem to be next to the viewer in the middle of the room. The immersive CAVE is the main challenge, in this moment, of Virtual Reality installation. This system is very difficult to get right, because the images must be razor-sharp and adjust perfectly to the different walls, to the mirrors hanging in the middle and the position of the projectors.Developers are constantly seeking new ways to increase the realism of the experience of Virtual Reality. A way to do this is by allowing users to use their sense of touch through a peripheral device such as a control, to move. This technology allows users to use their sense of touch is called haptic technology. The haptic technology is the study of how to couple the human sense of touch with a computer-generated world. There are two types of haptic feedback: kinesthetic force feedback and tactile feedback. In Virtual Reality the haptic feedback usually is originated in the control of the actions. All haptic devices are derived from a convergence of mechanical and electrical engineering and software.One of the advantages of doing 3D visualization of a ship in an immersive environment is the ability to have geographically distributed participants sharing space with each other and the objects under discussion. This allows the different participants to point at specific objects in the scene or set the parameters of the simulation to specific values to clarify the information. It gives the users a common context for their discussions, especially in international collaborations.When there are collaborators (very common in this days), and they are distributed in different workstations, inclusive around the world, Virtual Reality becomes more challenging as this involves multiple networks, multiple time zones, and multiple cultures. Because of time zone issues it may be inconvenient to schedule meetings, so Multiuser Interface may be the most appropriate mode for transoceanic Virtual Reality. Multiuser Interface will also have the advantage that geographically distributed teams could work on the same Virtual Reality project.In many areas of the industry, before producing a certain product, it should have a physical prototype to allow validation before starting the manufacturing stage.Develop a physical prototype from a design is expensive, because it requires time and resources. Virtual Reality allows to simulate the real world as it allows an immersion into the system from 3D visualization; interaction with the model because of motion tracking systems and the ability to act with the product in real time.The main advantage of Virtual Reality is that it allows to anticipate possible problems in the production phase. This can provide a virtual prototype without the costs of a physical model and available from the prototype design stage.The virtual display scale prototype 1:1 enables absolute realism due to immersion in the scene.Virtual Reality tools interface with the work and equipment movement tracking systems allow a fully realistic interaction. It is possible to interact with the components of the product through simulations and the behavior becomes real.Finally, Virtual Reality environments allow locally or remotely collaboration. Therefore, the Virtual Reality opens up endless new possibilities so far and that would justify an investment in such facilities.The use of the Virtual Reality Rooms is being very productive so far. It could be highlighted the following aspects:•Cost reduction. Trained people are able to detect issues regarding the position of the equipments having in mind the operation of the vessel. These changes imply modifications to the 3D model and new releases of constructive drawings rather than major and expensive changes in the production stage. Many people in the production department are not trained to understand 3D models and they find much easier to visualize the vessel in the Virtual Reality Room due to the immersive sensation. During the sessions, they are foreseeing later production issues in a very easy way.Space understanding. The possibility of placing dummies is very important in vessels with little room (especially submarines). Placing dummies in realistic positions grants a full understanding of the real space in the vessel compartments.Commercial activities. The whole vessel is being presented to new customers before it is built. They realize the complexity of it and appreciate the high level of details in the models (because the lack of room). Explanations of the functionality of the different systems are better understood if they are visualizing them at the same time. The walkthrough navigation is very realistic and makes the new customer to have a deep knowledge of the vessel structure (decks, bulkheads, ladders…).With products which it is possible to replace a real prototype by a virtual one, it can be questionable to use traditional technology or Virtual Reality, but in types of product where conduct a full-scale prototype is not possible, as the case of shipbuilding, applied to civil, military and artifacts, undoubted advantages have in offshore vessels.A solution of Virtual Reality needs to be composed of the following components:•A system display: 3D Monitor, 3D screen/projector, Virtual Reality helmet.A motion tracking system.Computer: PC, laptop.Infrastructure.Virtual Reality Software.The costs associated with the transportation of all components and their installation in the room used for that purpose should be considered.Obviously, the cost range for each of the above items will vary widely, depending upon a number of factors that they will be analyzed below.They are mainly used in meeting rooms and commercial applications. The main advantage would always bring brightness in high ambient lighting situation. Another advantage would be the ease of installation in any location.The main disadvantage is the size/price ratio compared to projectors; for a definite screen size, its price would be considerably higher.Prices, see following table, oscillate depending on the size and considering a range of products for professional use (Table 1).On the other hand, there are already successful 4K resolution monitors, so prices may be higher.As indicated in previous section, the projector display would be the lower cost visualization solution, for large screen formats.Its main disadvantages are the need to be installed in an environment where the projected image is not affected by ambient light, laborious installation and calibration, and the need for more space when it is necessary a back-projection mode.Factors for choosing an ideal projector for the Virtual Reality environment are: screen size, resolution required, lighting power, lamp technology.Approximate cost prices for professional projectors range are shown in the following Table 2.The helmets have the advantage of providing a total immersion in all directions as a function of how the head is moved and it will see all the space around. The main disadvantage is that just one person can use the helmet at time and one of the characteristics of this type of solutions, such as collaboration, would not apply.Prices of helmets from different manufacturers vary depending on the resolution of viewers incorporated. Therefore some approximate prices are showed in the following Table 3.Another factor that can increase its price is the power supply. The helmet can be connected to the electrical network to obtain the necessary energy, so the cable itself could disrupt in the working area. So, instead of using cables, it is possible to use a separate battery that could be fitted into a backpack.The motion capture systems are the hardware device that transforms a 3D visualization system in a Virtual Reality. There are two main technologies: optical tracking systems and tracking systems using ultrasound.Another factor that can affect the price of the final solution would be the size of the working area to cover, connecting the navigation device and operator sensor, via cable or wireless device, and for capturing accurate position data (Table 4).For Virtual Reality solutions is necessary to have a computer that has the ability to move graphical models with certain speed so that both immersion and navigation provide the same feel as in a real environment.Therefore computers to be used should have a high performance processor, sufficient RAM and disk space. The main component, apart from the above, is the graphic card. It should be compatible with the 3D settings, and should take the necessary GPU memory. In some types of Virtual Reality solutions, it is necessary to equip a cluster of graphic cards considerably more expensive of such solutions.As indicative, in a computer with a graphic card type K6000 could be priced at 5000€, and if the equipment has double CPU and double K6000, the price would be around 15,000€.For each type of Virtual Reality solution is necessary to prepare the necessary infrastructure. Wall supports to install a monitor, screens for projection systems, supports to install projectors, tracking systems, etc.If a display system is chosen using a projector and in case it is required to employ back-projection, it should consider the space available in the back of the screen. If the room, used for Virtual Reality, does not have the space required for this method, the projection system have to be equipped with reflection mirrors.So the prices may vary greatly depending on the complexity of the facility. Prices usually vary between 150€, required to install a small projector on the ceiling of a room, to 60k€ if there are multiple screens, mirrors, supports multiple projectors, etc.The solution proposed here could be more expensive if this solution incorporated an audio system, or a control system of the entire system using a touch panel.Another element that can also be expensive, it is the need to project on the floor. In this is the case, it is necessary to have a crystal with the ability to withstand the weight of several individuals (450kg/m2), clamping infrastructure, etc.A solution of Virtual Reality must have software that allows the interaction with the virtual prototype. There are different software solutions and they could be applied to various industrial products.Software companies usually offer modular solutions, so from an initial configuration, the solution can be improved with new features based on customers’ needs.The requirements or the needs of basic or advanced features for Virtual Reality, would determine the price. Another factor that determine the final price would be the kind of software solution required. If a display system, using projectors, is chosen in order to have the product display on the front screen, and a screen on the floor, most of the software require a product license for projection channel. The range of prices varying from 10,000€ to 300k€.So far, the features of the hardware/software and the different options available have been explained along this paper. When making the decision to implement a solution, another factors must be considered, such as the degree of immersion in the scene that it is needed to be achieved with one or more supports visualization, the size of the working area, screen size should be considered display screens, number of people participating in a single session, etc.If the technical paper now focus on a display system using projectors to take shipbuilding real component level, a solution with a single screen can be configured, two (front and floor), three (front, side and floor), four (front, sides and floor) and five (front, sides, floor and ceiling). The latter solution is called Virtual Reality cave and which would provide the greatest sense of immersion in the scene (Table 5).In conclusion indicate that a solution can be equipped with a Virtual Reality low cost or otherwise, with sufficient complexity so a large investment is required. In any case, it is necessary to analyze the added value to the project, involving an investment deal with these characteristics.Notice that prices in this technical paper are for guidance only, and mainly hardware components have important variations, and new products constantly appear on the market.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The great advantage from the old Virtual Reality is based in important improvements in hardware and software. Regarding the software, the intensive use of advanced CAD applications ensures an accurate ship 3D model that can be used in Virtual Reality navigations with the aid of specific tools with the necessary capabilities for the visualization and navigation. This tools, the viewers, need to handle a huge amount of data, need to have advanced capabilities to ensure a friendly navigation to the user, and more, they need to give users important advantages such as the possibility to see in 3D (stereoscopic vision) and the interaction with the model (tracking). From the hardware side, important advantages have been introduced in the market, which now offers solutions for any kind of requirement, both from the most simple and portable to the most sophisticated and complex.In this paper it has been described in detail the main application and uses of Virtual Reality in shipbuilding, from different points of view. As a conclusion of the paper, to mention that the main applications and advantages in shipbuilding are mentioned in detail, in the following Table 6.And the key features of the FVIEWER VR and Virtual Reality Rooms are exposed in the following Table 7.The future solutions have been explained during the paper. The collaboration between an improvement in the marine technology and developments in CAD/CAM/CAE software, will be a great step forward for the use of Virtual Reality in shipbuilding. The use of new technologies in different ship design stages, will be a great benefit for the ship design offices, shipyards and ship-owners, and will improve hugely the production process.At the end, there are several scenarios of improvements for the next years. Some of these improvements seem to be unreal or very difficult in short term, but the reality often exceeds expectations in any field, and probably more in the technology.