@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Colliding Bodies Optimization method for optimum design of truss structures with continuous variables

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A simple optimization algorithm is presented for weight optimal design of trusses.Colliding Bodies Optimization (CBO) is based on one-dimensional collisions of two bodies.CBO is internally a parameter independent algorithm.Comparison of the results of CBO with those of previous studies, demonstrate its capabilities.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Colliding Bodies Optimization,Meta-heuristic algorithms,Optimum design,Truss structures,Continuous variables,One-dimensional collision,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In recent years, the importance of economical considerations in the field of structures has motivated many researchers to propose new methods for minimizing the weight of the structures. In this paper, a new and simple optimization algorithm is presented to solve weight optimization of truss structures with continuous variables. The Colliding Bodies Optimization (CBO) is an algorithm based on one-dimensional collisions between two bodies, where each agent solution is modeled as the body. After a collision of two moving bodies, having specified masses and velocities, these are separated and moved to new positions with new velocities. This process is repeated until a termination criterion is satisfied and the optimum CB is found. Comparison of the results of the CBO with those of some previous studies, demonstrate its capability in solving the present optimization problems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Optimal design of structures is performed using different optimization algorithms in the last decade. These algorithms are convenient to use by the practicing engineers to find the minimum weight of structures. These methods can be divided into two general categories: (i) Gradient-based methods. (ii) Stochastic meta-heuristic algorithms.The most commonly used optimization techniques are gradient-based algorithms which utilize gradient information to search the solution space near an initial starting point. In general, gradient-based methods converge faster and can obtain solutions with higher accuracy compared to stochastic approaches. However, the acquisition of gradient information can be either costly or even impossible to obtain the minima. Furthermore, a good starting point is vital for a successful execution of these methods. In many optimization problems, prohibited zones, side limits and non-smooth or non-convex functions should be taken into consideration. As a result, these non-convex optimization problems cannot easily be solved by these methods. Therefore many new evolutionary algorithms are developed for structural optimization. Some efforts on the optimal design of structures have focused on utilizing meta-heuristic algorithms. One can list some of these as: Genetic algorithms [1], Evolution Strategies [2], Simulated Annealing [3], Particle Swarm Optimization [4], Ant Colony Optimization [5], Harmony Search [6], Big Bang–Big Crunch [7], Charged System Search [8], Ray Optimization [9], Democratic Particle Swarm Optimization [10], Bat Optimization [11], and Dolphin Echolocation method [12], among many others.Recently, an efficient and simple continuous optimization algorithm, so-called Colliding Bodies Optimization (CBO), for optimization problems, is developed by the present authors that utilizes simple formulation, and it requires no parametertuning [13]. This algorithm can be considered as a multi-agent method, where each agent is a colliding body (CB). In CBO, each CB is considered as an object with a specified mass and velocity before the collision. After collision occurs, each CB moves to a new position according to the new velocity. This process is repeated until a termination criterion is satisfied and the optimum CB is found.This paper considers: (i) The CBO algorithm is introduced for optimization of continuous problems. (ii) A comprehensive study of sizing optimization for truss structures is presented. The examples are chosen from the literature to verify the effectiveness of the algorithm. These examples are as follows: a 25-member spatial truss with 8 design variables, a 72-member spatial truss with 16 design variables, a 582-member space truss tower with 32 design variables, a 37-member plane truss bridge with 16 design variables, and a 68-member plane truss bridge with 4, 8 and 12 design variables. All the structures are optimized for minimum weight with CBO algorithm, and a comparison is carried out in terms of the best optimum solutions and their convergence rates in a predefined number of analyses. The results indicate that the proposed algorithm is very competitive with other state-of-the-art metaheuristic methods.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, the new method is briefly presented. Three well-studied engineering design problems and one structural design examples are studied in Section 3. Conclusions are derived in Section 4.Nature has always been a major source of inspiration to engineers and natural philosophers and many meta-heuristic approaches are inspired by solutions that nature herself seems to have chosen for hard problems [8]. The collision is also a natural occurrence, which it happens between objects, bodies, cars, etc. The idea of the proposed algorithm is based on observation of a collision between two objects in one-dimension; in which one object collide with other object and they moves toward minimum energy level.In physics, collisions between bodies are governed by: (i) laws of momentum and (ii) laws of energy. When a collision occurs in an isolated system, Fig. 1, the total momentum and energy of the system of objects is conserved.The conservation of the totalmomentumrequires the total momentum before the collision to be the same as the total momentum after the collision, and can be expressed as:(1)m1v1+m2v2=m1v1′+m2v2′Likewise, the conservation of the totalkinetic energyis expressed by(2)12m1v12+12m2v22=12m1v1′2+12m2v2′2+Qwhere v1 is the initial velocity of the first object before impact, v2 is the initial velocity of the second object before impact,v1′is the final velocity of the first object after impact,v2′is the final velocity of the second object after impact, m1 is the mass of the first object, m2 is the mass of the second object, and Q is the loss of kinetic energy due to impact [14].The velocities after a one-dimensional collision can be obtained as:(3)v1′=(m1-εm2)v1+(m2+εm2)v2m1+m2(4)v2′=(m2-εm1)v2+(m1+εm1)v1m1+m2where ε is thecoefficient of restitution(COR) of two colliding bodies, defined as the ratio of relative velocity of separation to relative velocity of approach:(5)ε=v2′-v1′v2-v1=v′vAccording to the coefficient of restitution, two special cases of collision can be considered as:(1)A perfectlyelastic collisionis defined as the one in which there is no loss ofkinetic energyin the collisionQ=0&ε=1. In reality, any macroscopic collision between objects will convert some kinetic energy to internal energyand other forms of energy. In this case, after collision the velocity of separation is high.Aninelastic collisionis the one in which part of the kinetic energy is changed to some other form of energy in the collision.Momentumis conserved in inelastic collisions (as it is for elastic collisions), but one cannot track the kinetic energy through the collision since some of it is converted to other forms of energy. In this case, coefficient of restitution does not equal to oneQ≠0&ε⩽1. Here, after collision the velocity of separation is low.For most of the real objects, ε is between 0 and 1.The main concern of the present study is to extend the application of the recently developed meta-heuristic algorithm, so-called Colliding Bodies Optimization, to optimal design of truss structures. In CBO, each solution candidate Xicontaining a number of variables (i.e. Xi={Xi,j}) is considered as a colliding body (CB). The massed objects are composed of two main equal groups; i.e. stationary and moving objects, where the moving objects move to follow stationary objects and a collision occurs between pairs of objects. This is done for two purposes: (i) to improve the positions of moving objects; (ii) to push stationary objects towards better positions. After the collision, the new positions of the colliding bodies are updated based on the new velocity by using the collision laws as discussed in Section 2.1.The CBO procedure can briefly be outlined as follows:(1)The initial positions of CBs are determined with random initialization of a population of individuals in the search space:(6)xi0=xmin+randxmax-xmin,i=1,2,…,nwherexi0determines the initial value vector of the ith CB. xmin and xmax are the minimum and the maximum allowable values vectors of variables; rand is a random number in the interval [0,1]; and n is the number of CBs.The magnitude of the body mass for each CB is defined as:(7)mk=1fit(k)∑i=1n1fit(i),k=1,2,…,nwhere fit(i) represents the objective function value of the agent i; n is the population size. Obviously a CB with good values exerts a larger mass than the bad ones. Also, for maximizing the objective function the term1fit(i)is replaced by fit(i).The arrangement of the CBs objective function values is performed in ascending order (Fig. 2a). The sorted CBs are equally divided into two groups:The lower half of CBs (stationary CBs); These CBs are good agents which are stationary and the velocity of these bodies before collision is zero. Thus:(8)vi=0,i=1,…,n2The upper half of CBs (moving CBs): These CBs move toward the lower half. Then, according to Fig. 2b, the better and worse CBs, i.e. agents with upper fitness value of each group will collide together. The change of the body position represents the velocity of these bodies before collision as:(9)vi=xi-xi-n2,i=n2+1,…,nwhere viand xiare the velocity and position vector of the ith CB in this group, respectively;xi-n2is the ith CB pair position of xiin the previous group.After the collision, the velocity of bodies in each group is evaluated using Eq. (3), Eq. (4) and the velocities before collision. The velocity of each moving CB after the collision is:(10)vi′=(mi-εmi-n2)vimi+mi-n2,i=n2+1,…,nwhere viandvi′are the velocity of the ith moving CB before and after the collision, respectively; miis the mass of the ith CB;mi-n2is mass of the ith CB pair. Also, the velocity of each stationary CB after the collision is:(11)vi′=mi+n2+εmi+n2vi+n2mi+mi+n2,i=1,…,n2wherevi+n2andvi′are the velocity of the ith moving CB pair before and the ith stationary CB after the collision, respectively; miis mass of the ith CB;mi+n2is mass of the ith moving CB pair. As mentioned previously, ε is thecoefficient of restitution(COR) and for most of the real objects, its value is between 0 and 1. It defined as the ratio of the separation velocity of two agents after collision to the approach velocity of two agents before collision. In the present algorithm, this index is used to control of the exploration and exploitation rate. For this goal, the COR is decreases linearly from unit to zero. Thus, ε is defined as:(12)ε=1-iteritermaxwhere iter is the actual iteration number and itermax is the maximum number of iterations, with COR being equal to unit and zero representing the global and local search, respectively [13].New positions of CBs are obtained using the generated velocities after the collision in position of stationary CBs.The new positions of each moving CB is:(13)xinew=xi-n2+rand∘vi′,i=n2+1,…,nwherexinewandvi′are the new position and the velocity after the collision of the ith moving CB, respectively;xi-n2is the old position of the ith stationary CB pair. Also, the new positions of stationary CBs are obtained by:(14)xinew=xi+rand∘vi′,i=1,…,n2wherexinew, xiandvi′are the new position, old position and the velocity after the collision of the ith stationary CB, respectively. rand is a random vector uniformly distributed in the range (−1,1) and the sign “°” denotes an element-by-element multiplication.(6)The optimization is repeated from Step 2 until a termination criterion, specified as the maximum number of iteration, is satisfied. It should be noted that, a body’s status (stationary or moving body) and its numbering are changed in two subsequent iterations.Apart from the efficiency of the CBO algorithm, which is illustrated in the subsequent section through numerical examples, the proposed algorithm does not include internal parameters besides the coefficient of restitution (COR). The linear variation law adopted for COR makes the proposed algorithm a parameter independent optimization technique. This is a definite strength of the CBO.The flowchart of the CBO algorithm is shown in Fig. 3. The main steps of CBO algorithm are as follows:Level 1: Initialization•Step 1:Initialization. Initialize an array of CBs with random positions and their associated values of the objective function (Eq. (6)).Level 2: Search•Step 1:CBs ranking. Compare the value of the objective function for each CB, and sort them in an increasing order.Step 2:Groups creation. CBs are divided into two equal groups: (i) stationary group, (ii) moving group. Then, the pairs of CB are defined for collision (Fig. 2).Step 3:Criteria before the collision. The value of mass and velocity of each CB for each group are evaluated before the collision (Eqs. (7)–(9)).Step 4:Criteria after the collision. The value velocity of each CB in each groups are evaluated after the collision (Eqs. (10) and (11)).Step 5:CBs updating. The new position of each CB is calculated (Eqs. (13) and (14)).Level 3: Terminating criterion control•Step 1: Repeat search level steps until a terminating criterion is satisfied.In order to assess the effectiveness of the proposed methodology a number of continuous optimization benchmark problems are examined. These examples include three well-known space trusses and two planar bridge structures. The number of design variables for the first to fifth examples are 8, 16, 32, 26, respectively and for the last example 4, 8 and 12 variables are used. Similarly, the number of colliding bodies or agents for these examples are considered as 30, 40, 50, 40 and 20, respectively. For all of these examples the maximum number of iteration is considered as 400. The algorithm and the direct stiffness method for the analysis of truss structures are coded in Matlab software.For the sake of simplicity and to be fair in comparisons, the penalty approach is used for the constraint handling. The constrained objective function can formally be stated as follows:(15)Mer(X)=f(X)×fpenalty(X)=f(X)×1+ε1∑i=1nimax(0,gi(x))ε2where X is the vector of design variables, giis the ith constraint from niinequality constraints (gi(X)⩽0, i=1,2,…,ni), and Mer(X) is the merit function; f(X) is the weight of structure; fpenalty(X) is the penalty function which results from the violations of the constraints corresponding to the response of the structure. The parameters ε1 and ε2 are selected considering the exploration and the exploitation rate of the search space. In this study, ε1 is selected as unity and ε2 is taken as 1.5 at the start and linearly increases to 6.Size optimization of the 25-bar planar truss shown in Fig. 4is considered. This is a well-known problem in the field of weight optimization of the structures. In this example, the material density is considered as 0.1lb/in.3 (2767.990kg/m3) and the modulus of elasticity is taken as 10,000ksi (68,950MPa). Table 1shows the two load cases for this example. The structure includes 25 members, which are divided into eight groups, as follows: (1) A1, (2) A2–A5, (3) A6–A9, (4) A10–A11, (5) A12–A13, (6) A14–A17, (7) A18–A21 and (8) A22–A25.Maximum displacement limitations of ±0.35in. (8.89mm) are imposed on every node in every direction and the axial stress constraints vary for each group as shown in Table 2. The range of the cross-sectional areas varies from 0.01 to 3.4in.2 (0.6452–21.94cm2).By the use of the proposed algorithm, this optimization problem is solved and Table 3shows the obtained optimal design of CBO, which is compared with GA [15], PSO [16], HS [6] and RO [9]. The best weight of the CBO is 544.310lb, which is slightly improved compared to other algorithms. It is evident from Table 3 that the number of analysis and standard deviation of 20 independent runs for the CBO are 9090 and 0.294lb, respectively, which are much less than the other optimization algorithms. Fig. 5provides the convergence diagram of the CBO in 400 iterations.Schematic topology and element numbering of a 72-bar space truss is shown in Fig. 6. The elements are classified in 16 design groups according to Table 4. The material density is 0.1lb/in.3 (2767.990kg/m3) and the modulus of elasticity is taken as 10,000ksi (68,950MPa). The members are subjected to the stress limits of ±25ksi (±172.375MPa). The uppermost nodes are subjected to the displacement limits of ±0.25in (±0.635cm) in both x and y directions. The minimum permitted cross-sectional area of each member is taken as 0.10in.2 (0.6452cm2), and the maximum cross-sectional area of each member is 4.00in.2 (25.81cm2). The loading conditions are considered as:1.Loads 5, 5 and −5kips in thex, y and zdirections at node 17, respectively.A load −5 kips in thezdirection at nodes 17, 18, 19 and 20.Table 4 summarizes the results obtained by the present work and those of the previously reported researches. The best result of the CBO approach is 379.694, while it is 385.76, 380.24, 381.91, 379.85 and 380.458lb for the GA [17], ACO [18], PSO [19], BB–BC [20] and RO [9] algorithm, respectively. Also, the number of analyses of the CBO is 15,600, while it is 18,500, 19,621 and 19,084 for the ACO, BB–BC and RO algorithm, respectively. Also, it is evident from Table 4 that the standard deviation of 20 independent runs for the CBO is less than the other optimization algorithms. Fig. 7shows the convergence diagrams in terms of the number of iterations for this example. Fig. 8shows the allowable and existing stress values in truss member using the CBO.The 582-bar spatial truss structure, shown in Fig. 9, was studied with discrete variables by other researchers [21,22]. However, here we have used this structure with continuous sizing variables. The 582 structural members categorized as 32 independent size variables. A single load case is considered consisting of lateral loads of 5.0kN (1.12kips) applied in both x- and y-directions and a vertical load of −30kN (−6.74kips) applied in the z-direction at all nodes of the tower. The lower and upper bounds on size variables are taken as 3.1in.2 (20cm2) and 155.0in.2 (1000cm2), respectively.The allowable tensile and compressive stresses are used as specified by the AISC ASD [23] code, as follows:(16)σi+=0.6Fyforσi⩾0σi-forσi⩽0whereσi-is calculated according to the slenderness ratioσi-=1-λi22Cc2Fy53+3λi8Cc-λi38Cc3forλi<Cc12π2E23λi2forλi⩾Ccwhere E is the modulus of elasticity, Fyis the yield stress of steel, Ccis the slenderness ratio(λi)dividing the elastic and inelastic buckling regions(Cc=2π2E/Fy),λiis the slenderness ratioλi=KLiri, with K being the effective length factor, Liis the member length and riis the radius of gyration. The maximum slenderness ratio is limited to 300 for tension members, and it is recommended to be limited to 200 for compression members according to ASD-AISC [23]. The modulus of elasticity is 29,000ksi (203893.6MPa) and the yield stress of steel is taken as 36ksi (253.1MPa). Other constraints are the limitations of nodal displacements which should be no more than 8.0cm (3.15in.) in all directions.Table 5lists the optimal values of the 32 size variables obtained by the present algorithm. Fig. 10shows the convergence diagrams for the utilized algorithms. Fig. 11shows the allowable and existing stress ratio and displacement values of the CBO. Here, the number of structural analyses is taken as 20,000. The maximum values of displacements in the x-, y- and z-directions are 8cm, 7.61cm and 2.15cm, respectively. The maximum stress ratio is 0.47%.Fig. 12shows the initial topology and the element numbering of a 52-bar dome-like space truss. This example has been investigated by Lingyun et al. [24], Gomes [25] utilizing the NHGA and PSO algorithms. Also, it has been investigated by Kaveh and Zolghadr [26] using the standard CSS. This example is optimized for shape and configuration. The space truss has 52 bars, and non-structural masses of m=50kg are added to the free nodes. The material density is 7800kg/m3 and the modulus of elasticity is 210,000MPa. The structural members of this truss are categorized into eight groups, where all members in a group share the same material and cross-sectional properties. Table 6shows each element group by member numbers. The range of the cross-sectional areas varies from 1 to 10cm2. The shape optimization is performed taking into account that the symmetry is preserved in the process of design. Each movable node is allowed to vary ±2m. There are two constraints in the first two natural frequencies so that ω1⩽15.916Hz and ω2⩾28.648Hz. This example is considered to be a truss optimization problem with two natural frequency constraints and 13 design variables (five shape variables plus eight size variables).Table 7compares the cross section, best weight, mean weight and standard deviation of 20 independent runs of CBO with the results of other researches. It is evident that the CBO is better than in term of best weight of the results. Table 8shows the natural frequencies of optimized structure obtained by different authors in the literature and the results obtained by the present algorithm. Fig. 13provides the convergence rates of the best result founded by the CBO.The last example is the sizing optimization of the planar bridge shown in Fig. 14a. This example has been first investigated by Makiabadi et al. [27] using the teaching-learning-based optimization algorithm. This bridge is 680ft long and 155ft high truss of the main span. Also, both upper and lower chords shapes are quadratic parabola. Because of symmetry of this truss, one can analysis half of the structure, Fig. 14b. The element groups and applied equivalent centralized loads are shown in Fig. 14b. The modulus of elasticity of material is 4.2×109lb/ft2, Fyis taken as 72.0×105lb/ft2 and the density of material is 495lb/ft3. For this example, allowable tensile and compressive stresses are considered according to AISC ASD (1989) [23]. According to Australian Bridge Code [28], the allowable displacement is 0.85ft.Three design cases are studied according to three different groups of variables including 4, 8 and 12 variables in the design. For three cases, the size variables are chosen from 0.2in.2 to 5.0in.2. Table 9shows the full list of three different groups of variables used in the problem.Table 10compares the results obtained of the CBO with those of the TLS algorithm. The optimum weight of the CBO are 299756.7, 269839.5 and 253871.3lb, while these are 368598.1, 315885.7, and 298699.9 for Case I, II and III, respectively. It can be seen that the number of analyses is much less than that of TLS algorithm. Fig. 15provides a comparison of the convergence diagrams of the CBO for three cases.In this paper, the recently developed meta-heuristic algorithm, known as the Colliding Bodies Optimization, is utilized for optimal design of truss structures. The governing laws from the physics initiate the base of the CBO algorithm, where these laws determine the movement process of the objects. In this algorithm, each agent solution is considered as the colliding body. After a collision of two moving bodies which have specified masses and velocities, these bodies are separated with new velocities.CBO utilizes simple formulation to find minimum of functions and does not depend on any internal parameter. Also, the formulation of CBO algorithm does not use the memory for saving the best-so-far solution (i.e. the best position of agents from the previous iterations). By defining thecoefficient of restitution(COR), a good balance between the global and local search is achieved in CBO. The proposed approach performs well in several test problems both in terms of the number of fitness function evaluations and in terms of the quality of the solutions. The results are compared to those generated with other techniques reported in the literature.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
