@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Pattern-based integration of system optimization in mechatronic system design

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new profile named is proposed to implement the selection of optimization method based on SysML.A pattern with mechatronic semantics is formalized for supporting the retrieval of feasible optimization methods.A general automated selection process of optimization method is proposed based on the optimization profile.The detailed retrieval process of optimization methods and the semantic similarity calculation are proposed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pattern-based integration,System design,System optimization,Semantic similarity,Complex mechatronic systems,SysML,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Model-Based Systems Engineering (MBSE) is a promising methodology for the design of complex mechatronic systems. There are some tools developed to support MBSE in complex system design and modeling. However, none of them has got the functionality of supporting system optimization. This work is precisely motivated by this gap and aims to develop effective methods to support automatic system optimization for MBSE. Specifically, a pattern-based method is proposed to support the integration of system optimization into mechatronic system design. In such a method, optimization problems, their solving methods and computation results are formally defined in each pattern based on the System Modeling Language (SysML). In addition, a model description scheme termed an optimization profile is proposed based on SysML to include the components for formalizing different kinds of optimization problems and optimization methods. After an optimization profile is created for an optimization problem, system optimization methods can be chosen automatically from the pattern library based on a semantic similarity evaluation. Then, optimization results are provided to users to support decision-making and the pattern library is updated using the relevant information obtained in this process. A system design example is used to demonstrate the feasibility and effectiveness of proposed methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The design of mechatronic systems is increasingly complicated as it involves considerations of constraints from multiple domains such as mechanical, control, electrical and software [1]. The Model-Based Systems Engineering (MBSE) has been widely accepted by mechatronic system designers ascribed to its key advantages [2]. With the help of the standard system modeling languages such as SysML [3], a mechatronic system can be represented as diagram-based models used to describe its requirements, structure and behavior. To verify the system design results, some research has been done on the integration of system simulation and system design [4,5]. Based on simulation results, system designers can compare the behavior of a system to see whether the given requirements have been met. However, it is not a trivial issue to obtain an optimal system design solution by solely using the simulation-based verification process.Generally, the system optimization process plays an imperative role for mechatronic system design [6,7]. It can improve the design solutions and decrease the production cost to some extent. To the authors’ knowledge, although there are some researches about the integration between system design and system optimization, there are some deficiencies. Firstly, there should be a complete and compatible representation method to facilitate the integration between system design and system optimization. Secondly, the engineering semantics information is an important issue for real mechatronic systems and must be considered and represented during the integration process. Thirdly, how to select the most appropriate optimization method is a key problem although there are lots of mature optimization methods.To the best of the authors’ knowledge, it retains an open problem in mechatronic system design to implement effective transfer of information between design models, optimization models and optimization algorithms. To support automatic system optimization during the system design process [8,9], two problems need to be solved. The first one is the automatic identification of design parameters for establishing a formalized optimization model. The second one is on how to find feasible optimization methods for specific problems effectively and efficiently. Additionally, it is also necessary to establish the correlations between the parameters in the design models and the variables in the optimization models.In this study, a pattern-based method is proposed for the effective integration of system optimization into mechatronic system design using a Meta-Object Facility (MOF) based on SysML [10]. A SysML-based scheme termed an optimization profile is proposed to formalize the definition of optimization problems and optimization methods. In addition, a semantics-based similarity evaluation method is proposed to find feasible optimization methods used in the existing patterns for solving specific optimization problems. In this scheme, a pattern serves the purpose of reserving the knowledge about the correlations between optimization problems and optimization methods. This research involves two primary hypotheses. Firstly, the modeled mechatronic system must have useful semantic information. Secondly, the modelled mechatronic system model must have a fine granularity to present the relevant attributes of its main components to provide a basis for the subsequent optimization process.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In next section, related work is reviewed. In Section 3, the structure of a pattern is defined and an overview of the proposed pattern-based approach is described in detail. The sub-profiles for describing an optimization problem based on SysML together with the engineering semantics are introduced in Section 4. The sub-profiles for describing an optimization method based on SysML is detailed in Section 5. The integration of system optimization into mechatronic system design is presented in Section 6. The implementation of the proposed approach in a case study is given in Section 7. Finally, the conclusions of this work are given in Section 8 along with a brief introduction to future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, a pattern-based method for the integration of system optimization into mechatronic system design is proposed based on the SysML extension mechanism. The whole process is demonstrated and the proposed method is evaluated based on the CVT example. The main contributions of this work are summarized as follows:(1)The pattern concept is introduced to capture and reuse the knowledge about understanding optimization problems and selecting optimization methods by exploiting the semantic information of complex mechatronic systems. The fields in the pattern structure are defined and described in detail.A new profile for complex system optimization is proposed to realize the automatic integration of system optimization into complex mechatronic system design based on the extension of SysML. It includes three sub-profiles for optimization problems, the mechatronic semantics and the optimization methods respectively. Using these sub-profiles, rich mechatronic engineering semantics can be described and utilized in the optimization problem formulation.A semantics-based similarity evaluation method is proposed for retrieving and selecting feasible optimization methods from the pattern library. Two parameters, i.e., correlation coefficient and common part coefficient are proposed to measure the semantic distance between two optimization problems.The case study has demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed method. All the key tasks such as the extraction of design information from the system design model, the construction of the complete optimization model and the retrieval of feasible optimization methods are completed satisfactorily. However, it is still in an early stage and there are also some limitations in this work. The mechatronic semantics defined in this work is still not comprehensive. It contains only partial information of the semantics specific to mechanical engineering. A complete definition of the semantic information for mechatronic systems will be considered in our future work. Meanwhile, there is still no unique classification standard for different types of optimization problems and various optimization methods. Another area that should be improved and refined is the completeness of the mechatronic ontology and the semantics-based similarity evaluation. More guidelines should be considered in the selection of optimization methods and similarity evaluation. In addition, the scale of the pattern library is still not large but the number of patterns keeps increasing as more and more case studies are completed.