@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A system design for surveillance systems protecting critical infrastructures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
System design based on assessment of user needs through domain expert interviews.The system design will alert operators of threats carried out by persons/vehicles.Surveillance capabilities to protect critical infrastructures are demonstrated.The design includes systems capabilities, the systems structure and its processes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Security systems,Surveillance systems,Critical infrastructure,User requirements,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Critical infrastructures are attractive targets for attacks by intruders with different hostile aims. Modern information and sensor technology provides abilities to detect such attacks. The objective of this work is to outline a system design for surveillance systems aimed at protection of critical infrastructures, with the focus on early threat detection at the perimeter of critical infrastructures. The outline of the system design is based on an assessment of stakeholder needs. The needs were identified from interviews with domain experts and system operators. The system design of the surveillance system and the user requirements in terms of capabilities were then determined. The result consists of the system design for surveillance systems, comprising the systems capabilities, the systems structure, and the systems process. The outcome of the work will have an impact on the implementation of the surveillance systems with respect to the sensors utilized, the sensor data algorithms and the fusion techniques.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent times, the risk for critical infrastructures to be subject to attacks from various groups of terrorists or criminals has become increasingly high and therefore they must be protected. To accomplish sufficient surveillance, modern information technology could be used. Such surveillance systems need to be based on modern sensors and sensor systems with advanced sensor-data analysis and data fusion. However, to accomplish systems of high quality, they must be based on the stakeholders’ needs, so that needed capabilities can be provided. The means of these capabilities are to support the system operators in their work to handle upcoming events and incidents enforced by intruders and to protect the facilities from external attacks [1]. Hence, to accomplish such surveillance systems it is essential to put a sufficient amount of resources on the early stages of the development, which is to identify the stakeholder needs and to define the user requirements in terms of system capabilities. To enhance the realization of such systems they should be based on an adequate system design. Thereby, the probability to get useful systems that provide the means to support handling of incidents and crisis management will increase and help to avoid or at least minimize the consequences of attacks on critical infrastructure facilities. An approach that can be taken to determine the system design may be based on the assessment of stakeholder needs through series of interviews with a number of especially appointed domain experts and security personnel.The work presented in this article has been carried out as a part of The Privacy Preserving Perimeter Protection Project (P5), co-funded by the European Union. The objective of the project is to demonstrate an intelligent perimeter surveillance system that can operate in all weather and light conditions and with privacy preserving properties. The system will monitor the area just outside the boundary of critical infrastructure facilities and, thereby, be able to provide early warnings of terrestrial and airborne threats. The system need to have a low false alarm rate, e.g., due to animals and other innocuous events, combined with high level of threat detection sensitivity.The objective of the work presented in this article is to design a surveillance system aimed at protection of critical infrastructures. In particular, the surveillance systems should be able to support the security staff at the facility to detect and respond to attacks from intruders at an early stage and thus the protection and surveillance of the perimeter of the facilities will be in focus to make it possible to give early warnings. The system should alert the operators of threats carried out by different types of objects, (persons, vehicles, etc.). Eventually, these capabilities of warnings should be realized by state-of-the-art sensor solutions. However, it is out of scope of the work presented in this article to determine what sensors and what methods for sensor-data analysis and fusion to use.The physical context in which surveillance systems of critical infrastructures operate is varying from facility to facility; especially with respect to the perimeter, which also differ with respect to the type of infrastructure that should be protected. Generally, the critical infrastructure facility can be described as containing a central complex, i.e., the surveilled area of the critical infrastructure with one or several buildings and installations as illustrated inFig. 1.The surveilled area is surrounded by the perimeter that differs in width with respect to its extension. Thus, in general, the perimeter can be defined as illustrated in Fig. 1 where the perimeter is made up by the restricted area, the boundary of the facility, a strip of the outside area, and the airspace above the facility. In some cases, there is no restricted area and thus the boundary of the facility coincides with the boundary of the surveilled area. The outside strip of concern must also be determined from facility to facility. To observe is also that, in some cases, the facility may in part be surrounded by water. The terrain type of different facilities, perimeters differ and the surveillance system must be able to adapt to such differences in the environment.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
