@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A systematic review of shared visualisation to achieve common ground

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We conducted a systematic review of shared visualisation for shared cognition.We have identified 9 shared visualisation strategies and techniques.These strategies, techniques are capable to provide social, task, cognitive support.The findings of this review suggest a guide for shared visualization design.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Shared visualisation,Collaborative design,Teamwork,Human–computer interaction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper reports a systematic review of shared visualisation based on fifteen papers from 2000 to 2013. The findings identified five shared visualisation strategies that represent the ways implemented to process data sharing and knowledge to arrive at the desired level of understanding. Four visualisation techniques were also identified to show how shared cognition is made possible in designing tools for mediating data or knowledge among the users involved. These findings provide research opportunities in integrating rich interactive data visualisation for mobile-based technologies as an effective mean in supporting collaborative work. Finally, social, task and cognitive elements which can be significantly supported by shared visualisation and a guideline for future researchers seeking to design shared visualisation-based systems are presented.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Achieving common ground or shared cognition is one of the major aims in the development of Collaborative visualisation systems. Collaborative visualisation is defined by [31] as “the shared use of computer-supported, (interactive,) visual representations of data by more than one person with the common goal of contribution to joint information processing activities”.In this definition, the term “shared use of … visual representations” refers to any form of joint viewing, interacting, discussing or interpreting within a group of members to amplify shared cognition that can be augmented by the use of visual representation. This shared cognition can be mediated and developed through any type of visual representation shared among the users, such as shared display (i.e. input technology) or using multiple displays as medium in shared devices. The use of shared visual representation, which remains one of the concerns of many researchers, is how data or knowledge can be captured, represented, presented and analysed among the users involved. Consequently, in the context of shared mental model, sharing cognition is described as having many types and aspects, which may later; result in different kinds of results of shared cognition.According to Isenberg et al. [31], shared cognition can be initiated in several scenarios within two types of collaborative visualisation environment, which are distributed and co-located. A distributed collaborative visualisation involves how collaborative contributions can be effectively structured and integrated into a shared visualisation directed to the division or spread of resources such as design artefacts, design knowledge or design team to form common ground. Such activities are performed via video conferences and email-based data discussions. On the other hand, a co-located collaborative visualisation is where these collaborative works are initiated into a shared visualisation in the same locations, where design team can conduct further discussion via wall displays or shared tables. In order to understand the implication of strategies demonstrated in both types of collaborative visualisation environments, this study aims to identify the implications of different visualisation strategies and techniques of shared visualisation applications as well as how they can be applied to designing collaborative visualisation systems. In particular, we are interested in determining the strategies and techniques that have been undertaken by researchers in handling the datasets in shared visual representation to reach a particular result of shared cognition.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
