@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effects of underdamped step-varying second-order stochastic resonance for weak signal detection

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Propose an underdamped step-varying second-order stochastic resonance method.Method implemented via choosing proper damping factor and calculation step.Distinct merits include secondary filtering, band-pass filtering, anti-noise.Suitable for detecting weak signal being submerged in multiscale noise.Validity and superiority are verified by simulations and defective bearing signals.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Stochastic resonance,Weak signal detection,Damping factor,Calculation step,Second-order system,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Stochastic resonance (SR) has been proved to be an effective approach for weak signal detection. In this paper, an underdamped step-varying second-order SR (USSSR) method is proposed to further improve the output signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). In the method, by selecting a proper underdamped damping factor and a proper calculation step, the weak periodic signal, the noise and the potential can be matched with each other in the regime of second-order SR to generate an optimal dynamical system. The proposed method has three distinct merits as: 1) secondary filtering effect produces a low-noise output waveform; 2) good band-pass filtering effect attenuates the multiscale noise that locates in high- and (or) low-frequency domains; and 3) good anti-noise capability in detecting weak signal being submerged in heavy background noise. Numerical analysis and application verification are performed to confirm the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed method in comparison with a traditional SR method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Since proposed by Benzi et al. in 1981, stochastic resonance (SR) has become a hot research topic in the field of nonlinear science [1]. The most distinct merit of SR is that the weak continuous signal can be enhanced by exploiting the noise energy [2]. SR has been widely adopted in amplification of weak signals in different research fields. For instance, SR and optimal detection of pulse trains by threshold devices was introduced in Ref. [3]. Signal amplification in a nanomechanical Duffing resonator via SR was proposed in Ref. [4]. Signal amplification and filtering with a tristable SR cantilever was suggested in Ref. [5]. Nonlinear signal detection via SR was presented in Refs. [6,7]. Comparison study between the SR and the matched filters in detecting bipolar pulse signals was reported in Ref. [8]. Condition for noise induced enhancement in weak signal detection via SR was studied in Ref. [9]. Detection performance via SR in hypothesis-testing problems in the Neyman–Pearson framework was discussed in Refs. [10,11]. These studies indicate that SR phenomenon exists in different signal systems which contain weak signals and noise, and the weak signals can be enhanced and then detected by the assistance of proper noise.The majority of SR theories are developed in the framework of small parameter (both signal frequency and signal amplitude should be far less than one) [12]. However, in practical signal processing applications, e.g., machine fault diagnosis, the small parameter limitation of the classical SR is hardly satisfied, and additionally, the engineering signals always present the characteristics of nonlinearity and nonstationarity. Hence, to make the classical SR suitable for addressing the large parameter signals, a lot of modified and optimized strategies have been proposed, such as re-scaling frequency SR [13], adaptive step-changed SR [14], frequency-shifted and re-scaling SR [15], multiscale noise tuning SR [16] and multi-scale bistable SR array [17], etc. These studies are realized by tuning the signal structure and (or) the system parameters to cope with the large parameter signal, and these efforts have effectively promoted the SR-based weak signal detection techniques in the applications of practical engineering signal processing.However, most of engineering signal processing methods via SR principle are based on the simplest first-order overdamped SR models, i.e., the system inertia is ignored and the system damping effect is regarded as insignificant (and hence the damping factor is normalized for simplicity). In fact, the SR output signal can be seen as a particle trajectory induced by particle oscillation within a potential under the synthetic forces from the weak signal and the noise [18]. From this perspective, the system inertia and the system damping factor will have effects on SR realization. Considering the system inertia means that the SR model is second-order, and actually, the second-order SR is beneficial to obtain a low-noise SR output signal as the SR procedure can be regarded as a specific signal filtering process (i.e., second-order SR means secondary filtering and hence produces a cleaner filtered signal than first-order SR) [19]. Furthermore, several studies indicate that the underdamped damping factor also affects the efficiency of particle oscillation in the potential and finally affects the SR performance [20–25]. Thus, considering a second-order SR model with an underdamped damping factor provides a possibility in improving the SR-based weak signal detection effect.Motivated by the aforementioned analysis, this study focuses on enhancement of weak signal detection by combining a system parameter tuning method (via changing calculation step [14]) and an underdamped second-order SR model. This proposed method, called underdamped step-varying second-order SR (USSSR), is realized by selecting a proper calculation step and a proper underdamped damping factor in the framework of second-order SR. These two optimal parameters make the system, the driving signal and the noise be matched with each other, and thus the weak signal can be extracted from the background noise to an extreme and finally the optimal output signal can be obtained. The USSSR method has three distinct merits as: 1) secondary filtering effect produces a low-noise output waveform; 2) good band-pass filtering effect attenuates the multiscale noise that locates in high- and (or) low-frequency domains; and 3) good anti-noise capability in detecting weak signal being submerged in heavy background noise. Hence, the proposed method is expected to be extensively used in weak signal detection, especially for signals with large parameters and (or) being subjected to multiscale heavy noise interference.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the theoretical background of the proposed USSSR method and introduces the weak signal detection strategy based on the USSSR method. Section 3 performs simulation analysis to evaluate the USSSR method in comparison with a traditional SR method. Section 4 verifies the practicability of the proposed method by analyzing a set of defective bearing signals and provides further discussions. Section 5 summarizes this paper.The basis of classical bistable SR phenomenon can be described as: a particle is driven by a periodic signal and the random noise in a bistable potential which consists of two potential wells and one potential barrier, and the periodic oscillation can be enhanced by the assistance of proper noise. Such a phenomenon can be illustrated with a governing equation by considering both the system inertia and the system damping factor as below:(1)d2xdt2=−dU(x)dx−γdxdt+S(t)+N(t)whereN(t)=2Dξ(t)with〈N(t),N(t+τ)〉=2Dδ(t)being the noise item, in which D is the noise intensity andξ(t)represents an additive Gaussian white noise (AGWN) with zero mean and unit variance.S(t)=Acos⁡(Ωt+ϕ)is a periodic signal, in which A is the amplitude,Ω=2πfdwithfdbeing the driving frequency, and ϕ is the phase. γ represents the system damping factor.U(x)is a reflection-symmetric quartic potential as written below:(2)U(x)=−12ax2+14bx4in which a and b denote the barrier parameters of the bistable potential with positive real value. Substitute Eq. (2) into Eq. (1), then we can get the following equation:(3)d2xdt2=ax−bx3−γdxdt+Acos⁡(2πfdt+φ)+2Dξ(t)The system model corresponding to Eq. (3) can be illustrated in Fig. 1, where it can be seen that the calculation of SR outputx(t)is equivalent to a secondary integration process and also equivalent to a secondary filtering process.Subsequently, the effect of second-order SR for enhancing the weak signal by exploiting the noise energy within the regime of small parameter is discussed. For simplicity, we setγ=0,ϕ=0and mathematically letdxdt=y, then Eq. (3) can be separated into two first-order differential equations as:(4)dxdt=ydydt=ax−bx3−γy+Acos⁡(Ωt)+2Dξ(t)Next, letA=0,D=0,dxdt=0,dydt=0, then three singular points((x+,y+)=((a/b),0),(x0,y0)=(0,0),(x−,y−)=(−(a/b),0))of the bistable potential can be obtained. Linearize Eq. (4) at singular points(x+,y+)and(x−,y−)then obtain the linearization matrix[01−2a0], and the corresponding eigenvalues can be calculated to beβ1,2=±−2a. Analogously, linearize Eq. (4) at singular point(x0,y0)then obtain the linearization matrix[01a0]and the corresponding eigenvaluesλ1,2=±a[19]. Obviously, the singular point(x0,y0)is an unstable saddle point asλ1>0andλ2<0, and the stable and unstable manifolds at(x0,y0)can be formed by the stable and unstable orbits that cross the saddle point, respectively. The stable manifold forms two boundaries of the stable attraction domains and the unstable manifold connects the three singular points. Subsequently, the probability density functionρ(x,y,t)of the particle motion can be deduced by consulting the Fokker–Planck equation as follows [26]:(5)∂∂tρ(x,y,t)=−∂∂x[yρ(x,y,t)]−∂∂y[(ax−bx3+Acos⁡Ωt)ρ(x,y,t)]+D(∂∂x2+∂∂y2)ρ(x,y,t)In addition, the quasi-steady-state distribution functionρst(x,y,t)corresponding to Eq. (5) can be further obtained based on the adiabatic elimination theory as [12,27]:(6)ρst(x,y,t)=N¯exp⁡[−U˜(x,y,t)D]in whichN¯represents the normalization constant, andU˜(x,y,t)is the generalized potential function that can be obtained by utilizing the small parameter expansions method as:(7)U˜(x,y,t)=12y2−a2x2+b4x4−xAcos⁡(Ωt)In addition, the probability transition rate between the two potential wells can be written as:(8)R±(t)=β1β22π−λ1λ2exp⁡(−U˜(x0,y0,t)+U˜(x±,y±,t)D)Substitute Eq. (7) into Eq. (8), the probability transition rate can be further obtained as:(9)R±(t)=β1β22π−λ1λ2exp⁡(−a24bD)exp⁡(±abADcos⁡(Ωt))Eq. (9) can be expanded using a Taylor series as:(10)R±(t)=R0[1∓abADcos⁡(Ωt)+12(abAD)2cos2⁡(Ωt)∓...]in which(11)R0=β1β22π−λ1λ2exp⁡(−a24bD)Subsequently, the system output spectrum can be expressed as [27]:(12)S(ω)=S1(ω)+S2(ω)whereS1(ω)andS2(ω)represent the output power spectra of the signal and the noise, respectively. To simplify the expressions ofS1(ω)andS2(ω), we define:(13)R1β=R0abADAnd thenS1(ω)andS2(ω)can be written as:(14)S1(ω)=πaR12β22b(R02+4Ω2)[δ(ω−Ω)+δ(ω+Ω)](15)S2(ω)=[1−R12β22(R02+4Ω2)]2aR02b(R02+4ω2)After that, the output signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) can be further defined as [27]:(16)SNR=∫0∞S1(ω)dωS2(ω=Ω)On combining Eqs. (11), (13), (14), (15) and (16), the output SNR corresponding to Eq. (4) can be finally obtained as:(17)SNR=aA22a4bD2exp⁡(−a24bD)[1−2a2A2exp⁡(−a22bD)4abD2exp⁡(−a22bD)+2bD2π2Ω2]−1Fig. 2shows the SNR plot calculated via Eq. (17) with small parametersA=0.005,Ω=0.002,b=1,a=0.5,1,1.5and D varying from 0.01 to 10. It can be seen that the second-order SR also reveals the celebrated feature of the classical first-order SR, which is characterized by the fact that the SNR firstly increases, and then reaches a maxima, and later decreases with the continual increase of noise intensity. Besides, Fig. 2 also indicates that the output SNR is influenced by the system parameters for the given input signal and noise level. This means that the output SNR can be optimized by choosing proper system parameters.The above subsections provide an analytic analysis of the second-order SR system. However, to make the engineering signal capable of being coped with by using the second-order SR, two issues should be considered as: 1) the above equation derivations are performed under the assumption of small parameter limitation; but actually, the analytic SR output cannot be obtained for the large parameter signal; and 2) the analytic analysis is performed in the framework of a continuous-time system; however, processing the digital signal in a discrete-time system is more convenient and efficient in practical applications. Hence, to make the basic second-order SR model able to detect large parameter signal in digital signal processing applications, the USSSR is proposed by considering tuning the calculation step in a numerical method. Basically, the USSSR is realized by selecting a proper calculation step and a proper underdamped damping factor in the framework of second-order SR. In practice, it is implemented by utilizing the numerical method which is based on the fourth-order Runge–Kutta (RK4) equation. By selecting a calculation step h, the output discrete time seriesx[n]according to Eq. (3) can be calculated as below:(18){y1=y[n];x1=−U′(x[n])−γy1+S[n]+N[n];y2=y[n]+x1h/2;x2=−U′(x[n]+y1h/2)−γy2+S[n]+N[n];y3=y[n]+x2h/2;x3=−U′(x[n]+y2h/2)−γy3+S[n+1]+N[n+1];y4=y[n]+x3h;x4=−U′(x[n]+y3h)−γy4+S[n+1]+N[n+1];x[n+1]=x[n]+(y1+2y2+2y3+y4)h/6;y[n+1]=y[n]+(x1+2x2+2x3+x4)h/6;}The output SNR can be further obtained by calculating the power spectrum of discretex[n]via fast Fourier transform (FFT) as:(19)SNR=10log10⁡Ad∑i=1N/2Ai−Adwhere N is the length of the time series,Adrepresents the power of driving frequency in the calculated spectrum, and the item∑i=1N/2Ai−Adrepresents the total power of noise.It can be noticed from Eq. (18) that the calculation step h plays a critical role in determining the SR output x. Here we intuitively exhibit how the step varying affects the output x. The tested signal is a noisy sinusoid with parametersA=1,2D=0.3,fd=1Hz, sampling frequencyfs=20Hz, and the signal length is 100 points. The system parameters a and b are fixed to be 1 and the damping ratio γ is set to be 0 for simplicity. Fig. 3(a) shows the bistable potentialU(x)and its corresponding potential force−U′(x). It can be found that when an oscillating particle approaches to one side of the potential wall (assume the wall locates atx>0), the restoring potential force becomes large and makes the particle bounce back to the other side of the potential wall (x<0) rapidly [18]. As shown in Fig. 3(b), a small h produces a small Δx (such a conclusion can also be indicated in the ninth row of Eq. (18)). However, a small Δx induces a small restoring force as indicated in Fig. 3(a), and so leads to a small particle movement displacement. That is to say, when h is too small, the particle cannot keep pace with the periodic signal and hence the SR cannot be realized. When h increases to 0.35, Δx also increases as confirmed in Fig. 3(c). Under this circumstance, the particle oscillates exactly following the driving frequency, which indicates the realization of SR. For a large enoughh=0.75(see Fig. 3(d)), Δx is so large that the particle bounces between the two potential wells intensively. However, the particle oscillation frequency is larger than that of the driving frequency, namely, the SR fails to happen. From the above analysis, we can see that the calculation step h is a rather crucial parameter that can determine the SR realization. Thus, the step-varying strategy is conducted in this study to make the particle oscillation exactly follow the driving frequency, and then the weak signal can be enhanced.Subsequently, a series of simulations are conducted to evaluate the relationship between the output SNR and the USSSR parameters. The test signals are the sinusoids with fixed amplitudeA=1, data lengthN=2000, sampling frequencyfs=200fd. For simplicity, the bistable potential parametersa=1,b=1in Eq. (2) are also fixed. Every data point is obtained by averaging 1000 independent realizations. The effects of the USSSR with alternately varying noise intensity, damping factor and calculation step under different driving frequencies are shown in Figs. 4(a)–4(c), respectively. It can be found that the system parameters have significant impacts on output SNR. From another aspect, these results indicate that the optimal output signal with maximum SNR can be obtained by jointly tuning the system parameters. Specially, for the deterministic noisy signal (the noise has already been contained in the signal), the optimal SNR can be obtained by selecting a proper damping factor and a proper calculation step as demonstrated in Fig. 4(d) with driving frequencyfd=100Hz. Besides, the analyzed results indicate that the proposed method has capability in dealing with large parameter signals, i.e., the small parameter limitation of the classical SR has been favorably overcome. Hence, the USSSR can detect high-frequency signals, and such ability is necessary in practical signal processing applications.As indicated in the above subsection, the optimal USSSR output with the maximal SNR (corresponding to the surface peak in Fig. 4(d)) can be obtained by jointly tuning parameters γ and h for a deterministic noisy signal. Consequently, the detailed steps for implementation of the proposed USSSR method for weak signal detection are summarized as follows:(1)Signal pretreatment. Common techniques such as band-pass filtering (to enhance target signal by filtering part of uncorrelated noise), envelope extraction (to better reveal the signal periodicity when other frequency components are modulated by the target signal) are executed.Parameter initialization. Initialize the calculation ranges and intervals of the system parameters γ and h.Parameter optimization. Compute the USSSR output via Eq. (18) for different parameters γ and h, and compute the corresponding SNR via Eq. (19). Then obtain the optimal parametersγoptandhoptaccording to the following objective function:(20)maximizeSNR(γ,h)subject toγ∈(0,1)andh∈(0,+∞)Ifγoptandhoptare both within the search ranges, go to Step (4); or else extend the range of γ and (or) h, go back to Step (2).Signal aftertreatment. Collect the optimal output waveform as the detected signal.SR can be regarded as a specific kind of filter, which is different from the traditional filters that focus on noise suppression. The SR-based filter utilizes the noise energy to enhance the weak periodic signal. In this subsection, the filtering performance of the proposed USSSR method is tested in comparison with a traditional step-varying first-order SR (SFSR) method. The classical first-order SR equation can be displayed as below [2]:(21)dxdt=−dU(x)dx+S(t)+N(t)The detailed steps for solving Eq. (21) via the RK4 equation can be found in Ref. [28]. The main concept of the SFSR method is selecting a proper bistable potential parameter (a or b according to Eq. (2)) and a proper calculation step to make the original large parameter signal be transformed to a small one, and hence the high-frequency signal can be detected. The details of SFSR can be consulted with Ref. [14]. In this study, the bistable potential parametersa=1is fixed; the potential parameter b and the calculation step h are adjusted to obtain the optimal output signal when applying the SFSR.The pure driving sinusoid withA=1,fd=100Hzis shown in Fig. 5(a), and an AGWN with noise intensity2D=1is injected to the pure signal and then the noisy signal is shown in Fig. 5(b). Fig. 5(c) displays the optimal output from the SFSR method. The sinusoid is almost recovered from the noisy signal, but some noise interference still can be noticed. By employing the proposed USSSR method, the result is illustrated in Fig. 5(d), where it can be seen that the recovered signal is almost noise-free. Moreover, the corresponding SNRs are calculated and displayed in each subfigure in Fig. 5. Both the SFSR and the USSSR methods show the SNR improvement referred to the noisy signal, and the proposed method behaves better than the SFSR method due to the extra secondary filtering effect. Additionally, to obtain a deeper observation of the particle motion within the bistable potential in different SR regimes, the phase portraits corresponding to Fig. 5 are plotted in Fig. 6. Obviously, the pure signal produces a deterministic elliptic trajectory as confirmed in Fig. 6(a). Fig. 6(b) shows that, the original elliptic trajectory is totally destroyed by the disorder noise. Fig. 6(c) indicates that the noise interference is still significant though the sinusoid can be clearly recognized as shown in Fig. 5(c). Finally, Fig. 6(d) demonstrates that the particle trajectory in second-order SR regime behaves relatively regular and well-ordered as compared to that in first-order SR regime. The phase portrait in Fig. 6(d) indicates the particle trajectory is approximately deterministic, and the effect of second-order SR for signal detection can be regarded as a secondary filtering procedure in which more noise interference is wiped out. Hence, such an effect is beneficial to periodic signal detection.After the qualitative analysis of the filtering effects for the USSSR method, subsequently a frequency response analysis is performed as such a metric is rather critical in practical signal processing application. The SFSR method is still used for comparison by fixing the parametersb=100000andh=0.0003; for the USSSR method, the parametersh=0.3andγ=0.3are fixed; other parameters in this comparison are set as:A=1,2D=2,fs=3kHz,N=3000points,fdvaries from 10 Hz to 350 Hz with a 10 Hz varying step; and every data point is obtained by averaging 1000 independent realizations. The results are plotted in Fig. 7, for the SFSR method, the SNR curve decreases monotonically as the driving frequency increases, and such a behavior is consistent with the classical SR feature, which is characterized by the fact that the frequency response has the form of Lorentzian distribution by concentrating most of the noise energy into the low-frequency region [16]. This also means that the first-order SR model is more suitable for detecting a low-frequency signal rather than a high-frequency one, which will be confirmed in the practical signal analysis in Section 4. For the USSSR method that is based on the second-order SR model, the result is quite different from that of the SFSR method. It can be seen that the SNR curve presents a non-monotonic tendency with the increasing offd. From a view of signal processing, the second-order SR behaves like a band-pass filter, which means that the USSSR method can amplify a deterministicfdwhile suppressing the noise components that deviate fromfd. This distinct merit is beneficial to detect the weak signal being submerged in multiscale noise that contains both high- and low-frequency components.In practical signal processing applications, the noise with different levels may have been involved in the acquired signals. Thus, the weak signal detection techniques should have good anti-noise performance in handling different noise level signals. The anti-noise performances of the traditional SFSR and the proposed USSSR methods are compared as shown in Fig. 8, where the driving sinusoid are fixed withfd=100Hz,A=1, and the noise intensity is altered from 0.1 to 20 with a 0.1 varying step. It can be seen that the proposed method shows ensemble superiority in comparison with the SFSR method as its SNR curve is always above that of the SFSR. These results imply that the second-order SR model with a proper system damping factor is quite beneficial to extract the periodic signal from the heavy background noise.To verify the effectiveness and the efficiency of the proposed USSSR method in practical engineering applications, a set of bearing data with localized structural defect are selected to analyze. Bearings play significant roles in a variety of industrial equipment. The defective bearing can cause unscheduled maintenance and breakdown loss; even worse a severe faulty bearing can induce a catastrophe. Thus, condition-based monitoring and fault diagnosis of bearings are necessary. Usually, the vibration signal that can reflect the bearing condition is acquired from an accelerometer attached to the bearing. But it is noteworthy that the noise from the coupled machine and the working environment is also involved in the acquired vibration signal, and the noise always present multiscale characteristic. Hence, how to effectively extract the distinct signatures related to the structural fault from the acquired nonlinear and nonstationary signal becomes a challenge. In this section, we attempt to apply the USSSR method to the defective bearing signal and expect to improve the fault-induced signal detection performance.The tested vibration signals are taken from the Bearing Data Center in Case Western Reserve University (CWRU) [29] with experimental setup as shown in Fig. 9. The test bearings are the deep groove ball bearings with the type of 6205-2RS JEM SKF and with the geometry provided in Table 1, and the sampling frequency is 12 kHz. Single point faults were introduced to the test bearings using electro-discharge machining at the outer raceway, inner raceway and rolling element separately. Three signals with different fault conditions are selected for the following analysis. In physics, the periodical impulses will emerge in the acquired vibration signal when a fault occurs in a bearing. Thus, the fault types along with the fault severities can be estimated by analyzing the impulse period and impulse intensity [30]. The fault characteristic frequencies (occurrence frequencies of the impulse) can be calculated theoretically based on the bearing type and the shaft/rotating speed as below [31]:(22)fBPFI=nrfr2(1+D1D2cos⁡α)(23)fBPFO=nrfr2(1−D1D2cos⁡α)(24)fBSF=frD22D1[1−(D1D2cos⁡α)2]wherenris the number of rolling elements,fris the rotating frequency of shaft,D1andD2are the diameters of one rolling element and the pitch diameter of the bearing, respectively, α is the bearing contact angle;fBPFI,fBPFOandfBSFare the bearing characteristic frequencies when the fault appears at inner raceway, outer raceway and rolling element, respectively. After that, the fault related parameters including the calculated fault frequencies, the defect size, and the approximate rotating speed are provided in Table 2.Firstly, we consider the outer raceway defective signal, and the original signal and its power spectrum are shown in Fig. 10(a). It can be seen that the structural fault-induced impulses can be barely seen from the waveform, but some spikes with higher energy may lead to the incorrect judgment of the bearing fault type. Since the machine vibrations are modulated by the fault-induced signals, the envelope analysis technique is employed to demodulate the acquired signal and to better reveal the periodicity of the impulses. To get the envelope signal, the noisy signal is firstly filtered with a third-order Butterworth band-pass filter in a bandwidth of 1500 Hz centered at 3250 Hz, and then demodulated via Hilbert transform [18,32] (note that the envelope signals in the following cases are all addressed in the same way but with different bandwidths and center frequencies). After that, the envelope spectral analysis results are demonstrated in Fig. 10(b), where it can be seen that thefBPFOcan be pointed out in the power spectrum, and the spikes' frequency is just accorded with the rotating frequencyfr. The rotating frequency modulates the defective frequency and the machine vibration, which affects the demodulation and precisely diagnose of the fault frequency. By applying the traditional SFSR method, the results are provided in Fig. 10(c), where it can be seen that thefBPFOhas been enhanced as compared to Fig. 10(b), but some noise components around thefBPFOstill can be noticed in the power spectrum. Finally, the proposed method is employed to analyze the same signal, and the results are illustrated in Fig. 10(d), where it can be seen in the time domain that the fault-induced impulses can be clearly recognized. The waveform is well arranged with good periodicity. Additionally, the power spectrum also confirms that thefBPFOhas been furthest amplified when majority of the noise components have been suppressed.To further confirm the effectiveness of the proposed method, the inner raceway defective signal is analyzed as follows. The original signal waveform and power spectrum (Fig. 11(a)) cannot reveal enough useful signatures to detect the fault-induced impulses. After envelope extraction (Fig. 11(b)), thefBPFIcan be pointed out in the spectrum; however, the noise interference is still obvious in both time and frequency domains. For the traditional SFSR method output results (Fig. 11(c)), it can be seen that majority of high-frequency noise has been suppressed. However, some low-frequency noise components (e.g.frandf1) are unexpectedly amplified rather than suppressed after the SFSR procedure. This indicates that the traditional SFSR is susceptible to the low-frequency interference, which has been verified in the numerical analysis in Section 3.2. In another word, the traditional SFSR method tends to amplify a low-frequency component rather than a high one. Thus, when the driving frequency locates in the relative high frequency bandwidth, the noise in low frequency domain may be enhanced preferentially, and hence the traditional SFSR fails to detect the target signal [18]. Finally, the proposed method results are provided in Fig. 11(d), where it can be seen in the power spectrum that both the high- and the low-frequency noise has been suppressed and the characteristic frequency,fBPFI, stands alone. In addition, the optimal output waveform also indicates that the fault-induced impulse plays a dominant role. This result demonstrates that the proposed USSSR method has a better band-pass filtering effect in detecting the weak periodical signal being submerged in multiscale noise as compared to the SFSR method.Furthermore, the rolling element defective signal is again analyzed by using different methods, and the results are synthetically shown in Fig. 12. The original signal and its power spectrum are shown in Fig. 12(a), in which it can be found that several ring down impulses emerge in the waveform, but the noise interference is so strong that the impulse intervals cannot be confirmed, and hence the fault type of bearing cannot be judged accurately. For the envelope spectral analysis results (Fig. 12(b)), thefBSFcan be pointed out, but the low-frequency noise with higher power than thefBSFare more obvious in the power spectrum. For the traditional SFSR output results (Fig. 12(c)), the weak signal detection effect is worse as compared to Fig. 12(b) because the interference noise locates in the low-frequency domain. By applying the proposed USSSR method, the optimal waveform and its corresponding power spectrum are shown in Fig. 12(d). Although the noise can still be found in the power spectrum, such a result is better than that in Fig. 12(c).The calculated SNRs corresponding to the above cases are synthetically provided in Table 3. The ensemble comparison results indicate that the proposed method has superiority in extraction of the weak fault-induced impulses under different working conditions as compared to the traditional SFSR method. Besides the performance comparison, the computational cost is recorded and shown in columns 5 and 6 in Table 3 on the platform configured with the following parameters: 2.90-GHz Quad-Core processor, 4-GB memory, 64-bit-win7 operating system. The 2-dimension parameter searching matrixes are set in the size of 200(parameterh)×30(parameter γ for the USSSR method, parameter b for the SFSR method) for a fair comparison. It can be seen that the computational time of the USSSR method is approximately twice that of the SFSR method as the computation complexity of Eq. (3) is also approximately twice that of Eq. (21) by applying the corresponding RK4 methods.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper proposes a USSSR method for improving the performance of weak signal detection. The USSSR method is implemented by selecting a proper underdamped damping factor and a proper calculation step in the regime of second-order SR. The USSSR has three distinct advantages as: 1) secondary filtering effect produces a low-noise output waveform; 2) behaves like a band-pass filter, and thus can enhance the driving signal while suppressing the uncorrelated multiscale noise; and 3) insensitive to noise and has robust capability in detecting weak signal being submerged in heavy background noise. Numerical analysis and application verification are conducted in comparison with a SFSR method that is based on the classical first-order SR model, and the results indicate that the proposed method surpasses the SFSR method in different contexts. The proposed method is expected to be widely used in weak signal detection area, especially when the weak signal is subjected to heavy multiscale noise interference.