@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A local adaptive weighted interpolation for deinterlacing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study local weighted interpolation method for intra-field deinterlacing (AWI).In AWI, a more accurate interpolation filter is used to estimate the center missing pixel.A center-independent interpolation method is proposed to replace the center-dependent interpolation strategy.An adaptive weighted interpolation method is used to improve the accuracy of interpolation.AWI provides good reconstruction performance and requires a low computational cost.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Deinterlacing,Adaptive weighted filter,Center-independent interpolation,Image quality,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a local weighted interpolation method for intra-field deinterlacing is proposed as an improved version of the DCS (deinterlacing with awareness of closeness and similarity) algorithm. The original DCS method is derived from bilateral filter which takes the local spatial closeness and pixel similarity into account when calculating the weight of interpolation. The proposed algorithm achieves three improvements: 1) instead of the line average, a more accurate interpolation filter is used to estimate the center missing pixel; 2) the center-independent interpolation method is proposed to replace the center-dependent interpolation strategy; 3) the adaptive weighted interpolation method is used to improve the accuracy of interpolation. Experimental results show that the proposed algorithm provides superior performance in terms of both objective and subjective image qualities when compared with other conventional benchmarks, including DCS algorithms with low complexity.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Recently, high-resolution display systems such as HDTVs, LCDs, and 3DTVs have been rapidly developed and are in wide use. However, most current broadcasting systems still employ interlaced scanning to compromise between frame rate and transmission bandwidth requirements [1]. Due to the adoption of interlaced scanning, these display systems suffer from undesirable visual artifacts such as interline flickers, line crawling, and field aliasing. Consequently, interlaced-to-progressive conversion is required to reduce these artifacts [2]. Various deinterlacing methods have been previously proposed, and they can be roughly grouped into intra-field methods [3–9] and inter-field methods [10,11].Inter-field methods exhibit better visual performance in that they exploit the motion information between neighboring frames. However, they require a great deal of calculation and memory for implementation. Furthermore, if the motion information cannot be estimated accurately using inter-field methods, the deinterlacing performance worsens in comparison with intra-field methods. However, intra-field methods have the advantage of lower complexity than inter-field methods because they only utilize the current frames, making them more suitable for real-time applications. Therefore, we mainly focus on the intra-field method in this paper.The existing intra-field deinterlacing methods can be roughly classified into two groups – one group is edge-based methods including ELA [3], EELA [4], MELA [5], LCID [6] and FDD [7] which all interpolate a missing line linearly between centro-symmetric neighboring pixels with the minimum difference. However, these directional interpolation techniques often perform poorly because they incorrectly estimate the direction or use only limited-direction models in high spatial frequency regions such as irregular edges and texture details. Another group is weight-based method including MCAD [8] and DCS (deinterlacing with awareness of closeness and similarity) [9]. MCAD is based on the correspondence between high-resolution covariance and low-resolution covariance. DCS is derived from a bilateral filter that takes the local spatial closeness and pixel similarity into account when calculating the weight of interpolation. These methods generally improve the deinterlacing performance when compared with the “line average,” though the visual effects of the deinterlaced frames could be further developed.In this paper, we apply an adaptive weighted interpolation filter on the basis of DCS to interpolate the missing pixels by exploring the correlations with the neighboring pixels. The proposed interpolation method is a center-independent interpolation (CII) method, which makes it more robust and reliable when compared with DCS. Additionally, by using an adaptive weighted strategy, the accuracy of the interpolation is improved. The proposed algorithm also has the merits of low complexity and good visual quality.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The DCS method is reviewed in Section 2, and the proposed adaptive weighted interpolation method is explained in Section 3. Experimental results are then presented to evaluate the performance of the proposed method in Section 4. Finally, conclusions are given in Section 5.The DCS method is based on the application of the bilateral filter [12] to deinterlacing. The idea of DCS is to combine gray levels based on both the geometric closeness and intensity similarity that is in favor of near values to distant values in both domain and range. Two weighting functions are designed to replace a pixel value with the average of similar and nearby pixel values in the sliding window in regards to space and intensity. Specifically, the closer the neighboring pixel is, the higher the weight that will be allocated. Similarly, if the neighboring pixel is more similar in gray level to the center pixel, the higher weight will be allocated. Two Gaussian kernels are used to measure the closeness and similarity of neighboring pixels.The weighting functions using Gaussian kernel for the spatial and intensity components are defined respectively as(1)Wi,jS=exp[−|(i,j)−(i0,j0)|22σS2],and(2)Wi,jR=exp[−|I(i,j)−I(i0,j0)|22σR2],whereI(i,j)is the intensity value at the given position(i,j), andI(i0,j0)is the pre-interpolated value by the line average (LA).The ensemble weight in DCS is the product of the two weighting functions in Eq. (1) and Eq. (2):(3)Wi,j=Wi,jSWi,jR.Finally, each pixel is interpolated using normalized weights as(4)I˜(i0,j0)=∑(i,j)∈N(i0,j0)Wi,jI(i,j)∑(i,j)∈N(i0,j0)Wi,j,whereI˜(i0,j0)is the interpolated pixel at location(i0,j0).N(i0,j0)represent the neighboring known pixels ofI(i0,j0)in Fig. 1(a). The parametersσRandσSare regularization factors used to adjust the influence ofWRandWS, respectively. Because different images have different features, it is impractical to choose specializedσRandσSfor each image, and they are generally chosen empirically.σRandσSare set as 23 and 0.6, respectively, after training with a set of nature images. Since the distance between the neighboring pixels and the center position(i0,j0)are fixed, the spatial weightWScan be pre-calculated to reduce the complexity.The drawback of DCS is that the interpolation accuracy is highly dependent on the pre-interpolation of the center pixel. If the center pixel is badly interpolated, the accuracy of interpolation will be notably degraded. In addition, the correlation of neighboring pixels is ignored in the DCS method even if they exhibit a strong correlation with the center pixel.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we proposed an efficient intra-field deinterlacing algorithm using a local adaptive weighted interpolation method. This method modified the DCS interpolation method by enhancing the accuracy of the center pixel estimation method and by using the center-independent interpolation method, which reflects the correlation of neighboring pixels, to replace the CDI method used in DCS. The proposed method is more robust and reliable than DCS since it is not dependent on the center pixel which cannot be altered. Furthermore, in CII, the correlation of neighboring pixels contains more local edge and intensity information than CDI. Consequently, the AWI interpolation method which combines the CII and the center enhanced interpolation method can preserve the smooth edges and details in the deinterlaced image. The experimental results showed that the AWI interpolation method produced better deinterlacing results than all other conventional intra-field deinterlacing methods tested. In addition, the method has an exceptionally low complexity, which makes it suitable for real-time application.