@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A random-coefficient third-order autoregressive process

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Derivation of a random coefficient third-order Laplace AR process.Pseudo-code to simulate Laplace AR process.Steps to design a Laplace AR process to meet a desired autocorrelation property.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Laplace,Autoregressive,Non-Gaussian,Random-coefficient,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Gaussian distributions are the most widely used probabilistic models to characterise physical processes [2]. There are, however, several signals and processes that require non-Gaussian probabilistic models. Laplace distributions are perhaps the most commonly used non-Gaussian statistical models in signal processing and communication systems [15]. Some examples, where Laplace probabilistic models are used, include modeling of estimators in speech enhancement and audio source separation [6,18], modeling of distributions of transform-coefficients in image and video coding [1], modeling of position errors in navigation systems and modeling of non-Gaussian noises in communication systems [3,24,27]. Furthermore, in finance, Laplace models are used for predicting and modeling of market risks [13].For mathematical representation of such Laplacian dynamic systems, a model that is flexible to be configured to accurately capture the statistical dynamics of the systems is desired. Moreover, for simulations purposes, it is essential that the mathematical model posses a structure that is simple and convenient for generating realizations of Laplace processes. In this paper, we present a random-coefficient [19] mathematical form to simulate a third-order Laplace autoregressive process. Following the work in [7], the Laplace AR process uses similar Markovian mathematical structure as those of the well-known Gaussian AR processes but the coefficients of the AR process are chosen to be random. This Markovian property allows it to be flexible and simple to implement. The most significant feature of the developed random-coefficient Laplace AR process is that its autocorrelation property has Yule–Walker type of equations which simplifies the generation of random sequences of desired autocorrelations, and also makes system modeling or data fitting convenient.There are other ways of generating non-Gaussian random sequence that have been reported in the literature [23,16,26,25,9]. A common way of generating a non-Gaussian random sequence is to apply a white noise Gaussian sequence to a system that consists of a linear time-invariant filter followed by a non-linear transformer. The function of the linear time-invariant filter is to produce a sequence of a desired autocorrelation, while the non-linear transformer is used to shape the random sequence to a specified distribution [22]. Such a method generates random sequences of accurate autocorrelations and correct distributions, however, it is inconvenient in its implementation because it does not posses a mathematical form that perfectly fits into a state-space representation which is essential for applying many popular parameter estimation techniques.Another idea for generating Laplace AR process lies in the fact that the marginal pdf of the real as well as imaginary component of the product of two independent circularly-symmetric complex Gaussian distributions is Laplace distribution [12]. Therefore, a Laplace AR process can be generated by multiplying two independent complex Gaussian AR processes and by taking only either the real or imaginary component of the product process. While this method can generate accurate Laplace process with desired characteristics, modeling systems with such two separate processes lacks conciseness and increases the dimension of unknowns in parameter estimation problems [12]. Furthermore, we note that while the real and imaginary components of the product process are uncorrelated, they are not independent [12]. Consequently, if generating a complex Laplace process with independent marginal distributions is desired, another product of two complex circularly-symmetric Gaussian AR processes would be needed, requiring four AR processes that have totally eight inputs of independent Gaussian processes. In contrast, our developed random-coefficient algorithm would require four uniformly distributed and two Laplace distributed processes to generate a complex Laplace process with independent marginal distributions.The paper is organized as follows: we first provide our motivation for developing the proposed Laplace AR process in Section 2. In Section 3, we define the mathematical structure of the random-coefficient third-order AR process, provide a detailed pseudocode algorithm to generate a Laplace AR sequence, derive Yule–Walker type autocorrelation equations of the AR process, and describe the conditions for wide-sense stationarity of the AR process. In Section 4, we provide illustrative computer simulation examples to verify our theoretical derivations and demonstrate its application for modeling Laplacian dynamic systems. Conclusions are given in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
There are several signals, processes and system that require non-Gaussian probabilistic models for their accurate description. Laplacian models are one of the most widely used non-Gaussian probabilistic models. In this paper, we have presented a random-coefficient mathematical structure to generate a third-order Laplace AR process. The developed Laplace AR process has a convenient and flexible mathematical structure for simulating sequences. Detailed pseudocode of the algorithm for generating a third-order Laplace AR process is provided.The most salient feature of the developed AR process is that, similar to the Gaussian AR processes, its autocorrelation function satisfies a Yule–Walker type of equations. This feature of the Laplace AR process enables us to design sequences that match a desired autocorrelation property.By way of simulations, we have verified that the statistical moments such as mean and variance as well as other measures of higher cumulants such as skewness and kurtosis of sequences generated by the proposed AR process are consistent with the expected theoretical statistical characteristics of a Laplace distribution.Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.dsp.2014.12.010.The following is the Supplementary material related to this article.MMC 1This is a MATLAB file of Fig. 1.MMC 2This is a MATLAB file of Fig. 3.MMC 3This is a MATLAB file of Fig. 4.