@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Enhancing indoor radio tomographic imaging based on interference link elimination

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We employ both temporal and spatial properties of shadowed links to detect the interference links.We utilize the target's dynamic to obtain the position prediction required by spatial detection.We propose to estimate the initial position of the target based on mean-shift clustering.The performance of the proposed method is greatly improved compared to those of existing methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Radio tomographic imaging,Indoor localization,Kalman filter,Clustering,Interference link elimination,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Radio tomographic imaging (RTI) is a promising technique to localize and track the target without wearing any electronic device. However, the performance of traditional shadowing-based RTI (SRTI) degrades in indoor environments due to the existence of interference links caused by multipath. The interference links can bring false spots in the imaging results of RTI and make the true spot drift, resulting in position estimation error of the target. In this paper, we propose an interference link canceling technique to improve the performance of RTI where temporal and spatial properties of shadowed links are jointly used to detect the interference links. Since the spatial detection relies on the prior knowledge of the position of the target, we use Kalman filter to provide the position estimation. Moreover, a mean-shift clustering method is adopted to obtain the initial position estimation of the target. The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed enhanced SRTI (ESRTI) method outperforms the existing methods in terms of both image quality and tracking accuracy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Radio tomographic imaging (RTI) has emerged as an attractive technology to localize the target without attaching any electronic device. So far various schemes of RTI including coherent RTI and non-coherent RTI have been proposed by research community in the past decades [1]. Among them, RTI based on received signal strength (RSS), which is a type of non-coherent RTI, has attracted a lot of attention because RSS can be easily obtained from most wireless communication devices without extra hardware. Thus, RSS-based RTI offers a cost-effective solution to image the monitored area. Recently, RSS-based RTI has been used in a variety of applications including roadside surveillance [2], through-wall sensing [3–6], floor plan formation [5–7], residential monitoring [8] and health care [9].Shadowing-based RTI (SRTI) was originally proposed by Patwari and Wilson [10] which exploited RSS variation obtained from a network of low-cost radio sensors to generate an attenuation image about the monitored area. The major assumption behind SRTI is that when the target obstructs the wireless links, the links will suffer from large shadowing loss. In addition, the RSS of links which are not blocked by the target will almost keep unchanged. The assumption is valid for open environments where the line-of-sight (LOS) path of a link is dominant. However, it does not hold in cluttered indoor environments due to the existence of multipath which makes RSS change unexpectedly. Diversity has proven to be an effective method to combat the multipath. For example, Kaltiokallio has proposed a channel diversity method which chose the best channel from different channels or weighted them by fading levels [11]. A fade-level based spatial model for RTI was also proposed, which divided the links to fading links and no fading links and treated the two types of links differently [12]. Bocca [13] found that by changing the orientation of antennas, the performance of RTI can be improved dramatically. But diversity requires measuring RSS on different channels or orientations, which results in increased measurement burden. Wei [14] employed electronically switched directional (ESD) antennas which have narrow beamwidth to mitigate the multipath. However, using directional antennas will increase the size and also the cost of radio sensors.In this paper, we attempt to cope with multipath problem from another perspective of canceling interference links. The interference links refer to the links whose RSS measurements are observed to have unexpected change. For example, the RSS measurements of some links are noticeably increased, which is rarely observed in outdoor environments. In addition, the RSS measurements of some links whose LOS paths are not obstructed also exhibit great attenuation. This may be caused by dominant multipath obstruction or fast fading due to the motion of the target. The participation of interference links will impair the performance of RTI. Specifically, if interference links are used to perform RTI, the image may be severely corrupted by false spots and noise. The true spot corresponding to the position of the target may also drift significantly. Both can result in large position estimation errors.Therefore, in this paper, we propose to enhance the RTI by interference canceling technique and the proposed method is referred to as enhanced SRTI (ESRTI). In summary, the paper has the following contributions:1)We employ both temporal and spatial properties of shadowed links to detect the interference links. Considering that the RSS of the obstructed links slowly varies, in the temporal domain a moving average filter is utilized to avoid the links corrupted by fast fading. Further, we detect the interference links according to the spatial property where the intersection points of the interference links are far away from the true position of the target. Note that the spatial detection phase requires the position of the target, which is unknown in advance. To tackle this problem, we replace the target's position with the position prediction obtained by Kalman filter. The links excluding interference links are used to generate the image about the monitored area.Since ESRTI requires that the initial position of the target is known, we propose to estimate the initial position of the target based on mean-shift clustering approach [15].The effectiveness of ESRTI method is also verified by experiments. We observe that the imaging results given by the proposed ESRTI are considerably enhanced, where the false spots disappear and the localization accuracy is significantly improved.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we briefly review related work about RTI. Section 3 presents the problem formulation of indoor RTI and the motivation of the proposed method. In Section 4, we give the details of the interference link elimination. Section 5 shows how to obtain the initial position of the target. In Section 6, the overall framework of ESRTI method is described. Section 7 validates the effectiveness of the proposed method by field experiments. Section 8 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
