@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new rotating machinery fault diagnosis method based on improved local mean decomposition

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel time–frequency analysis method called OLMD is presented in this paper.OLMD can weaken the mode mixing problem in traditional LMD.The simulation and experimental results validate the reliability and feasibility of the proposed methodology.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Local mean decomposition (LMD),Rational Hermite interpolation,Orthogonality criterion (OC),Rotating machinery,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Roller bearings and gearbox are widely used and key components of rotating machinery and their condition monitoring techniques are always a central topic for the maintenance of rotating machinery [1]. Because of the direct relationship between the vibration and the structure of the rotating machine, the vibration-based signal processing techniques are widely used in the diagnostic field and have been proved to be effective in fault diagnosis of gearbox and roller bearing [2]. There are many signal processing techniques that can extract the fault information from the response signal such as time-domain features, envelope spectrum, wallet transform, demodulation analysis and so on [3–5]. Nevertheless, the traditional signal processing methods have their own limits. Such as the windowed Fourier transform (WFT), once the window function is fixed, the size of the time–frequency window is unchangeable [6]. Wavelet transform (WT) can decompose multi-scales into several scale time–frequency components, which has ability of processing the non-stationary and nonlinear signals, it has been widely used to diagnose the rotating machine. In fact, WT is essentially an adjustable window Fourier transform, which doesn't have the nature of self-adaptive feature [7,8].Unlike aforementioned analysis methods, Empirical mode decomposition (EMD) method can self-adaptively decompose signal into a series of intrinsic mode functions (IMF), each of which consists of the natural oscillations embedded in the vibration signal [9]. Since the IMFs are determined by signal itself, rather than pre-determined kernels, EMD method is a totally self-adaptive signal processing method, which especially suits for processing the non-stationary and nonlinear signals. Although EMD method has been widely applied to various fields, it has many problems such as boundary effect, mode mixing and over- and undershoot problems [10], etc. Furthermore, when we apply Hilbert transform (HT) to each IMF, it usually results in doubtful negative IF [11].Recently, a novel adaptive time–frequency analysis method called local mean decomposition (LMD) is proposed by Jonathan S. Smith, which has been successfully used in EEG field [12]. LMD can decompose a superimposed signal into a number of product functions (PFs) and a residual. Each PF component is equal to the product of an envelope signala(t)and a pure frequency modulation (FM) signalsn(t). Envelope signal is the product of IA and IA is obtained by the pure FM signal. Therefore, LMD method can adaptively decompose any multi-component signal into several single-component AM–FM signals [11]. Compared with EMD method, the prominent advantage of LMD is that it directly gives access to the calculations of the IA and IF of each PF, avoiding performing the HT. LMD has been validated remarkable effectiveness in the rotating machinery fault diagnosis. Wang et al. [13] proposed an improved LMD and application to extract the rub-impact fault features from the vibration signals. Cheng et al. [14] applied LMD method to fulfill the gear and roller bearing fault diagnosis. Also LMD method is employed to complete the fault diagnosis on a rolling bearing and gear of locomotive bogies by Chen et al. [15].As a novel time–frequency analysis algorithm, some technical difficulties are encountered in the practical application of LMD method [13]. In original LMD algorithm, moving average (MA) approach is performed to construct the local mean and envelope estimate functions in the sifting process, it is time-consuming and may result in inaccurate decomposition results. It is well known that the decomposition results of LMD highly depend on the step sizes selection of MA, and the unsuitable sliding step sizes of MA has an adverse impact on the final calculation of IA and IF significantly. Unfortunately, the mathematic definition of the best step size in theory is non-existent and the better way to select the optimum step size of MA algorithm is still an unsolved problem [16]. Furthermore, the MA approach is time-consuming in the actual time series analysis, and there remains need for an efficient method that can perform the decomposition accurately and efficiently.To overcome the drawbacks of original LMD, many researches in recent years have focused on the alternative algorithm designation. Since the cubic spline interpolation has good convergence and high smoothness, L. Deng introduced the cubic spline interpolation approach to construct the local mean functionm(t)and envelope estimation functiona(t)[16]. B-spline approach is introduced to improve the analytical performance by Chen et al. [17]. However, the cubic spline interpolation is performed to construct the envelopes with outstanding over- and undershoot problems [18]. Recently, Lin et al. introduced cubic Hermite interpolation approach to fit the envelope of a signal with the extreme points and then obtain local mean and envelope estimate functions [19]. However, the cubic Hermite interpolation can't adaptively adjust the shape of the curve with the changing local characteristics of the waveform in the sifting process, it requires further research and improvement.It is also needed to refer to the work by Zhang et al., whereby the rational spline interpolation is introduced to replace the MA in the extraction process [20,21]. However, the rational spline-based LMD (RS-LMD) method has the following problems: (a) The selection of the tension parameter is difficult, which needs extended numerical computation. Moreover, the unsuitable tension parameter p makes the decomposition results worse than the traditional spline-based LMD method; (b) In the Pegram and Zhang's publications, once the tension parameter is fixed, it is unchangeable in the whole decomposition process. The fixed tension parameter in the whole sifting process is unreasonable. Since the waveform and fluctuating trend of the maxima and minima of the produced new time series may be quite dissimilar with the original signal, it requires the tension parameter is changeable in the sifting process. Therefore, the proposed approach in references [20,21] needs further research.Focused on the aforementioned problems, an optimized local mean decomposition (OLMD) method is proposed in this paper. The proposed method adopts rational Hermite interpolation to construct the local mean function and envelope functions. In order to select an optimal shape controlling parameters in each rank, an optimization process is designed. In this manner, the smoothing errors of MA are decreased, leading to a significant performance enhancement. Meanwhile, a signal extending approach based on mirror extending method is used to extend the signals in order to solve the boundary distortion problem. Also the orthogonality criterion (OC) is applied to guarantee that the obtained pre-OPFs almost meet the PF definition.To further investigate the performance of the proposed method, four evaluating indicators are introduced. Finally, the OLMD method is introduced into the simulation signal analysis and a comparison is conducted with original LMD and RS-LMD methods. The comparison results verify the superiority of the proposed method. Furthermore, the vibration signal of the incipient bearing fault and gearbox with crack fault is preprocessed by OLMD method and the envelope analysis technique is utilized to find out the fault frequency. Unlike the existing algorithms, the main contributions of this paper are succinctly stated below:•Development of a new envelope interpolation method called optimized rational Hermite interpolation method (OLMD), which has a shape controlling parameter compared with the cubic Hermite interpolation algorithm.Introduction of the bandwidth criterion to implement the optimization procedure in each step, leading to significant performance enhancement;Validation of the proposed fault detection and type identification algorithms by a bearing run-to-failure test and gearbox with crack fault test.This work is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the main steps of LMD. In addition, the definitions of rational Hermite interpolation as well as the OPF selection criterion are introduced briefly. In Section 3 the main steps of OLMD method are described. Simultaneously, the comparisons of simulation signal analysis among OLMD, RS-LMD and original LMD methods are discussed in Section 4, which show that the better decomposition results can be obtained by the proposed method. The analysis results of the fault vibration signal collected from the roller bearings and gearbox are given in Section 5. Finally, the conclusions about the diagnostic capability of OLMD are drawn in Section 6.LMD is originally developed to decompose a multi-component amplitude-modulated and frequency-modulated (AM–FM) signal into a sum of product functions (PFs), each of which is the product of an amplitude envelope signal and a frequency modulated (FM) signal [14]. Given any signalx(t), it can be decomposed by LMD method as follows:(1) Find out all local extremaniof the original signalx(t), and calculate the mean valuemiof two successive extremaniandni+1, then the ith mean valuemican be expressed as(1)mi=(ni+1+ni)/2Note that all the mean valuesmiare firstly connected by straight lines and then smoothed by using MA to form a varying continuous mean functionm11(t).(2) The envelope estimateaiis calculated according to Eq. (2).(2)ai=|ni+1−ni|/2MA approach is also applied to construct the local envelope functiona11(t)in the same way as in step (1).(3) Subtract the local mean functionm11(t)from the original datax(t), and then residual signalh11(t)can be written as(3)h11(t)=x(t)−m11h11(t)is then divided by the amplitude functiona11(t)to obtains11(t), it can be expressed as(4)s11(t)=h11(t)/a11(t)(4) Repeat steps (1) and (2) to get the envelopea12(t)ofs11(t), if the envelope functiona12(t)=1, stop the procedure and takes12(t)as the first purely frequency modulated signal. Otherwise, regards11(t)as the original signal and repeat steps (1)–(4) n times until the envelope functiona1(n+1)(t)ofs1n(t)satisfiesa1n(t)=1, which can be expressed as follows.(5){h11(t)=x(t)−m11(t)h12(t)=s11(t)−m12(t)⋮h1n(t)=s1(n−1)(t)−m1n(t)where(6){s11(t)=h11(t)/a11(t)s12(t)=h12(t)/a12(t)⋮s1n(t)=h1n(t)/a1n(t)(5) The corresponding envelope is obtained by Eq. (7).(7)a1(t)=a11(t)a12(t)⋯a1n(t)=∏q=1na1q(t)The first product functionPF1(t)can be constructed by the envelope functiona1(t)and the purely frequency modulated signals1n(t), which can be written as(8)PF1(t)=a1(t)s1n(t)In theory,PF1(t)contains the highest frequency oscillations of the signalx(t), whose instantaneous amplitude (IA) is exactly the envelope signala1(t)and instantaneous frequency (IF) is calculated by the purely frequency modulated signals1n(t), it can be expressed as(9)f1(t)=12πd[arccos⁡(s1n(t))]dt(6) This derivedPF1(t)is then subtracted from the original time seriesx(t), resulting in a new functionu1(t). Regardu1(t)as a new data and repeat the above procedure k times untiluk(t)is a constant or contains no more oscillations.(10){u1(t)=x(t)−PF1(t)⋮uk(t)=uk−1(t)−PFk(t)Thus, the original signal can be reconstructed according to(11)x(t)=∑p=1kPFk(t)+uk(t)whereuk(t)is the residue and k is the number of PF components.In literature [16], spline-LMD (SLMD) method is proposed, whereby the cubic spline interpolation is used to calculate the local mean functionm(t)and envelope estimate functiona(t). It is well known that the over- and undershoot problems often occur in the cubic spline interpolation shown in Fig. 1. It is clearly observed that both the upper and lower envelopes have over- and undershoot problems denoted by arrows.The reason of the over- and undershoot problems in cubic spline interpolation is that the cubic spline lacks the adequate flexibility when fitting the local extrema [22]. Considering that the cubic spline interpolation is of second-order smoothness (second-order derivable), while the cubic Hermite is only first-order smoothness, the cubic Hermite interpolation is often used in place of cubic splines for interpolating the maxima and minima points. However, the author finds that sometimes the cubic Hermite interpolation algorithm is too flexible, which may even cause the obvious break points.Since the cubic spline interpolation lacks adequate flexibility and the cubic Hermite interpolation lacks enough smoothness, a new alternative interpolation approach called rational Hermite interpolation is proposed in this paper.The rational Hermite interpolation has a shape controlling parameter compared with the cubic Hermite interpolation, which can control the shape of spline as well as retain the desirable characteristics of the cubic Hermite interpolation. The basis function selection is a key step to construct the rational Hermite interpolation. This paper proposes a four quartic polynomial basis function which has the advantages of simple structure, efficiency of computation and reliable outcomes [10].Definition 1Given0≤t≤1, and λ is the real number, then the four quartic polynomial can be described as the basis function of the rational Hermite interpolation:(12)Fi(t)=1−(λ−3)t2−(2λ−2)t3+λt4Fi+1(t)=−(λ−3)t2+(2λ−2)t3−λt4Gi(t)=t+(λ−2)t2−(2λ−1)t3+λt4Gi+1(t)=−(λ+1)t2+(2λ+1)t3−λt4Also some property of the defined basis functions can be obtained after the calculations, which satisfied the following:(13)Fi(0)=Fi+1(1)=1,Fi(1)=Fi+1(0)=0Fi′(0)=Fi′(1)=Fi+1′(1)=Fi+1′(0)=0Gi(0)=Gi(1)=Gi+1(1)=Gi+1(0)=0Gi′(0)=Gi+1′(1)=1,Gi′(1)=Gi+1′(0)=0andFi(t)=Fi+1(t)=1,Gi(t)=−Gi+1(1−t).The results show that: the defined basis functions have the absolutely same properties with the basis function of piecewise cubic Hermite interpolation. Especially, when theλi=0, the rational Hermite interpolation defaults to the cubic Hermite interpolation. So the four quartic polynomial can be considered as the extension of the basis function of piecewise cubic Hermite interpolation. Moreover, the defined basis functions can be taken as the definition of the rational Hermite interpolation. Due to the parameter λ, the shape of the splines constructed by the rational Hermite can be adjusted by changing the value of the parameter, which is an improvement of the cubic Hermite interpolation.Definition 2Given a series of discrete date(xi,yi,di)(i=1,2,…,N), theyiis the local maxima and minima at timexi, and thediis the first derivative at each timexi(di=dy(t)/dx(t)). The aim is to fit the two points to interpolate the segments. The rational Hermite interpolation can be constructed in each[xk,xk+1](k=0,1,…,N−1):(14)sk(x)=Fi(t)yi+Fi+1(t)yi+1+Gi(t)hidi+Gi+1(t)hidi+1wherehi=xi+1−xi,t=(x−xi)/hi, λ is the parameter used to control the shape of the spline andFi(t),Fi+1(t),Gi(t)andGi+1(t)are the basis functions of the rational Hermite interpolation. It has been proved that the propose interpolation is first-order smooth continuous and derivable.To illustrate the effectiveness of shape controlling parameter λ, the rational Hermite interpolation is applied to a section of the synthetic signal. The envelopes constructed by the rational Hermite with λ ranging from −10, −2, 0 (cubic), 2, 10 are presented in Fig. 2. The shapes of the envelopes are progressively changed as λ is varied.Seen from Fig. 2, it is difficult for us to determine which envelope-line is suitable to fit the extreme points, since the good mathematical definition of suitable envelopes of LMD is still a problem. To solve the aforementioned problems, this paper proposes a novel evaluation criterion to implement envelope algorithm automatic selection in each rank, which is discussed in the rest of this section.The shape controlling parameter λ is an integer and the range of λ is selected according to the calculation efficiency and calculation accuracy. Generally speaking, if the shape controlling parameterλ>0, the bigger λ value means greater fluctuation, while the condition is opposite if the shape controlling parameterλ<0. It can be seen from Fig. 2. Besides, a too large range of parameter λ is time-consuming and useless, since the much more fluctuation envelopes are usually unreasonable. Hence, both considering the calculation efficiency and calculation accuracy, the range of controlling parameter λ is from −10 to 10 in this paper.To realize the best shape controlling parameter automatic selection in each rank, an evaluation criterion called bandwidth criterion is introduced in this paper [23]. It can be implemented in the following way. Since the different shape controlling parameter of rational Hermite is directly related to the accuracy of the obtained PF, the optimum shape controlling parameter selection can be taken as the optimum PF (OPF) selection. Motivated by this, the best shape controlling parameter selection in each rank can be got through finding out the OPF from the pre-OPFs, which are derived from the rational Hermite interpolation with different shape controlling parameter λ.Since the PF criterion proposed by Smith to define a PF is not sufficient conditions for reasonable instantaneous frequency, which often leads to the instantaneous frequencies of obtained PFs meaninglessness. To guarantee that the instantaneous frequencies of PF components have enough physical sense, one more condition is considered in this paper.Based on the original definitions of a PF, the OPF is a signal that fulfills the following two conditions:(I)The signalsin(t)should satisfy−1≤sin(t)≤1and the envelope functionain+1(t)should satisfyain+1(t)=1in the sifting process;With the minimum of frequency bandwidth [23] among the obtained pre-OPFs;(I) is called pre-OPFs.It can be known that the second condition aims to guarantee that the OPF is the local narrowband signal. The detailed explanation of the bandwidth criterion (condition II) is as follows.For a given signalz(t)=a(t)ejϕ(t), we define the instantaneous bandwidth of the signalz(t)at time t is(15)Bt=|a´(t)/a(t)|The instantaneous bandwidth is used to estimate how theP(t,w)concentrates in the center IF at time t. Moreover, when theBtis very small,z(t)is considered as local narrowband signal and has perfect physical sense. Suppose that B is the bandwidth ofz(t), we can obtain Eq. (16) based on the knowledge of Fourier analysis.(16)B2=σw2=∫−∞∞(w−〈w〉)2|S(w)|2dw=∫−∞∞z(t‾)(1jddt−〈w〉)2z(t)dtSubstitutez(t)=a(t)ejϕ(t)into Eq. (16) then we can get(17)B2=Ba2+Bf2whereBa2=∫(Bt)2a2(t)dt,Bf2=∫(ϕ´t−〈w〉)2a2(t)dt,〈w〉=∫ϕ´ta2(t)dt.From Eq. (17), it can be known thatB2is a linear combination of two indexes: the frequency bandwidthBa2and the amplitude bandwidthBf2.Ba2results from the change of amplitudea(t)and it is only associated with amplitude modulating.Bf2results from the change of instantaneous frequencyϕ´(t)and it reflects the consistency of instantaneous frequency at all-time extended. The smallerBf2value means the closer the scale characteristics at different times as well as the slighter the scale-mixing problem.Hence, theBf2is taken as the OPF selection criterion and the optimization process mainly consists of two steps. Firstly, the different pre-OPFs with different shape controlling parameter λ can be obtained. Then, the pre-OPFs with least value ofBf2will be selected as the OPF in each sifting process. It means that the PFs with different envelope algorithms that satisfy condition (I) is called pre-OPFs and the PF that satisfy condition (I) and (II) is called OPF.Based on the above discussion, the envelope algorithms play a crucial role in the decomposing results of envelope-LMD. Based on LMD, the optimized LMD (OLMD) is introduced in this paper. For a given signalx(t), the algorithmic steps of OLMD can be described as follows:(1) Initialization:r(t)=x(t),i=1,j=1;(2) Identify all the local minima and maxima ofr(t);(3) Calculate the upper envelopEmax(t)and lower envelopEmin(t)of the signal being analyzed by using rational Hermite interpolation algorithms introduced in Section 2.2;(4) Compute local mean functionm(t)and envelope estimation functiona(t)using the upper and lower envelopes generated by different shape controlling parameter and then denote asmi1(t),mi2(t),…,mij(t)andai1(t),ai2(t),…,aij(t),j=1,…,n, respectively.(18)mij(t)=Emax(t)+Emin(t)2(19)aij(t)=|Emax(t)−Emin(t)|2(5) The local mean functionmij(t)is subtracted from the original datax(t).(20)hij(t)=x(t)−mij(t)h11(t)is then amplitude demodulated by been divided bya11(t).(21)sij(t)=hij(t)/aij(t)Then the envelopeai2j(t)ofsij(t)can be calculated. Ifai2j(t)≠1, the procedure needs to be repeated forsij(t). A smoothed local meanmi2j(t)is calculated forsij(t), subtractedmi2j(t)fromsij(t), and the resulting function amplitude demodulated usingai2j(t). This iteration process continues n times until a purely frequency modulated signalsinj(t)is obtained.(6) The corresponding envelope is given by(22)aij(t)=a11(t)a12(t)⋯a1n(t)=∏q=1na1q(t)Multiplysinj(t)by the envelope functionaij(t)and then give a product functionPFij(t), called pre-OPFs.(23)pre_OPFij(t)=aij(t)sinj(t)(7) Select the optimum OPF from the j pre-OPFs:pre_OPFi1(t),pre_PFi2(t),…,pre_PFij(t),j=1,…,naccording to the condition (II) of OPF and set thepre_OPFij(t)asOPFi(t).(8) Then the residualri(t)=x(t)−OPFi(t)and take theri(t)as the original signal. The above procedures are repeated until the residualri(t)i=2,…,nbecomes a monotonic function.In theory, OLMD method has encompassed the advantages of rational Hermite with different shape controlling parameters, leading to least envelope error and highest accuracy decomposition results compared with original LMD methods. The flowchart of OLMD method is illustrated in Fig. 3.In order to guarantee the obtained mono-components have enough physical meaning, a proper stop criterion for the sifting process is needed. In the LMD method, the PF criteria are that the signals1n(t)satisfies−1≤s1n(t)≤1and the envelope functiona1n(t)=1. However, it is a pity that the PF criteria are so ideal that they can't be realized in the real iteration process. In order to overcome the above drawbacks of the PF criteria, the orthogonality criterion (OC) is proposed in this paper, which is on the basis of the orthogonality of the components [24]. In OLMD method, the OC is applied to guarantee that the obtained pre-OPFs almost meet condition (I) approximately, and the parameters are set as follows:OC≤1.01andMax(|mik|)≤δ.(24)OC=|∑t=0Tx(t)mik(t)∑t=0T[x(t)−mik(t)]mik(t)|wherex(t)is the original signal,mik(t)is the envelope function of the ith PF component at sifting iteration step k.In order to validate the effectiveness of the OLMD method, a comparison should be done between the original LMD, rational spline based LMD (RS-LMD) and OLMD methods using a synthetic signal.Meanwhile, we need to illustrate the advantages and disadvantages of rational spline interpolation and RS-LMD method. Rational spline interpolation is proposed by Pegram et al. [25] to overcome the shortcomings of over- and under-shooting often experienced with cubic splines. Based on the advantage of rational spline interpolation, Zhang proposed a rational spline-based LMD. The individual segment functions of the rational splines can be written as:(25)sk(x)=Aku+Bkt+Cku3/(1+pt)+Dkt3/(1+pu)wheret=(x−xk)/hk=(x−xk)/(xk+1−xk),u=1−tand p is the pole parameter, whose function is to control the spline tension.From Eq. (25), we can see: it has a variable tension parameter p, the tautness of the spline changes as the parameter p increases. In other words, the tension parameter p can control the tautness of the spline. As p increases, the (1+pt) and (1+pu) which is the last two terms of Eq. (1) will diminish, and then the spline is gradually tending to be a straight line. When p is set to zero, the last two terms insk:(1+pt)and (1+pu) will become to one, and then the rational spline defaults to a cubic spline.Although RS-LMD method can improve the accuracy of the decomposition results using the tension parameter, it also suffers from it. Since the unsuitable tension parameter makes the decomposition results worse than the original LMD method. In additional, in the Zhang's publication, once the tension parameter is selected, it is fixed in the whole sifting process, which is unreasonable. The waveform and fluctuating trend of the maxima and minima of the produced new time series may be quite dissimilar with the original signal which requires the tension parameter is changeable in the sifting process.The RS-LMD method has the following problems: (i) Once the tension parameter is fixed, it is unchangeable; (ii) The selection of the tension parameter p is difficult, which needs extended numerical computation. Compared with RS-LMD method, OLMD has an optimization process, which can select best shape controlling parameter λ automatically. Moreover, the shape controlling parameter λ is changeable in the sifting process and the envelope error can be further removed. Hence, OLMD is more easily implementable and is physical more intuitive than the rational spline-based LMD that requires a good understanding of the signal characteristics for selection of the tension parameter p.Here a multi-component AM–FM simulation signalx(t)is given as follows.(26){x=x1(t)+x2(t)+x3(t)x1(t)=sin⁡(60πt)e−t/2x2(t)=(1+sin⁡(5πt))sin⁡(28πt)x3(t)=sin⁡(6πt)wheret=0:1/1000:2, set sampling frequency 1000 Hz. The simulation signal consists of two amplitude-modulated signals and a sine signal. The time domain waveforms ofx(t),x1(t),x2(t)andx3(t)are shown in Fig. 4. Additionally, the time series data is extended by using the mirror symmetric extension method in the three methods, which are described in literature [26] and also set the iterative stopping condition variationδ=10−3. Besides, the shape controlling parameter λ is an integer and the range of it is from −10 to 10.The simulation signalx(t)is decomposed by using original LMD, RS-LMS and OLMD methods and the decomposition results are presented in Fig. 5, Fig. 6and Fig. 7, respectively. It can be clearly found that the signal is decomposed into three PFs and a constant residual, simultaneously, thePF1(t),PF2(t)andPF3(t)components are corresponding to thex1(t),x2(t)andx3(t)of the original signal, respectively. As can be seen from Fig. 5 that the PFs derived from original LMD method are all anamorphic with serve scale-mixing problem. While in the decomposition of RS-LMD method shown in Fig. 6, although the scale-mixing problem can be alleviated, there still exists the mode mixing phenomena. Compared with the decomposition results of LMD and RS-LMD methods, the OPFs obtained by OLMD method coincide well with the real components with slight scale-mixing problem shown in Fig. 7. The comparison results illustrate that the OLMD method can obtain more precise components, which is more approximate to the real components ofx(t).To further compare the decomposition performance of LMD, RS-LMS and OLMD methods, the IF and IA of each mono-component should be discussed. Unlike Hilbert transform (HT) in EMD, the calculation of IF and IA of each mono-component is completed in the signal decomposition scheme of OLMD according to Eq. (7) and Eq. (9), which eschews the drawbacks of HT, such as windowing effect and negative IF. The time–frequency representation (TFR) can be obtained by combining IFs and IAs in one figure, which preserves the time and frequency information of the modulation signal. Therefore, the TFR of the mono-components derived from the two methods are shown in Fig. 8, Fig. 9and Fig. 10, respectively.It is clearly found in Fig. 8 and Fig. 9 that the TFR with first and second PFs of original LMD and RS-LMD are locally anamorphic and lose the physical sense, especially near the right end, which is due to the errors in the smoothing process by using the MA and envelope error produced by the rational spline. Conversely, the TFR of OPFs derived from OLMD can ameliorate the fluctuation phenomenon significantly. Moreover, the first and second horizontal lines in Fig. 10 (with IFs are 30 Hz and 14 Hz, respectively) has a narrower bandwidth than that of original LMD and RS-LMD methods. Therefore, the analysis results validate that OLMD method can significantly decrease the smoothing error of MA and rational spline and get more accurate IF and IA as well as TFR compared with other two methods.In order to compare the decomposition performance of LMD, RS-LMS and OLMD methods detailedly, orthogonal index, RMSE, iteration times for getting each component and consuming time are considered as evaluating indicators, which are described as follows.1) Orthogonal indexLike EMD method, an important property of LMD, RS-LMS and OLMD methods is that the obtained mono-components are expected to be mutually orthogonal [25]. Hence the orthogonal index (OI) is introduced to measure the orthogonality of the decomposition results, which can be described as [25]:(27)OI=∑i=1NPF∑j=1j<i|∑k=1NPFik×PFjk|∑k=1N(xk−rk)2whereNPFis the number of PFs. N is the length of the PF.PFik(t)andPFjk(t)are the ith and jth PF at sifting step k, respectively.xkis the original signal andrkis the residual after LMD decomposition. Theoretically, the PFs and the final residual obtained by LMD are expected to be mutually orthogonal. Namely, the OI index is expected to be zero. Therefore, the smaller OI (closer to zero) indicates the better decomposition results.2) RMSESince the first three components obtained by LMD, RS-LMS and OLMD are in accordance withx1(t),x2(t)andx3(t), respectively. The root mean squared error (RMSE) is utilized to assess the decomposition accuracy. Also the smaller RMSE value indicates the higher accuracy.(28)RMSE=E(s(t)−c(t))2wheres(t)andc(t)are the original defined component and the corresponding decomposed component, respectively.3) Iteration times of each PFAnother significant aim of OLMD decomposition is to minimize the number of sifts per PF. Since there is no good mathematical definition of the best envelope, least sifts per PF would reduce the sifting iterative error leading to the higher accuracy of decomposition results [26].4) Consuming timeEventually, the calculation efficiency of LMD, RS-LMS and OLMD needs to be considered. The simulation experiment is performed using the computer with 3.3 GHz i3-Core CPU, 4.0 GB RAM. Meanwhile, the MATLAB (R2010b) platform is employed to complete the simulation.The four assessing indicators mentioned previously are used to evaluate the decomposition results, which are shown in Table 1. From Table 1, the following conclusions can be got. Firstly, the RMSE values ofOPF1(t),OPF2(t)andOPF3(t)derived from OLMD method (0.0822, 0.0904, 0.1058) are smaller than that of RS-LMD method (0.1767, 0.2010, 0.1976) and LMD method (0.3953, 0.3056, 0.4620), which indicates the obtained OPF components are more close to the real mono-component of the original signalx1(t),x2(t)andx3(t)with slighter mode mixing problem. Secondly, the iteration times of OPF obtained by OLMD (3, 2, 2) are smaller than that of PF's obtained by RS-LMD (4, 2, 3) and original LMD (5, 4, 3), it indicates that OLMD has smaller iterative error compared with other two methods. Thirdly, OLMD has a smaller OI value than RS-LMD and LMD methods. Lastly, the total consuming time of OLMD (4.4345 s) is more than the consuming time of RS-LMD (3.0371 s) and LMD (2.8786 s).From the above discussion, it is shown that OLMD method has obvious advantages in components' accuracy, iteration times and orthogonality over RS-LMD and LMD methods. However, the optimization process in OLMD method will increase the calculation time, resulting in lower computation efficiency. The following conclusion can be drawn from the above comparison results: compared with the original LMD method, RS-LMD method can also enhance the decomposition accuracy and the ranking is OLMD > RS-LMD > LMD. Therefore, only the comparisons between OLMD and RS-LMD will be conducted in the following section.De-noising and fault characteristic extraction from the noisy signal are the key steps in rotating machinery fault diagnosis. Recently, there are many techniques available for the detection of rotating machinery faults, such as EMD [27] and LMD [28]. However, EMD exists many deficiencies such as boundary effect, mode mixing and over- and undershoot problems [10], etc. Compared with EMD, the prominent advantage of LMD is to avoid the Hilbert transform. However, it is still troubled by the step sizes selection of MA, since the unsuitable sliding step sizes of MA will influent the accuracy of decomposition results directly.Unlike the existing algorithms, a new time–frequency analysis method called OLMD is put forward in this paper. The principal contributions of this paper in contrast to these related works are two-fold. Firstly, the use of rational Hermite interpolation in place of MA reveals significant performance improvements in its applications. Secondly, bandwidth criterion for the estimates of the shape controlling parameters is developed, leading to more accuracy decomposition results.It is generally accepted that the envelope analysis technique is appropriate to extract the fault feature from gear and roller bearing vibration signals. When the gear and roller bearing with local fault operates, the measured vibration signal is a multi-component, AM–FM signal, and the amplitude of the high frequency is modulated by the shock impulse, which is generated by the local fault. Since OLMD approach can decompose a complicated signal into a serial of OPFs adaptively, each of which is the product of an envelope signal and a purely frequency modulated signal. In theory, each OPF is exactly a mono-component AM–FM signal [29]. Therefore, OLMD method is especially suitable for processing the gear and roller bearing fault signals. Based on the advantages of OLMD method, the fault diagnosis of roller bearing and gearbox can be summarized as follows: To begin with, the vibration signal can be decomposed into a set of OPFs using OLMD method. Then, the earliest extracted OPF that contains the main fault information is selected for further analysis. Lastly, the fault feature could be extracted effectively by performing the spectrum analysis of the instantaneous amplitudes of the selected OPF [30].In the most researches of bearing diagnostics, the analyzed experimental samples are the bearings that exhibit mature faults, or from simulated or “seeded” damage. However, the experiments using defective bearing have less capability to discover natural defect propagation in the early stages. In other words, the bearing fault that they are detecting is already known to them. To verify the effectiveness of the proposed OLMD approach in the early fault detection, a run-to-failure test was performed under normal load conditions on a specially designed test [31], shown in Fig. 11(a). The bearings have sixteen rollers in each row, a pitch diameter of 2.815 in., roller diameter of 0.331 in. and a tapered contact angle of 15.17°. On each bearing, two PCB 353B33 High Sensitivity Quartz ICP accelerometers were installed for data acquisition (one vertical, and one horizontal), as shown in Fig. 11(b). In addition, the sampling frequency is 20 000 Hz and the data length is 20 480 points and the shaft rotating speed of the motor is 2000 rpm with 6000 lb radial load.The test was beginning from February 12, 2004 at 10:32:39 AM to February 19, 2004 at 6:22:39 AM, which carried out 164 hours until amount of metal debris was found on the magnetic plug of the test bearing. Moreover, the root mean square (RMS) was used to depict the time domain features of the propagating process in this experiment depicted in Fig. 12. It can be observed that the bearing degradation processes have been presented obviously from health, weak degradation, severe degradation to failure. From Fig. 12, we can observe that the period of defect development (about 120 hours) is quite shorter than that of bearing fatigue time (about 40 hours). It means that if the traditional method such as Fast Fourier transform (FFT) is used to find the bearing fault, the response time available for the maintenance is very short, therefore, the incipient fault diagnosis approach is so important that it can leave enough buffer time for maintenance in the actually industry filed.The vibration signals collected from bearing 1 at the early degradation stage (the Phase I) and the severe degradation stage (the Phase II) are shown in Fig. 13and Fig. 14, respectively. Seen from the two figures, we can find that the vibration signal at the last stage presents clear periodicity due to the periodic impulse, while the sign of the periodic impulse is totally marked by the noise at early stage, representing none of the periodicity. Firstly, the traditional FFT algorithm is used to obtain the frequency domain and Fig. 15illustrates the FFT results of the original signal. As can be seen in Fig. 15, the sideband is unable to be distinguished, which is totally submerged by the noises. Hence, the early faults in roller bearing cannot be diagnosed only applying the FFT to the original signal.Then, the de-noising method proposed in this paper is applied to analyze the signal and find out the fault type. The vibration signals under early fault condition are decomposed into a sum of OPF components by using OLMD method. The decomposition results are shown in Fig. 16. It should be noted that since the fault information mainly contains in the front OPF components, only the first four OPF components are plotted for saving space. It is easy to find that the periodic impulse feature presented inOPF1(t)(denoted in red color). To see it more clearly, a section ofOPF1(t)is enlarged in Fig. 17, in which the periodic impulse can be discovered clearly. In fact, the decomposition process using OLMD is a de-noising process, which can remove the noises from the original signal effectively. TheOPF1(t)can be considered as the de-noised signal.Lastly, the envelope spectrum analysis technique is applied to find the fault type, which has proven to be a good tool for the diagnosis of local faults in bearings [32–34]. It extracts the bearing characteristic defect frequencies along with the modulation, so that the fault type can be identified. Table 2lists the equations [35] for calculating the characteristic frequencies of the faulty bearing.Since the fault information is mainly embedded in the high frequency, only theOPF1(t)is selected to perform the spectrum analysis of the IA. Fig. 18shows the amplitude spectrum of theOPF1(t)obtained by OLMD. From Fig. 18, there is obvious spectrum line of 234 Hz without interference frequency, which is closed to the frequency of band pass frequency of the outer race (BPFO) [36] 236.4 Hz according to Table 2, meanwhile, its harmonics2×BPFOcan be detected. Hence, the detection of 234 Hz is a strong evidence of bearing outer race fault. The above results illustrate that the characteristic frequencies of faulty bearings can be detected by analyzing the de-noising signal and the types of bearing defects can be determined. Therefore, the proposed OLMD method can not only provide better de-noising performance but also maintain the fault feature information in the original vibration signal, which is particularly appropriate for the incipient bearing fault diagnosis.In order to illustrate the advantages of OLMD over the demodulation method based on RS-LMD, RS-LMD (p=15) is also used to decompose the vibration signal and the decomposition results are shown in Fig. 19. Following the above procedures, we choosePF1(t)(denoted in red color) obtained from RS-LMD for further analysis and the amplitude spectrum of thePF1(t)is shown in Fig. 20. Additionally, for clearly comparison, the frequency-axis in Fig. 18 and Fig. 20 are amplified by 10 times.By comparing the two figures, the following conclusions can be drawn: firstly, fault frequency BPFO can be found both in Fig. 18 and Fig. 20, actually, the appearance of spectrum line of BPFO is the typical sign of outer race fault, which suggests the prognostic fault diagnosis of roller bearing with outer race fault has been completed. Secondly, for comparison purpose, although the two methods can identify the fault frequency, the amplitude spectrum ofOPF1(t)has a bigger value with clearer fault signature and less interference frequency than that ofPF1(t). Moreover, there remains spectrum line at the twice rotating frequency2×BPFOinOPF1(t)'s envelope spectra, while in the correspondingPF1(t)'s envelope spectra, there are no explicit spectrum lines, which is due to the mode mixing problem occurring inPF1(t)component. The comparison results indicate that the performance of the OLMD-based de-noising is better than the RS-LMD-based de-noising for the same vibration signal. The OLMD-based de-noising method can not only enhance the signal fault feature but also succeed in bearing early fault diagnosis.To make a further comparison of the two methods, the evaluating indicators (OI, RMSE, iteration times and consuming time) are applied to compare the decomposition performance. However, the RMSE indicator cannot be used in the practical application, due to the original defined components(t)in Eq. (28) in unknown in the real data. Also we total number of sifting times as the evaluating indicator. Therefore, in this paper, only the OI, number of sifting times and consuming time are considered as evaluating indicators. The three assessing indicators mentioned above are calculated to evaluate the two methods and the compassion results are shown in Table 3. The value of sifting times and OI of OLMD are smaller than that of RS-LMD, which indicates that OLMD method has a better performance of fault signature extraction. Meanwhile, the consuming time of OLMD (7.5423) is larger than that of RS-LMD (4.6748). The following conclusion can be got from Table 3: although RS-LMD method has higher computational efficiency, OLMD method can decompose various bearing vibration signals without considering the selection of the tension parameter p, and also has better decomposition performance. It preserves not only the periodicity of the impulses but also their amplitudes. The proposed method is demonstrated to be more applicable for bearing early fault diagnosis.A gear crack failure may cause fatal accidents, so the recognition of gear fault is very important for the safety of a gearbox. Fig. 21(a) shows the experimental set-up and the diagram of the system is displayed in Fig. 21(b). The system includes a gearbox, a three-phase induction motor for driving the gearbox, and a magnetic brake for loading [37]. The motor rotating speed is controlled by a speed controller, which allows the tested gear to operate under various speeds. The load is provided by the magnetic brake connected to the output shaft and the torque can be adjusted by a brake controller. As shown in Fig. 21(b), the gearbox is driven by the motor through a timing belt and there are three shafts inside the gearbox, which are mounted to the gearbox housing by rolling element bearings. Gear 1 on shaft 1 has 48 teeth and meshes with gear 2 with 16 teeth. Gear 3 on shaft 2 has 24 teeth and meshes with gear 4, which is on the output shaft (shaft 3) with 40 teeth. Gear 3 is the tested gear with crack fault. The rotating speed is 800 rpm, the fault frequency is 9.52 Hz (denoted asfII=9.52Hz), also the shaft 1 and shaft 3 are 3.17 Hz and 5.28 Hz (denoted asfI=3.17HzandfIII=5.28Hz), respectively. In addition, the acceleration vibration signals are collected with a sample frequency of 2560 Hz and the sample time of 1 s. Fig. 22illustrates the time domain waveform of the vibration signal of the gear crack fault.To begin with, the faulty vibration signal is decomposed by OLMD method and the decomposition results are shown in Fig. 23. Then the envelope spectrum analysis technique is utilized to analyze the vibration signal. Like the above steps, only the first component of OLMD is selected to perform the envelope spectrum analysis, which is shown in Fig. 24.In Fig. 24, we can clearly see obvious spectrum line of 9.52 Hz inOPF1(t)'s envelope spectra, which is corresponding to the fault frequencyfII. It means the Gear 3 on shaft 2 occurs localized crack fault. Therefore, OLMD and envelope spectrum analysis technique have proved to be an effective tool for localized gear crack fault detection and diagnosis.As a comparison, RS-LMD method is also applied to process the signal shown in Fig. 22. The RS-LMD (p=20) decomposition results are omitted for saving space and only the envelope spectra ofPF1(t)obtained by RS-LMD are shown in Fig. 25. Seen from Fig. 25, it has no distinctive faulty signatures, which are buried in strong background noise. The comparison analysis demonstrate the advantage of the proposed OLMD method in the ability of faulty signatures extraction from strong background noise than that of RS-LMD method.Simultaneously, three assessing indicators are also calculated to compare the two methods, which are listed in Table 4. It can be seen that OLMD method has the smaller value of the number of sifts and OI than RS-LMD method, which indicates the proposed OLMD method can obtain better decomposition results. Also, from the comparison of consuming time, we can know that the decomposition performance is improved at the cost of time-consuming.Successful fault diagnosis on a roller bearing and gearbox demonstrates that compared with RS-LMD method, OLMD combined with envelope spectrum analysis technique has better fault identification capacity in processing modulation signal, which is exactly efficient for the fault diagnosis of the rotating machinery.The above comparison results can be explained in the following way. A section of data intercepted from the signal in the sifting process is shown in Fig. 26, in which the envelope-lines fitted by the rational spline interpolation (p=20) is in green dashed line, whereas, envelope-lines fitted by optimized Hermite interpolation is in yellow line. As shown in Fig. 26, we find that the optimized Hermite interpolation can significantly reduce the over- and undershoot problems of rational spline interpolation, which can obtain more accurate and reliable envelope-lines. Therefore, the OLMD method not only significantly reduces the mode mixing phenomenon but also extracts more accurate fault signature with less noise effect over RS-LMD method.A novel time–frequency analysis algorithm named OLMD is proposed in this paper, which incorporates the computation of IF and IA in decomposition process without adopting Hilbert transform. The key modification of this work is the use of rational Hermite interpolation in place of MA to calculate the local mean and envelope estimate functions, which offers improved potential for its applications. Meanwhile, the OC is taken as the stop criterion and guarantees that the obtained pre-OPFs almost meet PF definition approximately. In order to guarantee the IFs of OPFs have enough physical meaning, the bandwidth criterion is developed to select the OPF with minimum instantaneous bandwidth from the pre-OPFs, which are derived from different shape controlling parameters. By analyzing the simulations and applying to roller bearing and gearbox fault diagnosis, it is confirmed that OLMD can not only suppress the mode mixing but also have a better identification performance than LMD and RS-LMD. Additionally, OLMD combined with envelope spectrum analysis technique is verified to be effective in extracting the fault features for gear and roller bearing fault detection.The definition of the optimum envelope interpolation in OLMD is believed to provide new insights in the best envelope selection of LMD, especially using a more reasonable selection criterion. However, the decomposition performance is improved at cost of time consumption, further research will attempt to increase the computation efficiency. To achieve this, the calculation steps of OLMD require to be redesigned.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
