@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Robust color image segmentation using fuzzy c-means with weighted hue and intensity

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Two more important image color components used to avoid redundant computation.The impact of each color component is controlled by tuned weights.Pixel statistics used in initialization to produce proper initial cluster centers.Tuned weights and proper initialization provide better FCM convergence.Our method leads to improved and more rapid performance compared with others.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Image segmentation,Fuzzy c-means,Weight tuning,Noise,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Image segmentation is defined as grouping image pixels with similar features into homogeneous partitions. Image segmentation has a critical role in image analysis as it makes the image more comprehensible for computer systems. Results of image segmentation are very useful in applications such as object recognition, medical image processing, face recognition as well as other computer vision applications. As yet there has been no method for image segmentation that could produce suitable results in all kinds of images. In recent decades various algorithms have been proposed for image segmentation that can roughly be divided into these main groups: thresholding methods, region growth methods, graph theory methods and neural network-based clustering methods [1].Thresholding techniques work on the histogram of image while spatial information of image pixels are ignored, making this approach noise sensitive. Some recent works have tried to improve its performance by means of evolutionary algorithms. Furthermore, this method is mainly for gray-level images and has not been found much suitable for multi-dimensional histograms of color images. Region growing based algorithms over-segment the image into small regions at first and then recursively merge similar regions until a stop criterion is reached. This family has shown good performance generally, but suffers high mathematical and computational complexity as well as high possibility of adding wrong boundaries. Graph based algorithms consider image pixels as graph nodes. Graph edges are some measure of consistency of two pixels connected by the edge. Then, in the next step, this graph is partitioned. Ncut [2] is a well-known method of this family. In this algorithm an optimal manner to perform cut operation on the graph was proposed and named normalized cuts. Neural network based segmentation algorithms can deal with fairly complex images. However, certain design procedures in this family lack theoretical basis, such as network layer design. Furthermore, training time for the neural network is usually long.Feature space clustering is another family of segmentation approaches. k-means is a famous algorithm of hard clustering type, while fuzzy clustering algorithms include GK (Gustafson–Kessel), GMD (Gaussian Mixture Decomposition), FCV (Fuzzy C Varieties), FCM (Fuzzy C Means) etc. Fuzzy C-means algorithm is the most conventional, among fuzzy clustering approaches, for the reason that it can extract much more information from data than other fuzzy approaches. Also, because of its implementation simplicity, it has been more practical than the majority of other image segmentation methods. Essentially, FCM is an iterative procedure that tends to minimize a cost function of distances of the pixels to their corresponding cluster centers. The standard FCM algorithm ignores the spatial information of pixels which weakens its performance when images are degraded by noise. A number of modified FCM algorithms have proposed making use of spatial information, especially the neighboring information of pixels, which resulted in more homogeneous segments, such as FCM_S [3]. However, this led to high computational overheads. Szilágyi et al. [4] suggested enhanced FCM (EnFCM) to speed up the clustering process, based on gray-level histogram. Cai et al. [5] proposed a powerful method called Fast Generalized FCM (FGFCM), which combines both the spatial information and the local gray-level relationships. It utilizes the SUSAN filter idea[6] for noise reduction and image reconstruction. In [7], a robust FCM-based method was proposed, by altering the fuzzy membership according to inherent high inter-pixel correlations. Zaixin et al. [8] proposed a new FCM-based algorithm with a novel distance criterion. To measure the pixel consistency, they introduce a new weight function integrating both image patch dissimilarity and local statistics called neighborhood weighted (NW) distance. The proposed distance criterion, compared to the Euclidean distance, gives a more exact and more robust distance measure. Therefore, this approach could lead to better results compared to other segmentation methods. While all the mentioned FCM segmentation papers are for gray level images, they can also be extended and modified for color spaces to segment color images.In this paper we propose a new adaptive robust FCM color image segmentation with an emphasis on the noise issue as well as problem dimension reduction. In fact we only use two color components: hue and intensity, and combine them with appropriate weights for robust image segmentation. In Section 2 we will review prerequisites for our algorithm. In Section 3 the proposed method will be explained. In Section 4 we will illustrate the implementation results of our method on an example. Section 5 involves a comparison of the proposed method with similar methods through experiments and Section 6 will conclude the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
