@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Perceptual encryption with compression for secure vector map data processing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We design a lossy/lossless compression and perceptual encryption algorithm for vector map.Our algorithm ensures access control and copyright protection of vector map.Each object is performed independently for random access about specified location.All objects are compressed as a unit of minimum coding object (MCO) units.All objects are perceptually encrypted using mean points and directions of MCO.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Vector map data,Vector compression,Perceptual encryption,Copy detection,Access control,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
With the rapidly rising interest in geographic information system (GIS) contents, a large volume of valuable map data has been unlawfully distributed by pirates. Therefore, the secure storage and transmission of classified national digital map datasets have been increasingly threatened. As the importance of secure, large-volume map datasets has increased, vector map security techniques that focus on secure network and data encryption have been studied. These techniques are required to ensure access control and prevent illegal copying of digital maps. This paper presents perceptual encryption on the vector compression domain for copy protection and access control of vector maps. Our algorithm compresses all vector data of polylines and polygons by lossless minimum coding object (MCO) units and perceptually encrypts using two processes using the mean points and directions of MCOs. The first process changes the position of vector data by randomly permuting the mean points of MCOs, the so-called position encryption. The second process changes the geographic shape by circularly encrypting the directions of vertices in MCOs by the XOR operator. Experimental results have verified that our algorithm can encrypt GIS digital maps effectively and simply and can also improve the compression ratio, unlike general data encryption techniques, and thus, our algorithm is very effective for a large volume of GIS datasets.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A geographic information system (GIS) is designed to capture, store, manipulate, analyze, and manage all kinds of geographic information. As such, GIS is the emerging system for cartography, statistical analysis, and database technology [1–3]. Many countries have greatly spread the application of geographic information in both the public and the private sector by constructing a GIS frame and network at a national level. In recent mobile applications such as navigation, smart phone, and Wi-Fi, GIS has rapidly grown into a new paradigm of Where 2.0 with Web GIS through Internet mapping, mobile mash-up services, and social communities. The data structure of the geographical dataset, as shown in Fig. 1, consists of spatial data fields and object data fields. The spatial data are classified as vector data and raster data. The former can be displayed as vector graphics, which uses geometrical primitives such as points, lines, curves, and shapes or polygons, whereas raster data appear as an image. Geographical features are often expressed as vectors by considering those features as geometrical shapes.The security of a geographical dataset encrypts map data or controls user access to prevent damage to or theft of the dataset, which can happen in the integration process with a number of datasets of geographical information. Cases in which second- or third-party consumers illegally distribute datasets established by private or national institutes have been frequently reported. Some countries have invested significant amounts of their budgets to the development and construction of security solutions as a part of an integrated construction project of national geographic information to link systems of institutes.Looking into recent techniques for geographical dataset security, network security techniques for secure transmission of map data have been researched extensively [4–8]. Researchers have worked on the cryptography-based data encryption of database files or data profiles [9–11] and on the watermarking and hashing of vector maps or raster maps for copyright protection [12–20]. Conventional approaches to dataset security that are based on authentication and watermarking have some limitations. These limitations are as follows. First, the cryptography of data files and profiles increases complexity because of complex encryption algorithms. Some objects that illustrate contour lines in map expression fields, such as houses, roads, and main sewers, can be frequently activated or nonactivated, and the switching of map expression can occur on the basis of various event types. Thus, because the encryption and decryption of a dataset must always be performed when cases such as the above occur, the flexibility of such a system is very low. In particular, database management systems (DBMSs) based on security techniques [10] are vulnerable to the conversion of data format. Therefore, the security technique must preserve the security of the dataset in various formats. Second, the network security technique cannot preserve security in the case of data leakage in offline or loophole exposure of network administration. Third, the conventional works cannot perform the indexing when layers or objects in an encrypted map are detected and displayed. This indexing is very useful in GIS. Finally, map watermarking, which is the post-processing of security, determines whether pirated map data are illegally copied. In short, it is difficult to create a basic solution for map dataset security.To compensate for limitations in the conventional approaches described above, we present the perceptual encryption of layer units on vector compression to protect against illegal copying and distribution and to control access of a large volume of map datasets. Our algorithm perceptually encrypts a vector map by using position and direction parameters in vector compression domains that imply lossless hierarchical compression. The main advantages of our algorithm are the high efficiency of perceptual encryption using low-complexity indexing for special or only desired objects in the encrypted map without a decryption process for the total map, as well as the improvement of the compression ratio for a large volume of map datasets.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe map security techniques and related works regarding map datasets. In Section 3, we explain the proposed perceptual encryption in detail. In Section 4, we discuss the experimental results, and we conclude the paper in Section 5.A vector map consists of a number of data layers that contain geographical features of roads, railroads, rivers, buildings, and so on, as well as spatial and nonspatial data. Each layer contains object sets of points, lines or polylines, polygons, and characters. Geometric types of points, lines or polylines, and polygons are represented by one or more vertices. In addition, vector maps can be stored and distributed using various formats according to the production environments [21–24]. Despite the various formats, all geometric data contain consecutive vertices of floating points on a 2D plane, and any layer in a map can be generated by a geometric dataset. Most geographical features can be represented by polylines and polygons.Watermarking and encryption techniques have been studied by many researchers to address the security of the content of the many kinds of vector map data. Vector map watermarking has been extensively researched as a solution for the protection of spatial data since the early 2000s [12–20]. However, because the purpose of vector map watermarking is to verify whether a pirated map has been copied, this seems to be the end step of this security strategy. Therefore, vector map watermarking is not a suitable method for ensuring secure transmission and storage of a map.Perceptual encryption of multimedia contents degrades the quality of the content according to the security or quality requirements for previewing the secure media content [25]. Fig. 2shows the concept of perceptual encryption. The control factor handles the quality degradation corresponding to the encryption strength. In general, perceptual encryption is realized by partial encryption algorithms with a format-compliant feature. The focus of most perceptual encryption algorithms has been on images and video in a compressed domain [26–30]. These various perceptual encryption techniques for multimedia were investigated, and it has been found that perceptual encryption techniques for GIS as the vector data, which is an important multimedia tool, have been inadequate thus far. Only conventional network securities and file encryptions are applied for map security. However, these methods present several issues regarding computation complexity and fast database access. Encrypting a large volume of map data using existing encryption algorithms, such as Advanced Encryption Standard (AES), Data Encryption Standard (DES), etc., consumes a vast amount of processing time and computational volume. In addition, when an authorized user wants to access a map of some specified locations from the encrypted map database, the database server must decrypt all the map data files related to the specified locations. This causes a large temporal delay and computational cost. We address current vector map encryption techniques in this section.Map cryptographic techniques for the security of vector maps have been researched in the context of secure map datasets. Many conventional works [4–8] manage map datasets by using access control on the Web or a database. Bertino et al. [4] discuss technical challenges raised by the unique requirements of secure geospatial data management such as access control, security, and privacy policies, as well as the development of secure and, in particular, interoperable GIS applications. The authors [5] present an approach to the definition of an access control system for spatial data on the Web. Similar works have been published on access control using semantic R-trees [6] and Web-oriented GIS [7]. In addition, a role-based access control model [8] was presented, but access control and management on Web or databases do not maintain security in the outflow of an authenticated user.The following are approaches to cryptography for map datasets. Dakroury et al. [9] combined AES and RSA cryptography with a simple watermarking technique for the copyright protection of vector maps in online/offline services. This algorithm encrypts map data using an AES block cipher operator of 256 bits. Because Dakroury et al. [9] tested a low-volume map of low complexity and memory, data processing seemed to take a short time. The complexity of this algorithm will increase for a large volume of the map datasets that are widely used for vector mapping in navigation systems or Web GIS or for detailed numerical maps such as those used in military or government services. Furthermore, because this algorithm encrypts map data without considering geographical features, it has a disadvantage in that it has to decrypt the entire map data in order to extract parts of layers or features. Li [10] encrypted the vector dataset in an external Oracle DBMS by using DES and an R-tree spatial index. This algorithm encrypts the spatial index when the map dataset is transmitted to the client and designs the key management of public and private keys on a PKI system. However, this algorithm does not keep the security of the vector map on the DBMS because it focuses on DBMS security and does not provide support for various data formats. Wu et al. [11] proposed a compound chaos-based encryption algorithm of vector data by considering the storage characteristics and sensitivity of the initial values and parameters of chaos-based systems. This algorithm does not provide support for various data formats and object indexing. Aiming at low complexity, fast object indexing and online/offline availability to overcome the disadvantages of conventional works, we present in this paper a partial encryption algorithm using position and direction parameters in the vector compression domain as a kind of perceptual encryption technique. By randomly modifying all the verticesʼ positions and their directions from the preceding vertices via our encryption scheme, the original vector map data that indicate specified geographical locations can be tangled up, making them unrecognizable perceptually, that is, by the human eye. We propose developing the perceptual encryption on polyline and polygon datasets so that it can be applied across various data formats. We present some map cryptography and compression algorithms to ensure the security and transmission efficiency of GIS maps. If these algorithms are combined with vector map compression, the efficiency of both security and compression will be improved. We also address current vector map encryption techniques in this section.Many researchers have worked on the loss or lossless compression of the vector map. For the secure transmission and storage of a large volume of map datasets or a detailed map, lossless compression is more useful than lossy compression because a map dataset has to be reversible. In this subsection, we discuss some works on vector map compression. Kolesnikov et al. [31] presented a compression algorithm using polygon approximation and encoded low-resolution data and quantization errors by arithmetic coding for progressive transmission of vector maps in a narrowband network. Despite high compression and short computation time, Kolesnikov et al.ʼs algorithm [31] can be applied only to polygon data. Furthermore, their algorithm has a long processing time and causes the compression ratio to decrease rapidly when handling complex topography such as that on a digital map. Kolesnikov et al. [32] also presented the data reduction algorithm by using a near-optimal approximation of multiple polygonal curves. Because their data reduction algorithm simplifies loss compression, it is difficult to apply to a detailed map that demands the precision of vector data. Shekhar et al. [33] designed a dictionary algorithm for map compression that minimizes errors of approximation for locations of spatial objects in a map. Because their algorithm is irreversible, it is difficult to apply to the lossless compression of a large volume of map datasets. Loup et al. [34] presented compression based on a wavelet transform of longitudes and latitudes in a vector map. However, it is difficult to compact spectral energies from large numerical maps and to apply reversible applications because of quantization errors and integer loss in the transform process. For map simplification, Xingchun et al. [35] presented an accelerated algorithm of the Douglas–Peucker algorithm for polyline simplification of vector maps. Park et al. [36] presented the hybrid line simplification for segmenting and simplifying linear features on the basis of quantitative characteristics of a line. However, these algorithms are irreversible and therefore, have difficulty being applied to the secure transmission of a detailed map. General data compression algorithms, such as zlib, 7-zip, rar, and alz [37–40], can be performed for lossless compression of vector maps, but these compression algorithms cannot produce high compression efficiency and cannot be used to easily access data without recovering the compressed data.We have designed a hierarchical lossless compression algorithm of polylines and polygons for the secure transmission and storage of a large volume of map datasets or detailed numerical maps. This compression algorithm will be effective for combining map cryptography.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we focused on the issue of realizing perceptual encryption of vector maps with low complexity and object indexing in the compressed domain. We proposed vector compression with lossless and hierarchical precision as well as two perceptual encryption algorithms for position and direction of polyline and polygon objects. The position perceptual encryption changes all positions of polyline and polygon objects by encrypting mean points of objects. The direction perceptual encryption changes the shape of geographical feature objects by encrypting the deviation signs of vertices in objects. The encryption algorithm is used as a simple XOR cipher to minimize the complexity of a large volume of map datasets. Experimental results showed that the proposed algorithm is very effective in the perceptual encryption of a large volume of map datasets. Our algorithm can be applied to various file formats or standard vector maps because only polyline and polygon objects were encrypted and can be used for map database security of map services online/offline as well as of mobile GIS services. Furthermore, our algorithm can be applied to various vector contents such as CAD, computer graphics, and 3D content fields.