@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Outsourcing chaotic selective image encryption to the cloud with steganography

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a scheme to source chaotic selective image encryption to the cloud.The plain image is encrypted by the cloud but not exposed to it by steganography.The client can extract the embedded secret data directly in its encrypted form.The scheme saves significantly computations and communication cost for the client.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Selective encryption,Outsourcing,Cloud computing,Chaos,Steganography,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper considers the problem where resource-limited client such as a smartphone wants to outsource chaotic selective image encryption to the cloud; meanwhile the client does not want to reveal the plain image to the cloud. A general solution is proposed with the help of steganography. The client first selects the important data to be selectively encrypted, embeds it into a cover image, and sends the stego image to the cloud for outsourced encryption; after receiving the encrypted stego image from the cloud, the client can extract the secret data in its encrypted form and get the selectively encrypted image. Theoretical analysis and extensive experiments are conducted to validate the correctness, security, and performance of the proposed scheme. It is shown that the client can fulfill the task of selective image encryption securely and save much overhead at the same time.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Digital images play a fairly important role nowadays and they are everywhere, not only throughout the Internet and personal computers (PCs), but also in cellular network and smartphones. The prevalence of images facilitates our daily life greatly, but at the same time it brings security problems and challenges unprecedentedly. Image data are usually massive, multidimensional, and high-redundancy; therefore traditional encryption paradigm that treats plaintext as binary stream and encrypts on the entire bit stream is not suitable for image encryption, especially in real-time communication or resource-limited environment. For this reason, many researchers have been seeking for specific ciphers tailored for images, and chaotic image encryption is a good example [1–4]. However, the efficiency of many chaotic image ciphers is still unsatisfactory because a massive volume of data is to be handled and chaotic encryption is computationally extensive.In this circumstance, selective encryption is proposed to only selectively encrypt a portion of important data that is crucial for visualization. Because the volume of data to be encrypted is cut down, the encryption efficiency can be boosted significantly [5–7]. Even so, selective encryption is still a heavy task for some resource-limited devices such as smartphones. Smartphones have limited hardware capability and energy supply, so that they are not able to perform complicated encryption operations, or even an orthogonal transformation being needed for many selective encryption schemes [8]. Fortunately, the emergence of cloud computing [9] provides us an effective way out to solve this problem. As the cloud has much more powerful resources, resource-limited devices can outsource selective encryption to the cloud [10].However, outsourcing in cloud computing results in serious problems regarding security and privacy, since the data should be transmitted to the cloud and will be handled by the cloud [11,12]. The situation is even more serious in the case of outsourcing encryption because the plaintext to be encrypted is usually confidential. If the plaintext is sent to the cloud directly for encryption, the security of the plaintext can be easily compromised by the eavesdropping on communication link or the cloud. For this reason, how to let the cloud encrypt the plaintext and keep its security at the same time becomes a great challenge. Although there are many existing techniques based on homomorphic encryption [13,14] and secure multiparty computation [15,16] to allow the cloud performs computations securely, they are computationally intensive and thus not applicable for resource-limited client.In this paper, we consider the situation in which a resource-limited client wants to outsource chaotic selective encryption of images to the cloud. The encryption consists of two phases: a permutation performed by a chaotic map and a bitwise exclusive OR (XOR) masking by another chaotic map. We propose a scheme to solve this problem with the help of steganography [17–22]. Our contributions can be summarized as follows:•To the best of our knowledge, we consider the outsourcing problem of chaotic selective encryption for the first time. We formally define the problem and make reasonable assumptions.We present a general solution with the help of steganography, and it guarantees that the cloud fulfills the outsourced chaotic selective encryption and has no knowledge of the plain image meanwhile.The proposed solution has little specific requirement on chaotic map and is thus generally suitable. Furthermore, the client can extract the embedded data in its encrypted form directly.Theoretical analysis and extensive experiments are conducted to validate the correctness, security, and performance of the proposed scheme. It is shown that the proposed scheme saves much computational cost than traditional local encryption and maintains satisfied security at the same time.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives the related work. Section 3 presents the problem, and some reasonable assumptions are also made there. Section 4 proposes the solution to the problem in detail. Its theoretical analyses are provided in Section 5. Experimental results are given in Section 6. Finally, Section 7 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we have proposed a scheme to let resource-limited client such as a smartphone outsources chaotic selective image encryption to the cloud; the scheme ensures that the cloud is not aware of the existence of plain image during the encryption. In our scheme, the client selects the 4 MSB planes of plain image for selective encryption and embeds them into the 2 LSB planes of a cover image using SM2LSB steganographic embedding, and then sends the stego image to the cloud; the cloud uses two chaotic maps to encrypt the stego image and returns the encrypted stego image back to the client; the client extracts the embedded data in its encrypted form and then gets the selective encryption of plain image. The scheme is a general solution and any satisfied chaotic encryption scheme can be incorporated. We theoretically analyze the correctness, security, and performance of our scheme. Extensive experiments demonstrate that through the proposed scheme, the client can efficiently outsource computationally intensive encryption to the cloud while concealing the plain image from the cloud.