@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The constant false alarm rate property in transformed noncoherent detection processes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
CFAR property for transformed detectors established.Generic clutter model proposed that yields CFAR detectors.New detectors proposed for X-band radar application.Better performance achieved than that with a Pareto clutter model assumption.Application to real X-band clutter with synthetic target considered, and shows improvements on previous applications.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Constant false alarm rate,Radar detection,Pareto distributed clutter,Transformations,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Recently a transformation approach for noncoherent radar detector design has been introduced, where the classical constant false alarm rate detectors for Exponentially distributed clutter are modified to operate in any clutter intensity model of interest. Recent applications of this approach have introduced new decision rules for target detection in Pareto and Weibull distributed clutter. These transformed detectors tended to lose the constant false alarm rate property with respect to one of the clutter parameters. A closer examination of this transformation process yields conditions under which the constant false alarm rate property can be retained. Based upon this, a new model for X-band maritime radar returns is investigated, and corresponding detectors are developed. The relative merits of this new development are investigated with synthetic and real X-band data.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Constant false alarm rate (CFAR) detectors are of considerable importance in maritime surveillance radar signal processing, and their development continues to be explored in many different clutter environments [1–8]. Such detectors are usually proposed without formulation of the optimal Neyman–Pearson detector, but are often derived based upon analysis of clutter distribution properties and range-Doppler map characteristics [9,10]. Due to the fact that Neyman–Pearson detectors require knowledge of clutter distribution parameters and target strength, these alternative detection processes are often introduced in an attempt to avoid variation in the desired false alarm probability by sacrificing detection performance [11,12].In earlier low-resolution radar systems, the assumption of Exponentially distributed amplitude squared (or intensity) clutter was found to be valid, and as a result of this, it was possible to apply a simple detection process to introduce CFAR. In particular, based upon a range-Doppler map, measurements either in range or Doppler (or both) can be taken such that they are sufficiently separated from a cell under test (CUT), and then averaged. This average is then normalised using a threshold multiplier, which provides adaptive control of the false alarm probability. The presence of a target in the CUT is declared if the return being tested exceeds this normalised measure [11].Fig. 1illustrates this process in more general terms, and is implemented as a sliding window which runs across the range-Doppler map [13]. The detection strategy takes a sample of observations (in this case in range or Doppler) and passes them after square law detection (SLD) to a shift register as shown. The returns are separated into a series of components. Measurements of the clutter are subdivided into two disjoint sets{C1,C2,…,CM}and{CM+1,…,CM+N}, each of length M and N respectively. These are separated from the CUT by a number of guard cells (shown as shaded in Fig. 1). Based upon the two subsets of clutter, two measurements are taken, denoted byf1andf2, which provide a synthesis of the clutter, via an appropriate statistic (such as averaging or order statistics, for example). These two measurements are then combined to produce an overall measurement of clutter, denoted byg(f1,f2). The latter is normalised by τ, which is used to regulate the false alarm probability. This is then compared with the CUT and a detection decision can be made. This binary result is recorded, and the sliding window is then continued over the range-Doppler map, and the results can be applied to a moving target indicator to allow tracking [14].In the case where the clutter measurements are homogeneous and independent Exponentially distributed returns, a detection process such as that illustrated in Fig. 1, can achieve the CFAR property for a very large class of admissible clutter measurement functionsf1,f2andg(f1,f2)[15]. The selection of alternatives to the averaging case have been proposed due to the fact that as the sliding window is run across the range-Doppler map, the data used for clutter measurement will be subjected to interference and changes in the clutter homogeneity. Interference can be due to secondary targets present in the clutter cells, which can be managed through the selection of an order statistic (OS) forf1andf2, for example. In the context of maritime surveillance radar, changes in the clutter homogeneity can arise from variations in the sea surface. Hence, although a simpler alternative to the Neyman–Pearson based detectors, it is an engineering challenge to design an effective sliding window detection scheme that achieves CFAR and manages these performance issues. This is a much more difficult exercise when such processes are constructed for higher resolution maritime surveillance radar.The cell-averaging CFAR (CA-CFAR) [16], which bases the measurement of clutter level on averaging, is optimal for target detection with a Swerling 1 target model in homogeneous Exponentially distributed clutter [17]. However, in the presence of clutter irregularities and interference, the CA-CFAR experiences severe performance degradation [15]. Hence there have been many alternative CFAR schemes proposed. Earlier attempts to improve on the CA-CFAR's performance involved the idea of taking the smallest-of (SO) of two cell-averaged components of the range profile [18]. This detector, known as the SO-CFAR, arose out of the need to improve the resolution capability of the CA-CFAR. The greatest-of (GO) CFAR was introduced in an attempt to better manage false alarm regulation [11,19]. However, both these approaches have severe drawbacks as outlined in [15]. The idea of applying an order statistic to measure the average level of clutter was thus introduced in [13], producing an OS-CFAR, which could be designed to manage interfering targets very well, while also regulating the false alarm probability. A further improvement on the OS-CFAR is introduced in [15], where a trimmed mean is used. This involves censoring of a number of lower and upper clutter measurements in the range profile, and then using the sum of the remainder as the estimate of the clutter power level. More recent advances in CFAR for target detection in Exponentially distributed clutter can be found in [20], where a switching mechanism is used to improve performance of the CA-CFAR.With improvements in radar resolution, there has been a natural progression from the Exponential intensity clutter model to others that capture the statistical structure of higher resolution radar's clutter returns. Consequently, there has been extension of the CFAR schemes designed for Exponential intensity clutter to the Log-Normal [21], Weibull [3,22–24], K [5,25,26] and Pareto [27,28,30] distributed clutter environments. In the extension to such clutter models, two general approaches have been used. The first is to apply the CFAR scheme developed for Exponentially distributed returns directly to the new model of interest. This then necessitates the determination of the appropriate threshold multiplier for the new clutter environment [24,27]. The second approach is to exploit characteristics of the clutter model [21,22]. The first approach can always be applied, while the second depends on the availability of useful properties of the underlying clutter model.This paper is concerned with a recently developed transformation approach for CFAR detector development, introduced in [32], which was developed in an attempt to provide a systematic way in which detectors could be produced. This approach begins with the well-developed CFAR detectors designed to operate in independent and identically distributed Exponential clutter, and introduces a mapping allowing such detectors to be transformed to operate in any clutter model of interest. This generalised the results of [28], which examines the special case of the transformation of detectors to operate in Pareto distributed clutter. Also illustrated in [32] is the result of transforming CFAR detection processes to operate in Weibull distributed clutter. The advantages of this transformation approach is that detectors can be very easily produced for new clutter environments while retaining the original formulation of the threshold multiplier. As shown in [27], direct adaptation of classical detection schemes to the Pareto case can add computational complexity in the threshold multiplier calculation. The disadvantage of the transformation method is that clutter Parameter dependence may occur, resulting in the loss of the CFAR property with respect to a particular parameter.As a result of the analysis reported in [32], a number of interesting and important questions arose. The first is that since the transformation approach can result in clutter parameter dependence, can this be rectified with the selection of a more appropriate clutter model? In terms of the Pareto clutter case, transformed detectors are CFAR with respect to the Pareto shape parameter, but not its scale parameter. This situation is reversed in the Weibull clutter case, so that the transformed detection processes are only CFAR with respect to the Weibull scale parameter. Thus it is of interest to explore whether any clutter model distributions produce detectors that are CFAR with respect to all clutter model variables under the transformation approach.Secondly, if such a clutter model could be proposed, it would be useful to know whether there was a severe detection loss relative to those produced with the Pareto clutter model assumption, since this model has become popular for X-band maritime surveillance radar clutter [31].One of the issues with application of the detectors of [28] to Defence Science and Technology Group's (DSTG) real data is the presence of the Pareto scale parameter in the formulation of the detectors. This tends to result in a scaling up of the normalised measurement of clutter, resulting in a severe detection loss in real data, as illustrated in [29,30]. Hence it is of relevance to see whether this can be rectified. This paper explores these three problems in detail, and presents a solution.The paper is organised as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of the principles of CFAR. Section 3 outlines the transformation approach of [32], and reformulates it to reveal when transformed detectors will be CFAR. Based upon this, Section 4 investigates these results relative to DSTG's maritime surveillance radar clutter.This Section overviews the mathematical formulation of CFAR detectors, and includes some relevant properties that will be used throughout this paper. Useful references on the principles of CFAR are [12,14], while properties of probability distributions can be found in [33].In view of the processing outlined in Fig. 1, and as is the approach in the literature on analysis of such sliding window detection schemes, we can assume that we have a series of independent and identically distributed clutter statistics denoted byZ1,Z2,…,ZN, which is referred to as the clutter range profile. Let the statistic of the CUT be Z. Using the language of statistical hypothesis testing, letH0be the hypothesis that the CUT does not contain a target, andH1the hypothesis that the CUT contains a target embedded within clutter. Then if we let τ be a nonnegative constant, a decision rule can be written(1)Z≷H0H1τg(Z1,Z2,…,ZN),where the function g provides an appropriate characteristic parameter that reflects the clutter power level based upon the clutter range profile, and the notation used in (1) means that we rejectH0if and only if Z exceedsτg(Z1,Z2,…,ZN). The threshold multiplier τ is determined so that the probability of false alarm (Pfa) remains fixed in ideal scenarios. The relationship between the Pfa and τ can be expressed through(2)Pfa=P(Z>τg(Z1,Z2,…,ZN)|H0).The CA detector results from the selection of g as a sum of the elements in the clutter range profile, and has decision rule(3)Z≷H0H1τ∑j=1NZj.The threshold τ in (3), in the case where eachZjhas an Exponential distribution with parameter α, can be shown to be related to the Pfa through(4)Pfa=(1+τ)−N,and since the relationship (4) does not vary with α, the detector (3) is said to have the CFAR property. This is because if the threshold multiplier can be set independently of clutter model parameters, then variation in the clutter model's power will not affect the false alarm probability [34].As a second example of a decision rule, the clutter measurement can instead be based upon the kth order statistic. Such a detector takes the form(5)Z≷H0H1νZ(k),whereZ(k)is the kth order statistic, for a fixedk∈{1,2,…,N}. In the case of Exponentially distributed returns, it is shown in [13] that its Pfa is related to the threshold multiplier ν through the expression(6)Pfa=N!(N−k)!Γ(N−k+ν+1)Γ(N+ν+1),whereΓ(⋅)is the Gamma function. Since (6) is independent of the clutter parameter, the decision rule (5) is CFAR, and is referred to as an order statistic (OS)-CFAR.This paper will examine the results of transforming the detectors (3) and (5) only. The reason for this is that these two are the most basic and well understood in the Exponential clutter model scenario, and so represent baseline detectors.The next Section introduced the general transformation approach and discusses the CFAR property with respect to transformed detectors.The transformation approach to detector development introduced in [32] is outlined in this Section, and then a formulation of it in terms of a generic clutter model is presented. Based upon this, it is then possible to understand when transformed detectors will preserve the CFAR property with respect to certain clutter parameters. Consequently it is possible to construct clutter models to ensure the corresponding detectors maintain the CFAR property.Suppose we are interested in radar detection, in the intensity domain, with homogeneous independent clutter modelled by a random variable Y with distribution functionFY(t):=P(Y≤t). Since distribution functions are monotonically increasing, they have a well-defined inverse. Hence the function(7)H(t)=FY−1(FZ(t)),is well defined, where Z is an Exponential random variable with distribution functionFZ(t)=1−e−t, fort≥0. Then it is shown in [32] thatH(Z)=dYand since H has a unique inverseZ=dH−1(Y), where the notationX=dYmeans that the random variables X and Y share the same distribution function, and have the same support. These results mean that random variables Z and Y can be generated from each other through the function H or its inverse. The following is the key result in [32]:Lemma 3.1Suppose that the random variablesY1,…,YNare independent and identically distributed with distribution functionFY(t). Then the detector(8)Y˜≷H0H1H(τg(H−1(Y1),…,H−1(YN))has its threshold multiplier τ set via(2), whereY˜is the cell under test.The decision rule (8) is thus a transformed version of (1), which has been adapted so that it operates in the new clutter model of interest, while preserving (2).It is more insightful to instead formulate (8) in terms of the clutter environment of interest. Suppose that the clutter model Y has distribution function of the form(9)FYc(t)=e−μh(t)whereFYc(t)=1−FY(t)is the complementary distribution function,μ>0is a distribution parameter andh(t)is a function that satisfies the conditions thath(0)=0andh(t)is increasing. The latter conditions are imposed so that (9) has the properties of a distribution function. The functionh(t)may have dependence on unknown clutter parameters. This general form of a clutter distribution will be referred to as the h-clutter model.The function h is intimately related to the function H. In particular, using the definition of H and its inverse, it can be shown thatH−1(t)=μh(t)and consequentlyH(t)=h−1(t/μ).Note that the choice ofh(t)=tresults in Exponentially distributed clutter. The general Weibull case, with shape parameter κ, is also recovered with the choice ofh(t)=tκ. Additionally, the choice ofh(t)=log⁡((t+β)/β)yields a complementary distribution function(10)FYc(t)=(ββ+t)μ,which can be identified as what is referred to as a Pareto Type II or Lomax distribution [33], with shape parameter μ and scale parameter β.The following presents an alternative to (8):Lemma 3.2The detector(11)Y˜≷H0H1h−1({τμ}g(μ[h(Y1),…,h(YN)]))is equivalent to(8), where τ is set with(2), and under the clutter model given by(9).Since distribution functions are monotonic, we can applyFYto both sides of (8) to re-express it in the form(12)FY(Y˜)≷H0H11−e−τg(H−1(Y1),…,H−1(YN)),sinceFY(H(t))=FZ(t)by construction, and applying the distribution function of Z. By some simple analysis, it is not difficult to show that (12) is equivalent to(13)−log⁡FYc(Y˜)≷H0H1τg(−log⁡FYc(Y1),…,−log⁡FYc(YN)).The final result now follows with an application of (9) to (13), as required.  □The following is a simple consequence of Lemma 3.2:Corollary 3.1In the case where the function g satisfies the pseudo-linearity property thatg(λ(x1,…,xN))=λg(x1,…,xN), for fixedλ>0, the detector(11)reduces to(14)Y˜≷H0H1h−1(τg(h(Y1),…,h(YN))),implying the decision rule is CFAR with respect to μ.Many of the possible selections for g, with reference to those developed for CFAR in Exponentially distributed clutter, result in the pseudo-linearity property required in Corollary 3.1 being valid, such as when g is a sum, an order statistic or the corresponding function used in SO-CA and GO-CA. As specific examples, the CA-CFAR (3) results in the detection scheme(15)Y˜≷H0H1h−1(τ∑j=1Nh(Yj)),with τ set through (4), while the OS-CFAR (5) is equivalent to(16)Y˜≷H0H1h−1(νh(Y(k))),with ν set via (6).The results of Lemma 3.2 and Corollary 3.1 give an insight into when a transformed detection process will inherit the CFAR property. Clearly to produce a CFAR process, the functionh(t)must have no dependence on unknown clutter parameters. It is also clear that, for the class of transformed detectors, the CFAR property will be only achievable with respect to μ.Observe that with the selection of(17)h(t)=log⁡(1+ω(t)),whereω(0)=0andω(t)is increasing, the complementary distribution function of Y is(18)FYc(t)=(1+ω(t))−μ,which provides an extension of the Pareto distribution (10). The parameter μ will act as a shape parameter. One can examine whether choices can be made forω(t)that improve on the Pareto fit. Since the Pareto case utilisesω(t)=t/β, one can explore alternatives such asω(t)=tnfor somen>0, orω(t)=temt, again wherem>0, in an attempt to improve the fit to real data, while not increasing the number of clutter parameters. Note that if we can selectω(t)>t/β, then it can be shown that this implies that the complementary distribution function (18) is always larger than (10), and ifω(t)<t/βthen (18) is always smaller than (10). Hence, in data fitting, if it is found that the distribution (10) under or overestimates the data, a modification based upon (18) can be used to improve the fit.It is clear that(19)h−1(t)=ω−1(et−1),so that (17) and (19) can be applied to the detectors (15) and (16).The next Section examines a simple alternative to the Pareto model, and examines the cost of using it in terms of detection performance.The purpose of this Section is to provide an example of the application of the results of the previous Section. One of the major conclusions of the previous analysis is that the CFAR property will only be attained with respect to the parameter μ in the h-clutter model. Hence a purely CFAR detector will necessitate a one-parameter clutter model. Thus in this Section a simple alternative to the Pareto distribution is considered.Given the discussion at the end of Section 3, and in particular, in view of (17), the production of a CFAR detector will require the choice ofω(t)to have no unknown parameters. The Pareto distribution (10), as remarked previously, has been shown to be an excellent two-parameter model for DSTG's X-band maritime surveillance radar data. Hence one can consider the effect of reducing this to a single parameter model. Thus the choice ofω(t)=tis examined, which essentially sets the scale parameter to unity. This simplified model is examined in this Section, and analysis of the two transformed detectors (15) and (16) will be undertaken.Ingara is an experimental airborne multi-mode X-band imaging radar developed by DSTG [35], deployed in a Raytheon Beech 1900C aircraft [36]. During an upgrade in 2002, it was made fully polarimetric, with the integration of a dual linear polarised antenna. The radar has been deployed in a number of data gathering exercises; the data used in this paper resulted from a trial, known as SCT04, in August 2004, in the Southern Ocean near Port Lincoln in South Australia [37]. During this trial, the radar operated with a frequency of 10.1 GHz, with a pulse length of 20 μs, and LFM transmitted bandwidth of 200 MHz. With the latter bandwidth, it was possible to achieve a range resolution of 0.75 m. The radar operated in a circular spotlight mode, surveying the same patch of ocean at different azimuth angles, and at different incidence angles [38]. It is reported that during this trial, sea states varied from 2 to 5, while wind speeds varied from 6.1 to 13.2 m/s [38].The data set used for the analysis of detector performance is designated run 34 683, which has been investigated extensively in [39]. This data set was collected on August 16, 2004, at around 10:52 am local time, and consists of 1024 range compressed samples of roughly 920 pulses, in 5° azimuth angle increments, at an incidence angle of 51.3°, and at an altitude of approximately 2314 m [39]. The wind speed, at the mid-data collection time on the trial day, was reported to be 7.1 m/s, in a direction of 47°, with a wave height of 2.4 m in a direction of 211°. The upwind direction was 227°, downwind at 47°, while the cross wind directions were 137° and 317° respectively. Further details of the data can be found in [39,40]. For the analysis presented in this paper, the data set corresponding to an azimuth angle of 225° with horizontal polarisation is considered. This data set, consisting of 1024 range compressed samples of 821 pulses, has been selected because it is one of the most spiky Ingara data sets, and so presents a serious challenge from a target detection perspective.To begin the numerical investigation, the new clutter model is fitted to the Ingara data set under investigation, and its fit is assessed by examination of its empirical cumulative distribution functions (ECDFs). For comparison purposes, the fit is assessed relative to that of the two parameter Pareto distribution (10), as well as that of a Weibull distribution. A Weibull random variable W has distribution function(20)FW(t)=1−e−(tλ)κ,whereλ>0is its scale parameter,κ>0is the shape parameter andt≥0. In all cases, maximum likelihood estimation is used to fit unknown parameters. The methodology is to estimate unknown clutter model parameters, and then simulate the fitted model to produce ECDFs, which are then compared with the data's ECDF.Fig. 2shows the results, with the right subplot plotting the upper tail region of the fits. Hence the latter is a plot of the complementary empirical distribution function. The estimated Pareto parameters areα=4.7241andβ=0.0446, while the estimated Weibull parameters areλ=0.0111andκ=0.8716. The fitted estimate for the h-clutter model isμ=84.8173. Fig. 2 shows that the Pareto fit is the best, while that based upon the new model is inaccurate in the upper tail region. This is to be expected from a single parameter clutter model. However, such a clutter model will be the only one of the three that can produce a CFAR detection scheme. Hence this is the tradeoff in achieving CFAR. The next subsection will begin to examine this in the context of target detection.The first part of detector analysis is to investigate the cost, in terms of detection performance, of using a single parameter clutter model instead of the two parameter Pareto distribution. This is done in the setting of homogeneous independent clutter with no interference.With the selection ofω(t)=t, it is not difficult to show that the detector (15) reduces to(21)Y˜≷H0H1∏j=1N(Yj+1)τ−1,with τ set via inversion of (4), while (16) becomes(22)Y˜≷H0H1(Y(k)+1)ν−1,with ν set through (6).For comparison purposes, the geometric mean (GM) detector of [28](23)Y˜≷H0H1β1−Nτ∏j=1NYjτ,is also included, where τ is set by (4), as well as the Pareto OS-detector [41](24)Y˜≷H0H1β1−νY(k)ν,with ν set through (6).Additionally, it is worth comparing these detection processes with the direct application of (3) and (5) under the assumption of Pareto distributed clutter. This approach was examined in [27], where the threshold multipliers were determined for the Pareto case. In the application of (3) in a Pareto clutter environment, it is necessary to set the threshold multiplier via(25)τˆ=ζ(α,N)Pfa−1/α,where the function ζ is given by(26)ζ(α,N)=(∫01⋯∫01(w1−1/α+…wN−1/α)−αdw1…dwN)1/α.Similarly, the appropriate threshold to be used in conjunction with (5) can be shown to be(27)νˆ=(N−k+1N+1Pfa−1)1/α.The derivation of (25) and (27) can be found in [27]. Note that evaluation of (26) requires extensive numerical work, as well as knowledge of the Pareto shape parameter. Although (27) also requires a priori knowledge of α, it is less computationally expensive to evaluate.An upperbound on detector performance is also be provided, by plotting the CA-CFAR (3) under the assumption of Exponentially distributed clutter with a Swerling 1 target model. In all cases, detector performance is with a Pfa set to10−4, a range profile length ofN=32, and the OS-index isk=26. This index has been selected so that the OS-CFAR is able to manage up to 6 interfering targets [15]. The CUT has a Swerling 1 target model, and Monte Carlo simulation with 106 runs is used to estimate the probability of detection (Pd) for each signal to clutter ratio (SCR). All detection processes are simulated with clutter parameters estimated as in Subsection 4.3.Fig. 3shows the results, plotting the Pd as a function of the SCR. The interesting observation is that the new detection processes introduce a significant detection gain over those based upon a Pareto clutter model assumption. This can be explained from the factor ofβ1−Nτandβ1−νthat appear in front of (23) and (24). In all fits of the Pareto distribution to the Ingara data, it has been found thatβ<1[31], so that these factors result in the right hand side of the Pareto detection processes becoming very large, and consequently forcing detection performance to decrease. This explains the poor performance of the Pareto-based detectors illustrated in [29,30].The detection schemes which apply (3) and (5), together with (25) and (27), are labelled as classical CA and classical OS respectively in Fig. 3. It is interesting to note that the classical CA detector has the worst performance, despite knowledge of the Pareto scale parameter. The classical OS detector has slightly better performance than the transformed Pareto based detectors. However, these classical detectors are inferior in performance to the newly proposed detectors, which do not require clutter parameter knowledge.This result also demonstrates the merits in the transformation approach for detector development, and the fact that the single parameter model can be useful in practice.It is now important to consider the effects of interference on the new detection processes. Hence detection performance is examined when Swerling 1 target models are inserted into the clutter range profile. These interfering target models have SCR of 20 dB and are independent. Only the performance of the new detection processes are illustrated. Fig. 4shows that the OS-CFAR process does a very good job in managing interfering targets, while the CA-CFAR experiences a significant detection loss.The performance of CFAR detection schemes is also assessed to examine whether they are robust to clutter transitions [15]. Such a phenomenon occurs when, for example, an airborne maritime surveillance radar receives clutter returns from different sea states. The effect on the resultant Pfa is assessed by slowly increasing the clutter power in the clutter range profile cells. When the mid point of the clutter range profile is saturated with higher powered returns, the CUT is then considered to experience a power level increase. Hence Fig. 5plots the estimated Pfa as a function of the number of higher powered clutter cells, for a clutter power increase of 0.5 dB. This increase is referred to as the clutter to clutter ratio (CCR). In addition to this, Fig. 5 shows the effect on the estimated Pfa when there is a Swerling 1 interfering target embedded within the range profile, with an interference to clutter ratio (ICR) of 5 dB. The Pfa has been estimated using Monte Carlo sampling as for the detection probability estimation. The Figure shows that the two new detection processes manage the clutter transition reasonably well in the presence of no interference. When interference is introduced, the resultant Pfa is severely effected, although the OS-CFAR tends to manage this better. It is worth noting, however, that when subjected to interference, the false alarm rate is reduced, which is better than an increase in the number of false alarms.To complete the numerical analysis, the performance of the two detection schemes is assessed when they are run directly on the Ingara data set under consideration. The detectors are run over each range line sequentially, in order to provide Monte Carlo estimates of detection performance. Two guard cells were applied to each side of the CUT, and a sliding window was run over the data, with a Swerling 1 target model in the CUT. As a result, the available run length was 840, 683 for each SCR. Additionally, the performance when a single interfering target in the clutter range profile is shown. This is a Swerling 1 model with SCR of 40 dB. This SCR has been selected because it was found that interference with smaller SCR showed very little effect on the CA-CFAR. Fig. 6shows the performance, which appears to be consistent with the homogeneous case in Figs. 3 and 4, except there is better management of the interfering target by the CA-CFAR. There are two main reasons for this, especially in view of the fact that the interference has been selected to be double that used in Fig. 4. The first is that the detector design assumption of independent and identically distributed clutter has been violated because the Ingara data is correlated, as illustrated in [32]. Secondly, and as a result of this, the detection curves plotted in Fig. 6 may have different resultant Pfa. Hence it is necessary to examine receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves to clarify this.An ROC curve plots the Pd as a function of the Pfa, for a fixed SCR in the CUT. Fig. 7plots this for the case under consideration, when the Swerling 1 target model in the CUT has SCR of 10 dB. The interfering target is identical to that used in Fig. 6. Fig. 8increases the SCR in the CUT to 20 dB. These ROC curves show results consistent with that in Fig. 6, and so the change in performance is likely due to the failure in the detector design assumptions. Regardless of this, the new detection schemes are showing good performance in real data.This paper established that a one-parameter clutter model generates transformed detectors which preserve the CFAR property. Two basic transformed detectors were considered, based upon the CA- and OS-CFARs for Exponentially distributed clutter. It was found that the detectors based upon the h-clutter model had better performance than those based upon a Pareto clutter model. This is due to the absence of a scaling factor in the new detectors. Performance analysis of the new detectors was examined, and it was found that the OS-CFAR had better performance in general. This was replicated when the detectors were applied directly to real X-band clutter returns with a synthetic Swerling 1 target model.The two detectors examined were selected for their simplicity. Further work will examine whether improvements in managing interference can be achieved, with the h-clutter model, with a switching-based transformed decision rule.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
