@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
ECG biometric authentication based on non-fiducial approach using kernel methods

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new design of experimental evaluation setup for identity recognition is concerned.The use of mother wavelet functions is extended for denoising ECG signals.A novel non-fiducial verification framework is modelled by kernel-based methods.The effect of different feature extractor models is examined by recognition rates.Window and subject recognition rates are tested on random unknown data sets.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
ECG biometric recognition,Non-fiducial feature extraction,Kernel methods,Dimensionality reduction,Gaussian OAA SVM,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Identity recognition faces several challenges especially in extracting an individual's unique features from biometric modalities and pattern classifications. Electrocardiogram (ECG) waveforms, for instance, have unique identity properties for human recognition, and their signals are not periodic. At present, in order to generate a significant ECG feature set, non-fiducial methodologies based on an autocorrelation (AC) in conjunction with linear dimension reduction methods are used. This paper proposes a new non-fiducial framework for ECG biometric verification using kernel methods to reduce both high autocorrelation vectors' dimensionality and recognition system after denoising signals of 52 subjects with Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT). The effects of different dimensionality reduction techniques for use in feature extraction were investigated to evaluate verification performance rates of a multi-class Support Vector Machine (SVM) with the One-Against-All (OAA) approach. The experimental results demonstrated higher test recognition rates of Gaussian OAA SVMs on random unknown ECG data sets with the use of the Kernel Principal Component Analysis (KPCA) as compared to the use of the Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) and Principal Component Analysis (PCA).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Biometric recognition technology provides a reliable security system through identity verification and recognition of individuals based on their inherent characteristics in both modes of identification and verification or authentication [1]. The human features can include physiological or behavioural traits. Physiological features include face, iris, and fingerprints whereas keystroke dynamics, gait and voice/speech are behavioural features. However, these modalities are not robust enough against falsification. Some instances of attacks in the biometrics security system involve the use of latex for recreation of a fingerprint, voice imitation and the application of contact lenses copied from original iris features [2].A new generation of biometric identity recognition modalities has been introduced extensively during the last decades. It includes biosignals which are typically utilised for clinical diagnostic purposes such as Electrocardiogram (ECG) and many others [3,4]. ECG is a non-invasive diagnostic method which is effective, simple and involves a low-cost procedure to gather information on structural and functional heart muscle activity and other body tissues over time. Each individual has unique ECG characteristic signals such as universality, uniqueness and liveness detection and thus, offer robustness against falsification using fraudulent techniques [5–7]. However, despite these benefits, the technique encounters a number of difficulties due to time-varying nature of the ECG signals, irregular conditions of cardiac disorders, and the long waiting period to collect the ECG data [4,7,8]. Nevertheless, the ECG biometric technology can be widely applied in government and commercial environments, secure public and travel documents, health monitoring systems, forensic systems (including identifying criminals and law enforcement) [9] and distributed systems such as smart cards and many others [2,10,11].Performance is the most important and significant criteria to evaluate a biometric recognition system [12]. As the ECG is not periodic and highly repetitive signal [2], the ECG biometric systems encounter a number of difficulties in building an accurate identity recognition system. The challenges occur mainly in feature extraction from ECG signals and so in biometric recognitions [4,11,12]. The statistical methods, machine learning and data mining techniques are suitable for dealing with feature extraction learning and pattern classification (recognition) problems and overcome overfitting and improve generalisation property in numerous real-world and biometric applications [13].A typical normal heartbeat of ECG wave consists of three main components: P wave, QRS complex and T wave. Fiducial features are amplitudes of P, R and T waves, the temporal distance between wave boundaries (onset and offset of the P, Q, R, S and T waves), the area of the waves, and slope information [11]. The ECG biometric systems based on fiducial detection rely entirely on the localisation of the points in a heartbeat cycle. The fiducial feature extraction method proposed by Biel et al. [3] is among the earliest research in the use of ECG for human identification. The research has showed the impact of a number of features on misclassification and personal identification that used only one lead ECGs. The identification performance of the system was 100% over 20 subjects. Another study based on fiducial features by Israel et al. [14] has proven the effects of an individual's mental stress, and the placement of ECG leads to identification performance. The system achieved 100% subject recognition and 81% heartbeat recognition rate for a population of 29 individuals. Most of the proposed methods in fiducial-based ECG biometric have employed the signals that were acquired using standard leads on the chest and limbs using clinical grade equipment (clinical source data). [15–17] have conducted experiments on standard one-lead ECG signals over a different number of healthy subjects including 25, 76, and 51, respectively. The identification accuracies of these systems were respectively obtained 99, 98, and 99.85%, and equal error rates (EERs) of 1.88% [16] and 0.01% [17] in authentication mode. On the other hand, some studies have proposed fiducial based methodologies which extracted features from characteristic points on ECG recordings acquired at the hands and/or fingers in an off-the-person approach (non-clinical source data) [18–22]. The ECG signals captured from fingers and hands are noisier than the standard ECG signals acquired on the chest using clinical grade equipment, so it leads to make subsequence processing more difficult [18]. However, the fiducial-based algorithms mentioned in the above study and in many other studies have faced the difficulty of missing a number of efficient ECG morphological attributes [4]. In addition, there is no universally acknowledged rule that is able to detect the boundary of fiducial points, so complexity of biometric system is overall increased [7,23].Many researches based on a non-fiducial approach have been carried out to overcome the fiducial based problems since 2006. The most important advantage of non-fiducial approach over the fiducial ones is in its simplicity of computation as it does not have to determine wave boundaries and fiducial points' detection. Indeed, non-fiducial based techniques extract discriminative information within the ECG waveform without having any particular reference points in heart beat cycles as features. Some methodologies have been presented different types of non-fiducial based features like a sequence of symbols [17], wavelet coefficients [24], and autocorrelation coefficients [23]. In [17], non-fiducial based features were extracted by simple analysis of quantisation to convert a set of ECG waveforms into a set of strings. The identification rate of the system was reported as 99.39% and equal error rate of 0.13% in authentication, tested over 51 healthy subjects. Chan et al. [24] has proposed a human identification system based on collecting ECG signals from fingers across multiple sessions. The Wavelet Distance (WDIST) was used to measure a distance between wavelet coefficients. The system achieved 89% identification rate on a dataset of 50 subjects. Plataniotis et al. [23] have suggested a new and robust approach for feature extraction that relies on a combination of Autocorrelation (AC) and Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) of the overall morphology of ECG waveform. The DCT has been applied to the autocorrelation (AC) sequence of windowed ECG data segments for dimension reduction in the non-fiducial approach. The identification performance was 97.8% as tested over standard one-lead ECG signals from 13 subjects. However, the non-fiducial approach based on autocorrelation involves the challenge of high-dimensional data and so analysis or processing is a computationally demanding task, referred to in the literature as the curse of dimensionality [4]. The undesirable template size can have an impact on overall recognition, and it is not able to predict accurately [12]. Thus, it is important to handle data adequately through the construction of a meaningful low-dimensional space form a high-dimensional observation space [25]. Dimensionality reduction can be an effective solution to prevent the curse of dimensionality and enhances the efficiency of learning methods by extracting a number of relevant and significant features often using linear and nonlinear dimensionality reduction techniques [26]. Agrafioti and Hatzinakos [27] dealt with the problem of high-dimensional data in this non-fiducial approach with the use of a combination of AC with Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) for human identification system based on fusion of all of the 12 ECG leads' data. The AC/LDA algorithm has been also utilised in studies of [4] and [28] in order to extract discriminative features from one-lead ECG signals collected based on two-session and single-session data (non-clinical source data), respectively. LDA is a linear supervised learning method which has been extensively used in dimension reduction and classification areas for higher inter-class variability [29] in order to control misclassification errors. The linear dimension reduction methods cannot find adequate structures in real-world data that are nonlinear. In recent years, many different techniques have been broadly developed to solve the nonlinear dimensionality reduction problem by using the basic idea of kernel-based learning methods [25,30] such as the Kernel Principal Component Analysis (KPCA) [31]. The main concept of kernel functions is implicit nonlinear mapping of observations in the input space into higher dimensional feature space to be optimally separate input patterns [32]. To the best of our knowledge, there are no reports in the literature about the non-fiducial approach based on an autocorrelation in conjunction with nonlinear dimension reduction methods over non-clinical source data.The biometric recognition systems in identification and verification modes are classifiers and they are considered respectively as one-to-many and one-to-one problems. The identification systems recognise a subject by comparing an individual's own biometric properties with all enrolled templates in a database to find the highest probability match. The verification systems will then indicate the individual's claimed identity as either accepted or rejected [1]. One verification approach is to compare the probabilities estimate during identification against a threshold to obtain verification decisions. Another approach is to perform a binary classification problem to achieve a probabilistic learning model when the number of individuals in the systems is large [1,33]. The biometric recognition performance is assessed by measuring two misclassification error rates of False Match Rate (FMR) and False Non-match Rate (FNMR) that are respectively termed as False Acceptance Rate (FAR) and False Rejection Rate (FRR) [1]. Training optimal recognition model can be effective on the highest match between the ECG test signals and a collection of training feature vectors. Therefore, the proper selection of robust classification methods can increase generalisation capability and enhance ECG biometric recognition accuracy. General recognition algorithms have been frequently applied in the use of the ECG biometrics including supervised classifiers such as Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) [14], K Nearest Neighbours (KNN) [27,6] and also in several research on Support Vector Machines (SVMs) [34,35] and other classification algorithms [11]. SVM is a kernel-based classifier based on a statistical learning theory in machine learning [36] that can attain predictive accuracy with reduced generalisation errors in object detection and classification problems [32]. Multi-class SVM classification is a supervised learning problem that has been proposed as an effective extension of binary classification. One-Against-All (OAA) is a multi-class approach which is proposed for biometric verification problem in the current paper by decomposing multi-class SVM into several binary classifiers.This paper proposes a novel ECG verification framework based on non-fiducial approach using kernel methods in both feature extraction and classification after denoising signals with Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT). The central consideration of the paper is to evaluate the effect of different linear and nonlinear dimension reduction algorithms in the recognition or authentication performance of a multi-class SVM, and to determine whether the learning classifier is robust in identity verification for individual recognition of unlabelled test data (unknown) by setting training samples.The paper is organised as follows: Section 2 describes the methodology of the study, relevant technical backgrounds, and an investigation on the systematic analysis of some of the technical backgrounds. Section 3 explains how ECG data sets were collected and how design parameters for multi-class SVMs were chosen. The experimental recognition rates of the proposed feature extraction and recognition system over the ECG data sets are presented in Section 4. Finally, a conclusion and suggestions for future research are discussed in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
