@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Extended-dimensional anisotropic diffusion using diffusion paths on inter-color planes for noise reduction

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We extend the diffusion dimension of typical anisotropic diffusion for denoising.Diffusion dimension is extended by producing diffusion paths on inter-color planes.Inter-color prediction is proposed to properly utilize an inter-color correlation.Regionally and directionally varying diffusion threshold is proposed.In the results, the proposed method showed an outstanding denoising performance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Image denoising,Extended anisotropic diffusion,Inter-color diffusion,Inter-color prediction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents an anisotropic diffusion (AD)-based noise reduction that extends the diffusion dimensions of a typical AD by producing diffusion paths on inter-color planes. To properly utilize an inter-color correlation for the AD-based noise reduction, inter-color planes from different color planes are predicted by adjusting their local mean values. Then, diffusion path-based kernels (DPKs) for the current color plane and predicted inter-color planes (PIPs) are generated to transform the iterative AD into a single-pass smoothing, which can avoid iterative region analysis. Simultaneously, a regionally and directionally varying diffusion threshold is adopted for the current color plane to preserve image details and to improve the quality of noise elimination near strong edges. For the PIPs, diffusion thresholds are regionally adjusted depending on local correlations between the current color plane and each of the PIPs to optimize the performance of noise reduction obtained from the extended diffusion dimension. Lastly, DPK-based filtering is performed in the current color plane and PIPs by using selected diffusion thresholds for the noise reduction. The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method successfully improves the quality of denoising by greatly increasing the peak signal-to-noise ratio and structural similarity indexes by up to 4.921 dB and 0.090, respectively, compared with benchmark methods. In addition, the proposed method effectively reduces the computational complexity by avoiding the use of an expensive region analysis.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Image and video signals are often contaminated by image noise during acquisition, transmission, or recording processes. Because this image noise significantly degrades the image quality, image denoising is exploited in many digital image processing applications. Linear smoothing is the most fundamental and intuitive image denoising approach, where all pixels are averaged evenly without incorporation of structural information, such as image details or image boundaries. Thus, it causes severe loss of structural information during the smoothing process. To alleviate this problem, structure-preserving image denoising, which eliminates image noise by incorporating structural information, has been extensively exploited [6,14,23,25]. This approach can be broadly divided into two categories [18]: the kernel-based method and the partial differential equation (PDE)-based method [2,15,28]. The kernel-based method makes a filter kernel by considering structural information for grouping similar pixels when it restores a current pixel value. Adaptive smoothing [26], bilateral filtering [30,35], non-local means filtering [5], and mean-shift filtering [11] are included in the kernel-based method. The PDE-based method utilizes a PDE for formulating the denoising process and restores a pixel value by solving the PDE. Several methods, such as total variation diffusion [8,29] and anisotropic diffusion (AD) [24], have been proposed. Among the PDE-based methods, AD is widely used in image denoising because of its high denoising performance and low computational cost.AD, often called the Perona and Malik (PM) model, applies a diffusion process on an image domain to remove gray-level variations caused by image noise. During the diffusion process, it utilizes a time- and spatially varying diffusivity to preserve structural information while removing image noise. The diffusivity is adjusted by gray-level differences between a pixel and its neighboring pixels. Accordingly, the diffusivity is reduced at a region where the gradients are high, thereby decreasing smoothing strength. Therefore, the structural information in this region is preserved or even enhanced. Based on this approach, various research studies have been proposed to enhance the quality of the structural information preservation and noise reduction by modifying the diffusivity selection or the gradient calculation. Catté et al. [7] utilized Gaussian smoothing before the gradients calculation to solve the ill-posed problem of AD for various images and to improve the accuracy of the gradient calculation. Weickert [33] indicated that the PM model cannot consider the edge direction of a pixel because it uses a scalar-valued diffusion coefficient. As a result, the PM model could not successfully remove the image noise in a region having a low diffusivity. To alleviate this problem, Weickert introduced a diffusion tensor to accelerate diffusion along the edge direction while preventing the diffusion perpendicular to the direction of the edge. Consequently, it improves the performance of noise elimination in a region near strong edges. Yu et al. [34] introduced the kernelized gradient operator to improve the separation between the image signal and noise signal during the gradient calculation. In [9] and [21], the diffusion threshold for a pixel is adaptively determined by utilizing a local variance to preserve structural information. Cho et al. [10] proposed a dictionary-based AD method (DAD) that regionally selects the optimal diffusion threshold using a pre-trained dictionary. In addition, the iterative AD operations are transformed into single-pass smoothing by using a diffusion path-based kernel (DPK). By using DPK-based filtering with the optimal diffusion threshold, the performance of noise reduction and the computational efficiency were greatly improved over typical AD. Moreover, this architecture of single-pass filtering makes it easier to implement a real-time HW of AD-based noise reduction.Although the DAD method shows the most promising noise reduction performance from among the conventional AD-based methods, further improvements can be possible by following feasible strategies.First, in the conventional AD-based methods, the diffusion process is naturally applied channel-wise while the diffusivity is coupled across all channels by combining the gradient values in multi-channels. In this scheme, conventional AD-based methods cannot utilize pixel values (not a gradient) in the other channels when the diffusivity-based restoration of a pixel value in the current channel is performed. In most images, RGB color channels are highly correlated [17]. Hence, if these highly correlated pixel values are used for the diffusivity-based pixel value restoration in an efficient way (such as multi-channel diffusion), the quality of denoising can be significantly improved. Specifically, if this inter-color correlation is utilized with DPK-based filtering, which enhances the efficiency of AD-based noise reduction, the denoising performance can be further improved. Second, the conventional AD-based methods, including DAD, cannot successfully remove image noise near strong edges when they utilize the regionally adaptive diffusion threshold for structural information preservation. This is because they apply a low smoothing strength for all directions of a pixel near strong edges. This problem can be alleviated by selectively applying the directionally varying diffusion threshold for a pixel near strong edges.In this paper, we propose a novel AD-based noise reduction method that extends the dimension of diffusion by considering inter-color planes which mean the other two color planes from one color plane (the current color plane) in a given RGB input image [16,20]. In this method, the inter-color planes predicted from different color planes, and an extended DPK is produced by analyzing diffusion paths in the predicted inter-color planes (PIPs) in addition to the current color plane. Simultaneously, by exploiting a local correlation between each pair of color planes, regionally adaptive diffusion thresholds for the PIPs are used to generate the extended DPK. For the current color plane, the directionally varying diffusion threshold is selectively adopted for a pixel having a low diffusion threshold to mitigate the unsuccessful removal of image noise near strong edges.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the operation of the proposed method is described. In Section 3, the experimental results are demonstrated. Finally, Section 4 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
