@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Best basis compressive sensing of guided waves in structural health monitoring

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Compressive Sensing based on wavelet analysis and frequency warping operator.Frequency warping Wavelet analysis.Compression of Ultrasonic Lamb Waves.Acoustic emission localization in plates with dispersion and reverberation.Procedure is tested with a passive network of three piezo-sensors.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wavelet packet best basis selection,Compressive sensing,Ultrasonic guided waves,Embedded Zerotree wavelet algorithm,Wavelet filters optimization,Frequency warping transform,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Guided waves (GW) based approaches are an attractive mean for monitoring many important structural components in aerospace systems, land and marine transportation, civil infrastructures, and in the oil and gas industry [1]. In fact, approaches based on GW allow the inspection of large areas and provides excellent sensitivity to multiple types of damage [2,3]. Such capabilities have been widely exploited for instance in GW based methodologies for impact/damage localization in plate-like structures.In such applications, generally arrays of piezoelectric transducers are used to record acoustic emissions. Several array shapes have been investigated, including single-ring or fully populated circular patterns [4], two-dimensional square arrays [5] or more complicated configurations realized with piezoelectric paint [6]. The typical mode of operation of these systems involves the phased actuation of transducers and the observation of several dynamic response measurements from large network of sensors. While the majority of sensor networks in use today employs a wired architecture, development of wireless sensor networks has exploded in recent years [7].The integration of wireless communication technologies into SHM methods has to be investigated since they eliminate the cost of cable deployment and reliability issues due to aging and de-bonding of cables of traditional SHM systems, and have distinct advantages such as simple, cost-effective, flexible, and reconfigurable, thus allowing scalable installation [8].However, in embedded sensing devices, the wireless connectivity may consume a large fraction of the available energy. Therefore, in order to achieve long battery lifetime, performing data reduction locally, i.e. within the wireless smart sensors, is of primary importance [9,10]. By doing so communication traffic can be greatly reduced, minimizing the need of storing or transmitting large amount of multichannel data. Data reduction could consist either in the extraction of relevant information (such as time of flight or energy [11,12]) from the acquired waveform, or in signal compression. When the information extraction task is too much computationally onerous to be performed on a local embedded processor, the best option is to compress efficiently the acquired signal, and then to transmit it to a central unit where the signal is recovered and the processing is performed [13,14].In this work, a signal compression strategy specifically dedicated to Lamb wave signals for SHM, and aimed at achieving high compression ratio with low distortion in signal recovery is proposed. For signal compression, a novel approach is proposed whose starting point is the design of a suitable signal representation basis. The framework rely on the assumption that Lamb wave signals can be sparsified in a frequency warped domain [15]. The warping procedure allows to design a time–frequency decomposition matched to the dispersive behavior of Lamb waves, i.e. achieving a sparse representation of the signal; further improvement in the sparsity of the signal can be obtained with a proper basis designed by reshaping the scale domain through the warped Wavelet Packet (WP) decomposition [16,17]. In this article we use a dictionary of warped wavelets, adaptively selected in the warped wavelet packet decomposition tree by means of the Best Basis algorithm, to achieve maximally sparse representations. Moreover we have analyzed and studied the wavelet filter banks design to compute the adaptive warped wavelet basis.The proposed dictionary selection procedure has been exploited within a Compressive sensing (CS) framework [18] through the minimization of a surrogate cost function and it has been compared with a well-known data compression scheme, i.e. the Embedded Zerotree (EZT) coding [19]. Both the approaches rely on the assumption that Lamb wave signals can be represented as sparse linear combination of basis functions.The structure of this paper is as follows: in Section 2 the Wavelet Packet transform and the Best Basis parametrical optimization is presented, while Section 3 is devoted to the data compression procedures: the Embedded Zerotree WP encoding is presented in Section 3.1, and the CS procedure with the Best Basis WP is described in Section 3.2. The proposed CS framework that exploits the Frequency Warped basis is detailed in Section 4. Experimental validations of the proposed CS framework and the comparison with the EZT coding are shown in Section 5. The experiments consist in compressing and recovering dispersive guided wave signals acquired in an aluminum plate by using PZT sensors. The conclusions end the work.Multiscale transformations such as the wavelet transform (WT) analyze and represent efficiently ultrasonic [20,21,15,12] or electrocardiogram signals [22]. Let us callx∈RNthe real-valued vector which may represent the discretized guided Lamb wave signal, in the considered application domain. The WT operator Ψ can be used to decompose the signal x such thatx=Ψα, where α is the N-dimensional WT coefficients vector.The signal is said to be sparse in the new representation basis, if the vast majority of the entries ofθ=[θ1,θ2,…,θN], are zero-valued or negligible. Sparse signals can be approximated using just the K largest entries of θ and setting all other terms to zero:(1)x≈∑k=1Kθ(k)ψ(k),withK≪Nwhere the functionsψ(k)are elements of the wavelet basis.As for the WT, the inner products between the signal and the elements of the adjoint operatorΨ†which produce the wavelet coefficients can be computed efficiently by applying nested low-pass h and high-pass g filters to the original signal x as suggested by the Multiresolution Analysis theory developed by Mallat [23]. Depending on the sequence (tree) of the low and high pass filters, different wavelet transforms take place.As known, the frequency resolution which can be achieved by using an octave-band finite impulse response (FIR) filter is limited, especially at high frequencies. This limits the use of the Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) in guided waves based applications.The Wavelet Packet (WP) transform is a generalization of the DWT decomposition where the outputs of the filters h, the signal approximations, and also the outputs of the filters g, the details, are filtered while stepping in the next decomposition level.Alternatively, the number of filtering stages of the full WP tree can be limited (pruning) by selecting the decomposition depending on the signal characteristics, as schematically represented in the example in Fig. 1.As for guided Lamb wave signals, a suitable pruning allows to obtain a discrete representation of the signal better matched to its inherent multi-scale structure.To such aim, in this work a procedure that couples the pruning (Best-Basis) technique [24] with the lattice parametrization of the wavelet basis [25] is proposed. More specifically, the wavelet basis is defined by a proper parametrization of the coefficients of the scaling filter h. For a finite impulse response filter of length L, there areL/2+1conditions to ensure that the wavelets define an orthogonal Discrete Wavelet Packet Transform (DWPT) and thus there areL/2−1degrees-of-freedom to design the scaling filter h. The lattice parametrization presented in [25] offers the opportunity to design orthogonal wavelet filters via unconstrained parameters.In particular, forL=6the design parameters α and β givesi=0,1:h[i]=142×[(1+(−1)icos⁡α+sin⁡α)(1−(−1)icos⁡β−sin⁡β)+(−1)i2sin⁡βcos⁡α]i=2,3:h[i]=122×[(1+cos⁡(α−β)+sin⁡α+(−1)isin⁡(α−β))]i=4,5:h[i]=12−h(i−4)−h(i−2)The optimal parameters are chosen to minimize the distortion of the signal after decoding for a given compression rate, in the case of signal compression. The metric used to quantify the difference between the original signalx[n]and the reconstructed signalxˆ[n]after decoding is the percent residual difference (PRD) (%)(2)PRD=∑n(x[n]−xˆ[n])2∑nx[n]2×100In other words, the selected decomposition is optimal in the sense that corresponds to a time frequency tiling that best concentrates the Lamb wave signal energy in few WP coefficients.The Embedded Zerotree (EZT) wavelet technique [26] is a transform-encoder which operates on acquired, digitized, and wavelet-transformed signals. EZT exploits the efficiency of the representation offered by the WP transform to effectively compress the signal. In particular, the EZT algorithm uses interrelations and self-similarities among WP coefficients in different sub-bands. Thanks to these relations it is possible to organize the wavelet coefficients in sub-trees. If the lowest frequency wavelet coefficient in a subtree is zero or nearly zero (that is if its absolute value is below a given threshold) it is highly probable that all the other coefficients in the same subtree are also zero valued (i.e. the considered coefficient tree is a zerotree). If this is the case, the whole subtree can be encoded with a very limited number of bits. Threshold has to be accurately selected to achieve a predefined target compression ratio (CR%). Over-threshold coefficients are usually a very small subset of the total, and can be encoded with the Huffman algorithm [27] which produces a lossless data compression. It is worth noting that the subtrees' structure for a given wavelet transformed signal can be defined dynamically for an arbitrary WP decomposition [28], so that the EZT algorithm can be easily extended to the Best Basis WP decomposition.The basis optimization procedure is halted when the wavelet representation is maximally sparse. Then the EZT procedure and the Huffman coding are launched. After transmission, the acquired waveforms can be recovered by performing sequentially: i) Huffman decoding, ii) the inverse zerotree encoding (IEZT) and iii) the inverse WP transformation (IWP).The computational scheme based on EZT compression of the Best Basis WP coefficients and Huffman coding is reported in Fig. 2.The Compressed Sensing (CS) approach differs considerably from that of the transform encoders, such as the EZT, but it also relies on the fact that the signal to be compressed is sparse in the WP Best Basis representation described in Section 2. Indeed, the CS theory states that if x is sparse, one can recover its K-term approximation by only collectingM=O(Klog⁡N/K)measurements, thus sensing and compressing at the same time. The so called M-dimensional measurement vector y is acquired by computing this product:(3)y=ΦxTo guarantee a robust and efficient signal recovery, the sensing matrix Φ must be properly designed. In particular, it must be verified that Φ and the WT operator Ψ are incoherent, that is the parameter μ:(4)μ(Φ,Ψ)=N⋅max1≤k,j≤N⁡|〈ϕk,ψj〉|must be small enough. This property is usually fulfilled when the sensing matrix Φ is a random matrix with Gaussian distributed entries. Several different hardware architectures have been proposed to perform the multiplication in Eq. (3), some solutions are based on analog circuits [29], some others, as the one used in this work, on the multiplication of digital signals [30].Finally, an accurate reconstruction of the signal x from the linear measurement vector y can be accomplished by solving the following convex optimization problem. Considering a noisy measurementsy=Φx+w, where w is the additive noise bounded by‖w‖≤σ, one can turn the constrained formulation(5)minα˜∈RN⁡‖α˜‖1subject by‖ΦΨα˜−y‖2≤σwhere σ bounds the amount of noise unavoidably corrupting the data, andα˜is the N-dimensional sparse approximation of the coefficient vector, into a penalized variational problem(6)x⁎=arg⁡minx∈R⁡E(x,Ψ,t)E(x,Ψ,t)=12‖Φx−y‖2+t‖Ψx‖1where the Lagrange multiplier t should be set so that‖Φx⁎−y‖∼σ.Fixed bases are not efficient enough to sparsify ultrasound signals, and more redundancy is required. This section extends the recovery process in Eq. (6) to a dictionary of orthogonal bases, the union of which contains a large collection of atoms.A dictionaryDΛ={Bλ}λ∈Λof orthogonal basesBλ={ψmλ}mofRis used instead of an a priori fixed basis such as the Wavelet or Fourier basis, choosing a parameterλ⁎∈Λadapted to the structures of the signal to process and using the basisBλ⁎. This dictionaryDΛdefines a highly redundant set of atoms{ψmλ∖λ∈Λ,m}. One could use directly this set to reconstruct a signal from compressive measurements, but this is numerically impracticable for large signals so setting constrain on the sparsity of orthogonal bases leads to fast algorithms for structured dictionaries.In order to match a given signal x, eachλ∈Λis constrained to be a tree, that is a subset of the larger tree Λ, to enable the fast optimization of the parameterλ⁎. Each node in a tree corresponds to a refinement in the segmentation.A best basisBλ⁎adapted to a signalx∈Ris optimized to obtain the best possible approximation of x for a given sparsity, as measured byl1the norm. This constrained formulation is turned into a Lagrangian unconstrained optimization problem by minimizing a LagrangianE[31](7)λ⁎=arg⁡minλ∈Λ⁡E(x,Bλ,t)E(x,Bλ,t)=ming∈R⁡12‖x−g‖2+t‖Ψλg‖1whereΨλg={<g,ψmλ>}m=0N−1.The full compression and reconstruction scheme is shown in Fig. 3. Such method performs an iterative joint estimation of the signal x (l1minimization block) and of the Best Basis WP operator Ψ. The optimization of WP tree pruning is performed by selecting the wavelet filters h and g a priori with the procedure described in [25], as in the EZT case. In the acquisition stage a multiplication between the signal and a random matrixM×Nis performed; in the reconstruction stage from the measurement y the algorithm described in Algorithm 1is applied to recover the signal x.The Best Basis Compressive Sensing algorithm perform an iterative estimation of the signal x, updating at each iteration the best wavelet packet tree. The main difference between the algorithm of Ref. [32] is related to the wavelet filter that in this work is optimized a priori as described in Section 2.In this section, the procedure to extend the applicability of CS framework to dispersive signals is described: it is based on the use of the frequency warped operator to further enhance the sparsification of the signals(t). The warped frequency operator W produces a non-linear rescaling of the frequency axisw(f), called warping map, such as:sw(t)=W{s(t)}F{sw(t)}=w˙(f)⋅S(w(f))wheresw(t)is the warped signal, F denotes the Fourier operator andw˙(f)represents the first derivative ofw(f). The effect of the warping procedure is to design a time–frequency (TF) representation matching with the group delay of the propagating wave packets as shown in [15]. Based on a priori knowledge of the group velocitycgM(f)for the propagating mode M, the warping map is selected according to the ruleKw˙(f)=1cgM(f), where K is a normalization parameter selected so thatw−1(0.5)=w(0.5)=0.5.In practice, the warping operator directly maps the dispersive time waveforms to an equivalent non-dispersive domain, or dually its inverse operator maps a time invariant decomposition basis in a group delay covariant one [33].Like ordinary scaling functions, warped scaling functions are strategical for the construction of warped wavelet bases. In the Fourier domain the warped wavelets are related to the dyadic wavelets as follow:Ψ¯n,m(f)=(Wψn,m)(f)=dw(f)dfΨn,m(w(f))=2ndw(f)dfΨ(2nw(f))e−j2nmw(f)The warped wavelets are not simply generated by dilating and translating a mother wavelet. Rather, the translated wavelets are generated by all-pass filteringe−j2nmw(f). Scaling also depends on the warping mapw(f). Fig. 4shows how the Wavelet tiling of the TF plane allows to match with a single propagating mode as reported in Fig. 5, but the resolution on the frequency axis is not variable. Atoms change their shape versus time with the dispersive properties of the single mode.Given an orthogonal and complete set of dyadic wavelets{ψn,m}n,m∈Zwhereψn,m(t)=2−n2ψ(2−nt−m)=D12nSmψ(t)whereSmrepresents the shift-by-m operator, one defines the warped wavelets asψ¯n,m=Wψn,m.The set{ψ¯n,m}n,m∈Zis orthogonal since W is a unitary operator, such that:〈Wψn′,m′,Wψn,m〉=〈ψn′,m′,W†Wψn,m〉=〈ψn′,m′,ψn,m〉=δn′,nδm′,mand complete since, by unitary equivalence, givenx∈L2(R)it is always possible to findy∈L2(R)such thats=Wy. Hence, by expanding y over the dyadic wavelet set and exploiting the continuity of the warping operator, we haves(t)=Wy(t)=W⋅∑n,m∈Zyn,mψn,m=∑n,m∈Zyn,mψ¯n,m(t)whereyn,m=〈y,ψn,m〉=〈x,Wψn,m〉=〈x,ψ¯n,m〉=〈W†x,ψn,m〉.Therefore the signal is sparsified by means of the inverse warping operatorW†, then the expansion coefficients of the nonstationary frequency warped wavelet basis are computed in the Compressed sensing Best Basis optimization procedure described in Algorithm 1 within the Update Best Basis step of the algorithm.The resulting block scheme is reported in Fig. 6.The compression algorithms detailed in the previous sections have been applied to the passive monitoring experimental setup depicted in Fig. 7. An aluminum 1050A plate 1 m × 1 m wide and 0.003 m thick was sensorized with piezoelectric transducers (PZT discs, diameter 0.01 m, thickness 0.001 m). Guided waves were excited by hitting the plate with an impact hammer. The generated signals were recorded using a LC534 series LeCroy oscilloscope at a sampling frequency of 300 kHz. The AWGN transmission channel has been simulated with MatlabTM software. For the wavelet parameterization, a filter lengthL=6was used in all cases, with step size for both parametersα,βequal toπ/4. CS Best Basis Frequency warping wavelet is repeated for all values of a the predefined set of parameters and the value leading to the minimum PRD is chosen as representing the best mother wavelet (wavelet optimization). Thus two signal-based optimization processes are implemented; the first (internal) is the best basis CS selection that is performed for each mother wavelet and the second (external) is the selection of the parameter.A first set of acquisitions was used as a reference to select the wavelet filter coefficients with the procedure detailed in [25].The coefficients are reported in Table 1.Then, the Best Basis WP filter bank was selected according to the pruning procedure described in Section 2. The proposed WP analysis provides a very efficient representation of the acquired signals. This is illustrated in Fig. 8(a), where K is the sparsity of the signal and the errorϵ(K)=‖x−xM‖2/‖x‖2associated with the non-linear approximationxM(see Eq. (1)) of the acquired wave x is plotted versus the number of coefficients, M, used in the selected linear expansion; for each curve the error is calculated as the mean over 84 signals.Fig. 8(a) shows that the use of the Best Basis WP filters in Table 1 (green line) instead of the well known Daubechies filter (red line), in the analysis, yields to a more sparse codification of the informative content associated with the acquired signals.In Fig. 8(b) it is reported the distribution of the error associated with the non-linear approximationxMrelated to the set of 84 signals; in particular the plot reports for a value ofK=100, i.e.log⁡(K)=2the difference of the approximation error between WP Daubechies–WP optimized parametrization. The results are consistent with those in Fig. 8(a) since forlog⁡(K)=2it yieldslog⁡(eWPopt)−log⁡(eWPd)=0.2witheWPd=0.45. After simple mathematical substitutions we obtain a mean value ofeWPd−eWPopt=0.08which is comparable to the one obtained analyzing the histogram in Fig. 8(b).The performance of the EZT coding has been studied by considering the trade off between the Compression Ratio (CR) and the distortion of the reconstructed signal. The distortion metric used to quantify the difference between the original signal x and the reconstructed signalxˆis the Percent Residual Difference (PRD)(%) expressed by the relation (2).The Compression Ratio is varied by changing the value of the EZT threshold. In Table 2, the values of the CR and PRD obtained on an experimental signal resulting from an impact at positionx=0.45cmandy=0.30cmare reported.It is worth noting that an optimal PRD is achieved with low EZT threshold but this leads to a low CR; on the contrary a high threshold produces a good compression but an high PRD. A good compromise between CR and PRD can be obtained when the EZW threshold is equal to 0.013. In Fig. 9is shown the acquired guided wave and the recovered signals for different EZT threshold values.In the Best-Basis CS approach, the performance in terms of CR is determined by the ratiomn, where m and n are the dimensions of the sensing matrixΦm×n. The wavelet filter used in the procedure is again the one detailed in Table 1. In Table 3is reported the PRD obtained for different CR values in two cases:1.pure wavelet packet basis as sparsified dictionary (“without W”);by using the warped wavelet packet basis (“with W”).In Fig. 10, the performance comparison between the EZT algorithm and the CS framework is reported. The results are related to 84 acquisitions. Such dataset was generated by recording the acoustic emissions produced by 21 different impacts positions with the described 4 PZT sensors. The compression and recovery algorithms were applied both on the acquired signals and on corrupted versions of the same signals, obtained by adding white Gaussian noise (AWGN) to the transmitted waveforms. The EZT threshold was set equal to 0.013. The PRD has been calculated between the original signal without noise and the reconstructed signal.It can be seen how the PRD achieved by the proposed Frequency Warped CS approach is lower than the one achieved by EZT for all the considered SNR levels.The results confirm how exploiting the sparseness of the signal selecting the proper basis within the warped wavelet dictionary yields to better performances instead of using a compression scheme non-tailored with the handled class of signals like EZT.In Fig. 11, the comparison between the EZT algorithm and the proposed CS framework related to the PRD at different compression ratios CR (%) when the signal to noise ratio is kept constant (SNR=30dB) is reported. It can be noticed that for high CR with the traditional CS approach it is possible to achieve lower reconstruction error, while for low CRs the EZT approach gives slightly better results.Finally, it worth noticing that the CS performed in the warped decomposition basis produces slightly better results w.r.t. the one performed in the Best-Basis wavelet packet domain in all the considered scenarios.In SHM applications the data compression is necessary to send the acquired signals to a central base station which perform a proper algorithm in order to find for example a possible failure or impact from the ultrasound propagating wave. It is important to compare the localization performances of a reference algorithm using compressed or not compressed signals. In order to estimate the of the localization error the compressed signals and the original ones have been applied to the algorithm described in [34]. Fig. 12shows the localization cumulative error rate with and without signal compression.The blue line represents the results obtained and reported in [12] without data compression; the red line represents the cumulative error with Best-Basis wavelet compression with threshold 0.013. The green line represents the localization error cumulative rate (%) for the novel CS procedure which incorporates the BB frequency warping wavelet. It is worth noticing that despite to the obvious performance degradation with the compressed signal, the error is less than 5 mm in more than the 60% of the cases.The difference of the mean localization error with/without compression is reported in Table 4; this parameter has been calculated with the formulae¯comp−e¯acqe¯acq(%), wheree¯compis the mean error value obtained with compressed signals ande¯acqis the mean error value obtained without compression, for the whole set of impact depending on the EZW threshold.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this work, Lamb wave signal compression and reconstruction procedures were presented. In particular, the Compressive Sensing approach is compared with the Embedded Zerotree algorithm with Huffman coding. Both the considered approaches are based on wavelet filters optimization procedures to generate a sparse but accurate multiscale representation of the acquired dispersive signal. The wavelet filter bank is optimized to match the signal characteristics using lattice parametrization which offers the opportunity to design orthogonal wavelet filters via unconstrained parameters. Experimental results show how the compression strategies are suitable for data transmission reaching a percent residual difference of 8–10% and a Compression Ratio of 75%. In conclusion, CS applied to Best Basis wavelet coefficients and optimization of the mother wavelet through parametrization is particularly suited to provide an adaptive approach for optimal signal representation with low Signal-to-Noise Ratios and high compression ratios.