@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
High dimensional low sample size activity recognition using geometric classifiers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper addresses classification of High Dimensional, Low Sample Size Data (HDLSS).An efficient QR factorization base Nearest Affine Hull approach NAH-lsq is proposed.Extensive evaluation of 8 approaches is carried out on 5 HDLSS datasets.NAH-lsq outperforms other Geometrical approaches in accuracy and efficiency.In online settings, it achieves faster classification than online SVMs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
High dimension low sample size classification,Action recognition,Geometric classification,Multimedia analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Research on high dimension, low sample size (HDLSS) data has revealed their neighborless nature. This paper addresses the classification of HDLSS image or video data for human activity recognition. Existing approaches often use off-the-shelf classifiers such as nearest neighbor techniques or support vector machines and tend to ignore the geometry of underlying feature distributions. Addressing this issue, we investigate different geometric classifiers and affirm the lack of neighborhoods within HDLSS data. As this undermines proximity based methods and may cause over-fitting for discriminant methods, we propose a QR factorization approach to Nearest Affine Hull (NAH) classification which remedies the HDLSS dilemma and noticeably reduces time and memory requirements of existing methods. We show that the resulting non-parametric models provide smooth decision surfaces and yield efficient and accurate solutions in multiclass HDLSS scenarios. On several action recognition benchmarks, the proposed NAH classifier outperforms other instance based methods and shows competitive or superior performance than SVMs. In addition, for online settings, the proposed NAH method is faster than online SVMs.high dimension low sample sizelinear discriminant analysisk nearest neighbornearest affine hullnearest convex hullnearest hyperdiskone-against-all SVMone-against-one SVMsupport vector machineSVM with stochastic gradient descentsingular value decomposition

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Modern computer vision and pattern recognition tasks deal with large amounts of data of arguably moderate dimensionality. High dimension, low sample size (HDLSS) data therefore constitute a special case which, however, is becoming increasingly common in practical settings. Consider, for example, the problem of human activity recognition from unconstrained web videos. While the dimensionality of spatio-temporal features extracted from videos often ranges in the tens of thousands, the number of labeled instances per activity class seldom exceeds a few hundred. For such data, the curse of dimensionality causes distances among feature vectors to become uniform [1,9]. Scarcity and sparsity of labeled training data result in simplicial class regions in feature space where each training instance forms a vertex of the convex hull of the data set. Hence, classifiers based on approximating class regions, discriminating among class regions, or computing low-rank representations suffer from artifacts due to high dimensionality. It is therefore important to understand and analyze the distribution and geometry of data in multiclass HDLSS scenarios. Yet, recent approaches in computer vision and, in particular, in human activity recognition, tend to ignore these issues and use off-the-shelf approaches such as Support Vector Machines, Linear Discriminant Analysis, or k Nearest Neighbors without consideration.In this paper, we investigate the geometry of subspaces spanned by high dimensional feature vectors related to human activities and affirm the neighborlessness of these data. We show that Nearest Affine Hull (NAH) classifiers which loosely approximate class regions yield competitive or even better classification rates than SVMs for multiclass HDLSS. While existing NAH approaches [6] to HDLSS classification suffer from high time and memory requirements, we propose an efficient NAH approach by adopting a least squares method based on the QR factorization.We compare the empirical performance of the proposed NAH-lsq classifiers with that of other hull based methods, namely Nearest Hyperdisk, Nearest Convex Hull, and NAH-svd as well as with more traditional approaches such as kNN, LDA, and SVM. Note that the latter represents different paradigms. For instance, kNN classifiers are based on local proximities; LDA focuses on low rank approximations, and SVMs apply the idea of maximum margin separation. Our results show that NAH approaches are competitive to SVMs in terms of accuracy and superior to all other classifiers in our tests. Like other lazy classifiers (e.g. kNN and NCH), NAH requires no training. We also show the efficiency of NAH-lsq to be comparable to one-against-one SVMs and that it is far superior to other instance based approaches including NAH-svd.Our empirical evaluation also reveals that, for the case of multiclass HDLSS data, optimal classification is achieved when using almost all the training data to support decision surfaces. In addition, we show that NAHs are well suited for online learning scenarios where even fast SVM-based algorithms such as the sequential approximation method LASVM [3] and stochastic gradient descent method SVM-SGD [4] suffer from expensive retraining. Moreover, unlike other methods, NAHs are inherently non-parametric and require no cross validation in online settings. In short, this paper provides empirical insights into the complexity of the multiclass HDLSS classification problem and offers a simple yet effective solution.Our presentation proceeds as follows: Section 2 reviews related work; Section 3 discusses geometric classifiers and a novel, efficient approach to NAH classification is presented in Section 4. Section 5 provides details as to our benchmark datasets and feature extraction methodologies while Section 6 reports our results. Finally, Section 7 concludes the article.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
