@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimal multi-level thresholding with membrane computing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel multi-level thresholding method with membrane computing is proposed.A cell-like P system with the nested structure of three layers is designed.An improved velocity-position model is developed.Inherent mechanisms of the cell-like P system are utilized to realize an efficient and robust multi-level thresholding method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Membrane computing,Cell-like P systems,Image segmentation,Multi-level thresholding,Histogram,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The conventional methods are not effective and efficient for image multi-level thresholding due to time-consuming and expensive computation cost. The multi-level thresholding problem can be posed as an optimization problem, optimizing some thresholding criterion. In this paper, membrane computing is introduced to propose an efficient and robust multi-level thresholding method, where a cell-like P system with the nested structure of three layers is designed as its computing framework. Moreover, an improved velocity-position model is developed to evolve the objects in membranes based on the special membrane structure and communication mechanism of objects. Under the control of evolution-communication mechanism of objects, the cell-like P system can efficiently exploit the best multi-level thresholds for an image. Simulation experiments on nine standard images compare the proposed multi-level thresholding method with several state-of-the-art multi-level thresholding methods and demonstrate its superiority.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Image segmentation is one of the most important tasks in computer vision and video applications. Thresholding has been widely used as a popular image segmentation technique [1]. The goal of thresholding is to separate objects from background image or discriminate objects from objects that have distinct gray levels. The existing thresholding methods can be roughly classified as two categories: bi-level thresholding and multi-level thresholding [2–4]. Bi-level thresholding segments an image into two different regions. The pixels with gray values greater than a certain threshold are classified into object, and those with gray values lower than the threshold are regarded as background. Thresholding problem can be posed as an optimization problem. Otsu's method [5] and Kapur's method [6] are simple and effective bi-level thresholding, which maximize the between-class variance of gray levels and the entropy of the histogram to optimize single threshold for an image respectively. Multi-level thresholding determines more than one threshold for an image and segments the image into several distinct regions, which correspond to one background and several objects. The Otsu's and Kapur's methods can be extendable to multi-level thresholding, however, they are inefficient because gray level histograms of most of the real-life images are multimodal. Thus, multi-level thresholding has received much attention in recent years. In order to solve the multi-level thresholding problem, some natural computing methods have been applied to solve the multi-level thresholding problem, for example, genetic algorithms (GA), particle swarm optimization (PSO), ant colony optimization (ACO), differential evolution (DE), artificial bee colony (ABC), and bacterial foraging (BF) algorithm. Tao et al. [7] presented a three-level thresholding method that used the GA to find the best thresholds. Hammouche et al. [8] proposed a multi-level thresholding method, which allowed the determination of the appropriate number of thresholds as well as the adequate thresholds. However, GA has several shortcomings, for example, slow convergence rate and premature convergence to local minima. Thus, some PSO-based multi-level thresholding methods have been developed [9–11]. In addition, Tao et al. [12] used the ACO to obtain the best parameters of the presented entropy-based object segmentation method, while Sathya et al. [13] proposed a multi-level thresholding method using the bacterial foraging algorithm. Akay et al. [14] presented a study on PSO and ABC algorithms for multilevel thresholding. Agrawal et al. [15] presented an optimal multi-level thresholding method using cuckoo search algorithm. Osuna-Enciso et al. [16] reported a comparison study of PSO, ABC and DE for multi-threshold image segmentation. Fan et al. [17] proposed a molecular kinetic theory optimization algorithm (MKTOA) to solve the multi-level thresholding problem. Yin et al. [18] proposed a multilevel image segmentation through fuzzy entropy maximization and graph cut optimization.Membrane computing initiated by Gh. Pǎun [19], as a new branch of natural computing, is inspired from the structure and functioning of living cells as well as interaction of living cells in tissues and organs. Membrane computing is a novel class of distributed parallel computing models, known as P systems [20]. In the past years, a variety of variants of P systems have been proposed [21–27], including membrane algorithm of solving global optimization problems [28]. The research results on a variety of optimization problems have indicated that compared to the existing evolutionary algorithms, membrane algorithm offers a more competitive method due to its three advantages: better convergence, stronger robustness and better balance between exploration and exploitation [29–31].Based on the above consideration, this paper introduces membrane computing to deal with multi-level thresholding problem and proposes a novel multi-level thresholding method. A cell-like P system with the nested structure of three layers, including several evolution membranes, several local store membranes and a global store membrane, is considered as its optimization framework to exploit the best thresholds for an image. Moreover, based on the special membrane structure and communication mechanism of objects, an improved velocity-position model is developed to evolve the objects in the system. In recent, Peng et al. [32] presented a multi-level thresholding method based on tissue-like P systems, where fuzzy entropy is used as the objective function to optimize the thresholds. However, there are three differences with Peng's method [32]: (1) this paper uses the between-class variance criterion and entropy criterion as objective functions respectively, and the existing works have indicated that they are two most effective measures in histogram-based thresholding; (2) a variant with a special membrane structure, namely, a cell-like P system with the nested structure of three layers, is considered in this paper, so the proposed method is inspired from the different mechanism from Peng's method; (3) the external best objects are used to guide the evolution of objects in Peng's method, which can cause the degradation of the objects when initial objects in evolution membranes are very close to each others in solution space.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews two multi-level thresholding problems to be solved, which use the between-class variance criterion and entropy criterion as objective functions, respectively. Section 3 describes the proposed multi-level thresholding method based on cell-like P systems. Experimental results are provided in Section 4, and conclusions are discussed in Section 5.Assume that a given image I has L gray levels,{1,2,…,L}. Lethidenotes the number of pixels with gray level i, thus total number of pixels equalsN=h1+h2+…+hL. The occurrence probability of gray level i is given by(1)pi=hiN,pi≥0,∑i=1Lpi=1.For the image I, a multi-level thresholding method determines m thresholds,(t1,t2,…,tm), and divides the image intom+1classes:C0for[1,…,t1],C1for[t1+1,…,t2], …, andCmfor[tm+1,…,L]. Therefore, the gray level probability distributions for them+1classes are as follows:(2)C0(p1ω0,…,pt1ω0),C1(pt1+1ω1,…,pt2ω1),⋯,Cm(ptm+1ωm,…,pLωm)where(3)ω0=∑i=1t1pi,ω1=∑i=t1+1t2pi,…,ωm=∑i=tm+1Lpi.Mean levels for them+1classes,μ0,μ1,…,μm, respectively, are(4)μ0=∑i=1t1ipiω0,μ1=∑i=t1+1t2ipiω1,…,μm=∑i=tm+1Lipiωm.LetμTbe the mean intensity for whole image. Thus, we have(5)μT=ω0μ0+ω1μ1+⋯+ωmμm,ω0+ω1+⋯+ωm=1.Multi-level thresholding can be posed as an optimization problem, which optimizes the m thresholds by maximizing some thresholding criterion (objective function). Usually, there are two thresholding criterions broadly used in literature, between-class variance criterion and entropy criterion, which can be used as the objective function of the optimization problem.The between-class variance criterion is firstly used in Otsu's bi-level thresholding method [33,34], and then is extended to multi-level thresholding. For the m thresholds, the between-class variance of the image I can be defined by(6)σB2=σ0+σ1+⋯+σmwhereσ0=ω0(μ0−μT)2,σ1=ω1(μ1−μT)2,…,σm=ωm(μm−μT)2. Thus, the multi-level thresholding problem can be configured as the following optimization problem:(7)max1≤t1≤⋯≤tm≤L⁡J1(t1,t2,…,tm)=max1≤t1≤⋯≤tm≤L⁡σB2(t1,t2,…,tm)wheret1,t2,…,tmare m parameters (thresholds) to be optimized.The entropy criterion has been developed by Kapur in bi-level thresholding [6,35], and has been extended to multi-level thresholding. For the m thresholds, the entropy criterion can be defined as follows:(8)He=H0+H1+⋯+HmwhereH0=−∑i=1t1piω0ln⁡piω0,ω0=∑i=1t1pi,H1=−∑i=t1+1t2piω1ln⁡piω1,ω1=∑i=t1+1t2pi,⋯⋯⋯⋯⋯⋯Hm=−∑i=tm+1Lpiωmln⁡piωm,ωm=∑i=tm+1Lpi.Based on the entropy criterion, the multi-level thresholding problem can be configured as the following optimization problem:(9)max1≤t1≤⋯≤tm≤L⁡J2(t1,t2,…,tm)=max1≤t1≤⋯≤tm≤L⁡He(t1,t2,…,tm)wheret1,t2,…,tmare m parameters (thresholds) to be optimized.The proposed multi-level thresholding method uses a cell-like P system with the nested structure of three layers as its optimization framework. The role of the cell-like P system is to optimize the m thresholds for an image. Fig. 1shows the cell-like P system with the nested structure of three layers, consisting of (2q+1) membranes: a skin (the outermost) membrane, q middle membranes and (the innermost) elementary membranes. The q middle membranes are labeled by1,2,…,qrespectively, called evolution membranes, role of which is to evolve the objects of the system. Each evolution membrane contains an elementary membrane, called local store membrane, role of which is to store the best object found so far in the evolution membrane. The local store membranes are labeled by1′,2′,…,q′, respectively. The skin membrane labeled by 0 is also called global store membrane, role of which is to store the best object found so far in whole system. Note that there are no evolution rules in the global store membrane and the local store membranes.In the designed cell-like P system, each evolution membrane contains n objects, and each of them expresses a set of m thresholds to be optimized. Thus, each object is a m-dimensional vector of the form(10)X=(t1,t2,…,tm)wheret1,t2,…,tmare m thresholds to be optimized. The cell-like P system will find the best thresholds for an image by evolution of objects. Each local store membrane contains only an object, called local best object, which is the best object found so far in the corresponding evolution membrane. The global store membrane also contains an object, called global best object, which is the best object found so far in whole system.Object evolution is realized by evolution rules. In this work, an improved position-velocity model is developed based on inherent communication mechanism of cell-like P systems, which can be regarded as a variant of the velocity-position model in particle swarm optimization (PSO) [36,37]. For jth object in kth evolution membrane,Xk,j, the extended velocity-position model can be described as follows:(11)Vk,j=ω⋅Xk,j+c1r1(Pk,j−Xk,j)+c2r2(Gk−Xk,j)+c3r3(G⁎−Xk,j),Xk,j=floor(Xk,j+Vk,j),j=1,2,…,n,k=1,2,…,q,where ω is an inertia weight,c1,c2andc3are learning factors,r1,r2,r3are three random numbers in(0,1),floor(⋅)is a rounded function,Vk,jis the velocity vector associated withXk,j, andPk,jis the found best position of objectXk,jso far. Different from the classical velocity-position model, the extended velocity-position model uses two best objects to guide the evolution of objects in each evolution membrane: one is the best object in current evolution membrane,Gk, and another is the found global best object in all evolution membranes so far,G⁎. The consideration can bring two benefits: (1) the mechanism that the global best object involves the co-evolution of objects in multiple evolution membranes can speed up the convergence of the system; (2) since the two best objects are from different sources, this mechanism can better improve the diversity of objects in the system, thus it can avoid premature convergence to local optima.Another mechanism of the cell-like P system is communication of objects between each evolution membrane and the corresponding local store membrane or between each evolution membrane and the global store membrane. The arrows in Fig. 1 show the communication relations of objects. The communication often happens after the evolution of objects in evolution membranes. After all objects are evolved, each evolution membrane automatically communicates its best object into the corresponding local store membrane and the global store membrane to update the corresponding local best object and the global best object, respectively. The update strategy used is as follows: if fitness value of the communicated object is higher than that of the existing object in local store membranes or global store membrane, it will replace the existing object; otherwise, it will be discarded.As usual in P systems, all of the evolution membranes as parallel computing units work in a maximally parallel way (a universal clock is considered here). Moreover, the global store membrane is assigned as output region of whole system. For simplicity, a maximum execution step number given in advance is considered as halting condition. The cell-like P system will continue to run under the control of its evolution–communication mechanism until the halting condition is reached. When the system halts, the global best object in the global store membrane is regarded as the output of whole system, namely, m best thresholds.Based on the cell-like P system, the proposed multi-level thresholding method is summarized in Table 1. In the following, we briefly discuss its computational complexity. We consider its two versions: parallel version and non-parallel version. The thresholding method consists of three main steps: initialization, object evolution and halting. From Table 1, it can be observed that initialization step contains double loop (q and n times, respectively), so its time complexity isO(qn). For object evolution step, there are triple loop (q, n, and S times, respectively), therefore, its time complexity isO(qnS). For halting step, its time complexity isO(1). Therefore, for non-parallel version, its time complexity isO(qnS). However, in the case of parallel version, the proposed multi-level thresholding method hasO(nS)complexity since all of the q evolution membranes are parallel computing units.In experiments, we have implemented non-parallel version of the proposed multi-level thresholding method (due to the limit of series architecture of the used computer) as well as two recently developed multi-level thresholding methods, which are BF-based and PSO-based methods. Table 2gives the input parameters of the three methods used in experiments. Nine well-known test images with 256 gray levels and size512×512are used for conducing our experiments, which are “Lena”, “Peppers”, “Baboon”, “Hunter”, “Stanwick”, “Living room”, “House”, “Airplane” and “Butterfly”, respectively. Fig. 2shows these images and their histograms.Two case studies are considered to evaluate the efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed method, where Ostu's between-class variance and Kapur's entropy are used as objective functions of the optimal multi-level thresholding problem respectively. For each case study, the comparison is considered in terms of quantitative and qualitative results, including best thresholds, objective function value, PSNR (Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio), computing time and the thresholded image. A higher objective function value indices a better result. A larger PSNR value indicates a better quality of thresholding. The shown objective function values and computing times are the averages over 50 runs, and mean value and standard deviation of PSNR are also provided.Case study 1 is considered to solve the optimal multi-level thresholding problem (7), in which Ostu's between-class variance is used for its objective function. Table 3provides the best thresholds, average objective function values of the three methods over 50 runs, in which four number of thresholds are considered, i.e.,m=2,3,4and5. The best thresholds of a method refer to a set of thresholds with the largest objective function value. It can be clear observed from Table 3 that the proposed method achieves the largest objective function value in comparison to other two methods.Figs. 3–5show the detailed qualitative segmentation results of P system for the nine images. Table 4gives mean values and standard deviations of PSNR values obtained by the three methods over 50 runs. It can be seen from Table 4 that average PSNR values of P system are higher than that of PSO and BF. The quantitative and qualitative results illustrate that compared with PSO and BF, P system has better quality of thresholding. Meanwhile, the P system has the lowest standard deviation for each of the nine images. The comparison results demonstrate that P system outperforms other two methods in terms of robustness.Table 4 also provides the comparison results of the three methods in terms of computing time (second). Note that the computing time refers to spending time of a method when it converges to its best objective function value during its a run. It can be seen from Table 4 that BF has the smallest average computing time, second is PSO, while P system is the longest in the three methods. However, an interesting conclusion is observed in the comparison results. According to the parameter configure of the three methods listed in Table 2, the P system has all 250 objects, which apparently corresponds to a PSO with 250 particles or a BF with 250 bacteria. Intuitively, the computing time of the non-parallel version of the P system is several times more than that of PSO or BF. However, its computing time is slightly higher than that of PSO or BF. The results illustrate that the non-parallel version of the P system has also relatively faster convergence.Case study 2 is used to test the performance of the three methods for the optimal multi-level thresholding problem (9), where Kapur's entropy is used for its objective function. Table 5reports the best thresholds, average objective function values of the three methods over 50 runs. The results clear show that the P system can exploit the best thresholds for the nine images.Table 6provides the comparison results of PSNR values obtained by the three methods over 50 runs in terms of mean value and standard deviation, respectively. It can be seen from Table 6 that the P system has the highest average PSNR value for each image in comparison to BF and PSO. Figs. 6–8show the thresholded images generated by the P system. The quantitative and qualitative results demonstrate that the P system can achieve a better quality of thresholding for nine images. Meanwhile, the comparison results in Table 6 show that the P system have the lowest standard deviation in the three methods, which illustrates the P system is robust for the optimal multi-level thresholding problem (9).The comparison results of the three methods in terms of computing time are provided in Table 6. Although the computing time of the P system is slightly larger than that of PSO and BF, however, the comparison results indicate that its non-parallel version has also relatively faster convergence based on above analysis.A nonparametric statistical significance test, Wilcoxon's rank sum test, is conducted at the 5% significance level in the experiments. We create three groups for each case study, which are corresponding to the three methods (P system, BF and PSO) respectively. Each group consists of best objective function values and RMSE values produced by 50 consecutive runs of the corresponding methods for the nine images, respectively. Table 7and Table 8give the p-values of two groups (one group corresponding to P system and another group corresponding to some other method) for the two case studies, respectively. The shown results indicate that all p-values are less than 0.05 (5% significance level). This is a strong evidence for establishing significant superiority of the proposed multi-level thresholding method.This paper has presented a novel method inspired from membrane computing to solve the optimal multi-level thresholding problem. A cell-like P system with the nested structure of three layers has been considered as its computing framework designed, and an extended velocity-position model has been developed to evolve the objects of the system. Based on inherent evolution-communication mechanism, the cell-like P system can effectively and efficiently exploit the best thresholds for an image. Moreover, the mechanism can also accelerate the convergence of the proposed thresholding method and enhance the diversity of objects in the system. The proposed multi-level thresholding method has been tested on nine standard images and compared with two recently developed thresholding methods, PSO-based and BF-based multi-level thresholding methods. Simulation results of both qualitative and quantitative comparisons for the three multi-level thresholding methods demonstrate the proposed multi-level thresholding method has a better quality, robustness and computation efficiency.The parallel computing is one of advantages of the cell-like P system, however, the parallel computing has not been realized in the simulation due to the limit of series architecture of the computer used in the experiments. In order to overcome the shortcoming, our further work is to consider the realization of its high performance computing, for example, on GPUs (graphics processing units) or multicore CPU system.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
