@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An adaptive method for health trend prediction of rotating bearings

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An adaptive method for health trend prediction.The CV curve is used for the assessment health condition based on EMD–SOM.Four different degradation stages are identified by using the CV value and CV change rate.Different prediction strategy tailored to the specific degradation profile.The adaptive prediction method is accurate and reduces computational complexity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Rotating bearing degradation,Adaptive prediction,Empirical mode decomposition,Self-organizing map,Confidence value,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Rotating bearing degradation is a physical process that typically evolves in stages characterized by different speeds of evolution of the characteristic health indicators. Therefore, it is opportune to apply different predictive models in the different stages, with the aim of balancing accuracy and calculation complexity in light of the varying needs and constraints of the different stages. This paper proposes a condition-based adaptive trend prediction method for rotating bearings. The empirical mode decomposition–self-organizing map (EMD–SOM) method is applied to analyze vibration signals and calculate a confidence value (CV) on the bearing health state. Four different degradation stages, normal, slight degradation, severe degradation and failure, are identified by using the CV value and CV change rate. At each stage, we develop a different prediction strategy tailored to the specific degradation profile. In operation, upon recognition of the stage, the corresponding prognostics models are selected to estimate the health trend. A case study on datasets from 17 test bearings demonstrates and validates the feasibility of the proposed method. The experiment results show that the adaptive prediction method is accurate and reduces computational complexity, which can be important for online applications, especially in case of limited computing resources.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Prognostics and health management (PHM) is expected to provide early detection of incipient faults and predict the progression of degradation in industrial components and systems [1–3]. Condition monitoring (CM) data, such as vibration, temperature, and pressure are collected and techniques of signal processing, feature extraction, health assessment, and RUL prediction are developed to fulfill the goals of a PHM system [4].Rotating bearings are very common mechanical components and play an important role in a number of industrial applications. In many instances, operation of these components is in harsh working and environmental conditions, which can lead to unexpected failures [5]. In order to avoid fatal breakdowns and the consequent decrease of machinery service performance, effective component and system health management, and accurate remaining useful life (RUL) prediction are interesting solutions to implement while the roller bearing is operating.Bearing as a common rotary machinery component, has attracted attention in both industry and academia [6–8]. The research efforts in the area of PHM for bearings have resulted in the development of various algorithms and models tailored to specific applications. With the spread of artificial intelligence and machine learning technologies, data-driven methods for estimating the RUL based on CM data have gained attention for rotating bearing health management. Heng et al. made a review of prognostics techniques and current challenges for rotating machinery prognosis [9]. Si et al. systematically reviewed the data-driven models and approaches reported in the literature in recent decades [10]. Benkedjouh et al. proposed the use of the isometric feature mapping reduction technique (ISOMAP) and support vector regression (SVR) for degradation assessment and RUL prediction [11]. Zhao Wei et al. utilized a dynamic particle filter-support vector regression method for reliability prediction [12].Each of these prognostics models proposed in the literature has good result, however, a single prediction model may not be able to handle all situations in real practice [7,13]. Recently, researchers focus on the adaptive prognostics strategy in order to get a better prediction results. Liu points out the importance to balance the prediction efficiency and accuracy adaptively and propose an on-line adaptive data-driven prognostics strategy of SVR method [14]. Liao and Kottig applied a hybrid prognostics method to a battery degradation case to show the potential benefit of the hybrid approach [15]. Liao and Tian provide a framework for predicting the RUL under time-varying operating conditions [16]. Sun et al. develop a state-space-based degradation model to reduce failure prognostics uncertainty [17]. Bearing degradation has great uncertainty and the dynamic degradation states have significant influence on the PHM models effectiveness [18,19]. Although there are some adaptive methods, which can adjust their modeling by changing the parameters to follow different degradation dynamics, the results are not always satisfactory under some other circumstance [20,21]. Furthermore, the adequacy of the model for the different dynamic stages of degradation should also consider the time requisites of the application and the effects of algorithmic complexity [22,23]. In fact, in some applications CPU computing resources may be limited frequently in industrial machinery operation [24,25]. The control computers are running their own working programs and they leave not too much computing resources for PHM algorithms. Therefore, reducing the computational complexity while ensuring accuracy, can be particularly important in practice, especially for industrial systems with limited computational resources. Alternatively, a condition-based method could be developed capable of selecting the adequate prognostic models depending on the current dynamic condition state of the bearing.Rotating bearing degradation is a physical process that typically evolves dynamically in stages characterized by different speeds of evolution of the characteristic health indicators. Therefore, it is opportune to apply different predictive models in the different stages, with the aim of balancing accuracy and calculation complexity. This leads to an adaptive scheme of PHM, whereby the stages in which the degradation proceeds gracefully calls for methods with less accuracy and, therefore, less computationally demanding, whereas the stages in which the process evolves faster call for more accurate predictions but at the expense of more demanding efforts in computation. In this way, the adaptive approach can select the better algorithm according to the varying degradation stages, while avoiding the limitations of a single algorithm.To cope with the dynamic degradation behavior of rotating bearings and choose the proper prognostics methods for life prediction, an adaptive method for health assessment and prognosis is proposed in this paper, based on the analysis of vibration signals. The original acceleration vibration signal is decomposed by empirical mode decomposition (EMD) and the useful intrinsic mode functions (IMF) are obtained. Then, the EMD energy entropy, which can reflect the actual health condition, is converted into a confidence value (CV) to assess the bearing health state, by using a SOM method. In order to dynamically select the proper prognostics models, the bearing health state is categorized into four different health stages to each of which corresponds a specific method for predicting the health trend. A case study of a bearing run-to-failure test is analyzed.The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the bearing health assessment method based on EMD energy entropy, and SOM. The bearing health state is represented by the computed CV. Section 3 presents the framework of the proposed adaptive prediction method. In Section 4, the experimental verification and results are presented with reference to the bearing run-to-failure test. The conclusion of this paper is given in Section 5.EMD is a powerful signal processing technique, extensively studied and applied in prognostics of rotating bearings [26]. Traditional signal processing techniques, including time-domain and frequency-domain analysis, cannot provide complete information of the vibration signals of the bearing, which possess non-stationary and non-linear characteristics. As a self-adaptive method for time-frequency analysis, EMD is here adopted to decompose the signal into a number of IMFs and the residue of the decomposition [27]. The original signalx(t)is decomposed in terms of n-empirical modes as follows,(1)x(t)=∑i=1nci(t)+rn(t)wherern(t)is the residual function andci(t)are the IMFs of different frequency bands ranging from high to low.While the roller bearing is operating under different working conditions, the energy of the signal changes with the frequency distribution. The EMD energy entropy is used to illustrate the change of energy. For a vibration signalx(t), the n IMFs and the residuern(t)are obtained by using (1): the energies of the n IMFsE1,E2,⋯,En, are calculated as follows,(2)Ei=∫−∞+∞|ci(t)|2dt(i=1,2,...,M)and the corresponding EMD energy entropies are designated as,(3)HEN=−∑i=1Mpilog⁡piwherepi=Ei/E(E=∑i=1nEi)is the percent of the energy ofci(t)in the whole signal energy. Generally, the first m IMFs containing the most of the faulty information are considered. These m most informative selected IMFs,c1(t),c2(t)⋯cm(t), include different frequency components and the energy distribution in the frequency domain of the rotating bearing vibration signal can be obtained as follows,(4)T=[HEN1(t)HEN2(t)⋯HENm(t)]The proposed health assessment method is presented in Fig. 1. In order to provide an assessment of the bearing health, the confidence value (CV), which ranges from zero to one, is calculated as health indicator to represent the bearing health state, with 1 indicating a perfect health condition and 0 indicating an unacceptable failure condition [28].The CV is obtained from the EMD energy entropy through a SOM network, which provides a way of representing multi-dimensional features into a one or two-dimensional space [29]. Each neuron i of the network is represented by an n-dimensional weight vectormi=(mi1,mi2,⋯,min)T. The SOM is trained with data recorded during normal operation of healthy bearings. In the use of the trained SOM, for each input feature vectorTthere is a best matching unit (BMU), whose weight vectormcis the closest to the input vector and can be found in the trained SOM. The distance between the input data and the weight vector of the BMU is defined as minimum quantization error (MQE), which actually quantizes how far the degradation condition is from the normal operation state [30]. The MQE can be calculated and converted into CV to represent the degradation state of the bearings as follows,(5)MQE=‖T−mBMU‖(6)CV=cMQE+cwheremBMUstands for the weight vector of the BMU of the inputT, and c is a scale parameter determined by the MQE under normal conditions.The procedure of the condition-based adaptive prognostics method is illustrated in Fig. 2. The bearing degradation process is described in four different stages, distinguished as normal, slight degradation, severe degradation and failure. Because the characteristics of the degradation process and the requirements of the prediction in those four stages differ, we use different prediction methods in each, as presented in Table 1. Firstly, the collected vibration signal data is used to calculate the CV by using the health assessment method described in Section 2. Then, the change rate of the CV value of the bearing is used to identify which degradation stage the bearing is currently operating in.According to the characteristics of each stage, the prediction model should be adaptively selected. The selection rules are developed based on the historical data. The goal of applying the adaptive prediction method is to achieve the desired prediction accuracy in each stage while keeping the computational complexity under control with respect to the practical requirements of the different stages.In this stage, the bearing is in the normal state and the CV value is maintained at a high level. This is the stage in which the bearing operates in, during most of its life. Thus, there is no need to use a complex prediction algorithm in this stage. We simply collect the vibration signal at a relatively low sampling frequency and monitor the CV value: an incipient fault starts if the CV values exceed the degradation threshold whose setting depends on the user requirements, e.g.CV=0.8, and the bearing enters the degradation region.In this stage, slight degradation has emerged and the CV values are continuously decreasing, but the bearing can still be used. In this situation, we should increase the frequency of monitoring the signal and activate the prediction model. Some data-driven models, such as ANN and ARMA, can be applied to track the bearing conditions. In the application that follows, we have chosen, as an example, the Wavelet Neural Network (WNN) algorithm to predict the CV value. WNN is proposed as an alternative to feed forward neural networks, based on wavelet transform theory [30]. WNN has been shown to possess good properties of approximation and robustness [31]. In WNN, wavelet basis functions are used as node activation functions. In the application of this paper, it is designed as a three-layer structure with an input layer, a hidden layer, and an output layer. Fig. 3shows the schematic diagram of the three-layer WNN, whereInkis the n-th input CV value of the k-th data vector. Morlet wavelet, which is a widely used wavelet function, is taken as the activation function in the hidden layer.Once the CV value is lower than the threshold or the change rate of the CV value increases significantly, the bearing is considered to be suffering from a severe degradation and entering the third stage, precisely the severe degradation stage.In this stage, the bearing is close to the end of its life. Although the bearing seems to work well, it may break down. In this situation, the accurate prediction of RUL is of utmost importance for the personnel to make maintenance decisions; then, one should further increase the sample frequency for monitoring and apply a more accurate prediction algorithm. This prediction algorithm should have a good capability to handle high data dimensionality and small sample size regression problems, because the bearing is degrading relatively fast. As an example, we chose the Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) algorithm for RUL prediction. GPR has high prediction accuracy and provides probabilistic outputs, which can reflect the confidence in the RUL prediction that is used to take the maintenance decisions [32]. As a probabilistic technique for nonlinear regression, it computes the posterior degradation estimates by constraining the prior distribution to fit the available training data [33,34]. For a new test inputx⁎, we can establish a joint Gaussian prior distribution of the training outputyand the test outputy⁎as follows,(7)[yy⁎]∼N(0,[C(X,X)+σn2IC(X,x⁎)C(X,x⁎)C(x⁎,x⁎)])whereC(X,X)is an n-order symmetric positive definite covariance matrix,C(X,x⁎)is then×1covariance matrix of the test inputx⁎and the training inputX, andC(x⁎,x⁎)is the covariance matrix of the test inputx⁎. Under the conditions of a given inputx⁎and the training setD={(xi,f(xi))|i=1,2,⋯n},xi∈X, the GP can calculate the test outputy⁎according to the posterior probability formula,(8)ξ(y⁎|x⁎,D)∼N(μy⁎,σy⁎2)(9)μy⁎=C(x⁎,X)(C(X,X)+σn2I)−1y=∑inαiC(xi,x⁎)(10)σy⁎2=C(x⁎,x⁎)−CT(x⁎,X)(C(X,X)+σn2I)−1C(x⁎,X)whereμy⁎,σy⁎are expectation and variance ofy⁎andα=(C(X,X)+σn2I)−1ywhereIis the unit matrix. Therefore, the predicted value is a linear combination of the covariance functionC(xi,xj). Once the posterior distribution is obtained, it can be used to assess prediction values for the test data points. Typically, the squared exponential (SE) covariance function is used and the hyper-parameters in the covariance functions can be optimized from the training data by maximizing the marginal likelihood algorithm [35].The failure stage is the last stage of a bearing life. The bearing may not be completely broken down but due to safety requirements or others, it should be replaced immediately when entering this stage. Also this final failure threshold is set according to the user requirements. In the example that follows, we set the threshold atCV=0.6, with adequate safety margin to maximize the usage of the component while preventing complete failure.In order to validate the proposed adaptive prediction method, bearing run-to-failure test data were used, taken from the bearing Accelerated Life Tests (ALT) [36]. The overview of the experimentation platform is presented in Fig. 4. Two accelerometers are placed radially on the external race of the bearing in vertical and horizontal directions, respectively, and the load is applied to the bearing radially in horizontal direction. Vibration data are recorded from two channels for each bearing, at a sampling frequency of 25.6 kHz every 10 s. Seventeen bearings are tested in three different operation conditions, as shown in Table 2. Twelve bearing data are taken for training, and the remaining five bearing sets of data are used for testing.By applying the EMD method, the vibration signals are decomposed into several IMFs. The first five IMFsC1(t),C2(t),…,C5(t)include the most relevant degradation information, and are arranged from high to low frequency. The corresponding energy entropies are calculated and the feature vectorsTare obtained according to (2)–(4). The first 50 feature vectors of the training data when the bearings are in the normal state are used to train the SOM. After training, the whole life data of the whole 17 bearings are used for testing and the CV curves are obtained by using (5)–(6).Due to the limited space, only four typical CV curves of the training data are given in Fig. 5. Some obvious stage changes can be found in CV1, CV2 and CV4. Once the CV curves have been obtained, the corresponding degradation rates can be calculated. A higher degradation rate represents a rapid deterioration, whereas a lower rate indicates a slow evolving health state. The varying degradation modes suggest that the adaptive prediction model should be applied.An example of adaptive prediction for Bearing 3-3 is illustrated in Fig. 6. The CV curve is obtained and three degradation stages can be identified as shown in Fig. 6(a). In the first stage of the CV curve, a slight degradation can be found when the CV value reaches the threshold 0.8, but there is no need to predict the RUL due to the relatively high CV value. CV decreases as bearing performance deteriorates continuously, then turns into a stable period up to time 300 s. A slight degradation stage can be identified. Thus, the WNN model is used to predict the degradation process in this stage. Seven past CV values are used to predict the next, one time step ahead, and 15 data vectors are used for training. Fig. 6(b) shows the CV change rate of the Bearing 3-3. After time step 303 s, the degradation mode of the bearing gradually changes into rapid degradation. The GPR model is selected to estimate the RUL. The prediction result at time 330 s is presented in Fig. 6(c), 20 data points are recorded and used to train the GPR model, the prediction result is 431 s, whereas the actual final time is 427 s. The relative prediction error of RUL is 4.1%, calculated by using the following formula,(11)Er=ActRULi−PredRULiActRULi×100%whereActRULiis the actual RUL andPredRULiis the estimation of RUL.According to previous research [37], the limitation of GPR is in the expensive computations needed for inverting the covariance matrix(K+σn2I)−1, which yields a cost ofO(N3), and for the mean prediction, which has a cost ofO(N), where N is the number of data points. From our experience in the experiment, to get high accuracy GPR indeed needs a substantially high computational cost during both learning and prediction. Although the GPR algorithm can get high prediction accuracy, it can result in significant computing resources also in the early or mid-degradation stages. In contrast to GPR, the WNN has approximately a complexity ofO(nmN)for training the network parameters, where m is the number of input nodes, n is the output nodes, and N is the number of data [38]. In general, WNN consumes little computational resources during the prediction process.Given the above, in the proposed adaptive method, we use the less computationally complex WNN method in the early degradation stages and apply the high prediction accuracy, relatively high computational cost GPR method in the late degradation stage. This ensures overall satisfactory prediction accuracy and reasonable consumption of computing resources suitable to the requirements.To further validate the performance of the proposed method, WNN and GPR are applied also separately throughout all degradation stages. The testing results of the three prediction methods are presented in Table 3. Five bearings are used for this analysis. It is easy to see that the WNN method employs less computing time, but does not achieve as much accuracy as the GPR method.An example of the computation time and relative error of the adaptive prediction method is illustrated in Fig. 7. The prediction algorithm is changed after time 303 s (Data point 233 in Fig. 7): as discussed in Section 3, low computation time and medium accuracy are important in stage 2; the computation time for the prediction is relatively low by using WNN, as shown in Fig. 7(a); however, when the bearing enters into stage 3, there is a requirement of RUL prediction accuracy: then, the GPR method is applied, with more computational cost in exchange for high accuracy, as shown in Fig. 7(b).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
