@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel 2D-ABC adaptive filter algorithm: A comparative study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel 2D-ABC adaptive filter algorithm has been proposed.The results show that the 2D-ABC adaptive filter algorithm has a better performance than the others.The proposed adaptive filter algorithm has been applied to image denoising problem.There is no study describing 2D adaptive filter algorithm based on metaheuristic algorithms in the literature.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
2D FIR digital filter,Artificial bee colony algorithm,Adaptive filter algorithm,Image denoising,Optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Digital circuits and systems take place of analog circuits and systems depending on the development technologies of semiconductor and integrated circuit (IC) techniques. Therefore the significance of digital signals increases compared to analog signals. Also, signals are mostly stored, processed and transmitted digitally due to the advantage of digital methods. As a result of this, applications of digital signals have become an important area of research. The studies which are intended for digital filter design are quite important because the digital filter design is one of the most common applications of digital signal processing. In literature, a digital filter is commonly described as a system that can be used in specified procedure such as modifying, reshaping, or manipulating the frequency spectrum of a signal according to some desired specifications [10]. Depending on the latest developments in computer technology, two dimensional (2D) digital signal processing has become more important. Digital image processing is a special name of the 2D digital signal processing and the one of the most studied topics in the digital image processing is 2D filtering. Consequently, the design approaches of 2D digital filters have attracted quite much attention from practitioners and researchers. The 2D digital filters have found a wide range application in the area of denoising of digital images, image enhancement, seismic and radar signal processing and biomedical image processing. 2D digital filters, like their 1D counterpart, are grouped into two main categories, 2D FIR and 2D IIR digital filters [38,37,30]. The 2D FIR and IIR digital filters are referred to as non-recursive and recursive digital filters, respectively. The 2D FIR digital filter is more stable than the 2D IIR filter and has linear phase response, which is important in applications of image processing and also it is much easier to implement. However, a 2D IIR filter can achieve a sharper frequency response than 2D FIR digital filter with the same order and this advantage makes it more efficient than the 2D FIR filter.To date, many studies related to adaptive filters have been proposed in research areas, such as biomedical signal and image processing, noise cancellation, antenna array processing, control engineering [41,27,24,22,23,5]. In the last two decades, like 1D adaptive filters, 2D adaptive filters have become a great deal of attention by researchers in literature [39,4]. The 2D adaptive filters have been successively applied in digital image processing area, such as image enhancement, adaptive line enhancer, adaptive noise cancellation and system identification [12,7]. The least mean square (LMS) adaptive filter was firstly modified in order to apply for 2D adaptive filtering [14]. The new two dimensional LMS (TDLMS) algorithm has a simple structure and it is especially useful in image enhancement. But their convergence speed is very slow for filter coefficient matrix optimization. Hence, to overcome the low convergence speed and weakness of the LMS algorithm, the 2D normalized LMS (NLMS) was introduced. Later, in order to improve the performance of the 2D LMS algorithms, the 2D affine projection algorithms (2D APA) was also firstly proposed by Muneyasu and Hinamoto [36]. On the other hand, this improvement is an important trade-off between the computational complexity and the performance. An improved version of the 2D APA algorithm was described by Glentis [13]. This new version reduced the computational complexity compared with the previous version and has a fast convergence speed with good observation capability. The 2D recursive least square (2D RLS) algorithm which is very efficient in many applications was described [39,7]. However, in the 2D RLS algorithm, the computational complexity is quite high. In conventional adaptive filter algorithms, like LMS algorithm, the filter coefficients are fully optimized at each iteration using optimization algorithms. To reduce the computational complexity and improve the convergence speed, the set membership (SM) and selective partial update (SPU) adaptive algorithms have been proposed [11,2]. The NLMS and APA algorithms were modified using the set membership (SM) and the filter coefficients were not updated at each iteration to reduce the computational complexity [45]. The selective partial update (SPU) was combined with the LMS and APA algorithms and the filter coefficients were partially optimized during the adaptation [44,1,35].In recent years, the evolutionary and swarm intelligence based algorithms have been widely used in the design approaches of non-adaptive 2D FIR digital filters [42,43,46,9,33,34,29,40]. For instance, Tzeng [43] introduced an effective genetic algorithm as the design approach of 2D FIR digital filter with specified magnitude and group delay responses. Boudjelaba et al. [9] described a comparative study of evolutionary algorithms for the design approach of 2D FIR digital filter. Manuel et al. [34] developed an approach based on the gravitational search algorithm for the design of 2D FIR digital filter. Latifoglu [29] proposed a novel filtering approach based on artificial bee colony algorithm and used it to remove speckle noise on noisy medical images. Sarangi et al. [40] designed 1D and 2D recursive filters using crossover bacterial foraging and Cuckoo search techniques. However, in the last three decades, one dimensional (1D) adaptive filter algorithms were adapted to 2D signal processing applications, such as system identification and image enhancement [14,36,3,7,4]. The proposed adaptive filter algorithms extended the 1D structure forms to 2D structure forms and so, the filter coefficients were easily updated horizontally and vertically on 2D plane directions. In literature, LMS, NLMS, RI, RLS and APA algorithms are the most studied and compared 2D adaptive filter algorithms. In this paper, a novel 2D-ABC adaptive filter algorithm was suggested and to the best of our knowledge, there is no study describing 2D adaptive filter algorithm based on metaheuristic algorithms in the literature.The artificial bee colony (ABC), which is a new and simple swarm intelligence based algorithm, can be easily implemented to solve optimization problems. ABC has efficient global optimization and quick local convergence abilities. Therefore, it seems to be a convenient tool to optimize digital filters. ABC simulates the intelligent foraging behavior of honey bees [15]. In order to solve various problems in different areas from the noise elimination to the parameter determination, the ABC algorithm has been used [20,19,21–23,31,28,6]. Also, lately, the ABC algorithm has been used to optimize the addressed problems in image enhancement and image segmentation [32,26,29,25,8].The paper described in Kockanat et al. [26] presents an image denoising approach with designed 2D FIR filter using ABC algorithm. In that work, the test images were corrupted by Gaussian noise with zero mean and 0.025 variance. It is said that the images were a little contaminated and the Gaussian noise can be easily filtering. The order of the 2D FIR filter was set to3×3. The proposed approach has not an adaptive structure and it cannot work for the non-stationary conditions. Moreover, it was not compared with another algorithm or method. In the present work, at the first stage, it is aimed to describe a novel 2D-ABC adaptive filter algorithm to optimize the 2D adaptive noise cancellation (ANC) setup as suggested in literature and to analyze its performance and computational efficiency in detail by comparing with the well-known and accepted 2D adaptive filtering techniques such as the 2D-VSS-APA, 2D-APA, 2D-SPU-APA, 2D-SM-NLMS, 2D-SM-APA, 2D-VSS-NLMS, 2D-SPU-NLMS, 2D-NLMS and 2D-LMS adaptive filter algorithms [4]. Moreover, in order to make a fairly comparison, the novel 2D-ABC and all competitor 2D adaptive filter algorithms were implemented to the same and suggested 2D ANC setup under same conditions. The 2D ANC setup was suggested and used by Hadhoud and Thomas [14], Abadi and Nikbakth [3] and Abadi and Nikbakth Aali [4], respectively. In this 2D ANC setup, the reference noise signal is generated by passing the white Gaussian noise with zero mean and unit variance through the 2D lowpass filter and the coefficients of the 2D lowpass filter were determined as recommend in [4]. So, the reference signal is very different from the Gaussian noise, but they are correlated with each other. However, for the 2D ANC setup, there is a conflict. In real application, the 2D-ANC setup may be not work because of the unavailability of the reference noise signal. On the other hand, the 2D ANC setup can be a good testing application for the performance evaluation of 2D adaptive filter algorithms and in this paper, it was only used for a fairly comparison of the 2D-ABC and competitor adaptive filter algorithms under the same conditions as suggested in [4]. Furthermore, in this work, the test images were corrupted by Gaussian noise with zero mean and unit variance and the PSNR values of them were set to 0 dB. It can be say that the Gaussian noise is plenty of dominant on the test images and the denoising process is not easy under this worst condition. Also, the novel 2D-ABC adaptive filter algorithm has an adaptive structure and its robustness is very strong under both the stationary and non-stationary conditions. And, to examine the effect of the 2D FIR filter orders on the performance, the orders were determined as3×3,5×5,7×7,9×9and11×11. At the second stage, the 2D ANC setup at the first stage was developed and an improved adaptive denoising approach was suggested. In this approach, different from the suggested 2D ANC setup in literature, there is no need a reference noise signal and only the noisy signal was used. So, the improved adaptive denoising approach can be used in real application. The novel 2D-ABC adaptive filter algorithm was employed in this improved adaptive denoising approach and it was tested for speckle noise filtering on clinical ultrasound test images. Finally, the results of the improved adaptive denoising approach using the novel 2D-ABC adaptive filter algorithm were compared with the other adaptive filter algorithms, methods and other well-known noise reduction filter types such as wiener and median filters. The rest of paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the preliminaries. In Section 3, the novel 2D-ABC adaptive filter algorithm is described. The results of the novel 2D-ABC adaptive filter algorithm are presented in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 gives the conclusions.A 2D digital filter is designed with regard to linearity of phase response because the human eye is very sensitive to the phase distortion. Therefore, linear systems and their phase responses have a great importance in digital image processing applications. 2D FIR digital filter is a kind of linear systems and has linear phase response. Also, 2D FIR digital filter is realized efficiently by software or hardware and it is always stable. Computational complexity and coefficient quantization errors are reduced by using 2D FIR digital filter [3,7,29,4]. The 2D FIR digital filter is defined by(1)y(n1,n2)=∑m=0M−1∑n=0N−1w(m,n)x(n1−m,n2−n)wherey(n1,n2)andx(n1,n2)are the 2D output and input signals, respectively.w(m,n)is the weight matrix of the 2D FIR digital filter. M and N denote the order of the 2D FIR digital filter. The weight matrix and input signal can be represented as(2)w(m,n)=[w(0,0)…w(0,N−1)………w(M−1,0)…w(M−1,N−1)](3)x(n1,n2)=[x(n1,n2)…x(n1,n2−N+1)………x(n1−M+1,n2)…x(n1−M+1,n2−N+1)]The 2D Z transform is applied to the 2D FIR digital filter and the transfer function can be represented as(4)H(z1,z2)=∑m=0M−1∑n=0N−1w(m,n)z1−n1z2−n2whereH(z1,z2)is the transfer function of the 2D FIR digital filter. The 2D FIR filter is always stable and this condition is maintained that any bounded input produces a bounded output.In image enhancement applications, the most preferred error measure is the mean square error (MSE) and it is defined as(5)MSE=1M1M2∑n1=0M1−1∑n2=0M2−1[Ioriginal(n1,n2)−Ienhancement(n1,n2)]2whereIoriginal(n1,n2)andIenhancementare the 2D original and enhancement signals, respectively.M1andM2are the order of the measured signals. The quality of the 2D original and enhancement signals is measured using peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR). The PSNR value is calculated after computing the MSE value and PSNR is given by(6)PSNR=10log10⁡(R2MSE)where R is the maximum possible pixel value of the image. Also, the PSNR measures the peak error between two signals. As seen from the inverse relation between the MSE and PSNR, for the best image enhancement performance, the MSE value should be low and the PSNR value should be high as much as possible.The structural similarity index (SSIM) measurement is a method for measuring the similarity between input and output images and it is defined as(7)SSIM(x,y)=(2μxμy+c1)(2σxy+c2)(μx2+μy2+c1)(σx2+σy2+c2)where x and y are the 2D original and enhancement signals, respectively.μx,μy,σx,σy, andσxyare the local means, standard deviations, and cross-covariance for imagesx,y.c1andc2are two variables to stabilize the division with weak denominator. SSIM value shows the similarity between two images and it should be close to one as much as possible.Gaussian noise is the most widely known noise model in literature. It is a statistical noise which has Gaussian distribution. The Gaussian noise is additive and an idealized form of white noise that is caused by random fluctuations in the signal. An original signal is corrupted by Gaussian noise and the generated noisy signal is defined as(8)Inoisy(n1,n2)=Ioriginal(n1,n2)+IGaussian  noise(n1,n2)whereIoriginal(n1,n2)andInoisy(n1,n2)are the original and noisy signals, respectively.IGaussian  noise(n1,n2)is the Gaussian noise and it is an additive and independent noise model which has a zero-mean Gaussian distribution defined with its variance.Speckle noise is a granular, random and a form of local correlated noise. It is a type of multiplicative noise and is defined as(9)Inoisy(n1,n2)−Ioriginal(n1,n2)ηm(n1,n2)whereIoriginal(n1,n2),Inoisy(n1,n2)andηm(n1,n2)are the original signal, noisy signal and multiplicative noise, respectively.The artificial bee colony (ABC) algorithm is a new swarm intelligence algorithm which is based on the foraging behavior of honey bee swarms. In the ABC algorithm, the foraging honey bees are grouped into three categories; employed bees, onlookers and scout bees. The employed bees exploit their food sources and interact with onlooker bees. Onlooker bees wait in the hive and decide which food source to exploit depending on the information gathered from the employed bees. Scout bees carry out random searches for new food sources around the hive. The number of the employed bees or the onlooker bees is equal to the number of solutions. The position of a food source represents a possible solution to the optimization problem and the nectar amount of a food source corresponds to the fitness of a solution [17]. The employed bees interact about the food sources with onlookers by dancing in the dance area inside the hive. The nature of the dance that is called waggle dance is proportional to the nectar amount of the food source. Onlooker bees watch the dances performed by the employed bees and choose a food source according to the probability which is proportional to the profitability of that food source. Thus, rich food sources draw more attention of onlooker bees as compared to other food sources. When a food source is exploited fully, by its employed bee associated with it and onlooker bees then, the food source is abandoned and its employed bee becomes scout. Scout bees can be visualized as performing the job of exploration, whereas employed and onlooker bees can be visualized as performing the job of exploitation.The ABC algorithm was introduced by Karaboga and it simulates the intelligent foraging behavior of real honey bees [15]. The performance of the ABC algorithm has been compared with that of some other well-known population based optimization algorithms by Basturk and Karaboga [16,17]. In our approach, the ABC algorithm is combined with 2D adaptive filtering algorithm and the proposed 2D-ABC adaptive filter algorithm optimizes the weight matrix of 2D FIR digital filter. In Eqs. (2) and (3), the weight matrix and 2D input signal can be converted into their 1D form by lexicographic ordering [14]. The lexicographic forms of the weight matrix and 2D input signal are represented as(10)wt(m,n)=[w(0,0)…w(0,N−1)…w(1,0)…w(M−1,N−1)]T(11)x(n1,n2)=[x(n1,n2)…x(n1,n2−N+1)…x(n1−1,n2)…x(n1−M+1,n2−N+1)]Twhere t is the iteration number and0≤t≤MN. In Eq. (1), the 2D output signal can be expressed as(12)y(n1,n2)=wtT(n1,n2)x(n1,n2)In order to adaptively optimize the weight matrix, the error signale(n1,n2)is computed by the difference between the desired signald(n1,n2)and the 2D FIR digital filter outputy(n1,n2). The error signale(n1,n2)at the tth iteration is defined as(13)e(n1,n2)=d(n1,n2)−y(n1,n2)=d(n1,n2)−wtT(n1,n2)x(n1,n2)The error signalet(n1,n2)is fed back into the 2D-ABC adaptive filter algorithm, and then the weight matrix of the 2D FIR digital filter is adaptively adjusted. So, 2D-ABC adaptive filter algorithm obtains the optimum weight matrix so that the objective function is minimized. The objective function used in the 2D-ABC adaptive filter algorithm is defined as(14)J(w(m,n))=1M1M2∑n1=0M1−1∑n2=0M2−1[d(n1,n2)−y(n1,n2)]2=E[|e(n1,n2)|2]where E is the expected error value. The 2D-ABC adaptive filter algorithm iteratively minimizes the value of objective function and the weight matrix, which is represented in Eq. (10), is optimized as much as possible. So, the 2D-ABC adaptive filter algorithm estimates the signal, or eliminates noise, by iteratively minimizing the objective function defined based on the difference between the desired and output signals.The pseudo-code of the 2D-ABC adaptive algorithm is given below:Step 1: Convert the weight matrix and input signal into their 1D lexicographic form.Step 2: Initialize the population of solutions of the weight matrix of 2D FIR digital filter(cij):cij,i=1,…,SN,j=1,…,D(SN: number of solutions in the colony), (D: the number of the coefficients of 2D FIR digital filter).Step 3: Evaluate the population of the weight matrix of 2D FIR digital filter by using Eq. (14).Step 4:Cycle=1.REPEATStep 5: Produce new solutions of the weight matrix of 2D FIR digital filter (vij) for employed bees by using the equationvij=cij+φij(cij−ckj)and evaluate them by using Eq. (14). Here,j∈(1,2,…,D)andk∈(1,…,SN)(k≠i), is a randomly chosen index.ϕijis random number in the range[−1,1].Step 6: Apply the greedy selection process between allvijgenerated by the employed bees andcij.Step 7: Calculate the probability valuespifor the solutions of the weight matrix of 2D FIR digital filter(ci)using equationsfiti(w(m,n))=11+Ji(w(m,n))andpi=fiti∑n=1SNfitn, wherefiti(w(m,n))is the quality of the solution i in the population andJiis the value of the objective function of solution i.Step 8: Produce the new solutions of the weight matrix of 2D FIR digital filter (vij=cij+φij(cij−ckj)) for the onlookers from the solutionsciselected depending onpiand evaluate them by Eq. (14).Step 9: Apply the greedy selection process betweenvijproduced by the onlooker bees andcij.Step 10: Determine the abandoned solution of the weight matrix of 2D FIR digital filter for the scout, if exists, and replace it with a new randomly produced solutioncibycij=cminj+rand[0,1](cmaxj−cminj).Step 11: Memorize the best solution achieved so far.Step 12:Cycle=cycle+1.UNTIL cycle = Maximum Cycle Number

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
