@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Parameter estimation in sparse representation based face hallucination

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Automatic parameter determination in sparse representation based face hallucination.Patch size choice is justified from the results of compressive sensing theory.Regularization parameter is analytically tractable under MAP framework.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Face hallucination,Sparse representation,Patch size,Regularization parameter,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Owning to the excellent ability to characterize the sparsity of natural images,ℓ1norm sparse representation is widely applied to face hallucination. However, the determination on two key parameters such as patch size and regularization parameter has not been satisfactorily resolved yet. To this end, we proposed a novel parameter estimation method to identify them in an analytical way. In particular, the optimal patch size is derived from the sufficient condition for reliable sparse signal recovery established in compressive sensing theory. Furthermore, by interpretingℓ1norm SR as the corresponding maximum a posteriori estimator with Laplace prior constraint, we obtain an explicit expression for regularization parameter in statistics of reconstruction errors and coefficients. Our proposed method can significantly reduce the computational cost of parameter determination while without sacrificing numerical precision and eventual face hallucination performance. Experimental results on degraded images in simulation and real-world scenarios validate its effectiveness.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Face super-resolution, or face hallucination, refers to the technique of estimating a high-resolution (HR) face image from low-resolution (LR) face image sequences or a single LR one. Due to restricted imaging conditions in many scenarios, it is hard to capture HR face images, and thus face hallucination is extensively used for pre- and/or post-processing in video applications, such as video surveillance and face recognition. In their pioneering work on face hallucination [1], Baker and Kanade employed a Bayesian approach to infer the missing high-frequency components of an input LR image from a parent structure with HR/LR training samples, leading to a large magnification factor with relatively good results. Liu et al. [2] proposed a two-step statistical modeling approach that integrates global structure reconstruction with local detail refinement.Following [1,2], learning-based face hallucination approaches have gained great popularity in recent years. The main idea is to estimate an HR face image from a single LR face image with the help of a training set of HR and LR image pairs. For example, singular value decomposition [3] and morphological component analysis [4] are respectively used to learn mapping coefficients from LR–HR training pairs. Owning to the excellent performance grasping salient properties of natural images, sparse representation (SR) has attracted more attention in face hallucination. Yang et al. [5] are the first to introduce SR to image super-resolution, where images are approximated by an over-complete dictionary for adaptive sparse image decompositions. This work spurred much follow-up research on SR based face hallucination. In [6], authors presented a dual-dictionary learning method to recover more image details, in which not only main dictionary but also residual dictionary are learned by sparse representation.In addition to the generic sparsity prior, some specific image priors are further exploited to boost performance in SR based image restoration. Dong et al. [7] proposed non-locally centralized sparse representation to explore the image nonlocal self-similarity. For a class of highly structured objects, such as human faces, the prior of facial positions is of importance and can be utilized to retain the holistic structure of face images. Following this idea, Ma et al. [8] proposed a sparse representation and position prior based face hallucination method. This method classifies high- and low-resolution atoms to form local dictionaries according to the different regions of human face and then uses different local dictionaries to hallucinate the corresponding regions of a face. Generally, SR based methods may select very distinct patches that are far from the input patch to favor sparsity and consequently result in dissimilarity in terms of Euclidean distance. To address this problem, literature [9] introduced a similarity constraint into sparse representation to promote accuracy and stability.Sparse representation is effective in face hallucination problem when sufficient observations are available, but there are at least two questions we need to answer. As usually done, face hallucination is performed on the basis of small image patches instead of a whole image. Thus, firstly, how to choose the optimal patch size given an observed image is worth investigating. Secondly, SR uses a regularization parameter λ to reach a reasonable balance between regression error and sparsity penalty, yet how to efficiently determine λ is unresolved.To the best of our knowledge, very few face hallucination literatures address patch size choice in a reasoning way. Wang [10] presented an algorithm to detect the lower bound of patch size by measuring the range of the local features in the texture. Kwatra et al. [11] proposed a graph-cut based method, in which the whole input texture is used as a patch and is cut when stitching to other patches. However, these two methods are primarily proposed for texture synthesis in pixel domain (e.g., image in-painting) rather than learning-based super-resolution.In contrast, classic parameter identification techniques have ever been used to find regularization parameter in super-resolution, such as generalized cross validation (GCV) [12] and L-curve [13]. L-curve is a tool for showing the parametric plot of the error versus penalty with the regularization parameter λ varied. The value of λ at the corner of the L-curve is the desired outcome. GCV produces asymptotically optimum value by iteratively solving a constrained minimization problem. GCV and L-curve can provide high quality solutions, whereas they are computationally expensive.In practice, representative learning-based face hallucination approaches [4–9] have to use empirical parameter for patch size or λ. All patch-based methods mentioned above set an empirical value for patch size without any theoretical justification. Similarly, the choice of the regularization parameter is based on trial-and-error experiments, which is actually a manual tuning procedure. Although this empirical practice is relatively reliable, it is cumbersome and computationally intensive because of repeated manual trials.In this paper, we take advantage of the well-known results from the compressive sensing theory to deduce the optimal patch size. As stated by compressive sensing theory, to faithfully recover sparse signal, the dimensions of observed and sparse signals as well as the sparsity should satisfy a pre-known constraint relationship. For SR based face hallucination, the dimensions of observed and sparse signals correspond to the patch size and the number of training images, respectively. Hence the proper patch size may be derived from this well-established constraint equation. Additionally,ℓ1norm SR can be interpreted as maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimator with Laplace prior imposed on solution. Under MAP framework, regularization parameter λ completely depends on the statistics of noise and coefficients, which actually implies an explicit way for determining λ. In our proposed method, the patch size and regularization parameter are analytically tractable, leading to high efficiency as well as pretty convenience. Experimental results in face hallucination task validate its effectiveness.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the proposed parameter estimation method in detail. Experimental results are shown in Section 3. In Section 4, we conclude the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we have proposed a novel method to automatically estimate the patch size and regularization parameter in SR based face hallucination. Different from empirical practice or L-curve method, our method enjoys both advantages of high computational efficiency and pretty convenience, while without sacrificing tuning precision. Experimental results on FEI and CAS-PEAL-R1 face databases as well as real-world images have confirmed its applicability in terms of numerical accuracy, computational cost and face hallucination performance. The proposed parameter estimation method can be readily incorporated into many existing SR based super-resolution approaches. Moreover, this reasoning paradigm can be generalized to similar patch-based super-resolution techniques employing other kinds of regularization, e.g., ridge regression.