@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Face recognition with Riesz binary pattern

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new image descriptor RBP is presented for face recognition in this paper.RBP is based on image multi-scale analysis and multi-order Riesz transform.RBP consists of two complementary components, i.e., local Riesz binary pattern (LRBP) and global Riesz binary pattern (GRBP).Experimental results on four databases demonstrate the superiority of our RBP compared with other image representation methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Face recognition,Monogenic signal representation,High-order Riesz transform,Binary coding method,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
First-order Riesz transform based monogenic signal representation has been widely used in image processing and computer vision, however it only characterizes image intrinsic one-dimensional structure, and is incapable of describing intrinsic two-dimensional structure. To this end, a novel feature extraction approach, named Riesz Binary Pattern (RBP), is proposed for face recognition based on image multi-scale analysis and multi-order Riesz transform. RBP consists of two complementary components, i.e., local Riesz binary pattern (LRBP) and global Riesz binary pattern (GRBP). LRBP is obtained by performing local binary coding operator on each Riesz transform response to extract image intrinsic two-dimensional structure features. While GRBP is the global binary coding of joint information of image pixel multi-scale analysis and multi-order Riesz transform. Histogram of LRBP and GRBP are concatenated to form face image RBP description. Experimental results on three databases demonstrate that our proposed RBP descriptor is more discriminant in extracting image information and can provide a higher classification rate compared to some state-of-the-art image representation methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Image representation is a key issue for face recognition task, and recent years have witnessed an increasing focus on image representation through local descriptors. As one of the most representative local descriptors, local binary pattern (LBP) characterizes the spatial structure of image texture by thresholding a local neighborhood with the value of the center pixel intensity and utilizing the sign information to form the binary pattern coding number [1]. Due to impressive computational efficiency and good texture discriminative property, LBP has achieved excellent performance and has gained considerable attention.To further improve the performance of LBP, a number of variants have been proposed recently. Heikkilä et al. [2] proposed center-symmetric LBP (CS-LBP), which is different from LBP in that it compares center symmetric pairs of pixels against a center pixel, rather than comparing each pixel with the center. This halves the number of bits of binary patterns for the same number of neighbors. One of the most critical deficiencies of LBP is that it only extracts the sign between neighboring pixels, while the magnitude is ignored, which may discard discriminative information. To better describe local micro patterns, Guo et al. [3] proposed the completed LBP (CLBP), which includes the information contained in the center pixel and magnitudes of local differences as complementary to the sign used by the original LBP. Considering that high frequency texture regions have high higher variances and do more contribution to discriminate image, Guo et al. [4] proposed variance weighted LBP (VLBP) histogram image representation method, rather than quantized the variance into N bins as in the original work [1]. Tan and Triggs [5] proposed local ternary pattern (LTP), which quantizes the image pixel gray-level differences between center and neighbor pixels into a ternary value instead of the binary one. It is more discriminant and less sensitive to noise in uniform regions than LBP. Huang et al. [6] proposed local circular patterns (LCP), which improve the LBP and its variants by replacing the binary quantization with a clustering method, resulting in higher discriminative power as well as better robustness to noise. Zhang et al. [7] proposed local derivative pattern (LDP) for image representation. The m-th order code of LDP is generated by encoding the variations of the image directional(m−1)-th derivative. Because there are a lot of pre-specific directions that can be used to estimate the variations of the(m−1)-th order local derivatives, LDP may result in too many codes for each pixel. Furthermore, it is impossible for LDP to address the rotation invariance issue. Guo et al. [8] proposed the local directional derivative pattern (LDDP), which encodes directional high-order derivative features along multi-direction around center pixel, for texture classification. Yuan [9] theoretically analyzed the original LBP from the Taylor expansion of a signal along a direction and proposed high-order derivative local binary pattern (DLBP), which is similar to the LDDP. And then by applying the circular shift sub-uniform and scale space operation let the DLBP descriptor has rotation and scale invariance capability for texture classification.Zhang et al. [10] proposed a local Gabor binary pattern histogram sequence (LGBPHS) descriptor to represent face information. By taking advantages of both Gabor wavelets and LBP feature extraction method, LGBPHS gained superior performances in uncontrolled environments. However, the multi-scale and multi-orientation Gabor feature extraction is computationally demanding and hence not affordable for real-time practical application. Yang et al. [11] proposed monogenic binary coding (MBC) image representation method, which encodes amplitude, orientation and phase of monogenic signal representation by employing the local binary coding scheme. Compared with LGBPHS method, MBC local feature extraction method has much lower time and space complexity, and leads to competitive performance. However, the main drawback of MBC method is that first-order Riesz transform based monogenic signal representation simply characterizes image intrinsic one-dimensional structure, and virtually unable to describe intrinsic two-dimensional structure.Recently, high-order Riesz transform is widely used in image analysis for complex signal models. Zhang et al. [12] proposed monogenic-LBP (MLBP) image descriptor, which is the combination of LBP, local phase of monogenic signal and the local surface type computed by the first- and second-order Riesz transform. Zhang and Li [13] binarized the coefficients of the first- and second-order Riesz transforms according to their signs as features to encode the palmprint and finger-knuckle-print local image patterns. However, this method does not consider the valuable image texture feature, which brings discriminant information for recognition. Marchant and Jackway [14] proposed to model local image interesting structures (e.g., lines, edges, corners and junctions) as the superposition of a two-dimensional steerable wavelet constructed by multi-order Riesz transform.Inspired by the conclusions of above mentioned works and further give a comprehensive description of the image information, we present a simple yet effective face image descriptor, Riesz binary pattern (RBP), for face recognition. The main novelty of our proposed RBP is twofold: (1) Multi-order (first, second and third) Riesz transform are jointly employed to analyze the image local intrinsic one- and two-dimensional structure information. (2) Local Riesz binary pattern (LRBP) and global Riesz binary pattern (GRBP) image patterns are devised to encode the structure information extracted by the multi-order Riesz transform. Therefore, RBP has the merits of robustness and compactness of coding based feature extraction method. The distribution of LRBP and GRBP codes within an image or sub-image is used to describe face image. Experimental results on three face databases show the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed descriptor.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we briefly review the related Hilbert transform, Riesz transform and monogenic signal representation. In Section 3, we describe our RBP based image representation method in detail. Section 4 presents the experimental results on three face databases. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
