@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
On the performance of joint iterative detection and decoding in coherent optical channels with laser frequency fluctuations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Use of joint iterative detection and decoding in high-speed fiber-optic communications.Near-optimal compensation of laser phase noise and frequency fluctuations.Efficient mitigation of (carrier) cycle slips in optical coherent receivers.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Coherent detection,LDPC,Joint iterative detection and decoding,Phase noise,16QAM,DWDM,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The joint iterative detection and decoding (JIDD) technique has been proposed by Barbieri et al. (2007) with the objective of compensating the time-varying phase noise and constant frequency offset experienced in satellite communication systems. The application of JIDD to optical coherent receivers in the presence of laser frequency fluctuations has not been reported in prior literature. Laser frequency fluctuations are caused by mechanical vibrations, power supply noise, and other mechanisms. They significantly degrade the performance of the carrier phase estimator in high-speed intradyne coherent optical receivers.This work investigates the performance of the JIDD algorithm in multi-gigabit optical coherent receivers. We present simulation results of bit error rate (BER) for non-differential polarization division multiplexing (PDM)-16QAM modulation in a 200Gb/s coherent optical system that includes an LDPC code with 20% overhead and net coding gain of 11.3dB at BER=10−15. Our study shows that JIDD with a pilot rate⩽5%compensates for both laser phase noise and laser frequency fluctuation. Furthermore, since JIDD is used with non-differential modulation formats, we find that gains in excess of 1dB can be achieved over existing solutions based on an explicit carrier phase estimator with differential modulation. The impact of the fiber nonlinearities in dense wavelength division multiplexing (DWDM) systems is also investigated. Our results demonstrate that JIDD is an excellent candidate for application in next generation high-speed optical coherent receivers.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Multi-gigabit coherent fiber optic systems based on quadrature phase shift keying (QPSK) and M-ary quadrature amplitude modulation (M-QAM) are currently being deployed in carrier networks. High spectral efficiency modulation and coding schemes are being considered to satisfy the projected increase of the bandwidth demand [2] and to enable advanced networking concepts such as the flexible grid and software defined optical networks. Carrier phase recovery (CPR) is a key function of intradyne coherent optical QPSK/M-QAM receivers [3,4]. In these devices, CPR algorithms are required to track effects such as laser phase noise and carrier frequency fluctuations [5].Since most of the M-QAM schemes considered for practical applications have rotational symmetry, errors in the carrier phase estimation may cause cycle slips (CS). After a CS occurs, all detected symbols are erroneous and they cannot be corrected by forward error correction (FEC) codes [3]. To counter this catastrophic effect, differential modulation is typically used [3]. In this modulation technique, the information is transmitted as the phase difference between two consecutive symbols. Therefore, the effects of a CS do not translate into catastrophic bit error bursts. While this option provides a solution to the CS problem, its sensitivity in terms of signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is worse than that achieved by non-differential schemes. For instance, a penalty of 1.2dB has been reported for differential QPSK modulation [6]. To avoid the penalty of differential modulation formats, the use of pilot symbols has been proposed in previous literature [7–9] to prevent error propagation in non-differential modulation.Although the catastrophic bit errors caused by CS can be mitigated by pilot symbols [10], their occurrence cannot be avoided and performance degradation will be experienced in the presence of high laser phase noise. This CS degradation caused by practical limitations of an explicit CPR is exacerbated by laser frequency instabilities introduced by mechanical vibrations including power supply noise [5]. These frequency fluctuations are modeled as sinusoidal frequency modulation of large amplitude (e.g., ∼500MHz) and low frequency (e.g., ⩽35kHz).In this work we investigate the performance of a joint iterative detection and decoding (JIDD) algorithm in optical systems based on pilot symbols and powerful FEC codes such as low density parity check (LDPC). JIDD uses the soft-output information on the coded symbols provided by the decoder and performs forward–backward recursions, taking into account carrier phase information. Although performance evaluation of JIDD has been addressed in the past (e.g., see [1] and references therein), its behavior in high-speed transmissions over optical channels with laser frequency fluctuations and phase noise has not been reported so far.The JIDD technique analyzed in this work builds upon the algorithm proposed in [1] for satellite channels with random time-varying carrier phase and constant unknown frequency offset. We present simulation results of post-FEC bit error rate (BER) for non-differential polarization division multiplexing (PDM)-16QAM in a 200Gb/s optical coherent system that uses the LDPC code with 20% overhead and net coding gain (NCG) of 11.3dB at BER=10−15 proposed in [11]. Our study shows that JIDD with a pilot rate of 5% is able to completely compensate laser frequency fluctuations with amplitudes as high as 700MHz [5]. We highlight that this performance is achieved without the need of a traditional CPR stage such as the blind phase search (BPS) carrier recovery algorithm [4]. Furthermore, our results demonstrate that JIDD achieves gains higher than 1dB over existing solutions based on an explicit CPR with differential modulation [5].This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 investigates the impact of the laser frequency fluctuations in optical coherent receivers with LDPC codes and existing carrier phase recovery algorithms. The JIDD algorithm is investigated in Sections 3 and 4. The performance of the proposed receiver in the presence of nonlinear effects is analyzed in Section 5. Conclusions are drawn in Section 6. To facilitate the reading of this paper, abbreviations most frequently used are listed in Table 1.Figs. 1 and 2show a simplified model of the PDM coherent optical transmitter and receiver, respectively. The components in phase and quadrature of transmitted symbols for each polarization modulate the intensity and/or phase of corresponding output of the polarization beam splitter (PBS) of the transmitter laser (TL) through parallel Mach–Zehnder modulators (MZM) arranged in a Mach–Zehnder super-structure. Then, the modulated signals of each polarization are combined in the polarization beam combiner (PBC). The optical fiber introduces chromatic dispersion, polarization mode dispersion, as well as attenuation. Optical amplifiers (OA) deployed periodically along the fiber compensate the attenuation and introduce amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) noise. At the receiver, the optical signal is mixed with a local oscillator (LO) laser, the system operates with intradyne detection. The mixing of the received signal and LO with a 90° hybrid of 4 outputs (HY) gives the in-phase and quadrature components for each polarization, which are then fed to balanced photodiodes. This scheme allows suppressing the relative intensity noise (RIN). The TL and LO lasers can be either distributed feedback (DFB) or external cavity laser (ECL). The four signals are sampled twice per symbol period (i.e., the sampling rate is2/Twith T being the symbol duration) and fed into a digital signal processor (DSP). The DSP implements the main receiver functions, such as coarse carrier recovery (CCR), compensation of chromatic dispersion (CD) and polarization mode dispersion (PMD), timing recovery (TR), etc. The CCR block estimates the carrier frequency offset (e.g., based on the spectral shift of the received signal) and compensates it in order to achieve a capture range of several GHz.1Due to the low bandwidth of the CCR loop, short-term frequency instabilities of the laser as well as correlated phase noise cannot be tracked.1The chromatic dispersion is compensated typically by a frequency domain equalizer (FDE). The fiber length is automatically identified during the startup and the response of the filter is programmed accordingly. A T/2 multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) feedforward equalizer (FFE) performs the polarization demultiplexing and the compensation of PMD and polarization-dependent loss (PDL). An adaptation algorithm is essential in optical channels since the receiver must track nonstationary effects (PMD, PDL, changes in the state of polarization of the TX or LO lasers, etc.). Towards this end, decision-directed LMS and/or the constant modulus algorithm (CMA) are typically used. A low latency phase-locked loop (PLL) is included to get tentative decisions required to implement the FFE adaptation algorithm [5,12]. Since most part of the carrier frequency offset has already been compensated by the CCR, the PLL is required mainly to track short-term frequency instabilities of the lasers as well as part of the phase noise [5]. To avoid the cycle slips introduced by the PLL in transmission with non-differential modulation, the signal not demodulated by the PLL is fed to the CPR. Therefore the CPR block must be able to track high-frequency laser phase noise, nonlinear phase noise as well as laser frequency fluctuations. Finally, the samples are processed by the soft decision demapper (SDD) which provides the soft information used by the iterative LDPC decoder to estimate the transmit bit.For simplicity, in this section we assume that:•Fiber optic impairments include only linear effects (i.e., CD and PMD). The impact of the nonlinear effects experienced in fiber optic transmission systems shall be analyzed later in Section 5.CD and PMD are perfectly compensated by the FDE and the MIMO-FFE, respectively.Most carrier frequency offset is compensated at the receiver input by the CCR stage (i.e., the residual carrier frequency offset at the output of the DSP is low and easily compensated by traditional CPR blocks such as BPS).Furthermore, from Fig. 2 notice that the two polarizations at the output of the DSP block are treated as two independent coded channels. Consequently, in this work a single polarization is considered for the channel modeling and the theoretical formulation of the JIDD algorithm.Letck∈Mbe a complex symbol of an M-QAM constellation with alphabetM. The information bits are encoded and mapped into symbols. Each codeword become in a block of coded symbols, denoted as symbol codeword, which corresponds to a set of K symbols. The received signal at the input of the carrier phase recovery can be expressed as [13](1)rk=ckejθk+zkwhereθkis the total phase noise andzkrepresents the ASE noise sample. The latter is modeled as a white complex Gaussian random variable with power2σ2. LetΔνbe the total laser linewidth parameter. The received phaseθkcan be expressed as(2)θk=θk-1+ϕk+wkwhere{wk}is a set of i.i.d white real Gaussian random variables with varianceσw2=2πΔνT[3], whileϕkis given by(3)ϕk=Ωc+ΔΩkwhereΩcis the angular carrier frequency offset given byΩc=2πTfc, withfcbeing the residual carrier frequency offset. The termΔΩkrepresents the phase change generated by frequency fluctuations, which can be modeled as(4)ΔΩk≈2πApTcos(2πTΔfck)whereApandΔfcare the amplitude and frequency of the modulation tone [5].As we shall show in Section 5, the generic model given by Eq. (1) can also be used to include the nonlinear interference caused by the Kerr effect in the fiber [13,14].Fig. 2 depicts the simplified model of the PDM coherent optical receiver, where a carrier phase recovery stage is used to demodulate the received signal. CPR is a key function of coherent optical receivers [2,3]. In particular, feedforward phase estimation schemes such as the Viterbi–Viterbi (VV) [3] or BPS [4] algorithms have been proposed for these receivers, as a result of their good laser linewidth tolerance and feasibility for parallel implementation. We consider two existing carrier phase recovery techniques denoted here as ECPR-1 and ECPR-2.ECPR-1 is the blind phase search carrier recovery algorithm [4] with differential modulation (see Fig. 3). The BPS block estimates the phase noise as follows:(5)θ̂k=Uargminφbgk(φb)whereU·is the unwrap function andφbis the test phase defined as(6)φb=bB.π2,b∈{0,1,…,B-1}with B being the number of phases to be tested; termgk(φb)is given by(7)gk(φb)=∑i=-NNrk-ie-jφb-Qrk-ie-jφb2whereQ(.)is the slicer function and N is the filter half width (see [4] for more details).On the other hand, ECPR-2 is a pilot-aided scheme that employs an interpolation filter followed by BPS with non-differential modulation [15] (see Fig. 4). Consider that one pilot symbol is periodically inserted afterD-1payload symbols. Thus, we define the pilot-rate asPR=1/D. The ith pilot symbol occurs at the discrete time instant iD, hence the pilot sequence is a zero-padded sequence given by(8)pk=ck,k=iD0,k≠iDThe system comprises a coarse phase tracking based on pilot symbols, where the received sequence is multiplied with the complex conjugate of the zero padded pilot sequence. The resulting sequence is filtered by an interpolation filter with impulse responsefk. The phase correction is generated by taking the argument of the samples at the output of the interpolation filter. To correct any residual phase error, a second CPR stage based on the BPS algorithm is used. Note that there is not phase ambiguity at the BPS input due to the use of the pilot symbols. A small residual phase offset is assumed therefore the phase estimate is limited to the range [-π/4,π/4). From the latter, note that no cycle slips are introduced by the ECPR-2 scheme since the unwrap operation is avoided. However, we highlight that if the pilot ratePRis not sufficiently high,2The proper value ofPRshall depend on the amount of phase noise power in the system.2burst errors may occur and the performance of the LDPC decoder should degrade significantly.The performance of ECPR-1 and ECPR-2 in the presence of laser frequency fluctuations is investigated by computer simulations. In all the cases, BPS usesB=32test phases and the filter half width N is optimized for each SNR. We consider a non-dispersive optical channel withfc=0, a baud rate of1/T=32Giga-symbols per second (Gs/s) with PDM-16QAM modulation (i.e., the bit rate is 256Gb/s). We use the LDPC code with 20% overhead and net coding gain in additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels of 11.3dB at BER=10−15 proposed in [11].3Note that the effective bit rate is ∼200Gb/s.3Three values of the pilot rate (PR) are considered for ECPR-2: PR=1, 2 and 5%. An LDPC decoder with 50 iterations has been used in all the cases in order to achieve all benefit possible. Results without laser phase noise and frequency fluctuations are also included for comparison purposes. This scheme (denoted as Ideal CPR) also uses an LDPC decoder with 50 iterations. We focus our study on the post-FEC BER as a function of the signal-to-noise ratio per information bit (Eb/N0), which considers the penalty caused by the code overhead and the pilot symbols.Fig. 5shows the post-FEC BER versusEb/N0in the presence of laser phase noise only (i.e.,Ap=0). Two values of the laser linewidthΔνare simulated: 500kHz and 5MHz. We observe that the ECPR-1 and ECPR-2 withPR=5%can operate with some degradation in the presence of phase noise. The penalty of ECPR-1 respect to ECPR-2 withPR=5%is mainly owing to the use of differential modulation.Fig. 6shows the post-FEC BER versusEb/N0in the presence of laser phase noise and sinusoidal jitter withΔfc=35kHz,Ap=200and 500MHz. Note that a dramatic performance degradation caused by the frequency fluctuations is experienced in both CPR schemes. Although the impact of the laser frequency fluctuations on the performance has already been investigated in the past (e.g., see [5]), we emphasize that our study considers the post-FEC BER and not the pre-FEC BER as usual in previous related work. Thus, short bursts of bit errors unnoticeable in pre-FEC BER analysis may cause high penalty when post-FEC performance is considered [16]. This fact is useful to understand the important degradation experienced in the presence the carrier frequency fluctuations shown in Fig. 6.From previous results we can see that powerful carrier phase estimation and decoding techniques shall be needed to combat the effects of both the laser phase noise and the frequency fluctuations. To compensate these impairments, in next section we propose the use of a joint iterative detection and decoding technique. This technique has been proposed in the past to compensate time-varying phase noise and constant frequency offset experienced in satellite communication systems [1]. So far, its application to optical coherent receivers in the presence of laser frequency fluctuations has not been investigated in the literature.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The performance of a joint iterative detection and decoding algorithm in optical coherent receivers has been investigated in this work. The excellent performance of JIDD in the presence of laser phase noise, fiber nonlinearities, and frequency fluctuations has been demonstrated. Computer simulations with high phase noise have also shown that JIDD outperforms BPS combined with non-differential modulation and the CS compensation technique proposed in [10]. Further work is needed to enable the implementation of JIDD in practical receivers. Nevertheless, we would like to emphasize that the key contribution of this work is to show that JIDD is able to successfully combat the laser phase noise and frequency fluctuations in high-speed transmissions over optical channels.