@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Wideband WDM coherent optical MIMO transmission over 50 μm-core GI-MMF using selective mode excitation technique

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We proposed a MIMO system by using a selective mode excitation technique to reduce DSP complexity.We obtained a small DMD over a wide wavelength range under selective mode excitation conditions.We achieved a C+L band WDM coherent optical 2×2 MIMO transmission over a 10-km 50μm-core GI-MMF.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Optical MIMO transmission,Digital coherent receiver,Multi-mode fiber,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We propose a WDM MIMO system that uses a selective mode excitation technique to reduce MIMO DSP over a conventional GI-MMF. We show numerically that we can selectively excite low-order modes with the small DMD of GI-MMF and confirm experimentally that we can obtain a small DMD over a wide wavelength range under selective mode excitation conditions. We realize a C- and L-band WDM coherent optical 2×2 MIMO transmission over a 10-km 50μm-core GI-MMF, which enables us to reduce MIMO DSP complexity over a wide wavelength range.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The explosive growth in Internet traffic will lead to a demand for greater capacity. Recently, a new approach for realizing a much higher transmission capacity has been developed that utilizes the higher-order mode (HOM) in multi-mode fiber (MMF). In optical multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) transmissions using HOMs, each signal channel can be recovered by digital signal processing (DSP) at the receivers despite the presence of inter-modal crosstalk in the fiber [1–3]. Recently, both few-mode fiber (FMF) with a small differential mode group delay (DMD) and a DMD compensation scheme have been investigated to reduce the DSP complexity [4–8]. By establishing a new transmission system that employs these specially engineered fibers, we can realize large capacity and long distance MIMO transmission.On the other hand, a graded-index MMF (GI-MMF) has been widely deployed over short to medium distances (e.g. data center or local area network). A conventional GI-MMF typically propagates more than several tens of modes. Thus, we can increase transmission capacity with existing GI-MMFs by employing a MIMO technique for short to medium distance transmission. However, we need to selectively excite the appropriate propagation modes to suppress the maximum DMD value and reduce DSP complexity. In our previous work [9], we successfully achieved a C- and L-band WDM coherent optical 2×2 MIMO transmission over a 10-km 50-μm-core conventional GI-MMF by exciting five mode groups. We confirmed the significance of the selective mode excitation technique with the demonstration experiment described in Ref. [9].In this paper, to provide further supportive evidence, we numerically investigate the selective mode excitation conditions for a 50-μm-core GI-MMF and discuss in detail the conditions for exciting low-order mode groups with a small DMD to reduce the amount of MIMO DSP. Furthermore, we confirmed experimentally that low-order mode groups have a small DMD over a wide wavelength range under selective mode excitation. By using a mode excitation unit (MEU), which enabled us to limit the number of excitation modes in our experiment, we restricted the number of propagation modes. Consequently, we realized a C- and L-band WDM coherent optical 2×2 MIMO transmission over a 50-μm-core GI-MMF that is compatible with ITU-T G.651, which employs two mode groups with an even smaller DMD than that reported in [9]. Moreover, we investigated the WDM-MIMO transmission performance in further detail.In typical multimode fibers, modes with the same or very similar propagation constants can be grouped together in sets. In general, modes belong to the same principal mode group M if the indexes of the LPl,pmodes fulfill the condition [10]:(1)M=2p+l-1For example, the LP21 and LP02 modes have an M of 3, and the LP31 and LP12 modes have an M of 4. The modes within a certain mode group have very similar propagation constants. Therefore, modes are often dealt with in mode groups instead of as individual modes. Fig. 1shows the effective index of each LP mode of GI-MMF with a core diameter d of 50μm, a maximum relative index difference Δmax of 1.0 % and a profile exponent α value of 2.0 at 1550nm. The calculations were performed using the finite difference method. The effective index decreases monotonously as the mode number increases. GI-MMF has 10 propagation mode groups at 1550nm. If we use the principal mode groups M from 1 to 4, we can utilize 6 LP modes. Next, we investigated the DMD characteristics for GI-MMF. Fig. 2shows the DMDs at 1550nm with profile exponent α values of 1.9, 2.0, 2.1 and 2.2. For example, for α=2.1when we only used the fundamental mode and the first HOM group, we could reduce the maximum DMD from 966 to 125ps/km compared with in the case of the existing fundamental mode and HOM groups from the first to the seventh.The measured DMDs of 50-μm-core GI-MMF are also shown in the figure. Here we measured the DMD after a 10km transmission using a mode scrambler on the input side of the GI-MMF to obtain steady-state mode excitation. The mode scrambler consists of a combination of the 50-μm-core GI and 50-μm-core step-index (SI) fibers. As shown in Fig. 2, the profile exponent α has a strong influence on the DMD. Although the GI-MMF we used in the experiment had an α value of about 2.1, we could obtain a small DMD when α was 2.0. Fig. 3shows experimental results for the impulse response of a 10km-long GI-MMF in the 1450 ∼ 1630nm wavelength range. We observed eight pulses that corresponded to the fundamental mode and seven HOM groups.Fig. 4(a) shows the wavelength dependence of the DMD of the 50-μm-core GI-MMF. The solid lines are calculated results (α=2.1) and the plotted symbols are experimental results. The DMD was smaller at shorter wavelengths and the maximum DMD was 968ps/km even though there were seven HOM groups over the S-C-L-band. The maximum DMD is expected to decrease further when α is 2.0. Thus, several HOM groups can be excited and a small DMD can be achieved over a wide wavelength range in GI-MMF under a selective mode excitation condition. Moreover, when we only used the fundamental mode and the first HOM group, we could reduce the maximum DMD to 106ps/km over the S-C-L band.We can selectively excite specific modes by adjusting the launch condition into the GI-MMF, namely, the spot size or offset value. The power coupling efficiency ηl,pfrom the light beam into the LPl,pmode of GI-MMF is obtained from the overlap integral of the incident field distribution and each mode field:(2)ηl,p=|∬Ei·El,p∗dxdy|2∬|Ei|2dxdy·∬|El,p|2dxdywhere Eiand El,pare the field distributions of the light beam and the mode, respectively. This means that a field distribution at the beginning of the fiber will mainly excite modes with a similar mode field distribution [11].For the sake of simplicity, the incident beam is assumed to have a Gaussian field distribution. We assume a GI-MMF with a core diameter d of 50μm, a maximum relative index difference Δmax of 1.0 % and a profile exponent α value of 2.0. Three examples of the coupling efficiency of each LP mode for center (0μm) and offset (5 and 10μm) launching at 1550nm are shown in Fig. 5. We do not show LPl,pmodes with an ηl,pof less than 0.05 in the calculating region to prevent the figures becoming too complex. As shown in Fig. 5(a), the center launching excites LP0,pmodes. In particular, when the spot size is 8μm, this launching almost exclusively excites the fundamental mode (LP01 mode). On the other hand, off-center launching excites not only the LP0,pmodes but also other LPl,pmodes. When the spot size is 6μm, the LP01, and LP11 modes are mainly excited as shown in Fig. 5(b) and the LP01, LP11, LP21, LP02, LP31 and LP12 modes are excited as shown in Fig. 5(c). Fig. 6shows the power coupling efficiency of the LP modes as a function of the offset of the incident beam when the spot size is 6μm. The LP01 mode coupling efficiency decreases monotonically as the offset increases. On the other hand, the HOM coupling efficiency increases as the offset increases. In particular, when the offset value is 4μm, we can only excite the LP01 and LP11 modes by suppressing the coupling efficiency of other HOMs to less than 0.05. Moreover, when the offset value is 6μm, we can only excite the LP01, LP11 and LP21 modes, and when the offset value is 9μm, we can excite the LP01, LP11, LP21, LP02, LP31 and LP12 modes.As a result, we can selectively excite specific modes by adjusting the spot size and offset value of the incident beam launched into the GI-MMF. We confirmed that the launching condition of the LP mode coupling efficiency is almost independent in the 1450–1625nm range. If we select the mode number in the GI-MMF by using the selective mode excitation technique, we can upgrade the system flexibly and reduce the MIMO DSP depending on the MIMO system.Next we investigated experimentally the selective mode excitation for low-order mode groups to reduce the DMD. We used an optical system consisting of two lenses and fine adjustment stages as an MEU. The signal light emitted from the end of a single-mode fiber (SMF) passed through two optical lenses, and the light was coupled into a GI-MMF. The numerical aperture (NA) of the GI-MMF was 0.2. The focal length and NA of the lens on the SMF side were 18.4mm and 0.15, respectively. The focal length and NA of the lens on the GI-MMF side were 11.0mm and 0.25, respectively. We placed the cleaved ends of the two optical fibers in fine adjustment stages and adjusted each stage so that we changed the launching condition of the spot size and offset value.Fig. 7shows the impulse responses of a 10km GI-MMF with steady-mode excitation, SMF center launching, and selective excitation. We used the mode scrambler, SMF and MEU as a mode exciter on the input side of the GI-MMF in each case. With the MEU, we adjusted the spot size and offset of the incident beam to excite mainly the LP01 and LP11 modes as shown in Fig 6. With the steady-mode excitation, we observed eight pulses. This means that many HOM groups were excited. The maximum DMD was larger than in other cases. With SMF center launching, we observed one pulse. This means that only the fundamental mode was excited. In this case, we could not realize optical MIMO transmission by using HOMs because the HOMs were not excited. With selective excitation, we observed one pulse each for the fundamental mode and the first HOM. As a result, we could experimentally reduce the maximum DMD to one ninth that obtained with MMF launching as shown in the calculation results of Fig. 2. Fig. 8shows the impulse response of a 10km-long GI-MMF induced by selective mode excitation in the 1450–1630nm wavelength range. We observed two pulses that corresponded to the fundamental mode and the first HOM in the 1450–1630nm wavelength range. The DMDs were 37, 56, 78, 96, 107ps/km and the total losses of the GI-MMF were 4.6, 3.9, 3.6, 4.2, 4.4dB for 1450, 1500, 1550, 1600, 1630nm, respectively. As a result, we could reduce the maximum DMD to one ninth that obtained with steady-state mode excitation (Fig. 3) over a wide wavelength range as shown in Fig. 4.Finally, we realized a wideband WDM coherent optical 2×2 MIMO transmission by using the low-order modes of GI-MMF under a selective mode excitation condition to reduce MIMO DSP complexity. Fig. 9shows the setup for a WDM coherent optical 2×2 MIMO transmission over 10km of GI-MMF. The CW light emitted from eight DFB lasers operating at 1530–1600nm with a 10nm channel spacing was split by a single-mode coupler (SMC) and coupled into two LiNbO3 modulators, and two independent 10Gbit/s BPSK signals (Tx1,Tx2) were generated. Each signal sequence consisted of 100,000 symbols. We selectively excited modes for each signal using an MEU. Different mode power distributions were generated between the signals because we adjusted the MEUs to obtain different offset values of around 2 and 5μm, respectively, as shown in Fig. 6. As a result, we selectively excited low-order HOM groups and realized mode group diversity at the transmitter. The two signals were coupled into a multi-mode coupler (MMC). We used a commercially available 2×1 MMF filter coupler. The filter coupler contained a half mirror and it had two input ports and one output port with MMFs. Half of the light coupled into one of the input ports was reflected by the mirror, and half of the light coupled into the other input port was transmitted through the mirror. The reflected and transmitted lights were coupled into the output port. The splitting ratio was not 50/50 for each mode group. Then the eight mixed wavelength signals were coupled into a 10km-long 50μm-core GI-MMF. The total loss of the GI-MMF was around 3.6dB under our selective mode excitation condition at 1550nm. The losses from Tx1 and Tx2 after the MEU to the output of the MMF were 7.0 and 7.8dB, respectively. We launched the signals at a power level of around 7dBm/channel. After transmission, the mixed signals were split with an MMC. The 1×2 MMC at the receiver had the reverse function as that in the transmitter. Then each of the two divided signals was coupled into a mode convergence unit (MCU), whose configuration was the inverse of that of the MEU [12]. The signal light emitted from the end of the GI-MMF passed through two optical lenses and then coupled into an SMF. In the MCU, almost the entire end facet of the MMF was mapped to the SMF core. We adjusted each fine adjustment stage so that we obtained different mode power distributions between the signals. As a result, we realized mode group diversity at the receiver. Since the optical devices at the receiver in our experiment were conventional single-mode devices such as optical bandpass filters and EDFAs, we needed this MCU, which acted as an interface between the multi-mode and single-mode devices. Information regarding the amplitude and phase of the HOMs is required for a coherent optical MIMO transmission. We can preserve the information by using the MCU. The losses from the MMF to Rx1 and Rx2 after the MCU were 9.6 and 11.7dB, respectively. Each WDM signal was filtered by an optical bandpass filter and pre-amplified with C- or L-band EDFAs. The received signal was combined with the CW light from a tunable local oscillator for each wavelength in each 90-degree optical hybrid. Each of the two 90-degree optical hybrids contained a polarization beam splitter, and we utilized only one of the two orthogonal polarizations. We adjusted the polarization controllers at the transmitter and the receiver so that the optical power at the output of each 90-degree optical hybrid reached its maximum value. The in-phase and quadrature parts were fed to two balanced photo detectors and digitized using a real time oscilloscope. The oscilloscope had a bandwidth of 16GHz and a sampling rate of 40GS/s. During the digital signal processing, the collected data were processed offline for symbol recovery with adaptive MIMO equalization realized by a decision feedback equalizer (DFE) [13]. We carried out the frequency offset compensation of the received signals by using the method described in [14] prior to the adaptive equalization. We determined the tap coefficient of the adaptive equalization with the DFE by using the recursive least squares (RLS) algorithm [15,16] and training sequences, and we switched to the decision-directed mode to compensate for the carrier phase noise. The decision directed mode of the adaptive equalizer was used to compensate for the small time variation in the impulse response over a short time range. The numbers of taps for the feedforward and feedback filters in the DFE for each wavelength were fixed at 10 and 1 for back-to-back and 10 and 30 for GI-MMF, respectively. Training sequences consisting of 1000 symbols from a total of 100,000 transmitted symbols were used for adaptive MIMO equalization.Fig. 10shows the impulse responses of each pass (Tx1–Rx1,Tx1–Rx2,Tx2–Rx1,Tx2–Rx2) as shown in Fig. 9 at 1550nm. We observed the impulse responses after the MCU. As shown in Fig. 10(a) and (b), we can see two distinctive pulses, which correspond to the fundamental mode and first HOM. In Fig. 10(c) and (d), we can see the second and third HOMs because we adjusted the MEU so that the first HOM was excited strongly for Tx2 as can be seen from the calculated results for the power coupling efficiency of the modes as a function of the excitation conditions as shown in Fig. 6. The DMDs of the first, second and third HOMs were 0.79, 2.04, and 2.99ns, respectively. For the second and third HOMs, we set the tap number corresponding to the DMD of the third HOMs. Fig. 11shows the tap coefficient characteristics (h11,h12,h21,h22) of the MIMO equalizer. We set the tap numbers of the FF and FB filters in the DFE at 10 and 30, respectively. Tap numbers 1–10 and 11–40 are the FF and FB filter coefficients, respectively. We can see that the tap coefficient characteristics of the DFE reflect the impulse responses of the MMF shown in Fig. 10. The FF filters adjusted the timing of Rx1 and Rx2 at the receivers. Therefore, by using selective mode excitation, we reduced the maximum DMD to about one third of that for MMF launching and there were about one third the number of taps for DSP compared with MMF launching. The differences between each impulse response shown in Fig. 10 reveal that mode group diversity was realized at both the transmitter and receiver.We then obtained the singular values (SV) from the estimated channel matrix H=[h11,h12;h21,h22] as shown in Fig. 11. Fig. 12shows the SVs over time when we determined the SVs over each of the 20 consecutive blocks of 5000 symbols. We find that the SVs are varying on time scales slower than 10μs for most of the time. We then defined channel dependent loss (CDL) as(3)CDL=maxλ12,λ22minλ12,λ22and averaged it over the full waveform [17]. As a result, we obtained average system CDL of 1.4dB. We consider that the main cause of this CDL is loss differences in the MCU at the receiver by exciting the HOMs strongly for Tx2 in our experiment. On the other hand, we can see that the system CDL has a negligible impact on capacity as described in Ref. [18].Fig. 13(a) and (b), respectively, shows the Q2-factors of signals at 1550 and 1600nm transmitted as a function of the received power at each receiver. In this measurement, we adjusted the polarization controllers at the transmitter and the receiver so that the optical power at the output of each 90-degree optical hybrid reached its maximum value. We next adjusted the received power by using the VOAs in the polarization states. We confirmed that the Q penalty was around 3dB at 1550 and 1600nm at the Q-limit of 8.5dB (dashed line) yielding BERs below 1×10−12 with the use of current commercial 10-Gb/s FEC techniques with a 7% overhead [19]. We assume that the main reason for the increase in the power penalty is the degradation of the restoration accuracy of the MIMO equalization caused by the increase in the crosstalk as a result of the distributed mode conversion in the transmission line. We believe the transmission distance limitation to be caused by the increase in the DMD and the modal crosstalk in the transmission fiber. When the DMD is increased, we need to increase the number of taps for restoration of the signals. We consider that the degradation of the restoration accuracy of the MIMO equalization caused by the increase in the number of inactive taps and the crosstalk that led to an increase in transmission distance. With the mode dependent loss, the resulting SNR degradation of the higher-order modes makes it difficult to increase the transmission distance if the number of modes is increased.The wavelength dependence of the Q2-factor is shown in Fig. 14. The received power was fixed at 10dBm at each receiver. All the channels had Q values above the Q-limit of 8.5dB. Thus, we realized a WDM coherent optical MIMO transmission with mode group diversity over a 10km GI-MMF with low MIMO DSP complexity in the 1530–1600nm range. Even though our transmission experiment used only one polarization, we expect polarization multiplexing to be employed under the same selective excitation condition by using a polarizing beam splitter to generate a transmission channel for another polarization at the transmitter and polarization diversity coherent receivers and 4×4 MIMO processing at the receiver.The GI-MMF we used has scalability for optical MIMO systems. As shown in Fig. 1, the GI-MMF has 30 LP modes at 1550nm. We expect an extension to 30 LP mode use. However, higher-order modes have a larger DMD and higher transmission loss than lower-order modes thus limiting both transmission distance and capacity. Moreover, we need to consider both the transmission fiber and the extendibility and insertion loss of MUX/DEMUX. If the number of branches increases, the loss of the coupler increases. In this case, we need to increase the launched power in each transmission channel. We expect a possible expansion of the number of modes by introducing a low loss mode MUX/DEMUX, such as the photonic lanterns [20] and the planar lightwave circuit [21]. On the other hand, by using the S-C-L-band, we can realize a WDM MIMO system with a wider band and less MIMO DSP with a view to realizing a larger capacity optical transmission system.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
