@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Experimental demonstration of the maximum likelihood-based chromatic dispersion estimator for coherent receivers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Experimental investigation of a maximum likelihood-based (ML-based) algorithm for chromatic dispersion estimation.Comparison of ML algorithm with CMA-based alternative showing advantage of the former.Demonstration of ML CD estimator robustness at low OSNR and high DGD for both QPSK and 16-QAM.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Chromatic dispersion,Optical performance monitoring,Maximum likelihood,Digital signal processing,16QAM,QPSK,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We perform an experimental investigation of a maximum likelihood-based (ML-based) algorithm for bulk chromatic dispersion estimation for digital coherent receivers operating in uncompensated optical networks. We demonstrate the robustness of the method at low optical signal-to-noise ratio (OSNR) and against differential group delay (DGD) in an experiment involving 112Gbit/s polarization-division multiplexed (PDM) 16-ary quadrature amplitude modulation (16QAM) and quaternary phase-shift keying (QPSK).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Linear impairments, in particular chromatic dispersion (CD) and polarization-mode dispersion (PMD) resulting from fiber transmission are now routinely mitigated by digital signal processing (DSP) in coherent receivers. This advancement allows for fiber-optic networks that no longer require dispersion compensating modules (DCMs) and two-stage amplification to perform reliable transmission. The major benefits of uncompensated links include: decrease in the noise figure (due to decrease in linear and nonlinear optical noise), reduction in link loss and latency, lower deployment capital expenditures.As optical networks adopt flexibility and dynamic lightpath switching [1], the CD accumulated in the signal may change between two different connection requests, even if a source and destination are the same. Therefore a conventional approach, where a coherent receiver uses a static CD filter, does no longer apply. This makes an accurate adaptive CD estimation for dispersion unmanaged coherent photonic backbones indispensable.Various approaches to non-data aided CD estimation in digital coherent receivers have been presented. One of the methods is based on parameter extraction from equalizer taps [2]. Due to a limited number of filter taps in the receiver, this solution might only be used to monitor relatively small CD, roughly corresponding to a stretch of one fiber span in long haul network. To support longer links, other methods, based on CD scanning are used. In those techniques, the space of possible CD values is searched in small steps (20–200ps/nm [3]) and a metric value is computed for each step. A characteristic feature of this metric, often global minimum or maximum, is used to indicate successful mitigation of CD. Diverse variants of this procedure, each using a different metric, have been shown so far. A method derived from constant modulus algorithm (CMA), where the metric is based on a departure from a fixed power threshold, is used in Refs. [3,4], delay-tap sampling estimator [5,6], autocorrelation of signal power waveform [7,8], clock tone search [9–11], Gardner time error detector variance [12]. Recently, another technique have been demonstrated, where the sweep over CD values is performed automatically when applying FFT on the autocorrelation of discrete spectrum [13].In this paper we present an experimental investigation of a method for CD estimation based on the maximum likelihood (ML) criterion [14]. The approach is experimentally verified in a transmission experiment using 112Gbit/s polarization division multiplexed (PDM) 16-ary quadrature amplitude modulation (16QAM) and quaternary phase-shift keying (QPSK) optical signals and its performance is compared, and found better, to an alternative (reference) method derived from constant modulus algorithm criterion from [4]. (Please notice that this is not the CMA commonly used for polarization demultiplexing.)In this section we shortly present the maximum likelihood CD estimator. The full derivation can be found in [14].We consider a coherent optical communication system using polarization multiplexing. The data, phase, and polarization state of the received signal are unknown, as is the differential group delay (DGD) along an unknown axis. The received signal can be expressed in the frequency domain asR(f)=H(f)e-j2πfτT(f)S(f)+N(f)≡X(f)+N(f),whereH(f)is the transfer function of the CD,τis an unknown propagation delay, the Jones matrixT(f)describes the polarization scrambling and DGD,S(f)is the Fourier transform of the transmitted signal, andN(f)is complex additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) with power spectral densityN0/2per each of the four real dimensions. The CD all-pass filter is described byH(f)=exp-jπf2λ2c∫0LD(z)dz=ejπηT2f2,whereλis the carrier wavelength, c is the speed of light,D(z)is the dispersion parameter, L is the total system length, andηis the CD parameter to be estimated. The likelihood for the received signal isp(r|η,τ,T,a)∝exp-1N0∫R(f)-X(f)2df,where we used Parseval’s theorem to write the likelihood in the Fourier domain and denoted a vector representation of received signal in time domain,r(t), byr. This expression depends on the data, represented by the sequence of transmitted symbolsa. To remove the dependency ona, we use the second order Taylor expansion ofp(r|η,τ,T,a)and take the expectation with respect toa. We thus find an approximate expression forp(r|η,τ,T). Further approximations allow us to remove the dependence onτ. However, the objective function still depends onT. We solve this by optimizing over a small number of polarization states and DGD values. We formulate the final result in terms of the received signal after matched filtering. Thus, we introduceY(f)=P∗(f)R(f), whereP∗(f)is the transfer function of the filter matched to the transmitted pulse shape. For any M-ary quadrature amplitude modulation or M-ary phase-shift keying modulation format forM>2, the final estimator turns out to be(1)ηˆ=argmaxηmaxM∈S∫-∞∞YH(f)MY(f+1/T)e-j2πηTfdf,where the set of matrices to test isS=100±1,01±10.Fig. 1shows the experimental setup, which can generate optical 16QAM signal at 14Gbaud or QPSK at 28Gbaud. A pulse pattern generator (PPG) generates four copies of decorrelated electrical signals carrying binary pseudorandom bit sequences of length215-1(PRBS-15) which are then amplified. For 16QAM, the PPG operates at 14GHz and the resulting four signals are grouped in pairs, one signal from each pair is attenuated by 6dB, and each pairs is combined in a resistive combiner. This results in two four-level signals: in-phase (I) and quadrature (Q) components for the double-nested Mach–Zehnder modulator. In the optical domain, a 16QAM signal at 56Gbit/s is obtained. For QPSK, two amplified PPG outputs operate at 28Gbit/s, generating two-level I and Q signals, which results in an optical QPSK signal at 56Gbit/s. The light source used in the transmitter is an external cavity laser (ECL) with a linewidth of 100kHz. Polarization division multiplexing is emulated by multiplexing the signal with its delayed copy in the orthogonal polarization, creating, respectively PDM–16QAM and PDM-QPSK optical signals at 112Gbit/s. An erbium-doped fiber amplifier is used at the transmitter to compensate for the insertion losses.The signal is launched into a link without dispersion compensating fiber using a commercial wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) equipment with all other WDM channels turned off. An amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) noise loading stage is used only for back-to-back performance measurements. The transmission experiment is performed over links of 240, 400, 640, and 800km lengths by using 3, 5, 8, and 10spans, respectively of 80km-long standard single-mode fiber, with nominal dispersion of 16.25ps/(nmkm) at the operating wavelength. Unless stated otherwise, the input power to the first span is 0dBm and the optical signal-to-noise ratio (OSNR) is measured at the receiver in 0.1nm bandwidth. A variable optical attenuator before the receiver is used to keep the power ratio between the signal and the local oscillator (LO) constant. For QPSK back-to-back measurements a DGD emulator is used to introduce delays of 20, 40, 60, and 80ps.The signal is received with a phase- and polarization-diversity digital coherent receiver whose structure is outlined in Fig. 2. The receiver consists of an opto-electronic front-end and a digital signal processing (DSP) stage.The front-end includes two polarization beam splitters (PBS) splitting the received signal and the local oscillator into two orthogonal polarizations (H – horizontal, V – vertical), two 90°hybrids for each polarization, a set of transimpedance amplifiers (TIAs) and analog-to-digital converters (ADCs). The ADCs are provided inside a real-time digital storage oscilloscope (DSO) with a 50GS/s with 16GHz bandwidth. The data is sampled by the DSO and the acquired traces are processed offline.The offline processing stage begins with signal resampling to two samples per symbol by spline interpolation. The downsampled signal is then fed into the CD monitor and CD equalizer block, where the signal is first divided into blocks of fixed length and transformed to frequency domain. Dispersion mitigation is then performed blockwise by a transversal frequency domain equalizer due to low, logarithmically increasing, computational complexity for increasing dispersion magnitude, as compared to time domain equalization [4]. The variable transfer function generator,H-1CD, is responsible for generating an inverse of the transfer function of fiber dispersion, according to the CD value supplied by the CD monitor. The CD value is swept with a resolution of 3ps/nm until an optimum value indicated by the metric algorithm (estimator) is found. Depending on the specific test case, either an ML-based algorithm or the reference method is implemented inside CD monitor block in Fig. 2. To avoid aliasing when evaluating Eq. (1), ML CD estimator shall operate with four samples per symbol. Therefore the downsampled signal is again upsampled to four samples per symbol before entering ML CD monitor. Upsampling is necessary to take into account the fact that the bandwidth of the transformed signalYH(f)Y(f+1/T)increases and 2 samples/symbol is not sufficient to satisfy the sampling theorem.After the frequency domain processing, the signal is subsequently transformed to time domain. In the next step, conventional DSP algorithms for a coherent receiver (Conventional DSP in Fig. 2) are used. Their structure typically follow the one presented in [15]. This includes a butterfly finite impulse response filter structure which combats the residual dispersion. It is important to emphasize that the CD monitoring algorithm considered in this work do not replace any of the conventional DSP blocks of a digital coherent receiver. This is a separate and complementary block used prior to the typical coherent receiver DSP, and is aimed at mitigation of the bulk dispersion. Without this block, the subsequent DSP algorithms will fail to operate correctly as a large CD values cannot be compensated for within the blind adaptive equalizer due to convergence issues. Since we only focus on the quality of CD estimates provided by the bulk CD monitors, there was no need to include any further DSP algorithms beyond the CD equalizer and CD monitor.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
