@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Unitary torus model for conical mirror based catadioptric system

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a new model for conical mirror based catadioptric systems.Definition of the unitary torus to model this non-central system.Definition of the conical fundamental matrix.Motion computation across two views from the conical fundamental matrix.The proposal is illustrated with simulations and real experiments.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Imaging geometry,Omnidirectional camera,Non-central catadioptric system,Epipolar geometry,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Catadioptric systems consist of the combination of lenses and mirrors. From them, central panoramic systems stand out because they provide a unique effective viewpoint, leading to the well-known unifying theory for central catadioptric systems. This paper considers catadioptric systems consisting of a conical mirror and a perspective camera. Although a system with conical mirror does not possess a single projection point, it has some advantages as the cone is a very simple shape to produce, it has higher resolution in the peripheral, and adds less optical distortion to the images. The contributions of this work are the model of this non-central system by means of projective mappings from a torus to a plane, the procedure to calibrate this system, and the definition of the conical fundamental matrix with a role similar to that of perspective cameras. Additionally, a procedure to compute the relative motion between two views from the conical fundamental matrix is presented. The proposal is illustrated with simulations and real experiments.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Vision systems stand out from other types of sensors because they provide very rich information and because of their versatility and low cost. For the last years, the use of omnidirectional cameras has been growing because they provide a panoramic view from a single image. A main class of cameras are the catadioptric systems, consisting of the combination of lenses and mirrors. Single viewpoint is a desirable property of a camera system, and the complete class of central catadioptric sensors with one mirror and lens are treated in [1]. A unifying theory for all central catadioptric systems was proposed in [2] and extended in [3]. In these works, the image formation model is developed by defining the well-known unified sphere model. Usual central catadioptric cameras are built combining a hyperbolic mirror with a perspective camera placed on one of the foci, or a parabolic mirror with an orthographic camera. Although having a single viewpoint is a desirable requirement in design, other features may be considered depending on the application.This paper considers catadioptric systems using a conical mirror and a perspective camera. Three example images taken with a conventional camera, a camera system with hyperbolic mirror, and the conical mirror can be compared in Fig. 1. These images have been taken in the same environment, a square outdoors, to illustrate their different features. The best quality but narrowest field of view is given by the conventional camera. The hyper-catadioptric camera captures the camera itself and shows good quality around the camera system, while the rest of the environment is concentrated in the border of the image with low resolution. In this case, part of the border is filled with the sky. On the other hand, the conical mirror based camera system does not capture the sky or the bottom part of the camera system and shows good resolution for the rest of the scene (i.e. the part of the scene between the sky and the floor around the camera system). For the same hardware, different setups lead to quite different image results (For instance: camera zoom, camera-mirror distance…).In general, the advantages and disadvantages of each different system have to be evaluated depending on the application considered. In particular, some of the advantages of conical mirror based cameras compared to usual catadioptric systems are that the cone is a very simple shape to produce, it has higher resolution in the peripheral and adds less optical distortion to the images [4]. Another advantage compared to paracatadioptric systems is that a perspective camera is used instead of an expensive and complex orthographic camera. The use of conical mirror results in a non-central camera system, which is easier to produce with respect to the central catadioptric model because the latter requires precise alignment of the optical center. Actually, when the viewpoint of the perspective camera coincides with the vertex of the conical mirror, a central camera system is obtained [1]. This particular case has been studied in [4,5] showing its feasibility but reducing the configuration possibilities. Thus, despite non-centrality, the versatility of the conical mirror setup is a desirable property as shown for example in the single mirror stereo arrangement proposed in [6]. The field of view of the conical mirror system is smaller in general but more flexible. In fact, the smaller vertical field of view can be seen as an advantage because it provides higher angular resolution with the same number of pixels. For example, the camera is out of its field of view and it is not projected in the image plane (so part of the image is not wasted imaging the sensor itself) [7]. Application examples using a conical mirror based system was presented in [8], providing a method for mobile robot navigation that avoids collisions with objects, and in [9], where conical mirrors are studied as radial imaging systems to recover the 3D structure of an object.Alternatively to catadioptric systems, panoramic images may also be captured by sensor-line cameras through rotation [10]. In the case in which the optical center follows a circular path with the line sensor parallel to the rotating axis, a panoramic image can be captured on a cylindrical surface. This case resembles the image formation model of the conical mirror based camera because its viewpoint is also a circular locus. The main benefit of these sensor-line cameras is the high resolution of recorded image data, whereas some disadvantages are the mechanical complexity of the rotating system and, since the acquisition of lines may require some time, moving objects in the recorded scene will appear geometrically distorted.As said, the conical mirror and camera system is non-central, and the contribution of this work is the projection model for this system. This is achieved by extending the concept of unitary sphere model to the unitary torus model and taking into account that the viewpoint of this system lies on a circular locus. Different methods have been proposed in the literature for the calibration of central catadioptric systems [11], for example by using line images [12] or point images from planar grids [13,14], and also for hybrid central cameras [15]. Methods to calibrate generalized cameras have been formulated capturing both central and non-central cameras in a unified framework [16,17]. Additionally, non-central systems with revolution symmetry can be studied as axial cameras since all the light rays pass through the axis of the symmetry [18]. Regarding non-central systems based on conical mirror, a method to calibrate the omnidirectional conical-based sensor named SYCLOP was presented in [19]. In that work, the different transformations between the world object, the conical mirror, and image plane were developed to calibrate the system by using a two-plane calibration pattern. Here, we propose a procedure for calibrating the conical mirror system by using the proposed unitary torus model.The estimation problem of the epipolar geometry using omnidirectional vision has been studied for central cameras [20,21] or approximately central cameras [22]. In [23], the existence of a general 15×15 fundamental matrix for all central catadioptric cameras is shown. Multi-view geometry is investigated in [24] considering a highly general imaging model using Plücker coordinates for central or non-central camera types. The epipolar geometry has been investigated for linear pushbroom cameras [25], for crossed-slits projection [26], and for circular panoramas [27]. In this work the epipolar geometry of a non-central catadioptric system based on a conical mirror is considered, and the conical fundamental matrix is defined with a role similar to the fundamental matrix of perspective cameras. The procedure to estimate the conical fundamental matrix from point correspondences is presented. As application, camera motion across two views can be obtained from this fundamental matrix.The contributions of this work are the model of the non-central system by means of projective mappings from a torus to a plane, the procedure to calibrate this system, and the definition of the conical fundamental matrix (Fc) with a role similar to that of perspective cameras. Additionally, a procedure to compute the relative motion between two views from the conical fundamental matrix is presented. The model has the advantage of computational simplicity to deal with the imaging theory of the conical mirror. The computation of model parameters and the determination of the relative camera placement of two or more cameras is also easier. This paper extends the work presented in [28] with more details on the model and the conical fundamental matrix, adding also a procedure for the catadioptric camera calibration. The previous paper was illustrated with simulations whereas the present work is also tested with the real catadioptric system.These contributions are novel regarding the state of the art given that most of the literature on the topic of conical mirror based camera systems focuses on modeling particular cases (e.g. like the projection of radial straight lines), and only a few works study the whole general system. Contrary to the procedure used so far with cameras based on conical mirror, where the camera system is calibrated by using the laws of reflection for describing the system projection (e.g. [19]), the unitary torus allows calibrating a simple model encapsulating the projection geometry. Additionally, further analysis into the multiple view geometry of this camera system involved with general motions has not been fully considered yet. With the proposed torus model, the camera system can be modeled with projections from the torus to the image plane. An advantage is that thanks to this unitary torus model, the multiple view geometry is formulated directly with point correspondences on the torus, rather than with correspondences between associated camera rays in 3D, as proposed for example in [24] for general cameras. This proposed formulation of the physical model leads us to the definition of the epipolar curves and the conical fundamental matrix, which can be easily computed from point correspondences on the torus. In this sense, the model we propose brings similar advantages to the non-central conical mirror based camera system than the sphere model to central systems. In this context, another advantage of the torus model is that the motion parameters can be easily extracted from the conical fundamental matrix.The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 proposes the camera model with a conical mirror and the procedure to calibrate this catadioptric system. The conical fundamental matrix is derived in Section 3. Section 4 presents the method to compute the relative motion between two views from the conical fundamental matrix. Simulations and real experiments are provided in Section 5 to demonstrate the proposal.We describe the geometry of the imaging system and define the catadioptric camera model using the conical mirror. The different parameters and coordinate systems involved are depicted in Fig. 2. The vertex of the conical mirror isOm, andOcis the center of the perspective camera. The conical mirror and the camera are vertically aligned with respect to the symmetry axis. The angle at the vertex of the cone is 2τ and the focal length of the camera is f. The distance from the mirror vertex to the camera center isfm. The origin of the coordinate system is the vertex of the cone with the z-axis aligned with the camera optical axis. It is known that the viewpoint of this camera system lies on a circular locus of radiusfxvertically translatedfzwith respect to the vertex of the cone [1], where(1)fx=fmsin(2τ),andfz=fmcos(2τ).The parameter α is also defined as(2)(α+τ)=π/2.Let us consider a world pointpwith coordinates(X,Y,Z)Tin a general reference system with originOmand z-axis aligned with the camera optical axis. For the subsequent development, it is interesting to align the x-axis of the reference with the vertical projection of the world point. This can be done by rotating the referenceφ=arctan2(Y,X)around the z-axis in such a way the new coordinates(px,py,pz)ofpare obtained as(3)px=X2+Y2,py=0,andpz=Z.This step can be performed with each world point in order to obtain its particular coordinate system with originOmas depicted in Fig. 2. Notice that, in this reference system,pxis the radial coordinate of the world point. Now, the center of projection of a particular world point is namedOt. Thus, the pointpis projected throughOtintersecting the mirror surface inpm. The equation of the ray fromptoOtis given by(4)z-pzx-px-fz+pzfx+px=0.On the other hand, the equation of the mirror surface is(5)z±x/tanτ=0.The coordinates(xm,zm)of the pointpmare the solution of (4) and (5). Next, the mirror pointpmis projected through the optical center of the cameraOc. The equation of the ray is(6)(zm+z)/(xm-x)-(zm+fm)/xm=0.Finally, the intersection of this ray with the image plane yields(7)xc=xm-xm(f+fm+zm)/(fm+zm),which is a radial coordinate that determines, together with φ, the image projectionpc=(xc,φ).The unitary torus model is inspired on the idea of the unified sphere model for central cameras presented in [2,3]. In central cameras, a section of the unitary sphere along the symmetry axis gives a unitary circle. In our case, the revolution of the unitary circle in each viewpoint across the circular locus yields a torus. Firstly, we define the coordinate system(xt,zt)with originOtand z-axis aligned with the segmentOtOc‾as shown in Fig. 2. In the following, the superindex t denotes that the value is referred to theOtcoordinate system. The distance d can also be computed using(8)d=OtOc‾=fx2+(fm-fz)2=2fmsinτ.The general equation of the torus particularized to the unitary torus is defined as(9)fx-x2+y22+(z-fz)2=1,where the center of the tube is the circle of radiusfx(i.e. the circular locus on which the viewpoint of the camera system lies) and the radius of the tube is the unit. The section of the torus is represented in Fig. 2 with two symmetric circles. The point on the mirrorpmin the coordinate system with origin inOtis given byxmt=fxt+zm/cosτandzmt=fzt, where(10)fxt=fxcosα+fzsinα=fmcosτ,(11)fzt=-fxsinα+fzcosα=-fmsinτ.The point on the unitary torus can be obtained normalizing the point coordinates and projecting to the image planexct=fxmt/fzt, which is the projection of the world point up to a rotation of the reference system. Finally, the image point can be obtained as(12)xc=xct+ftanα1-(xct/f)tanα,which gives an equivalent result as in (7). This procedure can be carried out inversely to reproject any image point to the unitary torus. Then, given the coordinatesxcand φ of a point in the image, it can be reprojected onto the torus following these steps:1.Coordinate transformation:xct=xc-ftanα1+(xc/f)tanα.Reprojection to the unitary torus obtaining thepttwith coordinatesxtt,zttin the reference system atOt:xtt=λxct/f, andztt=λwithλ=1/1+xct/f2.Coordinate transformation:xt=xttcosα-zttsinα,zt=xttsinα+zttcosα.These previous steps can be written in compact form with the following expression:(13)xt=xccos(2α)-fsin(2α)f2+xc2,(14)zt=-ff2+xc2.The result is a pointptprojected onto the torus(xt,zt,φ), playing a similar role as the point in the unitary sphere for central cameras. The practical implications of this unified representation of the presented model based on the unitary torus are very useful for the application and use of computer vision techniques using conical mirrors.The analogies of the sphere and torus models are illustrated in Fig. 3with an example of a hypercatadioptric camera system modeled with the unitary sphere and a conical mirror based system with the torus model. The geometry of the imaging systems is shown with the projection of world points from a squared pattern in the image plane. The projection of the points on the sphere and the torus is shown as well as the resultant projection in the image plane for each case. A summary of the equations to transform the image coordinates to the sphere and torus,(xs,zs,φ)and(xt,yt,φ)respectively, is also provided. The coordinate transformation for the torus model requires the use of (13) and (14). Regarding the unitary sphere model, (x,y) are the generalized coordinates calibrated from the image points withK, whereKis a matrix containing the conventional intrinsic parameters of the camera coupled with mirror parameters and ξ is a mirror parameter [2,3]. In order to be compared to the imaging geometry of the illustrated catadioptric system, we also provide in Fig. 3 an example of a sensor-line camera with the sensor parallel to the rotating axis. In this case, the panoramic image can be modeled with a cylinder and each image point, with vertical coordinatexc, can be represented in the cylinder with coordinates (xcl,zcl). The radius of the cylinder is denoted withRcland the distance of the line sensor to the cylinder axis isRc. Although the resulting image can be of great quality, the complexity of this kind of system is highly increased when used in dynamic scenes or moving platforms.One of the advantages of the sphere model is that it allows working directly on the unitary sphere coordinates. This is also the case of the torus model. Then, working directly on the unitary torus brings advantages like the definition of the two-view geometry, from which motion parameters can be extracted, and the robustness in the automatic estimation of the epipolar geometry, as well as the automatic detection of point correspondences and the removal of outliers and false matches using the epipolar relationship. Note also that the use of the torus model does not bring additional complexity when working with conical mirrors than when working with the associated camera rays in 3D used so far. In fact, we believe that the main advantage of using the torus model with conical mirrors is that this model allows working with this non-central system similarly to using the sphere model with central systems.In the following, we give an easy procedure to calibrate the camera system which may turn out more difficult without the model. The unifying model we have presented allows us to study the invariances and geometry of the projection through the conical fundamental matrix. Additionally, we show the similar behavior of the epipolar curves in the torus and the epipolar lines in conventional cameras.One important problem for any vision system is related with its calibration. We present here a simple procedure to calibrate the conical mirror based catadioptric system by using the unitary torus model. We show that the calibration can then be carried out with low computational cost.The first step consists in estimating the focal length of the camera f. This parameter has been depicted in Fig. 2. Notice that in the following procedure we assume square pixels of the sensor. Let us consider three equidistant points in a straight line parallel to the vertical axis of the catadioptric system (i.e. projected as a radial line in the image). The coordinates of these points in the space are denoted withpi=(Xi,Yi,Zi)withi=1,2,3. The projections of these points in the unitary torus are given by the coordinatespti=(xti,zti,φi). Similarly, the coordinates of the projection of these three points in the image are denoted bypci=(xci,φi). Given that the three points are equidistant, we can write the following equation:(15)2Z2=Z1+Z3.This relation can be translated to the unitary torus yielding(16)2zt2/xt2=zt1/xt1+zt3/xt3.Then, by using (13) and (14) in the previous expression and solving for f, we obtain the following equation(17)(xc1xc2-2xc1xc3+xc2xc3)cos(2α)f-(xc1-2xc2+xc3)sin(2α)f2=0.Discarding the null solution(f=0)we obtain the following solution:(18)f=(xc1xc2-2xc1xc3+xc2xc3)cos(2α)(xc1-2xc2+xc3)sin(2α).Thus, the focal length f can be computed from the coordinates of three equidistant radial points and the parameter α, which can be obtained from (2) by using the value of τ, the representative parameter of the mirror. Notice that the three equidistant points do not need to be vertically aligned to the system axis. Actually, it is enough if they belong to any vertical plane produced by the system axis (i.e. the line in which the three points lie and the system axis form a plane). This constraint can be guaranteed by checking if the three equidistant points lie on a radial line.Next, the procedure to estimate parameterfmis described. Regarding the dimensions of the conical mirror, let us denote D the diameter of the base of the cone and h the height. Let us also denote the diameter of the conical mirror projected in the image plane asDc. Taking into account similarity of triangles, from Fig. 2 the following expression can be deduced(19)fm=fDDc-h.In this expression that gives the value offm, the dimensions D and h are known from the conical mirror geometry,Dcis measured directly on the image in pixels and f has been computed using (18). When performing the calibration, it is convenient to ensure that different triplets of used points are distributed around the camera system covering the whole image plane, checking also that they hold the radial condition.The results provided by this procedure can be used directly or, if more accurate calibration is required, can be used for the initialization of the intrinsic parameters in an additional refining process. Then, we could also take into account factors such as misalignment or camera lens distortion leading to a minimization problem by using, for instance, planar calibration grids. However, we show in the experimental section that enough accuracy can be obtained using the calibration procedure presented without additional computations.The epipolar geometry represents the relative geometry between two views of a scene. The fundamental matrix is the algebraic representation of this epipolar geometry and it is used to formulate the epipolar constraint for image correspondences. It is independent of the scene structure and only depends on the relative configuration of the cameras and their intrinsic parameters [29]. In this section, a novel conical fundamental matrix (Fc) is introduced using the torus model, with a role similar to the fundamental matrix for perspective cameras.Let us suppose that the camera matrices of two views arePandP′with the origin of the global reference at the second camera. Representing the points of the world and the points on the unitary torus by homogeneous coordinates, the projection can be represented as(20)xtyt1=PXYZ1,xt′yt′1=P′XYZ1,where(X,Y,Z,1)Tis a world point and{(xt,yt,1),xt′,yt′,1}are two corresponding points on the unitary torus. Notice that the points have been normalized by the third coordinatezt,zt′. The camera matrices are represented by 3×4 matrices defined as(21)P=RcTcRT01-1,(22)P′=Rc′Tc′R′T′01-1.The rotation and translation of the first camera with respect to the origin are given by(23)R=r11r12r13r21r22r23r31r32r33,T=txtytz.Without loss of generality we have assumed that the second camera is in the origin, and thusR′=IandT′=0. Finally, the part related with the projection on the unitary torus is defined for both cameras asRc=cosφsinφ0-sinφcosφ0001,Rc′=cosφ′sinφ′0-sinφ′cosφ′0001,(24)Tc=Tc′=fx0fz,where φ has been previously defined andφ′is analogous, but including the motion of the first camera. The projection Eq. (20) can be written in a different form as(25)We nameAthe 6×6 previous matrix, and Eq. (25) must hold for any point of the scene and therefore,det(A)=0. Developing the determinant ofAand rearranging terms, it can be proved that there exists a 5×5 matrixFcthat we call the conical fundamental matrix satisfying(26)cosφ′sinφ′xt′cosφ′xt′sinφ′1TFccosφsinφxtcosφxtsinφ1=0.The entries ofFconly depend on the two camera matrices(P,P′). Notice also that the lifted coordinates of the image point correspondences on the unitary torus do not depend on the coordinates(yt,yt′). This is because of the axial symmetry of the catadioptric camera system and the selected coordinate reference system defined for the imaging model.Then, the expression of the conical fundamental matrix is(27)Fc=00f13f14f1500f23f24f25f31f32f33f34f35f41f42f43f44f45f51f52f53f54f55,where its entries are given by(28)f13=r21r33fx-r31r23fxf14=-r11r33fx+r31r13fxf15=r11r23fx-r21r13fxf23=r22r33fx-r32r23fxf24=-r12r33fx+r32r13fxf25=r12r23fx-r22r13fxf31=-r21fxf32=r11fxf33=-r21r33fz+r21(tz+fz)+r31r23fz-r31tyf34=r11r33fz-r11(tz+fz)-r31r13fz+r31txf35=-r11r23fz-r21tx+r11ty+r21r13fzf41=-r22fxf42=r12fxf43=-r22r33fz+r22(tz+fz)+r32r23fz-r32tyf44=r12r33fz-r12(tz+fz)-r32r13fz+r32txf45=r22r13fz-r22tx-r12r23fz+r12tyf51=-r23fxf52=r13fxf53=r23(tz+fz)-r33tyf54=-r13(tz+fz)+r33txf55=r13ty-r23txThe conical fundamental matrix can be computed from a set of point correspondences, without knowledge of the relative camera positions by solving a linear system of equations and using the constraint (26). The lifted coordinates are obtained from the normalized points of the unitary torus:(xt,yt,1)andxt′,yt′,1. Each point correspondence gives an equation. Given thatFcis defined by 21 unknown entries, a set of 20 point correspondences allows to determineFcup to a scale factor by solving a linear system of equations. In general, more than the minimum set of correspondences are available, and the system may be solved using singular value decomposition. In the presence of image noise or mismatches, a robust method like RANSAC [30] can be used for the estimation ofFc.Notice that, since the conical mirror catadioptric system can be seen as a general camera [24], the motion between two views can be computed using the minimum number of 6 image correspondences [31] by back-projecting corresponding pixels to 3D and using the coplanarity constraints of the corresponding light rays without using the conical fundamental matrix. Although our proposed method is over-parameterized, it additionally provides the conical fundamental matrix that improves the geometric coherence of the result. Besides the outlier removal, the advantage on minimal samples in RANSAC is due to efficiency considerations [32]. Moreover, the use of minimal samples implies noisy model hypotheses in practice. Therefore, although robustness to outliers may be reduced with an over-parameterized approach, and they need to be handled properly, robustness to noise is improved. In addition, our proposal is an efficient linear solution with low computational cost.The epipolar geometry for perspective cameras involves the epipoles, defined as the intersection point of the baseline with the image plane, and the epipolar lines, which are straight lines defined as the intersection of the plane containing the baseline with the image plane [29]. However, these geometric entities do not represent the corresponding conical mirror and camera system constraints. Let us consider the lifted coordinates of a point correspondence in two views satisfying the constraint (26). Fixing a point in the first view, all the possible matched points are obtained as(29)abcde=Fccosφsinφxtcosφxtsinφ1,where(a,b,c,d,e)Tdetermines the epipolar curve. The corresponding point in the second camera system lies on the epipolar curve, therefore(30)cosφ′sinφ′xt′cosφ′xt′sinφ′1Tabcde=0.This previous equation plays a similar role for the epipolar curve than the epipolar line of perspective cameras. The form of the epipolar curves defined by (30) is illustrated with an example in Fig. 4, and they are depicted on the unitary torus using Diedric projections. Note that the projection from the first view into the second view gives two solutions for the epipolar curves given that each ray intersects the torus in two different points.The relative motion between two perspective cameras can be computed from the decomposition of the fundamental matrix as summarized in [29]. With the same goal, a procedure for the motion extraction given the conical fundamental matrixFc(27) is presented. Firstly, the rotation matrix (R=rijwithi,j=1,2,3) between the two cameras is computed by retrieving the three rows ofRseparately. On the one hand, the first row ofRcan be obtained from the second column ofFc:(31)r1=r11,r12,r13T=-f32,f42f52T‖f32,f42,f52‖.On the other hand, the second row ofRcan be obtained from the first column ofFc:(32)r2=r21,r22,r23T=-f31,f41f51T‖f31,f41,f51‖.Finally, the third row ofRcan be computed solving a linear system derived from the first and second rows ofFc:(33)-r230r21-f130-r23r22-f23r130-r11-f140r13-r12-f24r31r32r331=0.After solving the system, the norm‖(r31,r32,r33)‖is used to normalize the resultant vector(r31,r32,r33)T. The singular values of any rotation matrix are{1,1,1}, but in general, the matrixRcomputed from real data will not have exactly unitary values. This constraint can be easily enforced by using the solution obtained using the Singular Value Decomposition (SVD). LetRbe the matrix computed andR=USVTits singular value decomposition, whereSis a diagonal matrixS=diag(s1,s2,s3). Then, we compute the rotation matrix by replacingSwith the identity matrixI∈R3×3as follows(34)R=UIVT=UVT,which is the closest matrix with unitary singular values to the initially estimatedRunder Frobenius norm. Notice that there are two solutions for the rotation depending on the sign factor of the fundamental matrix(Fc,-Fc)leading to(R,-R). The correct solution may be selected by testing point correspondences with both solutions.Secondly, the translation vectorT=(tx,ty,tz)Tbetween the two cameras is computed solving a linear system which is defined by using the entries of the conical fundamental matrixfijwithi,j=3,4,5. Then, we can write(35)0-r3r2r30r1-r2r10txtytz+fz=bwith(36)b=f33-(r31r23-r21r33)fzf43-(r32r23-r22r33)fzf53f34-(r11r33-r31r13)fzf44-(r12r33-r32r13)fzf54f35-(r21r13-r11r23)fzf45-(r22r13-r12r23)fzf55.Solving the previous system, the translationTcan be finally obtained.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
