@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Take your eyes off the ball: Improving ball-tracking by focusing on team play

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We investigate ball tracking in team sports from multiple cameras.We introduce a state space that explicitly accounts for the ball ownership.We utilize the players’ trajectories to achieve dependable ball tracking.We model our loss function as a CRF, and learn the potentials from training data.Our tracker yields significant improvement on long basketball and soccer video sequences.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Tracking,Video analysis and event recognition,Occlusion reasoning,Behavior analysis,Sports video,Tracking the invisible,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Accurate video-based ball tracking in team sports is important for automated game analysis, and has proven very difficult because the ball is often occluded by the players. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to addressing this issue by formulating the tracking in terms of deciding which player, if any, is in possession of the ball at any given time. This is very different from standard approaches that first attempt to track the ball and only then to assign possession. We will show that our method substantially increases performance when applied to long basketball and soccer sequences.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Accurate ball tracking in sports is of tremendous importance to athletes, referees, coaches, and fans. However, the size and speed of the ball and prolonged occlusions make ball-tracking challenging even for trained human observers. Solutions for basketball or soccer have not gained acceptance, and a solution for hockey puck tracking [1] developed for a television broadcast network enjoyed only a brief lifespan.Thus, a Computer Vision-based ball-tracking solution remains valuable and beyond the state of the art for most sports. Tennis is a rare exception because the ball is rarely occluded and its color is very different from that of the background, which makes tracking comparatively easy. It is far more difficult in team sports because the ball is often hidden by the players and follows an unpredictable trajectory as it is passed or taken from one player to another. Furthermore, the amount of image evidence for the ball, even when it is visible, is dwarfed by that for the players in its vicinity, as shown in Fig. 1. Frame-to-frame tracking is extremely unreliable in such cases. For example, even a state-of-the-art algorithm [2] that has been shown to be superior to many other state-of-the-art trackers for single object tracking and whose code is publicly available never tracks the ball for more than five consecutive frames in the sequences we present in this paper. Modern tracking-by-detection approaches that re-detect the object as often as necessary and aggregate results over several frames increase robustness but can still easily fail if the object is hard to detect in individual frames.The contribution of this paper is to turn the common approach of first tracking the ball and then deciding which player is in possession of it on its head. In our approach, we first track the players and decide possession. We then use this as a means to achieve reliable ball tracking, which lets us turn unreliable image-based information into dependable trajectories. This is effective because the trajectory of the ball is intimately linked to that of the players who pass it to each other or steal it from one another. Therefore, exploiting this correlation allows for disambiguation and improved performance.To this end we define a novel state space explicitly accounts for ball possession, a Conditional Random Field (CRF) [3] model that depends on the ball detections and the players’ trajectories, and a practical approach to learning the model parameters from training data. More specifically, we start from video sequences from several synchronized cameras from which both the players’ trajectories can be reliably extracted using publicly available software [4,5] and the ball ballistic trajectory can be also be extracted in consecutive frames when it is clearly visible. Between such frames, when individual players are in possession of the ball, its approximate position can be assumed to be their position up to the reach of their arms or legs. When the ball is passed, we take its path in the horizontal plane to be a straight line from one player to the next. As shown in Fig. 1, given perfect knowledge of ball possession as denoted by the “Oracle”, this simple approach yields a relatively accurate estimate of the ball location and obtaining this knowledge therefore is what must be addressed. We formulate this problem in terms of assigning possession to a player, or to no-one when the ball is being passed, by minimizing a global objective function that takes into account players’ positions and image information when the ball is visible.We will show that this approach produces very reliable possession assignments and a final accuracy of the ball trajectory that is close to the best that can be expected over multiple attack phases and timeouts. This is in stark contrast to most other published approaches that have only been demonstrated on short sequences.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
