@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Spatio-temporal texture modelling for real-time crowd anomaly detection

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A real-time crowd anomaly detection algorithm for video surveillance is proposed.The research has developed a spatio-temporal texture model for feature extraction.A redundant texture feature space has been composed by using wavelet transform.Detection algorithm is based on 3-sigma rule which is fast and robust.The system shows improved accuracy and efficiency against many benchmark systems.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Crowd anomaly,Spatio-temporal volume,Spatio-temporal texture,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractImage, graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The increasing demands of intelligent surveillance applications have triggered many innovative developments in automated video event detection areas. These techniques, such as crowd anomaly detection, can be used in monitoring and tracking emergency situations occurred in crowded scenes, including busy motorways, high streets, sporting events, and open air concerts.Modelling crowd scenes from video recordings present tough challenges due to severe occlusion problems among crowd subjects. Traditional top-down approaches, which focused on accurately tracking and identifying the so-called “abnormal” behaviours of crowd entities, have been proven inefficient and inaccurate for crowd-based anomaly detection [1]. Crowd scenes often contain uncertainties such as changes of subject density, average subject size, shape, and boundaries of these entities that can bring ambiguities to the definition and interpretation of the meaning and natures of crowd anomalies. For tackling those problems, it has been widely acknowledged that the modelling of all (or most of) the crowd behaviours through analysing their constituent elementary characteristics in a chosen feature space is unavoidable (the so-called bottom-up process).While the visual appearance of an individual subject's behaviour in a crowd scene may vary, their intra-/inter- group dynamics within certain quantifiable feature space are often statistically identical, for example, among a flock of birds, a school of fishes, and even vehicles travelling on a motorway. The swarm behaviours are constructed of similar “visual traces” for a studied scene. In the case of crowd anomaly analysis, such as to detect people's sudden gathering or dispersion, complex interactions of crowd subjects may change the visual appearance of the local/global image observations, which has motivated this research to model the crowd scene “changes” through analysing their overall grouping dynamics and facilitating real-time (or near real-time) anomaly warning applications.It is worth noting that “normal” and “abnormal” events are intrinsically ambiguous on semantic level. Certain crowd behaviours are normal in one scenario but may become hazardous in others. For example, crowds running in a marathon are “normal”, but groups of people suddenly start running in a shopping mall may indicate an accident or incident. Based on the nature of main stream surveillance applications, the occurrence of anomaly events usually counts a very small percentage of the entire surveillance cycle and often demands immediate verification and response. In this research, it is considered reasonable to define normal crowd behaviours as the dominate pattern. Instead of composing complex event models for semantic interpretation, a normality crowd model in this research can be learnt and self-updated by abstracting the visual features along surveillance time-lines.The core research problem highlighted in this research is to abstract effective visual features which can accurately describe normal crowd activities within the spatial and temporal domain, and to devise a robust decision making algorithm for real-world settings. Due to the application-oriented nature of this research, the implementation strategy should also be easily adopted by modern closed-circuit television (CCTV) systems with minimum lag.In this paper, a crowd anomaly detection algorithm has been introduced based on image textures formulated by spatio-temporal information. The so-called spatio-temporal texture (STT) has been proven as an effective dynamic representation media and mechanism for single human action detection. This research explores its characteristics in maintaining the statistical consistency across crowd events domain and its sensitivity to group anomalies (or sudden changes). A “redundancy” feature space has been formulated based on the STT structure through wavelet transform, which enables a flexible multi-criteria binary decision making mechanism to be constructed.This paper is structured as follows: a literature review of the related crowd modelling techniques have been introduced in Section 2. Section 3 focuses on the design of STT-based crowd modelling techniques. An innovative crowd anomaly detection algorithm is presented in Section 4. System evaluations over benchmarking approaches have been highlighted in Section 5. Section 6 concludes the research with a discussion on the pros-and-cons of the devised method and envisaged future improvements.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this research, an innovative STT based crowd anomaly detection method and its corresponding implementation techniques have been introduced. The prototype system starts from transforming video footages into a STV structure. After applying average flow field templates extracted from live video feeds, the highly dynamic areas from the crowd scenes can be quickly identified, which then guides the auto-selection of sizes, locations and directions of the sampling STV slices for further study. For distinguishing crowd “normalities” from abnormal behaviours, the sampled STT texture patterns are then analysed based on a Gaussian approximation model. A weighted multi-binary evaluation algorithm has been devised for online decision making based on the STT comparison outputs. The prototype system has shown satisfactory real-time performance during the tests and some promising characteristics for future intelligent CCTV surveillance applications.The statistical STT features encapsulate both the local variations as well as global similarities of the established video volumes. Comparing with the state-of-the-art techniques, the devised method has shown increased efficiency, accuracy and flexibility. Based on the rotation- and translation- invariant wavelet transforms, STT models can be composed for more detailed analysis based on the similarity statistics between two crowd scenes along the timeline. The low-level texture feature-based thresholding algorithm in this project ensures the real-time performance of the system.Although the current approach and system strategy are well-suited for high- and medium-dense crowd scenes of highly homogeneous STT feature patterns, for lower density crowd scenes where individual crowd element's behaviour may have significantly larger impact on the STT slice, the devised algorithm will gradually lose its performance superiority and robustness over other conventional image/frame-based approaches. Future work will see a crowd density estimation algorithm being investigated and embedded to the system for adaptive model selection and pattern recognition, which can open up new revenues for exploring more intelligent and adaptive crowd monitoring and early warning systems for real-life applications.