@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Water detection through spatio-temporal invariant descriptors

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We introduce a video pre-processing step to remove background reflections and inherent water colours.We introduce a hybrid spatial and temporal descriptor for local water classification.We introduce a new dataset, the Video Water Database, for experimental evaluation and to encourage research into water detection.We show experimentally that our water detection method improves over methods from dynamic texture and material recognition.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Water detection,Spatio-temporal descriptors,Fourier analysis,Invariants,Markov random fields,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this work, we aim to segment and detect water in videos. Water detection is beneficial for appllications such as video search, outdoor surveillance, and systems such as unmanned ground vehicles and unmanned aerial vehicles. The specific problem, however, is less discussed compared to general texture recognition. Here, we analyze several motion properties of water. First, we describe a video pre-processing step, to increase invariance against water reflections and water colours. Second, we investigate the temporal and spatial properties of water and derive corresponding local descriptors. The descriptors are used to locally classify the presence of water and a binary water detection mask is generated through spatio-temporal Markov Random Field regularization of the local classifications. Third, we introduce the Video Water Database, containing several hours of water and non-water videos, to validate our algorithm. Experimental evaluation on the Video Water Database and the DynTex database indicates the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm, outperforming multiple algorithms for dynamic texture recognition and material recognition.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The goal of this work is water detection in both natural and man-made environments from videos. Spatio-temporal water detection finds applications in unmanned ground and aerial systems (e.g. self-driving cars, and UAV’s (van Gemert et al., 2014)), outdoor surveillance, video search, and wildlife search. These applications are highlighted in Fig. 1. To the best of our knowledge, related work focuses on texture recognition in general, and thus does not specifically explore the motion properties of water.We focus on investigating the spatio-temporal motion properties of water. In biological studies, the visual properties of water have been investigated in order to understand the visual attractiveness of water in human and animal vision. From the work of Schwind (1991), it is known that water insects are attracted to the horizontal polarization caused by the reflections of water surfaces. This observation has for example been used to explain why certain insects lay eggs on highways (Kriska et al., 1998). In videos however, polarization information is not captured. Human observers are still experts at water detection without polarization information, indicating that water contains valuable spatio-temporal motion properties that can be exploited. Here, we investigate which spatio-temporal motion properties make water distinctive.Current methods for automatic water detection can be divided into two categories: in specialized systems or as part of a broader recognition framework. In the broader fields of material recognition (Hu et al., 2011; Mettes et al., 2014b; Sharan et al., 2013) and dynamic texture recognition (Chan and Vasconcelos, 2008; Doretto et al., 2003; Fazekas et al., 2009; Zhao and Pietikäinen, 2007) water is one of the target classes. In these works, the objective is to minimize the miss-classification rate over all classes and as a result, the distinctive properties of water specifically are not investigated. Furthermore, the focus is generally on classification or segmentation, but not on the joint problem as posed here. On the other hand, water detection in specialized settings, such as autonomous driving (Rankin and Matthies, 2006) and in maritime settings (Smith et al., 2003), either make non-generalizable restrictions on the movement and orientation of cameras (Rankin and Matthies, 2006) or use auxiliary data sources in their measurements (Rathinam et al., 2007; Scherer et al., 2012; Smith et al., 2003). To address the limitations of related work with respect to water detection specifically, this work provides an investigation into the temporal and spatial behaviour of water scenes.This work reports three contributions. (1) We introduce a video pre-processing step to remove background reflections and inherent water colours. (2) We introduce a hybrid spatial and temporal descriptor for local water classification. For the temporal descriptor, we analyze the periodicity and regularity of local water patches and derive a descriptor that captures these elements. For the spatial descriptor, we advocate Local Binary Patterns and we investigate what makes them suitable for local water detection. (3) We introduce a new dataset, the Video Water Database, for experimental evaluation and to encourage research into this topic. The Video Water Database, further discussed in Section 5, along with the code used in the experimentation will be made publicly available to encourage further research into this topic.This work extends an earlier investigation into this topic (Mettes et al., 2014a) in multiple aspects. An improvement is proposed in the pre-processing stage to deal with areas on the border of multiple objects of reflection, by modeling the density of pixel values over time. Also, further analysis is performed to investigate whether the hybrid descriptor is able to capture the spatial and temporal behaviour water ripples. In the experiments, we evaluate whether our method can generalize to water conditions and water types not seen during training. Lastly, another fusion of the temporal and spatial descriptor is evaluated.The layout of the rest of this paper is as follows. In Section 2, an overview of water detection in related work is provided. Section 3 introduces the pre-processing step of the videos and the analysis of the local behaviour of water. This is followed by the discussion on local probabilistic classification and spatio-temporal regularization in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 provides the experimental evaluation of the algorithm and the paper is concluded in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this work, the problem of detecting water in videos is tackled. As the specific problem of water detection has hardly been addressed in related work, this work investigates the temporal and spatial dynamics of water. First, a pre-processing stage is introduced that is aimed at removing reflections and water colours. After that, a hybrid descriptor and local detection algorithm are introduced for discovering water regions in a video. To evaluate the algorithm, the Video Water Database is furthermore introduced. Quantitative and qualitative evaluation show that the algorithm is able to robustly detect region of water in videos, with a high detection accuracy and a classification accuracy that outperforms algorithms from directly related fields.