@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Rejection based multipath reconstruction for background estimation in video sequences with stationary objects

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a new temporal-spatial block-based Background estimation approach to compute a foreground-free image for video sequences.Threshold-free clustering is proposed to discover similar blocks over time which contain the background data.An iterative spatial reconstruction selects blocks to obtain the final background.The performance improvement is validated in two datasets (36 sequences) using 13 state-of-the-art algorithms.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Background estimation,Stationary foreground,Background visibility,Clustering,Smoothness,Multipath,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background estimation in video consists in extracting a foreground-free image from a set of training frames. Moving and stationary objects may affect the background visibility, thus invalidating the assumption of many related literature where background is the temporal dominant data. In this paper, we present a temporal-spatial block-level approach for background estimation in video to cope with moving and stationary objects. First, a Temporal Analysis module obtains a compact representation of the training data by motion filtering and dimensionality reduction. Then, a threshold-free hierarchical clustering determines a set of candidates to represent the background for each spatial location (block). Second, a Spatial Analysismodule iteratively reconstructs the background using these candidates. For each spatial location, multiple reconstruction hypotheses (paths) are explored to obtain its neighboring locations by enforcing inter-block similarities and intra-block homogeneity constraints in terms of color discontinuity, color dissimilarity and variability. The experimental results show that the proposed approach outperforms the related state-of-the-art over challenging video sequences in presence of moving and stationary objects.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Segregating relevant moving objects is widely used in several applications of image processing and computer vision. This task often requires to estimate a foreground-free image (or background) under several visual challenges such as in Background Subtraction algorithms (Bouwmans, 2014; Sobral and Vacavant, 2014). Background estimation (BE) finds applications not only in moving object segregation from video sequences (Park and Byun, 2013) but also to represent redundancy in video compression (Paul, 2012), to repair deteriorated images for inpainting (Chen et al., 2010), to implement video-based privacy protection (Nakashima et al., 2011) and to obtain object-free images for computational photography (Granados et al., 2008).Several state-of-the-art BE approaches easily capture the background by assuming the availability of a set of frames without foreground objects (training frames) (Bouwmans, 2014). This assumption may not be correct in many video-surveillance scenarios (e.g. shopping malls, airports or train stations), where many foreground objects may exist due to crowds and stationary objects, making very challenging the capture of the background. In general, BE faces two problems related with spatio-temporal scene variations: background visibility and photometric factors. The former occurs when pixels or regions of the background are seen for short periods of time in the training frames (e.g. due to stationary objects or to high-density of moving foreground), thus the predominant temporal data is not the background. The latter affects BE performance by modifying the background (illumination changes) or by affecting to the employed features (shadows and camouflages). The presence of stationary objects is a major limitation in current approaches as background visibility is highly decreased in the training frames.To overcome the above-mentioned limitations, we propose a block-level BE approach based on a temporal-spatial strategy that reconstructs an object-free background in presence of moving and stationary objects. For each spatial location, a temporal analysis module obtains a number of background candidates (blocks) via motion filtering, dimensionality reduction and threshold-free hierarchical clustering. Then, the spatial analysis module selects the most suitable candidate for each spatial location according to available candidates in neighboring locations. First, the spatial strategy partially approximates the background by setting a number of initial locations (seeds) based on the motion activity along the training frames. Second, an iterative process estimates the remaining background based on inter-block and intra-block smoothness constraints. The experimental work validates the utility of the proposed approach, outperforming selected approaches in various datasets especially when dealing with stationary objects.The contribution of the proposed approach is fourfold. First, we propose a threshold-free clustering technique to determine background candidates without requiring parameter tuning to achieve optimal performance (Hsiao and Leou, 2013; Reddy et al., 2011). Second, we obtain an initial background estimation (seeds selection) containing more data than state-of-the-art approaches (Baltieri et al., 2010; Reddy et al., 2009; 2011) without introducing additional errors. Thus, fewer spatial locations need to be reconstructed, making the proposed approach less prone to estimation errors as compared to related approaches. Third, the iterative reconstruction estimates different hypotheses of the neighboring background at each location and selects one of them, unlike approaches based on single-hypothesis estimations which may have low-accuracy (Baltieri et al., 2010; Colombari and Fusiello, 2010; Reddy et al., 2009; 2011). Fourth, a new performance measure is proposed to avoid the use of a unique threshold (Baltieri et al., 2010; Reddy et al., 2009; 2011).The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses the related work and Section 3 overviews the proposed approach. Sections 4 and 5 describe the temporal and spatial analysis, respectively. Section 6 shows the experimental work. Finally, Section 7 presents some conclusions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We presented a block-wise BE approach to estimate the background of video sequences with moving and stationary objects. A clustering approach without the need of thresholds is performed over motion-filtered and dimension reduced data, which determines the candidate blocks to be background. Subsequently, a Rejection based Multipath Reconstruction based on background smoothness constraints selects the most suitable candidate. This multipath scheme includes a Seed Selection stage to initially estimate the background which is locally reconstructed using different paths (hypotheses), thus increasing the robustness against errors. An evaluation metric based on a sweep of threshold values is proposed to avoid the threshold dependency of existing metric AE. The experiments validate the performance of the clustering analysis and the Seed Selection technique and provide comparisons against related work, demonstrating the advantages of the proposed approach. The results show that BE is highly complex since no algorithm is able to correctly perform in all situations.As future work, we will explore the use of multi-resolution schemes, the improvement of background smoothness (e.g. by applying deblocking filters (List et al., 2003)) and the initialization-maintenance-detection interaction to improve Background Subtraction performance.