@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Efficient semantic image segmentation with multi-class ranking prior

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Combine local perdition with global cues obtained from multi-class ranking.Introduce inter-class co-occurrence statistics as pairwise constraint with S-SVM.Obtain highly competitive performance despite of much simpler and efficient model.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Computer vision,Machine learning,Semantic segmentation,Structural SVMs,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Semantic image segmentation is of fundamental importance in a wide variety of computer vision tasks, such as scene understanding, robot navigation and image retrieval, which aims to simultaneously decompose an image into semantically consistent regions. Most of existing works addressed it as structured prediction problem by combining contextual information with low-level cues based on conditional random fields (CRFs), which are often learned by heuristic search based on maximum likelihood estimation. In this paper, we use maximum margin based structural support vector machine (S-SVM) model to combine multiple levels of cues to attenuate the ambiguity of appearance similarity and propose a novel multi-class ranking based global constraint to confine the object classes to be considered when labeling regions within an image. Compared with existing global cues, our method is more balanced between expressive power for heterogeneous regions and the efficiency of searching exponential space of possible label combinations. We then introduce inter-class co-occurrence statistics as pairwise constraints and combine them with the prediction from local and global cues based on S-SVMs framework. This enables the joint inference of labeling within an image for better consistency. We evaluate our algorithm on two challenging datasets which are widely used for semantic segmentation evaluation: MSRC-21 dataset and Stanford Background dataset and experimental results show that we obtain high competitive performance compared with state-of-the-art methods, despite that our model is much simpler and efficient.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental but challenging problem in computer vision, which aims to assign each pixel in an image a pre-defined semantic label. It can be seen as an extension of the traditional object detection which aims at detecting prominent objects in the foreground of an image, with closed relation to some other fundamental computer vision tasks such as image segmentation and image classification. Semantic segmentation has many applications in practice, including scene understanding, robot navigation, and image retrieval.Semantic image segmentation algorithms in early stage typically solve this problem from a pixel-wise labeling perspective [1,2]. Although using pixels as labeling units is simple and straightforward, pixel itself contains limited and ambiguous information that cannot always be discriminative enough to determine its correct label. On the other hand, the proliferation of unsupervised image segmentation algorithms, such as mean shift [3], graph based segmentation [4,38], quick shift [5], TurboPixel [6] and SLIC [7], enables higher order features representation of regions. Therefore, more recently semantic segmentation approaches based on region-wise labeling [8–13] are also well investigated, which make use of region-level features that are not only more informative but also robust to noise, clutter, illuminate variance et al. In such a setting, an initial unsupervised segmentation is commonly adopted for pre-processing. However, image segmentation is still far away from being perfect without regard to the extensive attempts in the last several decades. From this point of view, how to make best use of these imperfect unsupervised image segmentation algorithms on the semantic segmentation problem is of fundamental importance yet is still unclear.Although higher order features extracted from regions are more expressive and informative than those from pixels, sematic ambiguity still exists because of the appearance similarity. A general consent is that contextual information within an image is a very useful cue to attenuate this ambiguity, which can be used to suppress/encourage the presence of object classes during labeling. Context refers to any information that is not extracted directly from local appearance and can be summarized into two categories: pairwise constraints and global cues. Pairwise constraints, such as smoothness based on contrast [14,9], relative location [10,11] and co-occurrence [8,11,15] are used to model the pairwise relationship between regions within an image. Global constraints are usually used to enforce higher level consistency of region sets or image level. Some approaches are proposed to model these cues, such as using image classification results [13], Potts potential [12], pNPotts potential [16] and its improved versions robust PNpotential [14], pN-based hierarchical CRFs [17], and Harmony potential [9]. These models will be further discussed in Section 2.In terms of the methodology, most of the existing methods [16,12,14,10,11,15,9] use conditional random fields (CRFs) to combine these constraints from different levels and make joint inference of labeling within an image, which is also known as structured prediction. In contrast to many sophisticated algorithms for inference, these models [10,11,9,14,15] are usually learned by gradient descent or heuristic search on validation set based on maximum likelihood estimation. On the other hand, Zhu et al. [18] showed that the max-margin based learning algorithm is more robust for structured prediction compared with the maximum likelihood estimation based learning algorithm in many machine learning applications.In this paper, we use maximum margin based structural support vector machine (S-SVMs) model to combine multiple levels of cues to attenuate the ambiguity of appearance similarity and we propose multi-class ranking based global constraints to confine the object classes to be considered when labeling regions within an image.For global cues, we first rank all the object classes for an image (class with higher probability present in the image gets larger score) using multi-class ranking algorithm [20] and transform the ranking scores into image-level soft constraint to confine the possible classes present in the image. The advantages of this global cues can be seen from two aspects: on the one hand, compared with robust pNpotential [14] which limits their parent node to take only one single label, our method ranks all the classes for an image and thus is more representative to heterogeneous regions. On the other hand, since we compute the ranking scores for all the classes and transform them to soft constraint, we do not need to make hard decision for every class and thus avoid searching exponential space of possible label combination as harmony potential [9]. The global cues are integrated with the prediction obtained from region feature and logistic regression to encouraging more likely classes while suppressing the others.We then introduce inter-class co-occurrence statistics as pairwise constraints and combine them with the prediction from previous stage under S-SVMs framework. This enables the joint inference of labeling within an image for better consistency. Moreover, our model can be can be efficiently learned with cutting plane algorithm [19] instead of using heuristic search approach as in CRFs learning. Experimental results show that we obtain high competitive performance with state-of-the-art methods with a much simpler and efficient model on two challenging datasets: MSRS-21 and Stanford Background Dataset.Probably the most related work is [21], which discussed the application of structural SVM in image semantic segmentation and compared with alternative maximum likelihood method. However, our model is different from their model in designing pairwise and global constraints as well as loss function in parameter learning. The standard contrast-dependent Potts model was used as pairwise constraint in contrast to our co-occurrence property. With regard to global constraints, they used very simple and straightforward K image-level classification results and the advantage of multiple classes ranking over 1-VS-All classifiers is discussed in [20].The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: In the next section we review the related work. Our model is presented in Section 3, including the problem formulation and model details. Sections 4 and 5 describe the inference and learning methods. Implementation details and performance evaluation are shown in Section 6 while conclusions are drawn in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
