@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A bioinformatics approach to 2D shape classification

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An alternative interaction between Pattern Recognition and Bioinformatics is studied.2D shape classification is faced using biological sequence analysis approaches.Classification results are competitive with literature.Other bioinformatics tools are used for understanding and interpretation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
2D shape classification,Bioinformatics,Sequence alignment,Visualization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In the past, the huge and profitable interaction between Pattern Recognition and biology/bioinformatics was mainly unidirectional, namely targeted at applying PR tools and ideas to analyse biological data. In this paper we investigate an alternative approach, which exploits bioinformatics solutions to solve PR problems: in particular, we address the 2D shape classification problem using classical biological sequence analysis approaches – for which a vast amount of tools and solutions have been developed and improved in more than 40 years of research. First, we highlight the similarities between 2D shapes and biological sequences, then we propose three methods to encode a shape as a biological sequence. Given the encoding, we can employ standard biological sequence analysis tools to derive a similarity, which can be exploited in a nearest neighbor framework. Classification results, obtained on 5 standard datasets, confirm the potentials of the proposed unconventional interaction between PR and bioinformatics. Moreover, we provide some evidences of how it is possible to exploit other bioinformatics concepts and tools to interpret data and results, confirming the flexibility of the proposed framework.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Research in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics experienced an unprecedented growth in the last years, mainly due to the fruitful interaction with many disciplines and fields of computer science. Among others, Pattern Recognition/Machine Learning techniques have been successfully exploited in this context [1], for many different reasons: it is possible to “learn from examples”, derive quantitative models, handle non vectorial data, and deal with many classification, clustering and detection problems commonly encountered in life sciences. In many cases the particular Pattern Recognition model has not been applied “as is”, but has been adapted and modified to take into account biological constraints and needs. Sometimes, this produced approaches that are very different from original methodology – a clear example is the profile-HMMs [2].To some extent, it can be stated that this tight interaction has been mainly unidirectional, with biology/life science gaining the largest benefit11In different cases bioinformatics issues have led to novel pattern recognition methodological challenges – the most famous example being the biclustering problem [3].. In this paper, we explore an alternative direction, trying to answer the following question: can we reverse the typical direction of interaction between Pattern Recognition and Bioinformatics? Or, in other words, can we exploit advanced bioinformatics models and solutions to solve pattern recognition tasks?.To the best of our knowledge, this perspective is rather new in the literature – the only relevant example is the video-genome project22See http://v-nome.org/about.html[4] – and it seems a promising direction for two different reasons. First, if we are able to encode the Pattern Recognition problem in biological terms then we can exploit the huge range of effective, optimized, and interpretable bioinformatics tools developed by more than 40 years of research. These tools heavily rely on the solution of general pattern recognition tasks such as matching, classification, retrieval, clustering, distance computation and so on. For example, in the video-genome project [4], authors established an analogy between biological sequences and videos, defining the so called “video-DNA”, a way to map features extracted from video frames into nucleotidic biological sequences. Having encoded the problem in biological terms, authors were then able to address the video retrieval task by using the famous BLAST [5] – an extremely fast and effective heuristic-driven algorithm for biological sequence retrieval. Second, and more important, the main goal in bioinformatics research is to derive knowledge from biological data: therefore, the interpretability of methods and solutions is a key feature, and many visualization, inspection and interpretation tools are available in the literature. These tools may be very useful also in the Pattern recognition scenarios, to better understand the different aspects of the data for a given problem: actually, in recent years interpretability has become a stringent need in Pattern Recognition [6].This paper makes another step in this direction, providing some further evidence on the effectiveness and interpretability of bioinformatics approaches for Pattern Recognition problems. In particular, in this paper, we propose and discuss a bioinformatics approach to 2D shape classification. Analysis of 2D shapes represents an important and vibrant research area (often paving the way for 3D object classification). Many approaches appeared in the literature (see for example the reviews [7,8]): very often, the 2D shape is encoded by the contour, which proved to be an effective and natural choice in many applications. Here we propose some methods to encode the shape contour as a biological sequence, employing tailored bioinformatics tools to perform classification. In the huge literature related to 2D shape analysis, many approaches exploit sequence alignments tools to perform shape matching ([9–13], just to cite a few) – some sequence matching-based approaches which start from shape-skeletons have also been proposed [14–16]. Focusing on our main target, i.e. to use biological sequence alignment tools, it should be noted that few approaches exist that employ techniques developed for biological sequences to perform shape classification or matching [17,18]. Nevertheless, these approaches propose a very different perspective with respect to our approach (and the video genome project), where the main goal is to encode the PR problem in biological terms, hence exploiting tools developed for biological sequence analysis. In other words, to exploit Bioinformatics tools for Pattern Recognition, one can consider two main steps: (i) encoding the PR problem in biological terms; (ii) applying bioinformatics tools to solve the problem. From this point of view, the approaches in [17,18] are rather poor, employing one particular technique for one particular purpose, and not considering a biological encoding which would allow the use of a wide class of algorithms for sequence analysis.In this paper we do explicitly consider this aspect: first, we establish an analogy between 2D shapes and biological sequences, this motivating the employment of bioinformatics tools. Then we propose three ways for transforming a silhouette, encoded with the 8-directional chain code [19], into an aminoacidic sequence; given that, we can compute the similarity between shapes by using established biological sequence alignment tools. Such similarity is then exploited for classification in a K-nearest-neighbor setting. Finally, we show that other biological tools and concepts (such as multiple sequence alignment, conserved domains and locality and quality of alignment) can be used for a deeper analysis of the results. We performed different experiments with five standard shape datasets; on one hand, we show that classification results are very competitive with the state-of-the art. On the other hand, we show that poor results we obtained on a retrieval case can be analysed in a deeper way by exploiting other biological sequence mining tools.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we explored the possibility of exploiting bioinformatics concepts, tools and solutions to address the 2D shape classification problem. In our framework, the contour of a 2D shape is encoded using the chain code, and then transformed into biological sequences through three encoding strategies. We then employ biological sequence alignment tools to compute a similarity measure between sequences/shapes, and we use a KNN classification approach. We also proposed some tailoring of the biological sequence alignment tools, which take into account the specific application scenario. Experimental results, on five benchmark datasets, confirm the potentials of the proposed scheme. We also carried out a further analysis to investigate the use of other bioinformatics tools and concepts to deeper inspect the unsatisfactory results obtained in the retrieval case.