@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Semi-supervised multi-graph hashing for scalable similarity search

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A semi-supervised multi-graph hashing method is proposed for image search.The different modalities are adaptively modulated by multi-graph learning approach.Our hashing method integrates various modalities information with optimized weights.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hashing,Multiple graph learning,Multiple modality,Semi-supervised learning,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Due to the explosive growth of the multimedia contents in recent years, scalable similarity search has attracted considerable attention in many large-scale multimedia applications. Among the different similarity search approaches, hashing based approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) search has become very popular owing to its computational and storage efficiency. However, most of the existing hashing methods usually adopt a single modality or integrate multiple modalities simply without exploiting the effect of different features. To address the problem of learning compact hashing codes with multiple modality, we propose a semi-supervised Multi-Graph Hashing (MGH) framework in this paper. Different from the traditional methods, our approach can effectively integrate the multiple modalities with optimized weights in a multi-graph learning scheme. In this way, the effects of different modalities can be adaptively modulated. Besides, semi-supervised information is also incorporated into the unified framework and a sequential learning scheme is adopted to learn complementary hash functions. The proposed framework enables direct and fast handling for the query examples. Thus, the binary codes learned by our approach can be more effective for fast similarity search. Extensive experiments are conducted on two large public datasets to evaluate the performance of our approach and the results demonstrate that the proposed approach achieves promising results compared to the state-of-the-art methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Recently, with the rapid advances of digit devices and the Internet, the amount of multimedia data (e.g. images, videos) are explosively increasing. These huge databases have posed a significant challenge in terms of scalable similarity search to many multimedia applications, such as content based multimedia retrieval (CBMR) [1], and classification.In order to perform nearest neighbor search, many content based multimedia retrieval applications exhaustively compare the query with each sample in the database, which is infeasible for large-scale cases because the linear complexity is not scalable in practical situations. Besides, many large-scale CBMR applications suffer from the curse of dimensionality since feature descriptors usually have hundreds or even thousands of dimensions. Therefore, beyond the infeasibility of exhaustive search, storage of the original data also becomes a challenging problem. Fortunately, in CBMR and many other applications, finding approximate nearest neighbors is sufficient. To overcome these problems, a lot of research efforts have been devoted to investigate the alternative solution – approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) search, which trades off a little search accuracy to greatly speed up the search process.Over the past decades, many advances have been made on ANN techniques for large-scale applications. In the earlier works, many tree-based methods [2–4] can perform similarity search effectively for low-dimensional data. However, for the high-dimensional cases and applications, their performance is not satisfactory and does not guarantee faster search compared to linear scan methods. Therefore, hashing techniques have been actively studied to provide efficient solutions for such high-dimensional data in recent years [5–7]. Hashing-based methods are promising in accelerating similarity search for their capability of generating compact binary codes for a large number of images in the dataset so that similar images will be mapped to close binary codes. Retrieving similar neighbors is then accomplished simply by finding the images that have codes with a small Hamming distance from the query, which is extremely fast to calculate. In addition, the binary codes representation can save much more storage space than the feature descriptors for large databases.Many hashing approaches have been developed in recent years. A notable hashing method is Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH) [5,6] which projects the data point to a random hyperplane and then conducts random thresholding. Inspired by spectral clustering, Spectral Hashing (SH) [7] and its extensions [8–10] attempt to apply machine learning approaches to find good data-aware hash functions. All of these hashing methods have shown success in scalable similarity search. However, most of the existing hashing methods only adopt single feature modality to learn the binary codes in hamming space. As we all know, the real-world images are often represented by multiple modalities, such as different kinds of visual features, and the importance of the roles that different modalities play can also be significantly different in hash function learning.In recent years, more and more researchers are attracted to study how to fuse multiple modality to improve the performance of hashing algorithms [11]. Zhang et al. proposed a Composite Hashing (CHMS) [12]. In CHMS, one graph is established for each source and then combine them to learn linear hashing functions for each source. Song et al. presented a Multiple Feature Hashing (MFH) [13] to tackle the near-duplicate video retrieval problem. Liu et al. formulated the hashing problem as a similarity preserving hashing with linearly combined multiple kernels [14]. Xia et al. extended KLSH to Multi-Kernel Locality Sensitive Hashing (MKLSH) [15] by using multiple kernels. However, most of the multi-modal hashing methods which employ graph learning might suffer from the high complexity of large graph construction and most of them learn the hash functions in an unsupervised manner, which cannot effectively preserve the semantic similarity. There exist supervised hashing methods that can handle such semantic similarity but they are prone to overfitting when labeled data is small or noisy.In this paper, we propose a semi-supervised Multi-Graph Hashing (MGH) approach for scalable similarity search. Different form the traditional methods, our approach can effectively integrate the multiple modalities with optimized weights in a multi-graph learning framework. In this way, the effects of different modalities can be adaptively modulated. It is worth to note that, in the existing multi-view (modality) based hashing method, [12,13] are also graph based, but they treat each graph equally. Besides, in our approach, anchor graph is employed for fast large graph construction and semi-supervised information is also incorporated into the unified learning scheme. Thus, the binary codes learned by our method can be more effective for fast similarity search. Fig. 1illustrates the flowchart of our proposed hashing approach. The characteristics of our work can be summarized as follows:(1)We propose a semi-supervised multi-graph hashing framework for binary code learning in scalable similarity search.The effects of different modalities can be adaptively modulated in our unified learning scheme. Therefore, our hashing approach can integrates different sources of information with optimized weights.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we give a brief review of the related work. Section 3 describes our semi-supervised Multi-Graph Hashing (MGH) approach in detail. We conduct extensive experiments on two large publicly available datasets in Section 4. Finally, conclusion and future work are given in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
