@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Learning object-specific DAGs for multi-label material recognition

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a multi-label material recognition framework.Object-specific DAGs are better to encode the correlations of material labels.Object recognition can provide semantic cue to enhance the material recognition.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Material recognition,Object recognition,Multi-label learning,Graph model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A real-world object surface often consists of multiple materials. Recognizing surface materials is important because it significantly benefits understanding the quality and functionality of the object. However, identifying multiple materials on a surface from a single photograph is very challenging because different materials are often interweaved together and hard to be segmented for separate identification. To address this problem, we present a multi-label learning framework for identifying multiple materials of a real-world object surface without a segmentation for each of them. We find that there are potential correlations between materials and that correlations are relevant to object category. For example, a surface of monitor likely consists of plastic and glasses rather than wood or stone. It motivates us to learn the correlations of material labels locally on each semantic object cluster. To this end, samples are semantically grouped according to their object categories. For each group of samples, we employ a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) to encode the conditional dependencies of material labels. These object-specific DAGs are then used for assisting the inference of surface materials. The key enabler of the proposed method is that the object recognition provides a semantic cue for material recognition by formulating an object-specific DAG learning. We test our method on the ALOT database and show consistent improvements over the state-of-the-arts.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Recognizing materials (plastic, wood, metal, etc.) enables us to understand and introduce novel objects or scenes more conveniently. For example, identifying the materials which an object is make of helps to reason about the physical properties of that object [1]. Automatic material recognition is also potentially helpful in a wide range of computer vision applications, such as image recoloring, image-based object modeling and scene reconstruction. Recently, materials have attracted increasing attention gradually in the visual recognition literatures. To identify materials from photographs, existing researches mainly focus on extracting distinguishable features for describing materials [2–7]. However, unlike other visual recognition tasks such as object recognition and texture recognition, it is difficult to find good and reliable features that can tell material categories apart [8]. The experimental study also reveals that material categorization is less accurate than object categorization [9].So far, existing literatures only take a single material per photograph into account [2–8,10,11]. However, the surface of a real world object (especially the man-made object) often consists of multiple materials. For example, a drum is always made up of leather, wood, and metal, and a stapler’s surface contains plastic and metal, which are illustrated in Fig. 1. We are therefore interested in considering the surface which contains multiple materials. Specifically, we aim to identify multiple materials on an object surface from a single photograph where the photograph covers a whole object. We treat this problem as a multi-label material recognition problem. Due to the diverse shapes as well as the complex surface textures of real-world objects, it is hard to segment different materials on the object surface and then identify them separately. Therefore, we introduce a multi-label learning framework to deal with this issue, where each sample (photograph) is associated with a set of labels (multiple materials).Surface materials are always related to the quality and functionality of an object, so there are strong relationships between material categories and object categories. For example, a surface of monitor likely consists of plastic and glasses rather than wood or stone. This observation motivate us to use object identity as semantic cues for material recognition. In view of the above, we wish to exploit the connections between material categories and object categories, and give insight of the relationship between object recognition and material recognition. In this paper, we want to address the following questions: (1) Is object recognition helpful for enhancing material identification in the multi-label case? (2) How to effectively utilize object recognition for assisting multi-label material recognition? (3) How well object recognition performance is required in our approach?For the above purpose, we present a multi-label learning framework for recognizing multiple materials of an object surface by exploiting label correlations locally. The localization is specified by grouping samples semantically according to their object labels. For each group of samples, we employ a Bayesian network structure (or Directed Acyclic Graph, DAG) to encode the conditional dependencies of the labels. Relying on the object-specific DAGs, a scheme of decomposing the multi-label classification problem into a set of binary classification problems (one for each possible label) meanwhile utilizing the label correlations for multi-label material recognition is developed. Experimental results will reveal that using the object-specific DAGs outperforms using a global DAG for identifying materials in multi-label case.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
