@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Exploiting local linear geometric structure for identifying correct matches

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We focus on identifying correct matches from a set of tentative correspondences.A subset of correct matches is first obtained for identifying all correct matches.We test the method on both matching image pairs and re-ranking images.The performance of the method is satisfactory compared with the state-of-the-art.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Local geometric structure,Image matching,Image re-ranking,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Selecting correct matches from a set of tentative feature point correspondences plays a vital important role in many tasks, such as structure from motion (SfM), wide baseline stereo and image search. In this paper, we propose an efficient and effective method for identifying correct matches from an initial batch of feature correspondences. The proposed method first obtains a subset of correct matches based on the assumption that the local geometric structure among a feature point and its nearest neighbors in an image cannot be easily affected by both geometric and photometric transformations, and thus should be observed in the matched images. For efficiency, we model this local geometric structure by a set of linear coefficients that reconstruct the point from its neighbors. After obtaining a portion of correct matches, we then provide two ways to accurately estimate the correctness of each match and to efficiently estimate the number of correct matches, respectively. The proposed method is evaluated on both applications including image matching and image re-ranking. Experimental results on several public datasets show that our method outperforms state-of-the-art techniques in terms of speed and accuracy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Establishing consistent point correspondences between a pair of images is important in many computer vision tasks, including structure from motion (SfM) [1–3], wide baseline stereo [4,5], and image retrieval [6,7]. For a pair of images, corresponding points are the projections of a same 3D point in a scene [8]. Though finding point correspondences across images is involved in many vision tasks, it needs to meet with different requirements. For example, image retrieval considers efficiency first, while SfM needs to obtain correct correspondences as accurate as possible. In the re-ranking phase of an image retrieval system, in order to perform geometric verification fast, the similarity between two images can be computed simply by counting the number of correct correspondences [9]. Therefore, there is no need to determine the correctness of each correspondence accurately. However, in SfM, one must use correct matches to estimate camera parameters and 3D structure, because any incorrect correspondence may lead to errors in the estimation of camera parameters and 3D structure.Accuracy and efficiency are two aspects of an algorithm for identifying correct matches from a set of tentative correspondences. Though this problem has been extensively studied, many proposed methods focus on only one aspect, i.e., the accuracy or the efficiency. For example, RANSAC (RANdom SAmple Consensus) [10], and its variants MLESAC [11], PROSAC [12] can accurately reject mismatches by estimating a given parametric model. However, these methods often have poor performances in both of speed and accuracy when the ratios of correct matches are low. Another problem of these methods is that they cannot work if we do not know the form of the parametric model. On the other hand, many methods [9,6,13] for geometric verification in image retrieval are indeed very fast. However, the correct matches established by these methods may not be genuine correct as they only consider weak geometric constraints. Therefore it is difficult to apply these methods directly to tasks which need accurate matching.In this paper, we propose a method that cannot only determine the correctness of each match accurately, but also estimate the number of correct matches between two images efficiently. The proposed method proceeds in two steps. In the first step, we identify correct matches by checking whether they maintain local geometric structure. Specifically, a feature point and its nearest K neighbors in an imageI1formulate a local geometric structure, and if this local geometric structure is maintained among their respective points in another imageI2, then theseK+1matches are considered to be correct; otherwise, the correctness of theseK+1matches is determined in the second step. We do this for each match, and then obtain a subset of correct matches after processing all matches. In the second step, we identify matches whose correctness is not sure in the first step by using the identified correct matches. In fact, the identified correct matches reflect the relationship between imagesI1andI2, and we use a vector valued function f to characterize this relationship. An unknown match whether it is correct or not can be identified by checking its consistency with f. Furthermore, we also provide a fast algorithm which can estimate the number of correct matches efficiently without determining the correctness of each match. Experimental results show that the proposed method is effective in identifying correct matches from tentative correspondences, and is also efficient in determining the similarity of an image pair.Vector Field Consensus (VFC) [14] and Identifying Correspondence Function (ICF) [8] also use a function or a function pair to obtain correct matches. VFC formulates identifying correct matches as maximum a posteriori problem and uses Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm to solve it. At each iteration, VFC needs to solve a linear system of size2N×2N, where N is the number of tentative correspondences. Though the method is robust to mismatches, it is extremely slow when N is large and inlier ratio is low. While our method estimates f only once by a subset of correct matches, and the experimental results show that our method can also apply to challenging image pairs with low correct match percentages. During the manuscript preparing, a sparse version of VFC, SparseVFC is proposed in [15]. At each iteration, SparseVFC estimates f with randomly selected tentative correspondences. Though SparseVFC reduces the complexity of VFC, it still needs to estimate f many times. ICF uses support vector regression to learn a correspondence function pair, and then rejects mismatches by checking whether they are consistent with the estimated correspondence function pair. Similar to VFC, ICF still needs many times of iterations to get a sound correspondence function pair, and finally obtain the set of correct matches. Furthermore, experimental results in [14] show that ICF has a much poorer performance than VFC on public datasets, while our method performs better than VFC.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the most significant related works available in the literature. The proposed method is presented in Section 3, and supported by the experiments in Section 4. We conclude this paper in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
