@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Conic epipolar constraints from affine correspondences

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Linear constraints on the fundamental matrix are derived from affine correspondences.It is shown that an affine correspondence is equivalent to 3 linear constraints.Two affine correspondences are shown to constrain the epipole location to a conic.A calculation method of the fundamental matrix by intersection of conics is proposed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Epipolar geometry,Affine invariant regions,Fundamental matrix,Homographies,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We derive an explicit relation between local affine approximations resulting from matching of affine invariant regions and the epipolar geometry in the case of a two view geometry. Most methods that employ the affine relations do so indirectly by generating pointwise correspondences from the affine relations. In this paper we derive an explicit relation between the local affine approximations and the epipolar geometry.We show that each affine approximation between images is equivalent to 3 linear constraints on the fundamental matrix and that the linear conditions guarantee the existence of an homography, compatible with the fundamental matrix. We further show that two affine relations constrain the location of the epipole to a conic section. Therefore, the location of the epipole can be extracted from 3 regions by intersecting conics.The result is further employed to derive a procedure for estimating the fundamental matrix, based on the estimated location of the epipole. It is shown to be more accurate and to require less iterations in LO-RANSAC based estimation, than the current point based approaches that employ the affine relation to generate pointwise correspondences and then calculate the fundamental matrix from the pointwise relations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Solving the geometry of a stereo rig is a preliminary step in solving many problems in computer vision such as image registration, structure from motion and object tracking. Luong and Faugeras [1] showed in 1995 that the geometry of two uncalibrated cameras can be described by a3×3singular matrix called the fundamental matrix. The fundamental matrix provides the correspondence between points in each image to lines in the other image and therefore greatly simplifies the task of finding correspondence points between images. Furthermore, once the fundamental matrix is known, a correspondence of points between the images allows for reconstruction of a 3D scene up to a projection ambiguity [2].The fundamental matrix can be estimated from correspondence of points between two images [3]. Each point correspondence yields a linear constraint on the location of the epipole; since the matrix is only determined up to scale, a correspondence of 8 points [4] results in a linear estimation of the matrix. An estimation of the fundamental matrix based on a correspondence of 7 points can be calculated by exploiting the singularity of the matrix [2]. It was further shown by Faugeras [5] that a correspondence of 6 points limits the location of the epipole to a 3rd order rational curve.In recent years, several methods have been proposed for matching of small regions between images [6–9]. Region correspondence methods usually assume that the geometric deformation between the images can be approximated locally by an affine transformation. Furthermore, affine normalization of the regions provides an approximation of a point correspondence and the local derivatives of the deformation between the images at the point of the correspondence [10]. We denote such a correspondence of points along with the derivatives of the deformation between the images at the point of correspondence by the name affine correspondence.The additional information available in the affine correspondence is rarely used for the calculation of the fundamental matrix. Methods that do employ information from affine correspondences try to convert the affine correspondence into point correspondences. Generally, since an affine transformation is determined by 3 points, it seems that it is roughly equivalent to the matching of 3 points between images. In [11–14] local affine approximation is used for generation of additional points. However, affine correspondences and point correspondences are different mathematical entities; there is no equivalence between an affine correspondence and a certain number of point correspondences. For example, 4 points of correspondence between images fully determine an homography between the images [2] whereas an affine correspondence and a single point correspondence do not fully determine an homography (we show in Section 3 that the direction of the transformation of an arbitrary point by an homography relative to the center of the affine correspondence is known from the affine correspondence. Therefore, the point correspondence only contributes a single constraint instead of two).A nonpointwise approach for calculating an affine fundamental matrix was presented in [15]. The method treats the affine correspondences as matched ellipses between the two images. It is shown that matching of two ellipses between images is sufficient for calculation of an affine fundamental matrix. However, the affine fundamental matrix has only 4 degrees of freedom as opposed to 7 in a general fundamental matrix. Such a model assumes that the camera centers are at infinity; it is therefore more suitable for narrow field of view cameras. Furthermore, notice that one degree of freedom is discarded from the affine correspondence as matched ellipses only determine an affine correspondence up to a rotation factor [10].To the best of our knowledge, there is no theoretical work that derives explicit constraints from affine correspondences on the epipolar geometry. In this paper, we offer a different point of view on the relation between affine correspondences and the epipolar geometry. We treat the affine correspondence as the derivative of an homography caused by a plane tangent to the surface viewed by the two cameras at the point of correspondence. The compatibility requirement between an homography and a fundamental matrix [2] is then employed for deriving constraints on the fundamental matrix. We prove that an affine correspondence yields 3 linear constraints on the fundamental matrix; we further prove that the linear constraints are sufficient conditions for an homography compatible with the fundamental matrix to exist. Therefore, 3 affine correspondences are sufficient to fully determine the fundamental matrix.In the case where two affine correspondences are known, a one dimensional family of solutions exists; we show that in this case the location of the epipole is constrained to a conic. We employ the result to calculate the location of the epipole from 3 pairs of affine correspondences by intersection of conics. The proposed method shows an improvement of up to an order of magnitude in the accuracy of estimating the fundamental matrix over using 3 points from each region with the traditional normalized 8 points algorithm. We also employ the proposed method for calculation of the fundamental matrix from matching hypotheses with low inliers rate by using Locally Optimized RANSAC [16]. In such cases the proposed methods showed comparable and slightly better results than the state of the art, point based, method [11].A surface viewed by a pair of cameras induces a set of correspondence points between the viewed images. An affine correspondence(u0,u0′,A0)between a pair of images is a pair of corresponding pixel coordinates(u0,u0′)along with the local derivatives at the point of correspondence,A0=du′du|uo. The matrixA0may be regarded as the Jacobian matrix of the homography that represents the point correspondence on a 3D plane, tangent to the viewed surface at the correspondence point (see Fig. 1).An homography, H, is said to be compatible with a fundamental matrix, F, if and only ifHTFis an anti-symmetric matrix [2]. Therefore, a known homography between a pair of images yields 6 linear constraints on the fundamental matrix. However, an affine correspondence does not fully determine an homography. In Section 2.2 we wish to determine the constraints on the fundamental matrix resulting from an homography which is not fully known, as only the affine correspondence(u0,u0′,A0)is known.Let H be an homography that represents the image correspondence caused by a world plane viewed in a pair of images; also let(u0,u0′,A)be an affine correspondence between the images of the world plane. As shown next, the affine correspondence determines the terms of an homography H up to two unknowns terms. We denote the terms of A as(1)A=a1a3a2a4and the terms of the homography H, expanded in homogeneous coordinates, as(2)H=h1h4h7h2h5h8h3h6h9The relation between H and A is expressed by the derivatives of the homography H atu0. Letuxanduyrepresent the first and second coordinates ofu(u=(ux,uy)T) andu′the transformation of u by H. The derivativedux′duxu0is expressed as(3)dduxh1ux+h4uy+h7h3ux+h6uy+h9u0=h1(h3u0,x+h6u0,y+h9)+h3(h1u0,x+h4u0,y+h7)(h3u0,x+h6u0,y+h9)2We limit the discussion to the case whereu0=0andu0′=0(the general case can be reduced to this case by a shift of coordinates). Sinceu0=0andu0′=0then, using (2),h7=h8=0and, using (1) we have(4)a1=dux′duxu0=h1h9A similar calculation relatesa2,a3,a4toh2,h4,h5respectively. Since the matrix H is only determined up to a scale factor, we can seth9=1, therefore H takes the form(5)H=a1a30a2a40h3h61leaving only 2 unknown parameters. In the general case whereu0≠0andu0′≠0the same relation applies after shifting the coordinates systems. LetSube a shift of the coordinates system:(6)Su=10ux01uy001The homography in this case is achieved by shifting (5):(7)H=Su0′a1a30a2a40h3h61S-u0We conclude thatu0,u0′and A explicitly determine the form of an homography, leaving two undetermined degrees of freedom.As previously mentioned, an homography forms 6 linear constraints on the elements of the fundamental matrix. If only an affine correspondence is known, the 6 equations contain two parameters,h3andh6, that describe the unknown terms of the homography. We show next that the 6 equations are equivalent to 3 linear equations on F and one polynomial equation.The derivation is performed for the case whereu0=u0′=0(as mentioned before, the general case can be reduced to this case by shifting the coordinate system). By (5) the anti-symmetric requirement onHTFresults in 6 equations:(8)f9=0(9)f6+a3f7+a4f8+h6f9=0(10)f3+a1f7+a2f8+h3f9=0(11)a3f4+a4f5+h6f6=0(12)a1f1+a2f2+h3f3=0(13)a1f4+a2f5+h3f6+a3f1+a4f2+h6f3=0Substituting (8)–(10), the non linear terms vanish. Therefore, three linear equations are formed. The linear equations can be simply formulated as(14)f9=0(15)f3f6=-ATf7f8An homography H, compliant with a fundamental matrix F, must also satisfy the non linear Eqs. (11)–(13). Note thath3andh6in (11) and (12) can be expressed as rational functions of the terms of F. They can therefore be substituted into Eq. (13) to yield(16)a1f4+a2f5+a3f1+a4f2-f6f3(a1f1+a2f2)-f3f6(a3f4+a4f5)=0The rational equation can be expressed in a polynomial form by multiplying (16) byf3f6:(17)f3f6(a1f4+a2f5+a3f1+a4f2)-(f6)2(a1f1+a2f2)-(f3)2(a3f4+a4f5)=0Eqs. (11)–(13) therefore result in a single third order polynomial equation in the terms of F.Since by definitiondet(F)=0, we next show that (17) is in fact redundant. Given a non singular homography matrix H, the anti-symmetric requirement imposed at the beginning of our derivation also implies thatdet(HTF)=0and thereforedet(F)=0. The requirement thatdet(F)=0forms a third order polynomial equation in the terms of F. Therefore, any solution of (17) must result a singular F. Indeed, by substituting (14) and (15) into (17), Eq. (17) can be rewritten in the form(18)det(A)det(F)=0Again, since A is invertible, a solution only exists ifdet(F)=0. This is however a general property of the fundamental matrix as all fundamental matrices are singular. Therefore, the linear Eqs. (14) and (15) are sufficient to guarantee the existence of an homography, H, with derivatives A atu0and a fundamental matrix F that is compatible with H. To conclude, each affine correspondence results in 3 linear equations on the terms on the fundamental matrix F. Moreover, an homography, compatible with a fundamental matrix can always be calculated from an affine correspondence if the linear constraints (14) and (15) are met.As a result of the previous section, the fundamental matrix cannot be fully determined by a pair of affine correspondences: The fundamental matrix has 7 degrees of freedom. Since each affine correspondence yields 3 linear equations on the fundamental matrix, a pair of affine correspondences should result in a one dimensional family of solutions to the fundamental matrix. It was shown by Faugeras [5] that 6 points of correspondence constrain the location of the epipole to a cubic. An interesting question is: What does a pair of affine correspondences tell us about the geometry of the corresponding image pairs? In this section, we show that 2 affine correspondences constrain the location of the epipole to a second order rational curve.Let(u1,u1′,A1)and(u2,u2′,A2)denote two affine correspondences. As shown in Section 2, each affine correspondence may be expressed through the derivatives of an homography at the specific point of correspondence. We denote the homographies asH1andH2. The line connectingu1andu2plays an important role in the derivation of the epipolar constraint presented here; we denote the transformations of the vectoru1-u2byA1andA2asv1=A1(u1-u2)andv2=A2(u1-u2).We denote a general point on the line connectingu1andu2as(19)x(β)=u1+β(u1-u2)A transformation ofx(β)byH1andH2to the pointsx′(1)(β)andx′(2)(β)respectively, yields a linear constraint on the epipole location as by the definition of the epipolar line the epipole and the two points should be collinear (see Fig. 2). The epipolar line connectingx′(1)(β)andx′(2)(β)can therefore be formalized as(20)l(β)=x′(1)(β)1×x′(2)(β)1and the location of the epipole,e, obeys the ruleeTl(β)=0.Eq. (20) forms a pointwise constraint on the location of the epipole. Since an affine correspondence also consists of derivatives we wish to exploit the derivatives to further constrain the location of the epipole. A second line is therefore generated by relating infinitesimal movements ofx′(1)(β)andx′(2)(β)caused by an infinitesimal movement ofx(β). The configuration is illustrated in Fig. 3. Since the epipole location does not depend onβ, the infinitesimal relation is formalized by taking the derivative ofeTl(β)=0. Therefore,eTdldβ(β)=0where(21)dldβ(β)=dx′(1)dβ(β)0×x′(2)(β)1+x′(1)(β)1×dx′(2)dβ(β)0If all the terms of (20) and (21) were known, then the epipole location could be determined as the intersection of the two lines. In the following derivation we evaluate (20) and (21) atβ=0; the quantities atβ=0correspond to the transformations ofu1by the two homographies. The termsx′(1)β=0anddx′(1)dββ=0can be expressed directly by the affine correspondence(u1,u1′,A1)as:(22)x′(1)β=0=u1′(23)dx′(1)dββ=0=v1We therefore remain with two unknown termsdx′(2)dββ=0andx′(2)β=0. The remaining terms are calculated from the affine correspondence(u2,u2′,A2). Since the local derivatives ofH2atu2are known, the line connectingu1andu2is transferred byH2to the line that pass throughu2′in the direction ofv2. In Appendix A we show that given a parameterization to the line:(24)x′(2)(β′)=u2′+β′v2the relation between the parameterizations (19) and (24) is a one dimensional homography; we denote it ast(β)=β′=(1+β)(1+β)(h3,h6)(u1-u2)+1. If the one dimensional homography, t, was known, we could easily extract the missing parameters for (20) and (21).A one dimensional homography can be determined by two pairs of corresponding points and a derivative (see Appendix B). By the affine correspondence(u2,u2′,A2)we have from (A.3) thattβ=-1=0anddtdββ=-1=1. In order to complete the puzzle, a single point correspondence on the line is still missing. However, as no more corresponding points along the line (24) are known, we set a parameter,α, that determines the location of the transformation ofu1by t. By defining the missing match asα=tβ=0we have that(25)x′(2)|β=0=u2′+αv2In Appendix B, we explicitly calculate the homography and show thatdtdβ|β=0=α2. A simple use of the derivatives chain rule then yields(26)dx′(2)dββ=0=α2v2Eqs. (23), (22), (25) and (26) determine all the terms of (20) and (21) atβ=0. We can therefore write the location of the epipole as(27)e=l(0)×dldβ(0)=u1′1×u2′+αv21×v10×u2′+αv21+u1′1×α2v20At a first glance, the curve may seem like a 3rd order rational curve. However, the third order term cancels out as a cross product of two vectors of the same direction. We show in Appendix C that the curve parameterization in equivalent to:(28)e=α2k2u1′1+(αdet(v1,v2)-k1)u2′+αv21whereki=det(vi,u1′-u2′). The epipole is therefore located on a second order rational curve - a conic parameterized byα. Note that we have only used partial information from the affine correspondence, as only the derivatives in the direction of the line connectingu1andu2were used for the calculation of the conic constraint.A classification of the conic (28) to an ellipse, hyperbola or parabola can be derived directly from the representation of the conic in non homogeneous coordinates:(29)en=α2k2u1′+(αdet(v1,v2)-k1)(u2′+αv2)α2k2+αdet(v1,v2)-k1The denominator of (29) is a second order polynomial with discriminant(30)Δ=det(v1,v2)2+k1k2A second order curve can be classified by the number of its intersections with the point at infinity (which is equal to the number of the distinct roots of the denominator). The conic is therefore an hyperbola if the denominator of (29) has two distinct roots (Δ>0), a parabola in the case where the two roots are equal (Δ=0) and an ellipse is no roots exist (Δ<0).Some interesting properties of the conic constraints can be derived from (28). We next show that the conic passes throughu1′andu2′and that the directionsv1andv2are tangents to the curve at the pointu1′andu2′respectively (see Fig. 4).The pointu2′is shown to be on the conic by settingα=0in (29), henceen(0)=u2′. Alsoen(k1det(v1,v2))=u1′. The derivatives of the curve can be calculated from the inhomogeneous representation (29). By taking the derivatives ofenrelative toα, one can easily show thatdendα(0)≅v2anddendα(k1det(v1,v2))≅v1where the symbol≅represent equality up to a scale factor.In this section we describe experiments for calculating the fundamental matrix using conic constraints. Given three affine correspondences, each affine correspondence contributes a conic constraint on the location of the epipole. The epipole can therefore be located by intersection of conics; the fundamental matrix is then calculated from the affine correspondences and the known location of the epipole.We perform two sets of experiments. In Section 4.2 we test the accuracy of the proposed method in a synthetic scenario: 3 regions are placed on three planes viewed by 2 cameras. The measurements are then contaminated with additive noise. We measure the accuracy of the proposed method, compared with the results of the normalized 8 points algorithm [17] on 3 points extracted from each region. In Section 4.3 we compare the proposed method with the point based method described in [11] for estimating the fundamental matrix from matching regions extracted by MSER [7]. We use both methods in a Locally Optimized RANSAC (LO-RANSAC) [16] robust estimation process. The compared methods are used for initial estimation of the fundamental matrix; each time the number of inliers is increased, the fundamental matrix is re-estimated from the new set of inliers, using the normalized 8 points algorithm on a larger number of regions. We measure the average number of iterations required by LO-RANSAC with each of the methods.We first describe the method we use for calculating the fundamental matrix.Once the epipole location is known, we use the following method for calculating the fundamental matrix: LetH1be an homography and let(u1,u1′,A1)be an affine correspondence on the homography (the homography is not fully determined; the affine correspondence and the homography are related by (7)). Also let(u2,u2′),(u3,u3′)be two additional correspondences unrelated toH1. We employ the point correspondences(u2,u2′)and(u3,u3′)to determine two additional constraints onH1and therefore fully determineH1.Each additional point correspondence onH1is determined by the intersection of two lines. The first line is the transformation of the line connectingu1tou2byH1; it is transformed to a line parameterized asu1′+γA1(u2-u1). The second line is calculated by the epipolar geometry. According to the epipolar geometry,u2is transformed byH1to a location along the line connectingu2′and the epipolee′(similarly to the scenario in Fig. 2). The intersection of the lines yields an additional point correspondence onH1(see Fig. 5); we denote it asu2′(1). An additional pointu3′(1)is found by the same method applied to(u3,u3′). Once the additional correspondences are calculated, the homographyH1can be calculated from (7) using the constraints implied by the affine correspondence(u1,u1′,A1)and the two points of correspondence(u2,u2′(1)),(u3,u3′(1)). (Note that each of the point correspondences only contributes a single new constraint, as the direction of the transformation of the point by the homography relative tou1′is already known from the affine correspondence). Since the fundamental matrix is directly determined by the epipole and an homography [2], we therefore have an alternative method to the normalized 8 points for calculation of the fundamental matrix F asF=[e′]xH1.As mentioned above, most methods that do employ additional information from affine correspondences (such as [11,12]) do so by extracting additional point correspondences. A minimal number of 3 correspondences is required in order to represent the affine relation. Since an affine correspondence is only a local approximation of an homography, the simulated correspondence points are placed near the point of affine correspondence. We conducted a computer simulation to test the accuracy in calculating the fundamental matrix from points simulated by the affine transformation versus calculation from the conic constraints presented here.In the experiment, three groups of nearby points are viewed by two cameras. Each group consists of three points and is located on a different plane. The angle between the first two planes varies in the simulations, the third plane is perpendicular to the two other planes. The configuration is illustrated in Fig. 6. A fundamental matrix is estimated once from the nine points of correspondence using the normalized eight points method and once from the epipole location and an affine correspondence as described above.We measure the accuracy in the estimation of the fundamental matrix in the presence of noise. The location of each group of points is shifted by a white Gaussian noise. The locations within the groups are also shifted by noise, relative to the distance between the points in the groups. Letujibe the j point of the group i. Also letξbe the distance between the points in each group. The coordinates of each point are perturbed by noise so that(31)ũji=uji+γ(ni+ξnji)whereγdetermines the magnitude of the noise andni,i=1,…,3,nji,i=1,…,3,j=1,…,3are zero mean uncorrelated Gaussian random variables. The distance between the estimations of the fundamental matrix by each of the methods and the theoretical matrix is measured by normalizing each matrix to have a unit norm (since the matrices are only determined up to scale) and taking the Hilbert–Schmidt norm of the difference of the matrices. Our method produces up to 9 solutions (up to 12 intersections of the three conics where 3 of the intersections are located on the correspondence points); we therefore choose the fundamental matrix that minimizes the geometric distance between the 9 matched points and the corresponding epipolar lines by that fundamental matrix.We conducted 1000 experiments for each value ofγ. The proposed method provides higher accuracy than the calculation of the fundamental matrix by the normalized 8 points algorithm using the 9 point correspondences. The results for angles of 60°, 120° and 180° between the first two planes are presented in Fig. 7. The results obtained by the proposed method are more accurate than the point based method. The improvement depends on the angle between the planes; the greatest improvement was measured in the two planes scenario (180° between the first and second plane) where it reached an order of magnitude. An example of the calculated epipole location and the conics is displayed in Fig. 8.Calculation of the fundamental matrix requires correspondence of points or regions. In most cases, a correspondence between images is not known; only hypotheses for correspondences are known. A correct calculation of the fundamental matrix must rely only on correct hypotheses. The problem of separating the correct hypotheses (inliers) from the incorrect hypotheses (outliers) is usually tackled by robust statistical methods such as RANSAC[18].In a RANSAC based solution, hypotheses are chosen at random and the fundamental matrix is calculated from the chosen hypotheses. The rest of the hypotheses are then used to vote for the correctness of the model. Since all hypotheses used for the calculation should be correct, the inliers rate and the number of hypotheses required for calculating the fundamental matrix greatly affect the number of attempts that should be done until a successful calculation is made. For example, point based methods that only employ the center of mass of the regions require a minimum of 7 points for calculation of the fundamental matrix; if the inliers rate is 10%, an average of1×107attempts are required for obtaining a successful guess. Therefore, such methods are only applicable when the inliers rate is high.In this section we demonstrate the use of the epipolar conic constraint for calculating the fundamental matrix in the presence of low inliers rate. As the proposed method only relies on the correspondence of 3 regions, it is applicable to cases where the initial inliers rate is low. We compare the proposed method with [11]. The method presented in [11] also employs the affine approximation from the matched regions. It does so by representing each matched region by 3 points. Therefore, the fundamental matrix can be calculated from 3 corresponding regions (9 points).As in [11], Locally Optimized RANSAC [16] is used for robust estimation of the fundamental matrix. In such an estimation scheme, in each iteration the model is calculated from 3 regions either by the proposed method or by [11]. If the number of inliers in the current iteration is higher than in all the previous iterations, the local optimization process is employed. The structure of the LO-RANSAC is described in Algorithm 1.Algorithm 1A general scheme of a LO-RANSAC robust estimation.Repeat until the probability of missing a set of inliers falls under a predefined threshold (As in standard RANSAC)1.Select a random sample of 3 matched regions and calculate the fundamental matrix from the regions.2.Calculate the number of inliersIk, i.e., the data points their error is smaller than predefined thresholdθ.3.if a new maximum of inliers has occurred (Ik>Ijfor allj<k), run local optimization and store the best model.The local optimization is performed in an iterative manner. In each iteration of the local optimization, a new model is calculated by performing RANSAC on all matched regions with error (distance of the center of mass of the regions from the corresponding epipolar line) lower thanK·θfrom the previous model. The value of K is decreased until the final model is calculated forK=1. Since the inlier rate is high in this phase (we start from the initial model calculated from the 3 regions), we use more than 3 regions for the calculation. As advised in [16],min(Ik/2,14)matches are used for calculating the fundamental matrix using the normalized 8 points algorithm. For compatibility with the experiment in [11], only the center of mass of the regions is used for the local optimization.We use the Daisy dataset [19,20] and the Leuven city hall dataset [21,22] to compare the performance of the methods. The Daisy dataset contains 4 pairs of images. The Leuven city hall dataset contains a sequence of 6 images; we calculate the epipolar geometry of the first image with any other image.We extracted MSER [7] regions from each image. Given a regionΩ∈R2with a center of mass atμ, it is shown in [10] that a coordinate system,u(n), invariant to affine transformations, can be determined from the second order moment matrix of the region, such that(32)u(n)=RM-12uwhere R is an unknown rotation matrix andM=1|Ω|∫Ω(x-μ)(x-μ)Tdx. We use the SIFT descriptor [23] both to detect the unknown rotation (by the dominant gradient location of the image atΩ) and to describe the image in the affine normalized coordinates system. We then create match hypotheses by the similarity of the SIFT descriptor.The affine normalization of the regions is also used to determine an affine transformation for each match hypotheses (for the proposed method) and to determine 3 points of correspondence (for [11]). The first point is the center of mass of the matched regions, two additional points of correspondence are the transformations of unit vectors in the directions of the x axis and the y axis in the normalized coordinate systems to the coordinate systems of the images.We perform 100 experiments for each pair of images and measure the average number of iterations required by the LO-RANSAC algorithm. The results are summarized in Table 1; examples of the pairs of images with epipolar lines calculated using the proposed method are shown in Fig. 9. The proposed method produces comparable and slightly better results than the state of the art, point based, method. Note that in this experiment the methods are not compared directly as an additional phase of estimation from more than three points is needed. Hence, the improvement over the point based method is not as big as in the synthetic experiment. The additional phase is required as the affine relations are not estimated with sufficient accuracy. Thus, comparison of the results of the synthetic experiment, to those obtained on real data leads to the conclusion that higher precision in estimating the local affine features is essential in order to achieve the potential performance gain of the proposed method, over the point the based method. Since the parameters of the local affine features are estimated by the MSER based procedure with only a limited accuracy, both the proposed method and the point based method can only serve as initializers in a Lo-RANSAC framework, and both provide comparable performance in this task. We are currently investigating new methodologies for improving the accuracy in estimating the parameters of local affine models from small image patches.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Although affine correspondences are widely used for obtaining matches between images, a comprehensive analysis of the constraints on epipolar geometry from affine correspondences has not been previously conducted. This paper provides a detailed analysis of the problem.We have proved that each affine correspondence yields 3 linear constraints on the fundamental matrix. Furthermore, if the linear constraints are satisfied, the affine correspondence can be completed to an homography. By using the homography structure it is shown that although two affine correspondences do not fully determine the fundamental matrix, they constrain the location of the epipole to a conic. A simple parameterization of the conic by the affine correspondences was derived along with the properties of the conic. This further demonstrates that an affine correspondence is not equivalent to a 3 point correspondence, as in the case of 6 corresponding points (3 from each affine correspondence) it was shown by Faugeras [5] that the epipole is constrained to a cubic instead of a conic.The conic constraint on the epipole was employed for calculation of the fundamental matrix from 3 affine correspondences. Experiments on synthetic data show that the calculation by intersection of conics is more accurate than the direct calculation by using the normalized 8 points method on points simulated from the affine correspondences. We further showed that since only 3 regions are required for calculating the fundamental matrix, the proposed method can be used for matching in scenarios where the inlier rate is low. However, as current affine estimation methods from small image patches are not accurate enough to enable accurate estimation of the fundamental matrix, on real data both the proposed and the simulated data methods can only serve as initializers for point based estimation from a larger number of points. Thus, comparison of the results of the synthetic experiments, to those obtained on real data leads to the conclusion that higher precision in estimating the local affine features is essential in order to achieve the potential performance gain of the proposed method, over the point the based methods.We show here that the relation between the line parameterizationβandβ′in (19) and (24) is a one dimensional homography. As shown in (7)H2can be represented as(A.1)H2=Su2′a1a30a2a40h3h61S-u2wherea1,…,a4denote the terms ofA2. The image of a pointx(β)=u1+β(u1-u2)by the homographyH2is(A.2)H2x(β)1=Su2′a1a30a2a40h3h61(1+β)(u1-u2)1Recalling thatv2=A2(u1-u2)we can rewrite (A.2) by treating(h3,h6)as a 2D vector as(A.3)Su2′(1+β)v2(1+β)(h3,h6)(u1-u2)+1≅u2′+(1+β)(1+β)(h3,h6)(u1-u2)+1v21where≅represents equality up to a scale factor. The relation betweenβtoβ′is therefore a one dimensional homography.We next show that a one dimensional homography can be calculated from 2 points and a derivative: A general form of a 1-D homography is given by(B.1)β′=aβ+bcβ+1Ifβ′=0corresponds toβ=0, thenb=0anddβ′dβ|β=0=a. In the general case, whereβ0correspond to someβ0′and the derivative atβ0isdβ′dββ=β0=a, we can express the one dimensional homography in homogeneous coordinates as(B.2)t=1β0′01a0c11-β001In Section 3, two parameterizations of a corresponding line by the homographyH2are given by (19) and (24). By the affine correspondence(u2,u2′,A2)we have thatβ′(β=-1)=tβ=-1=0anddtdββ=-1=1. Substituting into the general homography (B.2), the homography t is therefore given by(B.3)t=100110c11101=11cc+1where c is yet to be determined. By the chosen parameterizationtβ=0=α, hencec=1α-1. Since the homography is now fully parameterized byα, we can compute the derivative of t atβ=0; we therefore have thatdtdββ=0=α2.Leta,b,c,dbe some known vectors inR3, wheree=(a×b)×((c×b)+(a×d)). A reformulation ofecan be written as(C.1)e=(a×b)×(a×d)+(b×a)×(b×c)=[a·(b×d)]a+[b·(a×c)]bWe can use the formulation to rewrite Eq. (27): Leta=u1′1,b=u2′+αv21,c=v10andd=α2v20, the termb×dis rewritten as(C.2)(b×d)=u2′1+αv20×α2v20=α2u2′1×v20Thus the term that multiplyα3in (27) cancels out. Moreover, sincea·(b×d)=det(a,b,d)=α2k2andb·(a×c)=det(b,a,c)=αdet(v1,v2)-k1then Eq. (27) can be written more compactly as(C.3)e=α2k2u1′1+(αdet(v1,v2)-k1)u2′+αv21