@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A method for the evaluation of projective geometric consistency in weakly calibrated stereo with application to point matching

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a method for the indexing of point matches based on cross ratios.Matches are characterised by the distribution of a scalar measure derived from multiple point relations.Our consistency measure is processed statistically using random sampling.We propose applications both in weekly calibrated and uncalibrated scenarios.Our method exhibits low false positive rates without the use of thresholds.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Correspondence problem,Wide-baseline stereo,Epipolar geometry,Statistical estimation,Random sampling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We present a novel method that evaluates the geometric consistency of putative point matches in weakly calibrated settings, i.e. when the epipolar geometry but not the camera calibration is known, using only the point coordinates as information. The main idea behind our approach is the fact that each point correspondence in our data belongs to one of two classes (inliers/outlier). The classification of each point match relies on the histogram of a quantity representing the difference between cross ratios derived from a construction involving 6-tuples of point matches. Neither constraints nor scenario dependent parameters/thresholds are needed. Even for few candidate point matches the ensemble of 6-tuples containing each of them turns to provide statistically reliable histograms that prove to discriminate between inliers and outliers. In fact, in most cases a random sampling among this population is sufficient. Nevertheless, the accuracy of the method is positively correlated to its sampling density leading to an accuracy versus resulting computational complexity trade-off. Theoretical analysis and experiments are given that show the consistent performance of the proposed classification method when applied in inlier/outlier discrimination. The achieved accuracy is favourably evaluated against established methods that employ geometric only information, i.e. those relying on the Sampson, the algebraic and the symmetric epipolar distances. Finally, we also present an application of our scheme in uncalibrated stereo inside a RANSAC framework and compare it to the same as above methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
One of the first steps in most wide baseline computer vision algorithms, arising in tasks such as feature-based stereo 3D reconstruction, image registration, and camera self-calibration, is the acquisition of correspondences between image features extracted from different views of the same static scene. In traditional stereo or structure from motion the rigid motion between the cameras may be assumed to be small, which simplifies the feature matching or tracking operation. We are interested instead in wide-baseline settings where two images of the same scene may be taken from very different points of view, possibly by two different types of cameras, and without knowledge of the intrinsic camera parameters. Under these assumptions, the image points undergo a non-linear projective transformation which necessitates their evaluation inside a projective mathematical framework. Although much research has been directed at reliable matching, there are many difficulties to overcome for practical use; the difficulties arise at the lowest level with feature point detection and description, and at the highest level with reducing ambiguity among point matches. Our focus in this paper will be in the latter, namely how to express geometric validity of feature points given only their image coordinates.Researchers have generally addressed point matching as a necessary step in larger real world problems and, consequently, there exist a number of algorithms which are adequate for solving specific variations of the problem. Thus, given some information about the structure of the scene or the camera pose, one can limit the class of transformations that each region can undergo between a set of images, e.g. scaling, rotational and affine transformations which in turn simplify the matching procedure [1–3]. In wide-baseline scenarios with no scene knowledge these assumptions do not apply, so the initial approaches in the point matching pipeline use the basic idea of detecting local feature points together with local neighbourhood regions that are covariant with the underlying viewpoint change [4–8]. Feature matching, as a pattern recognition task, is quite a mature field and many algorithms that were developed in different contexts can be applied in the wide baseline scenario for detecting and matching local features. However, any local feature matching strategy that does not take into account the allowed spatial relationships arising from the subsumed projection model of the cameras is bound to produce spurious matches. Local feature matching is thus usually performed as a first processing step to obtain some initial matches that are subsequently refined using geometric information. Relevant algorithms can be classified into stratified reconstruction methods [9] and direct reconstruction methods [10] and projective reconstruction is a necessary first step in all these approaches. Inside this projective mathematical framework current state of the art algorithms make a preliminary detection of spurious matches/outliers, before attempting to upgrade or refine their estimates about the scene and the cameras [11–13]. One issue in any stratified algorithm is that while in each successive step, stronger and more physically meaningful constraints about the allowed point matches become available, their accuracy is very adversely affected by leftover outliers from previous stages. Thus the most efficient algorithm pipelines employ robust frameworks like RANSAC in the first stages and accurate non-robust methods like Levenberg–Marquard in the later ones, using the additional mathematical constraints that have arisen. However, the inherent difficulties of mathematical calculations in projective space often necessitate the tuning of thresholding parameters for the comparison of geometric features and derived quantities. This tuning is either done manually for a class of scenes, or performed as a pre-processing computational step [14]. Finally, as shown in [15,16,10], the addition of Gaussian noise in the points used to calculate the fundamental matrix leads to an elliptical error distribution of the epipoles. This can be in turn used to compute the envelope of the epipolar lines, which is proven to be a hyperbola. Although, some of the methods proposed compute the covariance of the fundamental matrix and subsequently the distribution of the epipoles without prior information [15], it is also stated that an accurate calculation requires the knowledge of the error distribution of image points.We propose a novel method to estimate a strong form of geometric validity in a projective setting given subsets of point-correspondences. Two main ideas are behind our approach. The first one is to take advantage of multiple geometric point relations to assess the conformance to the epipolar geometry of each putative match, in contrast to quantities like the epipolar distances that are derived by a single point-pair. Secondly, the large number of geometric relations for each match allows us to process them in a statistical framework, instead of relying on a single scalar value for each one. The statistical processing in turn is handled in such a way as to lower the computational complexity by sampling and to avoid the direct use of thresholds in the classification. More specifically, our method employs a new metric-like quantity based on the difference of the apparent cross-ratios as seen from each image and defined geometrically by 6-tuples of point-correspondences and the two epipoles. SinceP3is a metric-less space [9], the difference of cross-ratios or any function thereof cannot claim to exhibit true metric characteristics. We instead employ it in a statistical framework to characterise geometrically consistent and inconsistent point matches. Each point pair correspondence aggregates multiple estimates about their projective geometric consistency in relation to others, which are in turn used to approximate the empirical distribution function (EDF) of our confidence metric. We show experimentally that the distribution of our proposed quantity is sufficiently distinct between inliers and outliers as to enable their identification through simple clustering without any arbitrary thresholds. Naturally, the indirect assumption of an error distribution in the vector space of the EDFs and a threshold is implied by the clustering algorithm. However, as shown by experimental and theoretical analysis, in that resulting space the inliers and outliers can be indexed by a simple clustering algorithm that assumes linearly separable data. Finally we show that the performance of the algorithm improves with increasing sample ratio, yet attains good levels even for comparatively small sample sizes, especially regarding false positive matches classification.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
