@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Real time non-rigid 3D surface tracking using particle filter

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We recover simultaneously the non-rigid 3D shape and the corresponding camera pose from a single image in real time.We use an efficient particle filter that performs an intelligent search of a database of deformations.The surface is parameterized in different types of deformation clusters.We present an exhaustive Design of Experiments to obtain the optimal parameterization of the particle filter.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Real time tracking,Deformable tracking,Particle filter,Shape recovery,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Recovering a deformable 3D surface from a single image is an ill-posed problem because of the depth ambiguities. The resolution to this ambiguity normally requires prior knowledge about the most probable deformations that the surface can support. Many methods that address this problem have been proposed in the literature. Some of them rely on physical properties, while others learn the principal deformations of the object or are based on a reference textured image. However, they present some limitations such as high computational cost or the lack of the possibility of recovering the 3D shape. As an alternative to existing solutions, this paper provides a novel approach that simultaneously recovers the non-rigid 3D shape and the camera pose in real time from a single image. This proposal relies on an efficient particle filter that performs an intelligent search of a database of deformations. We present an exhaustive Design of Experiments to obtain the optimal parametrization of the particle filter, as well as a set of results to demonstrate the visual quality and the performance of our approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Recovering the 3D shape of a non-rigid surface from a monocular video sequence is a highly ambiguous problem because many 3D surfaces could have the same projection (see Fig. 1). Even when we have the intrinsic camera parameters and a well-textured surface, it is difficult to select the best mesh between all possible configurations of a deformable surface in order to solve the depth ambiguities. Along with the standard approaches that try to solve the shape recovery problem, we find approaches that establish prior knowledge [60], have a reference image [40], or are even based on a set of images of the target object [6].Some methods rely on modelling the physical properties of a surface to achieve an approximation of the physical behaviour [14]. Although they obtain accurate results, the challenge is to determine the physical properties that govern the surface behaviour. Others adjust the behaviour of a surface to the movements registered in a database [43], which contains the most representative deformations of the surface. There are other approaches [29] that reconstruct the deformation of a non-rigid surface by using 2D–3D correspondences between an input image and a reference image in which the 3D shape of the surface and the intrinsic parameters of the camera are known. Likewise, some methods [4] that do not require prior knowledge have been proposed. They extract 2D–3D correspondences for each frame by tracking points over the video sequence.The central idea of our method is to recover simultaneously and in real time the camera pose and the non-rigid 3D surface through the use of an efficient particle filter [19,37]. The particle filter performs an intelligent search in a database where a range of deformation templates and appearance descriptors are stored. Furthermore, two tracking methods are combined to offer robust tracking. The first one is based on appearance, which serves to do both the initialization and reset from a failure, while the second one is based on temporal coherence.The rest of the paper is organized in 5 sections as follows. First, we provide an overview of some works related to recovering a deformable 3D surface and the justification for choosing our method is presented. In Section 3, we address all the steps that have been carried out to solve the problem of recovering a non-rigid 3D surface. Afterwards, in Section 4 a Design of Experiments is presented to determine the optimal values of the parameters of the Particle Filter, as well as, a test suite that demonstrates the good performance of our tracking method. Finally, conclusions and future works are enumerated in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The problem of recovering the 3D shape of a deformable surface has become an important issue in different areas such as Computer Graphics and Computer Vision. In this paper we have presented a study of the different methods that we can find in the literature in order to solve the problem of the ambiguities that arise when reconstructing these types of surfaces.Furthermore, we have presented an alternative approach that is able to simultaneously calculate the 3D shape and the pose of a surface in an input image. The solution consists of creating one database for appearance descriptors and another one for deformation templates without any prior knowledge about the physical properties of the object. The novelty of our system relies on a particle filter that obtains real time execution by an efficient search through the deformation database to solve both problems simultaneously. Additionally, using a parallelizable technique like the particle filter, facilitates future improvements such as a GPU implementation.In addition to this, a refined Design of Experiments has allowed us to deduce the optimal parametrization of a particle filter that achieves correct visual results in line with low computational cost. The robustness of our system has also been tested by adding noisy matches and comparing our system with other approaches.The above contributions make us realize that new innovations and improvements are still possible in this field, and we will address them in the future. In terms of the database generation, which is a common problem in this type of techniques, it would be convenient to use this type of formulation in conjunction with a dimensional reduction technique such as PCA to retain the most significant modes of deformation. It would also be interesting to experiment not only with smooth movements but with strong ones where problems like the loss of information (that involve outliers) are dealt with. Following this idea, a possible improvement could be to combine our method with existing ones that offer more robustness but the computational cost is higher. Hence, considering the result of our system as an initial approximation of the deformed structure and its corresponding pose, a more robust system can feed with this information in order to achieve high levels of accuracy in real time performance.On the other hand, although our frame-to-frame tracking stage is able to self-regulate to small errors (selecting the particle that best fits to the image features in each frame), our system has the limitation of resetting the process when the tracking is completely lost. It would be appropriate to insert for example, a tracking-by-detection step in order to estimate both the pose and the deformed 3D structure without the need of treating the surface as a rigid object to calculate the first camera pose. Furthermore, since our system is highly adaptable, the 3D reconstruction can be resolved not only with the reprojection error but also by adding other features such as colour recognition.Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cviu.2014.12.002.