@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A generative restricted Boltzmann machine based method for high-dimensional motion data modeling

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Extended RBM to model spatio-temporal patterns among high-dimensional motion data.Generative approach to perform classification using RBM, for both binary and multi-class classification.High classification accuracy in two computer vision applications: facial expression recognition and human action recognition.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Restricted Boltzmann machine,Generative model,High-dimensional motion data,Facial expression recognition,Human action recognition,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Many computer vision applications involve modeling complex spatio-temporal patterns in high-dimensional motion data. Recently, restricted Boltzmann machines (RBMs) have been widely used to capture and represent spatial patterns in a single image or temporal patterns in several time slices. To model global dynamics and local spatial interactions, we propose to theoretically extend the conventional RBMs by introducing another term in the energy function to explicitly model the local spatial interactions in the input data. A learning method is then proposed to perform efficient learning for the proposed model. We further introduce a new method for multi-class classification that can effectively estimate the infeasible partition functions of different RBMs such that RBM is treated as a generative model for classification purpose. The improved RBM model is evaluated on two computer vision applications: facial expression recognition and human action recognition. Experimental results on benchmark databases demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Spatio-temporal patterns in high-dimensional motion data are crucial in many recognition applications. For example, human action is the combination of the body joint movements over a time interval. Facial expression is the result of the facial landmark movements (Fig. 1). Understanding the movement trajectories and modeling the underlying spatio-temporal patterns play an important role in recognizing these actions, especially with the recent emergences of reliable algorithms [1,2] to estimate the positions of body joints and facial landmarks.In this work, we are interested in developing a probabilistic model to capture the spatio-temporal patterns in high-dimensional time series for classification purpose. Many recent works develop novel models to capture the spatio-temporal dynamics [3–6]. However, most models, such as hidden Markov model (HMM) [5], dynamic Bayesian network (DBN) [7] and conditional random field (CRF) [8] are time-slice local models, which assume Markov property and stationary transitions and hence can only capture local dynamics. The local models suffer from two limitations. First, local dynamics may not represent a sequence well because it fails to model the overall dynamics. Second, the stationary transition assumption may not hold for many real-world applications.Compared with time-sliced dynamic models, restricted Boltzmann machines (RBMs) has shown strong capability of modeling joint distributions and therefore can capture the global patterns. In literature, RBMs have been successfully applied to separately capture the spatial [9] or temporal [10] patterns in different types of data. In this work, we propose a variant of RBM that can capture spatial and global temporal patterns simultaneously to comprehensively model the high-dimensional motion data.In a typical RBM, since there are no lateral connections among nodes in each layer, input data are independent of each other given the states of hidden layer. This assumption limits RBM’s representation power, since there exist direct dependencies among input data. There are generally two types of data interactions: interactions through latent variable and direct interactions independent of latent variable. For example, as stated in [11], soldiers on a parade follow the commander’s order to march in some direction, but they “form a neat rectangle by interacting with their neighbors”. This example illustrates that soldiers’ behavior are determined by both the commander’s order (latent) and the interactions with their neighbors. In this case, RBM is not effective in modeling the local interaction that is independent of the latent variable. The use of RBM for data representation and classification is further hindered by the difficulty in comparing different RBMs due to the intractable computation of the partition functions.Allowing interaction among visible units can overcome this shortcoming. We introduce restricted Boltzmann machine with local interactions (LRBM) to capture both the global temporal patterns and local spatial interactions in the input data. Specifically, we add a new pairwise potential term in the learning objective function of RBM to capture the local spatial interactions among components of an input vector. To perform efficient learning for the model, we replace the reconstruction procedure in the conventional Contrastive Divergence [13] algorithm with a mean field approach.For classification task, RBM is typically used for learning features, as the input to a second stage classifier (e.g., SVM [14]). Typically one model is trained for all classes. To obtain good features, deep structure is built and back propagation is employed to carefully tune the parameters. In this work, we use RBM as a generative model to capture the spatio-temporal patterns in the data. RBM is used for data representation instead of feature learning. Given an observation, the only output we get from an RBM model is the likelihood of the model. For the recognition purpose, one model is trained for one class of input data. To compare among different models, we employ a method to estimate the relative partition function of a pair of RBMs for binary classification, and a label ranking method is used to extend the binary classification to multi-class classification.To evaluate the performance of LRBM, we apply it to two areas related to complex spatial and temporal patterns: facial expression recognition and human action recognition. Experimental results on benchmark databases demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed model.The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents an overview of the related work. Section 3 introduces the LRBM to model the global temporal dynamics and spatial patterns of motion data, as well as the classification method. We will then give the experimental results in Section 4. The paper is concluded in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
