@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Efficient multi-target tracking via discovering dense subgraphs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A multi-target tracking is formulated as a dense subgraph discovering problem.Both local and global cues are exploited to represent the tracklet affinity model.The distinguishable appearance based models are learned for the targets.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi-target tracking,Dense subgraphs,Relation affinity graph,Discriminative target appearance model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we cast multi-target tracking as a dense subgraph discovering problem on the undirected relation graph of all given target hypotheses. We aim to extract multiple clusters (dense subgraphs), in which each cluster contains a set of hypotheses of one particular target. In the presence of occlusion or similar moving targets or when there is no reliable evidence for the target’s presence, each target trajectory is expected to be fragmented into multiple tracklets. The proposed tracking framework can efficiently link such fragmented target trajectories to build a longer trajectory specifying the true states of the target. In particular, a discriminative scheme is devised via learning the targets’ appearance models. Moreover, the smoothness characteristic of the target trajectory is utilised by suggesting a smoothness tracklet affinity model to increase the power of the proposed tracker to produce persistent target trajectories revealing different targets’ moving paths. The performance of the proposed approach has been extensively evaluated on challenging public datasets and also in the context of team sports (e.g. soccer, AFL), where team players tend to exhibit quick and unpredictable movements. Systematic experimental results conducted on a large set of sequences show that the proposed approach performs better than the state-of-the-art trackers, in particular, when dealing with occlusion and fragmented target trajectory.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Multi-target tracking in real world scenarios is a crucial problem for many computer vision tasks. Some of its potential applications include anomaly detection, visual surveillance, human–computer interaction and sports analysis.Generally speaking, a multi-target tracking framework takes a set of target detections in each frame from any pre-trained detector as its input and aims to recover the trajectories of all targets as well as maintaining their consistent identities. However, the problem and its difficulty depend on conflicting challenges, such as occlusion, drastically varying illumination and viewpoint for the target during the tracking, and therefore its trajectory is expected to be fragmented into multiple tracklets across video sequence. In addition, recovering the true target trajectories is an ambiguous problem when several visually similar targets move closely together. Apart from these challenges, the detector cannot be assumed to be accurate and may produce false negatives (missed targets) or extra detections. In such scenarios, revealing each individual’s identity results in an extreme complexity in the number of tracks and measurements, and thus quickly becomes infeasible.Recently, tracking-by-detection methods [1,2] have attracted much attention due to the promising improvements on object detection. They usually seek proper association between the target hypotheses by constructing their mutual similarities (affinities) based on multiple cues, such as motion similarity.In the proposed framework, multi-target tracking is formulated as a dense subgraph extraction problem, in which each recovered dense subgraph specifies the trajectory of the one particular target during the tracking. Here, the higher order correspondences between the observations (targets’ hypotheses across video sequence) are considered. With respect to the literature, this approach has the following advantages:1.An iterative strategy is devised to partition the spatio-temporal graph of target hypotheses into different subgraphs. Each reveals a different target trajectory. At each iteration, the most coherent vertices of the constructed spatio-temporal graph in a short time period of the video will be added to the existing subgraphs (tracklets) until reaching the densest subgraphs, which are more likely to be the true trajectories of the targets. Since the proposed method works on small graph partitions (in the few video frames), it is much more efficient in terms of computational expense.In the presence of occlusion of the target, whether caused by another target or visual obstacles where the target trajectories are only partially observable due to a failure of the pre-trained detector, a discriminative scheme is devised via learning the targets’ appearance models. In addition, target hypotheses are sparse in time (false negative), which prevents obtaining good target motion estimates. Therefore, the smoothness characteristic of the target trajectory is utilised by suggesting a smoothness tracklet affinity model to increase the power of the proposed tracker to associate the fragmented target tracklets to produce persistent target trajectories revealing different targets’ moving paths (see Fig. 1).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
