@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Encouraging serendipity in research: Designing technologies to support connection-making

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Tailored text messaging applied to a connection-making framework.‘Irrelevant’ text messages appeared to be positively perceived by participants.Suggestions’ phrasing did not influence participants’ responses on the suggestions.Unexpectedness involves location, memories, familiarity and non-familiarity.We propose a connection-making model and framework for design.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Making connections,Push text suggestions,Serendipity,Reflection,Diary study,Wizard of Oz,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Mobile applications have the ability to present information to users that is influenced by their surroundings, activities and interests. Such applications have the potential to influence the likelihood of individuals experiencing ‘serendipity’, through a combination of information, context, insight and activity. This study reports the deployment of a system that sends push text suggestions to users throughout the day, where the content of those messages is informed by users’ experience and interests. We investigated the responses to and interactions with messages that varied in format and relevance, and which were received at different times throughout the day. Sixteen participants were asked to use a mobile diary application to record their experiences and thoughts regarding information that was received over a period of five consecutive days. Results suggest that participants’ perception of the received suggestions was influenced by the relevance of the suggestion to their interests, but that there were also positive attitudes towards seemingly irrelevant information. Qualitative data indicates that participants, if in an appropriate time and place, are willing to accept and act upon push suggestions as long as the number of suggestions that they receive is not overwhelming. This study contributes towards an understanding of how mobile users make connections with new information, furthering our understanding of how serendipitous connections and insightful thinking could be accommodated using technology.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Understanding the way that people think and make associations among their own interests, resources and other people is important not only for encouraging communication and collaboration but also for identifying key elements that contribute to making unexpected connections – something that can be termed ‘serendipity’. Notions of serendipity have been widely documented as being ‘a happy accident’, something’ unexpected’ or a ‘pleasant surprise’ (Bawden, 1986). Furthermore, sagacity – that is the ability to make valuable connections among ‘unconnected’ information – has been documented as being an important element of serendipity (Kop, 2012). However, other researchers argue that something needs to be interesting as well as surprising in order to be considered serendipitous (Ge et al., 2010) and that serendipity can facilitate information browsing (Marchionini and Shneiderman, 1988). Recent research has identified that the conceptualization and realisation of ‘serendipity’ involves insightful thinking, promoting the idea that ‘serendipity’ is not just a ‘happy accident’ (Friedel, 2001; Makri and Blandford, 2012) but requires some proactive input from the individual. Serendipity has been researched in numerous contexts including counselling psychology (Krumboltz, 1998), information seeking (Foster and Ford, 2003), ubiquitous computing (Newman et al., 2002), entrepreneurship (Dew, 2009) and medicine (Klein, 2008; Ban, 2006). In Human Computer Interaction (HCI), serendipity has been explored especially under the context of recommender systems because they provide an excellent test-bed to tackle the so-called ‘serendipity problem’ (Iaquinta et al., 2008) and the overspecialisation of recommended information, which can impair serendipity (Gup, 1997), while aiming to provide richer experiences in suggestions. Our own work (Sun et al., 2011) has shown that the concept of serendipity is also relevant to the work of those who are conducting research, in both an academic and non-academic setting.While other researchers acknowledge that ‘inaccuracy’ can be critical for developing recommender systems (McNee et al., 2006), the majority of the recommender systems incorporate commonalities, relevancies and previous data patterns and choices (i.e. bookmark lists) as their operative core (Adomavicius and Tuzhilin, 2005; Resnick and Varian, 1997). However, new methods of data recommendations have emerged in recent years such as prediction techniques, content-based methods, collaborative methods and hybrid methods (Adomavicius and Tuzhilin, 2005). In an attempt to enrich the experience and data pool of modern recommender systems new approaches have been suggested such as ambient recommender systems, which utilise users’ emotional responses, machine learning and intelligent agents to provide focused and more personalised suggestions to the users (Gonzalez et al., 2006).However, a critical question here is whether absolute personalisation and content fit is the optimal answer to efficient and successful recommender systems. In a serendipity context, one could say that inaccuracy and ‘open-mindedness’ in systems is of fundamental importance in order to design and implement a system that can accommodate serendipitous encounters because such a framework allows wider reflection and surprise, open information augmentation and acceptance – qualities that can support serendipity (Gaver et al., 2003). While serendipity is a slippery concept (Makri and Blandford, 2012), attempts have been made to introduce serendipity into systems through serendipity heuristics (Iaquinta et al., 2008), shuffling algorithms (Leong et al., 2005), through design for reflection (Maxwell et al., 2012), through ambient intelligence and interactive data mining (Beale, 2007) and in music recommendations (Zhang et al., 2012).A system that can accommodate serendipitous encounters may not strictly be a ‘recommender system’ – according to past recommender systems’ definitions (Felfernig et al., 2007; Ricci et al., 2011) – however, there is value in developing a framework that provides the basis for new technologies, beyond traditional recommender approaches, to support elements of serendipitous encounters and encourages free connection-making between resources and people.Making new, loose associations that can lead to valuable, concrete connections in a mobile-dominated world is challenging due to the amount of information that is shared and forgotten. While there are models of serendipity that may incorporate the notions of connection-making (e.g. Sun et al., 2011; Makri and Blandford, 2012), the stage of connection-making, what influences it, and how technology can support it, is yet to be specifically examined. Despite the fact that we live in a world that values information and information sharing, there is a need to identify the role of technology and system design in supporting connection-making (Palmer, 1999). At the same time, information browsing and information encountering reaches new levels and offers new opportunities due to technology ubiquity demonstrating that environmental context plays an important role in information seeking and information understanding (Erdelez, 1999, 2004). We argue that there is value in exploring the value technology that is used every day, such as phone-based text messaging, as a medium to facilitate insightful thinking and connections-making, whilst also allowing time for reflection (e.g. through the use of a mobile diary application). By understanding the qualitative elements of connection-making we will be able to inform the design of systems that support serendipitous encounters and connection-making.According to empirically-driven models of serendipity (seeFig. 1), unexpected associations may be influenced by the environment in which new information is encountered (location), the timing of receipt of new information (time), the circumstances of information presentation (context) and the individual׳s preparedness for new thoughts and ideas (Makri and Blandford, 2012; Sun et al., 2011). Furthermore, ‘noticing’ and ‘examining’ presuppose the ‘capture of attention’ and ‘engagement’ of the user (Sun et al., 2011).Other researchers note factors that can influence unexpected connection-making including memory (Auble et al., 1979), creativity (Sternberg and Davidson, 1995) and engaging in activities that allow reflection (Mann et al., 2009). McCay-Peet and Toms (2011) have previously discussed specific elements that they have found that may induce serendipity encounters. Such elements include facilitating connection-making and exploration between information, exposing people to unexpected and varied information, accommodating browsing of information, promoting divergence and triggering curiosity. McCay-Peet and Toms (2011) have particularly looked at the importance of environment in inducing serendipity and unexpected connection-making by designing information environments that offer similarity-based recommendations based on (1) what users report as their likes/dislikes, (2) their tracked browsing history and (3) their previous search keywords.More recent research has particularly looked at design for positive experiences with special focus on the role of delight in serendipitous encounters (Kefalidou et al., 2012). While the concept of ‘delight’ is found to be associated to e.g. customer engagement and satisfaction (Chitturi et al., 2008) and positive user experience (Fleck, 2003), it is also found to be linked to the notion of ‘surprise’ when designing for ambiguity (Gaver et al., 2003). Surprise appears to be, indeed, a critical factor interplaying in experiencing serendipity and ‘delight’ therefore could be argued to offer potential triggers for serendipitous encounters (André et al., 2009; Leong, 2009).Connection-making pervades our everyday lives and manifests both in our face-to-face communications and technology-mediated communications (Siemens, 2005; Barzilai and Zohar, 2006). Indeed, the act of sharing appears to play a pivotal role in creating meaning and trigger new connections with ideas and perceptions (Short, 1993). Social media and microblogging have presented new opportunities for information sharing within business and personal communications (Java et al., 2007) while the utilisation of short, semi-structured messages can offer advantages in computer-supported collaborations by reducing complexity and making information processing more manageable (Malone et al., 1987). In this study we explore the value and design of short text messages, delivered to individuals throughout the day, in stimulating new thoughts and ideas, and potentially increasing the likelihood of serendipitous thoughts. We employed a ‘text-messaging’ framework to test the concept of instant text messaging and rapid information flow, both of which have been associated with serendipity in the past either in the form of serendipitous mobile file exchange mechanisms (Ahn and Pierce, 2005) or theories in mobile learning (Sharples et al., 2005). The text message suggestions tested within this study represent a small element of an anticipated mobile serendipity assistant that would support users in making inspiring and insightful connections with new people and information.When introducing new technologies it is important to understand their impact and the way in which they are perceived in a naturalistic manner wherever possible. In this study we use a mobile diary to record participant attitudes towards the receipt of messages ‘on the go’. The main advantage of mobile diary studies is that they can capture experiences, thoughts and events as they are lived (Bolger et al., 2003; Cranwell et al., 2015) while experience sampling methods can be used to prompt users to provide structured feedback on specific tasks (Consolvo and Walker, 2003). In this research we use text messages as the stimuli, and adopt a combination of mobile diary study and 2-stage interview methodology to capture participant responses and attitudes both immediately after receipt of messages, and before and after participating in the study for a five day period. While research using mobile diary studies and interviews has previously been conducted to explore the theoretical concept of ‘serendipity’ (Sun et al., 2011), based on participants’ past experiences and encounters, this new study explicitly examines responses to stimuli that were constructed based on knowledge about participants’ experiences and interests, mimicking the proposed behaviour of a ‘serendipity system’.This paper investigates how people can make connections among other people and among resources using a text messaging and mobile diary study framework ‘in the wild’. This is the first study that investigates the responsiveness of people using a combination of such frameworks in a contextual, experiential and suggestions-based perspective with the aim to explore how people perceive and determine the value of the suggestions through the use of a mobile diary and SMS text messaging. Past research has shown that, when browsing, seeking and evaluating information, users either: perform search-oriented browsing, then review-browse the information that they found; or scan-browse without necessarily reviewing but with an aim to just identifying interesting information (Carmel et al., 1992; Chen and Rada, 1996; Erdelez, 1999, 2004) leading researchers to identify different strategies in text browsing (e.g. verbalisers vs. imagers – Graff, 2005). Consequently, for the purpose of our study we examine serendipitous encounters through the lens of how surprising, interesting and valuable text suggestions are.As the use of smart phones and text messages communication increases, it is important to understand how mobile users perceive and respond to textual information ‘pushed’ to them by a device or system. If information is to be ‘pushed’ in such a manner it is also important to understand how the subtleties of presentation affect perception of that information. Pennebaker et al. (2003) provided reviews regarding the importance of intonation in spoken and written language and how this affects human perceptions, attitudes and their psychological status and insight into the perception of emotional polarity in words (Wilson et al., 2005). This past research suggests that particular syntactic frameworks of messages (i.e. question-like sentence framework vs. statement-like sentence framework) may influence the attitude that someone has towards a received message and the connections that they make. Pennebaker et al. (2003) report findings on linguistic styling and content, the changes of which apparently indicate personality, emotional and individualistic traits of the people that employ them. For example, utilising particular syntactic (as defined above) and grammatical structures within a single sentence (e.g. using imperative instead of employing a polite request) may not only provide information about the person that generates and expresses this sentence but also may influence the subsequent interactions of that person with the surrounding people and other peoples’ reactions to this sentence. Through a number of different analytical methods such as judge-based content thematic analyses, thematic content analyses, word pattern analyses, latent semantic analyses, word count and sentiment analyses (which is quite popular in social media research), it is concluded that words, their selection and usage manifest psychometric properties that retain their properties throughout different environments and social contexts. For example, in Mehl and Pennebaker’s longitudinal studies (e.g. Mehl and Pennebaker, 2003) students’ everyday conversations over a period of time and with an intermediate break appear to be utilising the same words, tones and syntax in their communications independently of whether they are at work or school, at home or anywhere else outdoors during their leisure time (public and private places).Nevertheless, despite the consistency observed in peoples speech and communications, the choice of words chosen to construct these communications appear to constitute markers for individual differences with strong indications that age contributes to changes in word selection and usage. In a cross-sectional analysis of multiple written and text spoken samples from disclosure studies and from a longitudinal project that analysed works of 10 novelists, playwrights and poets that lived in the past 500 years, it was found that as people grew older they tended to utilise more positive emotion words in their speech and text and fewer first person singular self-references (Pennebaker and Stone, 2003). Similar differences have been found in peoples’ converses depending on their gender.|Following prior research׳s indication that style and content of language may influence individual׳s interactions, we compare two types of syntactic presentation (i.e. question-like sentence framework vs. statement-like sentence framework) of messages in our study.The influence of the apparent ‘relevance’ of information on enthusiasm for and attitudes towards that information is also of interest. Research in the fields of marketing and advertising has examined consumer attitudes in mobile advertising (Tsang et al., 2004; Conti et al., 2012) and in the use of language in advertising (Piller, 2003). Through a field survey that aimed to investigate people׳s attitudes, intentions and behaviours towards Internet and mobile advertisement it has been found that peoples’ attitudes towards mobile advertising for the promotion of products through text messaging are mostly negative (Tsang et al., 2004). Tsang et al. (2004), found that entertainment, informativeness, and credibility related positively to the overall attitude of people responded to mobile advertisement while irritation is negatively correlated. A stepwise regression analyses indicated that entertainment is the foremost factor that affects overall attitude with credibility, irritation and informativeness following up. This suggests that peoples’ attitudes to mobile advertisement can be positive if only permission is asked prior to adverts distribution on their mobile devices. Conti et al. (2012) sent out 400 tailored mobile adverts to 20 professionals over 5 consecutive days and conducted follow-up interviews with them. It was found that busy workload and localised context influenced the decisions and opinions of the individuals towards the mobile advertising received. While participants appeared to appreciate the context-relevant adverts, it was found, overall, that they negatively rated the majority of the received adverts. Privacy, control of data and effective tailoring of the distributed adverts were found to be critical for determining the perception and attitude of people towards the adverts.Other research in this field has found that content irrelevance of an advert and the frequency of adverts is correlated with negative experience (Haghirian et al., 2005; Merisavo et al., 2007). For example, Haghirian et al. (2005), interviewed 815 mobile phone users over a 6-week period using a 5-point Likert-type scale questionnaire and found that both informativeness and entertainment relate strongly to advertising value confirming previous studies. They also found out that irritation correlates negatively with advertising value, although on a weaker extent compared to informativeness and entertainment observed correlations. High credibility of the advert correlates positively with advertising value suggesting that people׳s opinion about an advert is determined by the trust they assign to the marketer. Finally, and most importantly it was found that if people are exposed frequently to the same advertisements, they have a higher chance of perceiving the advert negatively as their informativeness is reduced (i.e. as exposed to the same advert repeatedly). Merisavo et al. (2007) applied structural equation modelling to test five metrics (utility, context, control, sacrifice and trust) of SMS-based mobile advertisement acceptance from data they obtained from 4062 Finnish mobile phone users. Context and sacrifice were found to be particularly strong indicators for acceptance and non-acceptance of the mobile adverts. This suggests that mobile adverts’ content and relevance to the individual needs need to be emphasised if it is to be accepted and be positively perceived by the individual. Contrary to previous studies, Merisavo et al. (2007) found that trust and privacy do not correlate strongly (negatively or positively) to advertisement value but utility and context are positive drivers for mobile advertisement acceptance.Although previous research on mobile text messaging has focused on the interestingness and relevance of content on peoples’ perceptions and acceptance, limited attention has been shown in investigating the impact of unexpectedness of content on peoples’ perceptions and attitude. Research into serendipity shows that the ‘unexpected’ nature or content of a source can be key in forming new ideas and insight (Sun et al., 2011). No research as of yet has taken place into attitudes towards messages that vary in their relevance in the context of serendipity and idea generation. We present users with two classes of messages, ‘relevant’ and ‘irrelevant’ and examine the different responses to and perceptions of these messages.In this paper we target users of smart phones to whom we send text suggestions either tailored towards their interests or apparently unconnected to their interests. We used this approach for two main reasons: first of all, in order to explore for the first time a widely-used technological message setting (as SMS text messaging is widely adopted with minimal learning curve) within serendipity and connection-making research; secondly, to investigate how connection-making ‘on-the-go’ can be facilitated through the exchange of specific text messages targeted to an individual and not necessarily to the whole world (e.g. compared to the more ‘public’ approach of tweets for example) and thirdly to construct and investigate a messages construction protocol for tailoring the suggestions sent to the individual participants. We deployed a mobile diary application and interviews before and after the use of the mobile diary application to understand users’ responses to and perceptions of these suggestions. We also captured the time at which the participants responded to the suggestions through acknowledging or exploring the message, notes-taking, photos-taking and audio-taking using the mobile diary application. This allowed an examination of the role of message relevance (relevant vs. irrelevant), framing (suggestions formed as a question or sentence) and temporal context on user attitude and response.RQ1: Does time of day influence peoples’ responses?It is well known that positive affect and mood behaviour is influenced by the time of day and the day of the week (Clark et al., 1989; Egloff et al., 1995). Furthermore, it has been found that human performance exhibits differences depending on the time of day (Fröberg, 1977) while the latter can determine the cognitive and evaluative efficiency of individuals (Natale et al., 2003). Consequently, considering that mood can influence human performance and evaluation activities, we wanted to investigate whether the time that a suggestion as a text message is being received by an individual, qualitatively affected the individual׳s response to the suggestion. In the study presented here, as we are using an ‘in the wild’ approach, we are unable to isolate time from other contextual factors, including physical location and the presence or absence of other distractors, therefore we refer to this factor as ‘temporal context’.RQ2: Does text content influence peoples’ responses?The manipulation of advertising message contents in response to customers’ involvement and engagement has been considered in the past (Andrews and Durvasula, 1991). Furthermore, recent research by Conti et al. (2012) has employed the action of sending advertisements to mobile phones in the form of text messages revealing a positive response towards context relevant texts. Therefore, we explored whether the relevance of the texts suggestions’ content influenced how positive or negative the participants would be towards the suggestions received.RQ3: Do text characteristics influence peoples’ responses?Linguistics framing and rhetoric patterns have long been considered that have an effect on audiences reactions and responses (Hallahan, 1999). In addition, reader-response theory emphasises the advertisement texts’ importance in message decoding and understanding (Scott, 1994). Consequently, we wanted to find out whether the way that texts were phrased and constructed had some impact on the way that people responded to the suggestions.RQ4: How do people perceive text suggestions ‘on-the-go’?Previous research (e.g. Westlund, 2008), suggested that approximately only one third of mobile users’ were positive in using mobile devices for reading news (i.e. information ‘pulling’), and that would happen only when they did not have any other means to get informed. However, more recently, as mobile technological innovations have risen, accessing news while ‘on-the-go’ has gained popularity. Furthermore, mobile devices have moved from being devices that support provision of news to being devices that support communication services. According to Lenhart et al. (2010), text messaging constitutes the major teenagers’ means for daily communication for contacting friends and family. A reason for this rise has been attributed to the widespread usage of social media (all of which are available through their mobile phone editions) and facilitate a ‘push and pull’ model of information exchange. More recently, the development of mobile recommendation systems has opened up more opportunities for enhancing ‘pushing’ and ‘pulling’ information for supporting decision-making ‘on-the-go’ (Van der Heijden et al., 2005). A number of mobile recommendation systems have been developed utilising different recommendation strategies that either based on collaborative, time-based, content-based or location-based filtering (Ricci et al., 2011). However, the major challenge that they possess includes the inability to employ (or acquire) the ‘right’ level of users’ information for the recommendation system to provide appropriate suggestions to each one of the users (Pazzani and Billsus, 2007). As such, our research here focused on identifying how people perceive suggestions ‘on-the-go’ generated by a human agent rather than by an automated system (i.e. a traditional mobile recommender system) that delivers recommendations based on an algorithmic approach.RQ5: Do people make new connections when they receive text suggestions ‘on-the-go’ and under what kind of circumstances?The widespread use of mobile devices across the world has created new ways to share and receive information (including information for educational purposes). Recent research has demonstrated that peoples’ learning can be substantially assisted via modern mobile devices while at the same time has the potential to change the way people learn and digest new information (Sharples et al., 2005). While mobile learning may take place within different contexts and via different ways (e.g. blogging, microblogging, social media, podcasts etc.), we wanted to investigate whether and how people generate new ideas, make new associations and act upon them based on information that they received via a familiar personal medium such as text messages on their mobile phone device.RQ6: How can we design new technologies that support connection-making ‘on-the-go?Acknowledging the modern necessity and challenge for having available the right information at the right place and time while ‘on-the-go’ (Church and Smyth, 2009), we wanted to explore how we can design new and novel technological approaches to facilitate and promote connection-making ‘on-the-go’ that is relevant to each user via appropriate content personalisation and tailoring of user suggestions. As Sun et al. (2011) suggest, context plays a critical role in connection-making and experiencing serendipitous encounters. Furthermore, according to Consolvo et al. (2009), behavioural change can take place via persuasive technologies that facilitate the following: abstraction and reflection, unobtrusiveness, publicity, aesthetic values, positivity, controllability, trending, historicity and comprehensiveness. Considering the challenges that current recommendation systems incorporate and the great potential mobile devices and services offer on acquiring and synthesising new information, we wanted to identify the factors that interplay in supporting connection-making while mobile and generate a framework to design technologies that support and inform this process.We explored the above research questions mainly through our qualitative data collected in our study.We employed a ‘Wizard of Oz’ approach in our system to investigate further aspects of messages tailoring. The concept of ‘Wizard of Oz’ is not new in research studies. In a ‘Wizard of Oz’ setting, a human acts as the information processor (in our case, the constructor of the messages sent to people) completing and simulating one or more of the intended system׳s operations and functions, without people being aware of that. Indeed, participants of such a study are usually informed about this setting after the end of the study and during their debriefing (Lazar et al., 2010). The value that ‘Wizard of Oz’ approaches for data collection offer is that they provide opportunities to test-bed and investigate particular frameworks and settings for dialogue and messages interactions between people and between people and machines (Dahlbäck et al., 1993). Natural language processing research has utilised ‘Wizard of Oz’ as a data collection method previously (e.g. Kelley, 1984; Dahlbäck et al., 1993) while more recently augmented reality studies have adapted it in a different mobile setting (i.e. that of simulating wearable mobile devices functionalities – e.g. Alce et al., 2015). In our context, adopting a ‘Wizard of Oz’ approach to investigate mobile-based connection-making provides us with opportunities to unpack aspects of messages tailoring (the level of which is found to be critical for peoples’ acceptance and perception of these messages as mentioned before) to fit individual׳s needs yet allow for new discoveries and ideas generation.The contributions of our paper are•Deployment of a ‘Wizard of Oz’ serendipity system that presents messages to participants as they go about their everyday lives through which we have unpacked aspects of how connection-making ‘on-the-go’ takes place.Structured examination of different content type (pre-defined as ‘relevant’ or ‘irrelevant’) on participant responses to and perceptions of messages – this has helped us understand better how content relevance and irrelevance interplay in determining not only peoples’ acceptance and overall perception of the messages received but also their attitude towards generating new connections Structured examination of impact of message syntax (messages formed as ‘statements’ or ‘questions’) on participant responses to and perceptions of messages – this has provided us with insights as to whether tone of phrasing and stylistic message construction influences the acceptability of messages and provide impetus in making new associations with information received and with existing knowledge.Varied time of day at which messages are presented, to qualitatively explore the impact of different times and contexts on participant attitudes and behaviours after receiving messages – this has revealed to us new understandings as to what effect frequencies of messages and personal and environment context of when messages were received interplays with connection-making and perception of messages utility. The production of two frameworks which are empirically generated from our data. Firstly, a renewed insight into serendipity is gained, through our new knowledge regarding the specific activity of ‘connection making’ within the serendipity process; secondly we propose initial categorisation of the different elements of design of technologies to support serendipity.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
