@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An evaluation of crowd counting methods, features and regression models

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper presents an evaluation of existing crowd counting algorithms.We evaluate 5 datasets: UCSD, PETS 2009, Fudan, Mall, Grand Central.We evaluate holistic, local and histogram features (size, shape, edges, keypoints).GPR outperforms linear, KNN and neural network regression.Multiple local features outperform holistic and histogram based features.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Crowd counting,Holistic features,Local features,Histogram features,Regression,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Existing crowd counting algorithms rely on holistic, local or histogram based features to capture crowd properties. Regression is then employed to estimate the crowd size. Insufficient testing across multiple datasets has made it difficult to compare and contrast different methodologies. This paper presents an evaluation across multiple datasets to compare holistic, local and histogram based methods, and to compare various image features and regression models. A K-fold cross validation protocol is followed to evaluate the performance across five public datasets: UCSD, PETS 2009, Fudan, Mall and Grand Central datasets. Image features are categorised into five types: size, shape, edges, keypoints and textures. The regression models evaluated are: Gaussian process regression (GPR), linear regression, K nearest neighbours (KNN) and neural networks (NN). The results demonstrate that local features outperform equivalent holistic and histogram based features; optimal performance is observed using all image features except for textures; and that GPR outperforms linear, KNN and NN regression.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Crowd size estimation is an important task for both operational and security purposes. The distribution of people throughout a public space can be used to gather business intelligence, such as consumer shopping patterns, or to ensure that normal operating conditions are maintained. Overcrowding may be an indicator of congestion, delay or security-related abnormalities such as fighting and rioting.As closed-circuit television (CCTV) becomes ubiquitous, it grows increasingly difficult for human operators to monitor all of the available data due to the sheer number of cameras installed. For example, there are estimated to be between 1.85 million [40] and 4.2 million [64] CCTV cameras installed in the United Kingdom alone. In most cases, security footage is used to investigate events after they occur, rather than to generate real-time alerts during an evolving situation.In recent years, researchers have turned to computer vision based surveillance technologies to monitor crowds automatically from CCTV. Existing crowd counting algorithms are predominantly holistic in nature, employing machine learning techniques to perform regression between image features and crowd size [71,24,59,65,45,53,48,83,43,8]. In recent years a number of local systems have also been proposed, although many of these algorithms are detection based and rely on assumptions about camera placement or visibility of human features such as head, face or body parts [51,85,15,90]. Other local approaches divide an image into a number of subregions and perform counting locally [47,5,50,13,22,75]. Histogram based approaches have also been proposed in which local information is accumulated into histogram bins and represented on a holistic level [48,49].Insufficient testing across multiple datasets has made it difficult to compare and contrast different methodologies. A comprehensive analysis across multiple datasets is required to compare local and holistic methods, and to compare various image features and regression models.This paper uses a cross validation protocol to evaluate the performance of various methods, features and regression models across five public datasets. Image features are categorised into five types: size, shape, edges, keypoints and textures. The regression models evaluated are: Gaussian process regression (GPR), linear regression, K nearest neighbours (KNN) and neural networks (NN). The following methods are evaluated: holistic (in which features are extracted across an image and regression is performed globally); local (in which foreground segmentation is used to localise groups and to perform feature extraction and regression locally); and a histogram based approach [48].Our experiments demonstrate that local features outperform equivalent holistic features and histogram based features; best performance is observed using all image features except for textures; and that Gaussian process regression outperforms linear, K-nearest neighbours and neural network regression.The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 presents the literature review; Section 3 introduces the benchmark datasets used in this evaluation; Section 4 describes the system design; Section 5 presents the experimental results of the evaluation; and Section 6 discusses the conclusions of this research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper evaluated feature types and regression models for crowd counting using local, holistic and histogram based approaches. Local features are specific to foreground segments in an image, and are used to estimate the size of each group. The local approach is annotated, trained and tested at a local level, whereas the holistic approach takes place across the entire image. The histogram approach accumulates information about local objects into histogram bins, and this information is represented at a holistic level. The following conclusions were reached as a result of this analysis:•The use of local features consistently outperformed holistic features and histogram features (Section 5.3).For the local approach, a greater quantity of features generally improved performance compared to fewer features, with the exception of textures (Section 5.1). The best performance was observed with the feature vector: ‘size, shape, edges, keypoints’. The omission of ‘size’ did not significantly reduce the overall performance (Table 8).For the holistic approach, edge and texture features did not provide optimal performance despite their widespread usage in the literature. Instead, best performance was seen with the feature vector: ‘size, shape, keypoints’ (Section 5.1).The use of Gaussian process regression consistently outperformed linear regression, K-nearest neighbours and neural networks, for both the local and holistic approach (Section 5.2). For the histogram based approach, the optimal regression models were linear regression and neural networks, consistent with the algorithm proposed by Kong [48].Future research is warranted across a wider range of datasets to confirm these findings and to establish if additional feature sets or regression models can improve performance further. A comparison of existing motion segmentation algorithms [89,25,79] and localisation strategies [13,75,50] may provide additional insight into current crowd counting technology. The present data suggests that optimal performance is observed when GPR is employed with multiple local features.