@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Face recognition in low resolution thermal images

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Facial feature detector for face thermal image resolution more than 64*64pixels.BRIEF and LBP have a good recognition rate compare with SIFT and ORB.BRIEF shows a good face signature, accurate, compact, and efficient in matching.PCA is the best recognition rate in very low resolution less than 16*16pixels.LBP shows the worst degradation in performance with decreasing the resolution.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Thermal imaging,MAP,Probabilistic model,Features detection,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper proposes an accurate, rotation invariant, and fast approach for detection of facial features from thermal images. The proposed approach combines both appearance and geometric information to detect the facial features. A texture based detector is performed using Haar features and AdaBoost algorithm. Then the relation between these facial features is modeled using a complex Gaussian distribution, which is invariant to rotation. Experiments show that our proposed approach outperforms existing algorithms for facial features detection in thermal images. The proposed approach’s performance is illustrated in a face recognition framework, which is based on extracting a local signature around facial features. Also, the paper presents a comparative study for different signature techniques with different facial image resolutions. The results of this comparative study suggest the minimum facial image resolution in thermal images, which can be used in face recognition. The study also gives a guideline for choosing a good signature, which leads to the best recognition rate.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Biometrics has received a lot of attention during the last few years both from the academic and business communities. It is a preferable way for human identification; since it captures physical characteristics of a subject. Face recognition is one of the main topics in the set of biometric applications as it does not need human cooperation and it is a user-friendly approach for human recognition. Research into face recognition has been biased towards the visible spectrum for a variety of reasons. Among those is the availability and low cost of visible band cameras. However, visible spectrum images have high variability since they are constructed by a reflection on surfaces. A dependence on the reflectivity makes it possible to fool the system by using photographs or dummy faces. These problems encouraged the interest in the use of thermal images, which can achieve high immunity to illumination changes and other variabilities in the image acquisition process. Therefore, thermal IR face recognition techniques can be used to identify faces when there is little or no control over lighting conditions.Usually, a face recognition pipeline consists of four modules: face detection, face alignment, face representation and face matching. Face detection is the first step in any face recognition framework where the facial region is segmented from its background before further processing. face alignment aims to detect facial feature points. Accurate detection of these points is crucial to the success of the later stages of the pipeline. Face representation is the most important step in face recognition pipeline where the extraction of distinguish feature vector for the person is required. This step is challenging from low resolution face images. Unfortunately, this is the case in many applications e.g., small-scale stand-alone camera applications in banks and supermarkets, large-scale multiple networked close-circuit television (CCTV) in law enforcement applications in public streets, etc. Therefore, researchers have recently focused on face recognition from low resolution visible images. Empirical studies [1] showed that minimum face image resolution between 32×32 and 64×64pixels is required for existing algorithms in visible images but there is no study about low resolution face recognition from thermal images.In this work, we propose an accurate, rotation invariant, and fast approach for detection of facial features (i.e., eyes, nose, and mouth) from thermal images. The proposed approach combines both appearance and geometric information to detect the facial features. First, an appearance matching is applied between a feature candidate and the facial points that are learned off-line. Then, detected points should match the geometric constraints that govern the layout of facial features. Experiments are conducted to evaluate the accuracy of the proposed detector. After that the proposed approach is used in a face recognition framework. This framework is based on extracting a local signature around each facial feature points. To highlight the accuracy of the proposed facial features detection approach, recognition results with proposed automatic detection of facial features, as well as manually annotated detection, at different face image resolutions are presented.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this work, we proposed an accurate, rotation invariant, and fast detection approach of facial features from thermal images. The facial features detection was formulated as an energy minimization function that incorporates the uncertainty of the texture model response and the shape prior model. Experiments confirmed that the accuracy of the proposed approach is better than the accuracies of many other existing algorithms for facial features detection in thermal images. Also, the performance of the proposed approach was tested in a face recognition framework. Recognition results showed that our proposed detector has the same effect of accurate manual detection in the recognition framework. Moreover, the effect on the recognition rate of using different signatures with the proposed technique was addressed. The results of this study concluded that facial features can automatically extracted from a 64×64pixels facial thermal image. Then we can get an accurate and fast face recognition using BRIEF signature.