@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-object reconstruction from dynamic scenes: An object-centered approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We introduce new framework for reconstruction of multi-object dynamic scenes.Co-recognition based object-centered approach is proposed to separate the scenes.Object 3D geometry provides automatic seeds to get accurate segmentation.Successful results obtained from various image and video data.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
3D reconstruction,Dynamic scenes,Co-segmentation,Multiple objects,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we present a new framework for three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction of multiple rigid objects from dynamic scenes. Conventional 3D reconstruction from multiple views is applicable to static scenes, in which the configuration of objects is fixed while the images are taken. In our framework, we aim to reconstruct the 3D models of multiple objects in a more general setting where the configuration of the objects varies among views. We solve this problem by object-centered decomposition of the dynamic scenes using unsupervised co-recognition approach. Unlike conventional motion segmentation algorithms that require small motion assumption between consecutive views, co-recognition method provides reliable accurate correspondences of a same object among unordered and wide-baseline views. In order to segment each object region, we benefit from the 3D sparse points obtained from the structure-from-motion. These points are reliable and serve as automatic seed points for a seeded-segmentation algorithm. Experiments on various real challenging image sequences demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, especially in the presence of abrupt independent motions of objects.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Multiple view geometry is an important research area in computer vision. Traditionally, multiple view-based three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction systems are restricted to static scenes, in which the scene configuration is unchanged as the images are taken in different views. In this paper, we aim to develop a reconstruction system that is capable of building 3D models of multiple rigid objects in dynamic scenes where each object and camera are moving freely.Suppose there are multiple target objects appearing simultaneously in the input images, and they are settled in different configurations in each scene. For example, several independent objects are captured in the multiple images, and the position and pose of these objects vary from image to image. In such settings, the reconstruction problem from the dynamic scene raises various challenges. Since there are arbitrary motions of multiple target objects in the scene, the multi-view constraint of the whole scene is not satisfied. Given that the 3D reconstruction applied to the whole images is not established due to the lack of global geometric consistency, the geometric conflict among the target objects has to be resolved prior to reconstruction. Thus, a natural way is to separate each object from the others and reconstruct each one independently. Once identifying and segmenting corresponding regions of same object among images and establishing feature correspondences among the regions, the multi-body problem can be easily resolved by finding relative camera poses for each object region individually.To solve the multi-body problem, we approach from the object recognition viewpoint. If we recognize each independently moving object in the image sequences, the solution gives us answers to the following concerns: the number of the objects, the membership of the objects, and their correspondences. These data serve as clues in reconstructing the structure of individual objects in the dynamic scene environment [1]. In the present work, we apply object recognition technique to decompose the dynamic scene into coherent regions that correspond to separated objects distinguished by color or texture characteristics.The key contributions of our approach are summarized as follows:1.We designed a 3D reconstruction system for multiple objects in dynamic scenes. It is the first solution to the 3D reconstruction problem of dynamic abrupt scenes with arbitrary view points. The solution to such problem has never been proposed in previous works. Our method is general in that it does not have any restriction on the number of objects or the ordering of sequences, yet yielding compelling results.Extended co-recognition technique has been utilized for identifying objects in multiple images. Co-recognition avoids feature tracking issues, one of the most troublesome problems in this area, when motion segmentation is applied to real images. Without feature tracking, our method can handle the general settings of objects between images.We have refined the patch-level object boundary obtained from object recognition algorithm up to the pixel-level precision. We applied an interactive image segmentation method in a non-interactive way by providing seed points automatically. The 3D structure of the target object is utilized to get reliable object segment.The structure of this paper is as follows: in Section 2, we start with a brief review of related works; Section 3 describes our approach and the detail of the proposed system; we present the experimental results on various data in Section 4; and the paper concludes in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
