@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Combine color and shape in real-time detection of texture-less objects

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Augmenting Hinterstoisser et al.’s DOT method with color naming.Efficiently implementing the proposed method using SIMD operations.Combining the color and shape matching scores based on logistic regression.An acceleration strategy to fast eliminate unpromising cluster templates.Extensive experiments on three different datasets containing more than 40 objects.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Real-time texture-less object detection,The Dominant Orientation Templates (DOT) method,Color name,Speed-up strategy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Object instance detection is a fundamental problem in computer vision and has many applications. Compared with the problem of detecting a texture-rich object, the detection of a texture-less object is more involved because it is usually based on matching the shape of the object with the shape primitives extracted from an image, which is not as discriminative as matching appearance-based local features, such as the SIFT features. The Dominant Orientation Templates (DOT) method proposed by Hinterstoisser et al. is a state-of-the-art method for the detection of texture-less objects and can work in real time. However, it may well generate false detections in a cluttered background. In this paper, we propose a new method which has three contributions. Firstly, it augments the DOT method with a type of illumination insensitive color information. Since color is complementary to shape, the proposed method significantly outperforms the original DOT method in the detection of texture-less object in cluttered scenes. Secondly, we come up with a systematic way based on logistic regression to combine the color and shape matching scores in the proposed method. Finally, we propose a speed-up strategy to work with the proposed method so that it runs even faster than the original DOT method. Extensive experimental results are presented in this paper to compare the proposed method directly with the original DOT method and the LINE-2D method, and indirectly with another two state-of-the-art methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Object instance detection is a fundamental problem in computer vision, and many applications require it as a necessary step. For instance, image-based tracking usually needs an object detection step in order to initialize the tracking. However, it is not a trivial problem because the object to be detected can undergo viewpoint, scale, and illumination changes, and sometimes can even be subject to partial occlusions. Generally, methods in this area are divided into two types. The first type of methods aims to identifying an instance of a specific object, while the other type of methods means to recognize an instance of an object that belongs to a generic object category, e.g., buildings, cars, or daily used items. In a recent tutorial, Gauman and Leibe [1] discuss both of these two types of methods. Of the methods in the first type, the solution to the detection of a texture-rich object has become quite standard and very successful [2,3], with its pipeline summarized as follows: (1) Construct a sparse model of features for an object using local features (e.g., SIFT features) extracted from multiple views of the object and the Structure from Motion (SfM) technique. (2) Match the features of the constructed model with those extracted from an input image, establishing the 3D–2D correspondences between the matched ones. After that, the pose of the object can be estimated [2] and wrong matches eliminated. This paper is focused on the detection of a specific object that has very few textures on its surface. Compared with the previous problem of detecting a texture-rich object, this problem is more involved because the detection is usually based on matching the shape of the object with the shape primitives extracted from an image, which is not as discriminative as matching appearance-based local features, such as the SIFT features. Hsiao and Hebert [4] compare invariant and non-invariant approaches for shape-based object instance detection. “Invariant” methods create a unified object representation across different viewpoints by explicitly modeling the structural relationships of high level shape primitives (e.g., curves and lines). In contrast, “non-invariant” methods use view-based templates and capture viewpoint variations by sampling the view space and matching each template independently. They conclude that non-invariant approaches are well-suited for specific object recognition and meanwhile can also be computationally efficient.In this paper, we propose a new method for the detection of texture-less objects in an image by extending the Dominant Orientation Templates (DOT) method proposed by Hinterstoisser et al. [5], which is one of the state-of-the-art methods for the detection of texture-less objects and can work in real time. The DOT method represents the sparse shape of an object at a given view using the dominant orientations of the gradients of the view’s image. However, one issue with the DOT method is that it may well generate false detections in a cluttered background, due to the fact that many shapes partially similar to an instance of the object can exist in a cluttered background. Intuitively, the performance of shape-based object detection can be enhanced by combining with complementary information. Inspired by the very recent success of fusing color and shape information in visual object recognition [6,7], in this paper we propose a new method that incorporates color information into the DOT method. The new method significantly enhances the robustness of texture-less object detection in a cluttered background, but does not compromise the real-time speed of the original method. In the rest of this section, we will discuss the related work and argue the contributions of the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
