@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Estimation of human body shape and posture under clothing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a representation that models human body shape and posture independently.We estimate body shape and posture under clothing from single or multiple frames.For multiple frames, the fitting approach is stable.Higher fitting accuracy is achieved than when using a common variant of SCAPE.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Digital human shape and posture modeling,Statistical shape space,Geometry processing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Estimating the body shape and posture of a dressed human subject in motion represented as a sequence of (possibly incomplete) 3D meshes is important for virtual change rooms and security. To solve this problem, statistical shape spaces encoding human body shape and posture variations are commonly used to constrain the search space for the shape estimate. In this work, we propose a novel method that uses a posture-invariant shape space to model body shape variation combined with a skeleton-based deformation to model posture variation. Our method can estimate the body shape and posture of both static scans and motion sequences of human body scans with clothing that fits relatively closely to the body. In case of motion sequences, our method takes advantage of motion cues to solve for a single body shape estimate along with a sequence of posture estimates. We apply our approach to both static scans and motion sequences and demonstrate that using our method, higher fitting accuracy is achieved than when using a variant of the popular SCAPE model [2,18] as statistical model.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The problem of estimating the body shape and posture of a dressed human subject is important for various applications, such as virtual change rooms and security. For instance, in virtual change rooms, a dressed user steps in front of a virtual mirror and the system aims to simulate different types of clothing for this user. To this end, such a system requires an accurate estimate of the body shape and posture of the user.We present an algorithm to estimate the human body shape and posture under clothing from single or multiple 3D input frames that are corrupted by noise and missing data. Our approach assumes that the clothing fits to the body and may fail for loose clothing, such as skirts or wide dresses. When multiple 3D frames of the same human subject are recorded in different postures, these observations provide important cues about the body shape of the subject. The clothing may be more or less loosely draped around a particular body part in different postures, which allows for improved shape estimates based on postures where the clothing is close to the body shape. To utilize these cues, we model body shape independently of body posture, and optimize a single representation of the body shape of the subject along with one pose estimate per frame to fit to a set of input frames. When multiple 3D frames of a subject in motion are recorded with high frame rates, our algorithm takes advantage of the temporal consistency of the acquired data. To reduce the complexity of the problem, our method does not explicitly simulate the clothing, but learns information about likely body shapes using machine learning.Current solutions to this problem use the SCAPE model [2] to represent the body shape and posture of a human subject. This model represents the body shape in a statistical shape space learned from body scans of multiple subjects acquired in a standard posture and combines this with a representation of body posture learned from body scans of a single subject in multiple postures. A popular variant of SCAPE that performs well in practice is the method by Jain et al. [18] that learns variations in body posture using a skeleton-based deformation. The main disadvantage of these methods is that even when acquiring multiple subjects in standard posture, the postures differ slightly, which leads to a statistical space for body shape that represents a combination of shape and posture changes. Hence, for SCAPE and its variants, shape and posture representations are not properly separated.To remedy this problem, we propose a method that uses a posture-invariant statistical shape space to model body shape combined with a skeleton-based deformation to model body posture. Using a posture-invariant statistical shape space for body shape offers the additional advantage that the shape space can be learned based on body scans of multiple subjects acquired in multiple postures, thereby allowing to leverage more of the available training data.This work makes the following main contributions:•We present a representation that models human body shape and posture independently. Human body shape is represented by a point in a posture-invariant shape space found using machine learning, and human body posture is represented using skeletal joint angles.We present an algorithm to estimate body shape and posture under clothing that fits closely to the body from single or multiple 3D input frames. For multiple input frames, a single representation of body shape is optimized along with a posture estimate per frame to fit to the input frames. This allows to take advantage of important cues about body shape from multiple frames.When multiple 3D frames of a subject in motion are recorded with high frame rates, the presented fitting approach is stable as temporal consistency is used for tracking.We show experimentally that using our method, higher fitting accuracy is achieved than when using the state of the art variant of SCAPE by Jain et al. [18].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
