@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Human content filtering in Twitter: The influence of metadata

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Author-HighlightsWe have examined which metadata cues are used when deciding to consume content.The online experiment used Twitter content and users as its subject.Users prefer content from someone with whom they already have a relationship.Users prefer content judged by others to have value (based on number of retweets).Clear metadata signals can affect decision making in content consumption.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Decision-making,Twitter,Metadata,Cues,Recognition,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Social micro-blogging systems such as Twitter are designed for rapid and informal communication from a large potential number of participants. Due to the volume of content received, human users must typically skim their timeline of received content and exercise judgement in selecting items for consumption, necessitating a selection process based on heuristics and content meta-data. This selection process is not well understood, yet is important due to its potential use in content management systems.In this research we have conducted an open online experiment in which participants are shown quantitative and qualitative meta-data describing two pieces of Twitter content. Without revealing the text of the tweet, participants are asked to make a selection. We observe the decisions made from 239 surveys and discover insights into human behaviour on decision making for content selection. We find that for qualitative meta-data consumption decisions are driven by online friendship and for quantitative meta-data the largest numerical value presented influences choice. Overall, the ‘number of retweets’ is found to be the most influential quantitative meta-data, while displaying multiple cues about an author׳s identity provides the strongest qualitative meta-data. When both quantitative and qualitative meta-data is presented, it is the qualitative meta-data (friendship information) that drives selection. The results are consistent with application of the Recognition heuristic, which postulates that when faced with constrained decision-making, humans will tend to exercise judgement based on cues representing familiarity. These findings are useful for future interface design for content filtering and recommendation systems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Micro-blogging has become a significant channel of communication that is now widely used on a day-to-day basis around the world (Java et al., 2007), often through Twitter,11http://www.twitter.comthe current most dominant micro-blogging service. The defining characteristics of this medium are its informality, limited message size and the streamed nature of content provision where users opt-in to receive any content published by users of their choice. These online relationships provide a social network structure through which content is mediated, with users being able to republish or “retweet” received content as they wish (Webberley et al., 2011).The ease with which content can be published results in a huge volume of potential content, much of this having limited relevance other than to a few users. A user׳s ability to choose whose content they receive counters to some degree the “long-tail” problem of social media content (Agichtein et al., 2008). However despite this, even following a small number of users can result in a significant real-time stream of tweets that becomes challenging to consume in its entirety. This necessitates the users exercising judgement and decision making to select content of higher priority or interest. This is a subconscious filtering process, deciding in real time whether content in the stream is worth consuming or ignoring. This filtering process may have many inputs, from parts of the tweet text itself (perhaps noticing keywords or hashtags) to metadata describing the tweet or tweet author.In this paper we examine the role of metadata as cues for human decision making in content selection from the Twitter timeline. Our motivation is to develop findings that are useful in designing systems to support partial filtering of streamed content and reduce the cognitive burden for users. Systems to actively accomplish this are in their infancy (e.g., Yu et al., 2013). This task involves cognitive decision making under constrained conditions and in psychology, three main modelling approaches have emerged (Gigerenzer and Gaissmaier, 2011): logic, statistics or heuristics. Most recently, heuristics have grown in importance. Heuristics are “strategies that ignore information to make decisions faster, more frugally, and/or more accurately than more complex methods”. Most significantly, the “less-is-more-effect” has been discovered (Gigerenzer and Gaissmaier, 2011), representing the existence of an inverted U shape relation between the accuracy of heuristic decision making and the resources (e.g., amount of information, level of accuracy, time) on which the decision is dependent. A range of different heuristics have been presented, including One-Reason Decision Making (e.g., Fishburn, 1974), Trade-off heuristics (e.g., Dawes, 1979), Fluency heuristics (e.g., Schooler and Hertwig, 2005) and Take the best heuristics (e.g., Martignon and Hoffrage, 2002). Arguably one of the most fundamental, and to which many others are related, is the Recognition heuristic (Goldstein and Gigerenzer, 2002) which states: “If one of two objects is recognised and the other is not, then infer that the recognised object has the higher value with respect to the criterion.”. This is based on the assume that cues based on familiarity can drive human preference. As noted by Gigerenzer and Gaissmaier (2011), a sense of familiarity appears in human consciousness earlier than recollection (Ratcliff and McKoon, 1989).We investigate to what extent recognition of cues dominate when readers are deciding which content to consume in Twitter. We have designed and built an open online experiment to observe human selection decisions. Participants are repeatedly shown metadata describing two pieces of content without revealing the content itself and are asked to choose which they would prefer to read. The content is taken from Twitter, and all participants are required to be Twitter users. One tweet is taken from the participants ‘timeline’, the stream of tweets they would usually see when browsing Twitter, so is a piece of content with which they have a relationship (typically they are already following the content author). The second piece of content is unknown to the participant, it is taken from a part of the Twitter network with which they have no relationship, so is a tweet they would not usually see or be exposed to. Without revealing the tweet content itself we control the information about both tweets on which the user is required to state her preference for reading. By varying the information presented on which the reader makes selection, we can ascertain the extent to which metadata cues, both quantitative and qualitative, have impact upon the decision making process.The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 gives an overview of work related to the experiment, Section 3 presents the experimental design and discusses details of the experiment operation and analysis, Section 4 presents and analyses the results of the experiment, while Section 5 summarises the conclusions of the work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The analysis of the experimental results presented in this paper reveals that metadata cues shown to users have a significant effect on the decision making process when those users are selecting which content to consume. These effects vary depending on the metadata presented, and the cues they represent may have a stronger or weaker effect dependent on whether they are presented individually or combined together. Overall, the results indicate that it is the relationship of the user to the content author that has the strongest effect on the decision making process, with metrics describing the quality of the content itself (the number of retweets in this case) also being important.Considering the first of the original questions posed in Section 3 (Q1), it is clear that in the absence of any further information, participants prefer tweets that may be recognised as coming from their personal timeline. This illustrates that the Recognition Heuristic is a definite part of decision making within the content selection scenario, users are choosing the content from an author that they recognise as a signal of familiarity and reassurance. When single cues are provided, users prefer to read the tweet written by a user with whom they already have a relationship in at least 74% of all questions (see Table 2). This proportion is highest for the questions in which the existence of a ‘Friendship’ relationship is explicitly stated, by telling the user “You follow this author”. When friendship cues are combined with numerical values these proportions are reduced, but are still statistically significant, although the explicit ‘Friendship’ cue becomes weaker than the other implicit friendship cues. Thus telling the user “You follow this author” becomes less important when additional information is also shown.Where quantitative values are displayed (Q2), users select the greatest value in over 61% of questions answered for each cue type, with the ‘Number of Retweets’ providing the strongest cue (see Table 2).This is the only quantitative cue displayed relating to the content itself rather than the author of the content. The second most important cue is the ‘Follower Count’, often seen as a quality indicator within the Twitter social network (the authors producing/sharing the best content will have more followers). The other quantitative cues still produce significant effects and should not be discounted. When quantitative cues are combined with friendship information, the proportion of users selecting the Greatest value are reduced, but remain significant except in the cases where the weaker quantitative cues (Tweet Count, Follower Count and Following Count) are combined with a strong friendship cue (Screen Name, Name and Avatar).Considering the selection of Timeline or Greatest Tweet as dependent variables (Q3) shows that when the Timeline tweet also has the Greatest value it is selected in over 77% of cases (see Table 3). When Timeline and Greatest are in opposition (so the tweet displaying the timeline cue is not the same as the tweet displaying the largest quantitative cue), it is the Timeline cue that drives selection of the tweet, with the Timeline tweet selected in a higher proportion of answers than the Greatest tweet in all but one case. Again, this strengthens the argument that recognition of an existing relationship with a content author is driving the selection of content. Considering the cases where two cues are presented in opposition, the ‘Number of Retweets’ cue is shown to be the strongest of the quantitative cues, as the proportion of users selecting against the quantitative cue is reduced in all cases where it is displayed. The cue combining Screen Name, Name and Avatar is shown to be the strongest Friendship cue in such cases, driving selection of the Timeline tweet in higher proportions than any other Friendship cue.In general it is found that the addition of a quantitative cue to a friendship cue is does not deviate subjects from selecting the Timeline tweet. Additionally, the combination of friendship cues (Screen Name, Name and Avatar) has the strongest influence for the selection of Timeline Tweets. When combined with quantitative cues, the explicit ‘Friendship’ cue is shown to have the weakest influence. Similarly, when adding friendship cues to quantitative cues, the friendship cue drives selection towards the Timeline tweet and away from the Greatest tweet significantly, providing evidence that user recognition of existing relationships with content authors is a significant driver towards content selection.These findings have a significant implication for future content recommendation and filtering systems. When presenting content to users within such systems, it may be necessary to present additional information or metadata describing the content alongside the content itself in order to attract the user to consume the content, or to convince the user that the presented content has some utility or relevance to them. In particular, content can potentially be presented to users based on prioritisation from metadata or through using selected metadata itself as a basis for cognitively efficient human decision making. This is an important contribution given the high volume of data that humans must navigate concerning social media. Alerting users to the high value of content based on information such as the number of retweets, or the social network graph linking the user to the content author could have a significant effect on the consumption of the content. Similarly, removing such cues from other content could reduce its importance within the content stream.