@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Gait recognition based on shape and motion analysis of silhouette contours

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
STS-DM uses spatio-temporal shape and motion of silhouettes for identification.It is robust to most challenges of gait with low computational cost.It uses component-based Fourier descriptors to be robust to carrying conditions.It fits ellipses to body parts to analyse full body shape and motion.It analyses angular rotation of leading knee with consideration of arm-swing.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Gait,Silhouette,Fourier descriptor,Histogram matching,Dynamic time warping,Krawtchouk moments.,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a three-phase gait recognition method that analyses the spatio-temporal shape and dynamic motion (STS-DM) characteristics of a human subject’s silhouettes to identify the subject in the presence of most of the challenging factors that affect existing gait recognition systems. In phase 1, phase-weighted magnitude spectra of the Fourier descriptor of the silhouette contours at ten phases of a gait period are used to analyse the spatio-temporal changes of the subject’s shape. A component-based Fourier descriptor based on anatomical studies of human body is used to achieve robustness against shape variations caused by all common types of small carrying conditions with folded hands, at the subject’s back and in upright position. In phase 2, a full-body shape and motion analysis is performed by fitting ellipses to contour segments of ten phases of a gait period and using a histogram matching with Bhattacharyya distance of parameters of the ellipses as dissimilarity scores. In phase 3, dynamic time warping is used to analyse the angular rotation pattern of the subject’s leading knee with a consideration of arm-swing over a gait period to achieve identification that is invariant to walking speed, limited clothing variations, hair style changes and shadows under feet. The match scores generated in the three phases are fused using weight-based score-level fusion for robust identification in the presence of missing and distorted frames, and occlusion in the scene. Experimental analyses on various publicly available data sets show that STS-DM outperforms several state-of-the-art gait recognition methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Numerous markerless gait recognition methods have demonstrated that gait has sufficient discriminatory power for identifying a human subject from a distance using low resolution video sequences without interfering with the subject’s activity when physiological biometrics, e.g., face, fingerprint and iris are not clearly visible [1–3]. However, variations of the subject’s clothes, footwear and hair style add complexity to gait recognition, and the subject’s physical and mental conditions, e.g., leg injury, drunkenness and pregnancy, distort the walking pattern [2,4]. Gait recognition is also affected by occlusions in the scene, variations in viewpoint and walking speed, shape distortions due to carrying conditions, shadows under feet and change in ground surface. Furthermore, gait characteristics change with ageing. Thus, a robust gait recognition method needs to analyse bio-mechanical gait characteristics via static and dynamic pose changes of gait as in [5–7].Gait recognition methods can be classified into model-based and model-free. Model-based methods (e.g., [7–12]) characterise a subject by a structural model and a motion model to mainly analyse dynamics of gait [2]. The structural model represents the subject by a stick figure, ellipsoidal fits or a volumetric model based on the proportions of the human body parts, and measures time-varying gait parameters, e.g., gait period, stance width and stride length for gait signatures. The motion model is used to analyse kinematical and dynamical motion parameters of the subject, e.g., rotation patterns of hip and thigh, joint angle trajectories and orientation change of limbs [2]. These methods can reliably deal with occlusions, and are invariant to scale changes, rotational effects and slight variations in viewpoint. However, they are characterised by complex search and mapping processes. The model-free methods (e.g., [4,13–23]) analyse the spatio-temporal shape and motion characteristics of a subject’s silhouettes without assuming any explicit model of the subject’s body. Although the inter-subject discriminability of these methods are high, they are susceptible to variations in viewpoints and the subject’s attire.A gait period, i.e., the time interval between successive heel strikes of the same limb, provides strong gait characteristics in terms of deformation of the subject’s silhouette shape and motion pattern. The popular shape descriptors used to analyse static shape characteristics are Procrustes shape analysis (e.g., [17,18,23]) and Fourier descriptors (FDs) (e.g., [24,25]). Although spatio-temporal deformation of the subject’s shape in a gait sequence provides better discriminative power than its kinematics, inclusion of dynamical motion characteristics improves the identification rate. Thus, we introduce a gait recognition method STS-DM that combines the spatio-temporal shape (STS) features of a subject’s silhouettes with the subject’s dynamic motion (DM) characteristics over a gait period using both model-free and model-based approaches to achieve robustness against the maximum number of challenging factors of gait recognition when compared to state-of-the-art gait recognition methods, namely robustness against small carried items, walking speed variations, shadows under feet, limited variations in clothing, segmentation noise, changes in ground surface, missing body parts, self-occlusions and distorted or missing frames due to presence of occluding objects in the scene. STS-DM operates on the lateral (i.e., profile) view of a subject since this view contains most of the significant gait characteristics.Most gait recognition methods do not consider the subject’s arm-swing and the self-occlusion caused by it. Thus, STS-DM introduces a novel analysis of angular rotation pattern of leading knee (ARPoLK) of silhouette contours for subject identification in the presence of across-day variations, e.g., clothing, footwear, hair style and ground surface, with a consideration of the subject’s arm-swing. STS-DM analyses the shape of the silhouette contours at ten phases of a gait period via their low-pass filtered FDs to only retain their global shape information. STS-DM uses ellipses fitted to body segments at ten phases of a gait period for full-body shape and motion analysis which is invariant to boundary shape distortions due to segmentation errors and missing or distorted body parts. Contour shape analysis at the ten phases that reveal most of the distinguishable shape characteristics also enables STS-DM to benefit from speed-invariant shape sequence processing with reduced processing time and achieve robustness against missing or distorted frames due to occlusions. Since the dynamic motion characteristics of gait manifest over a gait period more than in discrete phases, ARPoLK analysis is performed over a gait period.The proposed STS-DM is thus motivated by the need for a gait recognition method that addresses a wide varieties of challenging factors that limit the success of gait as a behavioural biometrics to reliably identify a subject in practical situations. The novelties of STS-DM are: (a) it effectively combines static shape characteristics with the local and global dynamic gait characteristics to achieve robustness against the maximum number of challenging factors; (b) it analyses the subject’s shape by FDs, and uses phase-weighted magnitude spectra (PWMS) to generate a match score; (c) it introduces an experimentally supported procedure for detecting carried items and a component-based FD analysis based on anatomical studies to achieve invariance to all common types of small carrying conditions, and this level of invariance has not been addressed before; (d) it introduces ARPoLK analysis which is invariant to self-occlusions of the limbs of a walking subject, and hence captures the local dynamic gait signature very efficiently; (e) the use of ARPoLK analysis enables STS-DM to implicitly address subject’s arm-swing, and the use of dynamic time warping (DTW) to obtain a match score which is invariant to walking speed; (f) it analyses the full-body shape and motion characteristics based on ellipse-fitting to body segments and uses Bhattacharyya distance histogram matching (BDHM) to obtain a match score; (g) the match scores obtained by PWMS, DTW and BDHM are combined using weighted sum rule of score level fusion for robust identification; (h) the robustness of STS-DM against missing frames is demonstrated; and (i) STS-DM provides competitive identification rates with reduced computational complexity.The rest of the paper is organised as follows. Section 2 discusses related work and Section 3 presents STS-DM. Experimental results are analysed in Section 4, and Section 5 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
