@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
3D anatomical shape atlas construction using mesh quality preserved deformable models

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Propose a robust framework to model shape and create shape atlas.It improves AFDM by incorporating an energy term to preserve shape quality.The results are generally smooth without significantly sacrificing shape details.Using this approach, we solve several diverse and challenging tasks.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Shape atlas,Shape modeling,Adaptive focus deformable models,Detail preserved smoothing,Shape registration,Shape statistics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
3D anatomical shape atlas construction has been extensively studied in medical image analysis research, owing to its importance in model-based image segmentation, longitudinal studies and populational statistical analysis, etc. Among multiple steps of 3D shape atlas construction, establishing anatomical correspondences across subjects, i.e., surface registration, is probably the most critical but challenging one. Adaptive focus deformable model (AFDM) [1] was proposed to tackle this problem by exploiting cross-scale geometry characteristics of 3D anatomy surfaces. Although the effectiveness of AFDM has been proved in various studies, its performance is highly dependent on the quality of 3D surface meshes, which often degrades along with the iterations of deformable surface registration (the process of correspondence matching). In this paper, we propose a new framework for 3D anatomical shape atlas construction. Our method aims to robustly establish correspondences across different subjects and simultaneously generate high-quality surface meshes without removing shape details. Mathematically, a new energy term is embedded into the original energy function of AFDM to preserve surface mesh qualities during deformable surface matching. More specifically, we employ the Laplacian representation to encode shape details and smoothness constraints. An expectation–maximization style algorithm is designed to optimize multiple energy terms alternatively until convergence. We demonstrate the performance of our method via a set of diverse applications, including a population of sparse cardiac MRI slices with 2D labels, 3D high resolution CT cardiac images and rodent brain MRIs with multiple structures. The constructed shape atlases exhibit good mesh qualities and preserve fine shape details. The constructed shape atlases can further benefit other research topics such as segmentation and statistical analysis.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
3D anatomical shape atlas is an important component in various biomedical studies, e.g., the neuroanatomical shape complex atlas [2] and the cardiac atlas [3]. In short, a 3D shape atlas provides reference of a population of shapes (usually of the same organ/anatomical structure) in a statistical way. These shape statistics can be exploited in numerous applications such as, but not limited to, statistical analysis of the populations [4], the segmentation of the structures of interest [5], the detection of the disease regions [6] and tracking for MRI-guided robotic intervention [7–9].A 3D shape atlas is usually constructed from a set of volumetric images with organs of interest labeled. In general, as shown in Fig. 1, the construction of a shape atlas consists of three major steps, surface reconstruction, surface registration and statistical analysis. Surface reconstruction aims to convert a labeled volume to a surface. Although different surface representations have been proposed in [10–12,2], triangle mesh is the most widely used one, which can be reconstructed by the marching cube algorithm [13]. In this way, a surface is described by a set of vertices and triangle patches. After a population of surfaces are reconstructed, surface registration is performed to build correspondences across different surface instances. More specifically, vertices of the same local anatomy should be labeled as correspondences across population. Only after correct correspondences are established, can statistical analysis (e.g., Principal Component Analysis [4]) be performed to extract meaningful shape statistics. In fact, since the quality of a shape atlas is highly dependent on the accuracy of surface registration, surface registration becomes the most critical yet challenging step of the construction of 3D shape atlas. We will mainly focus on surface registration in the remainder of this paper.Surface registration1In literatures, it is sometimes named as “correspondence matching” or “surface matching”.1has been extensively studied in recent decades (detailed in Section 2). Adaptive focus deformable model (AFDM) [1,14] is one of the most representative ones. In AFDM, a set of geometric attributes are designed to characterize a surface. By matching these geometric attributes, a surface can deform to another, which essentially establishes correspondences between them. Apart from the success of AFDM in various applications, the registration accuracy of AFDM is sensitive to the mesh qualities, which might degrade during the surface deformation. As shown in Fig. 2, if irregular topology and skinny triangle patches appear, geometric attributes will unexpectedly change, hence, the registration accuracy decreases.In this paper, we propose a new framework for 3D anatomical shape atlas construction. Our method aims to robustly establish correspondences across different surfaces and simultaneously generate high-quality surface meshes without losing shape details. Mathematically, a new energy term is incorporated into the original energy function of AFDM to preserve surface mesh qualities during deformable surface matching [15]. More specifically, we employ the Laplacian representation to encode shape details and smoothness constraints. An expectation–maximization style algorithm is designed to optimize multiple energy terms alternatively until convergence. In addition, a hierarchical strategy is employed to effectively extract shape statistics of complex anatomical structures, which often include multiple parts. In this way, only a limited number of training samples are required to obtain statistics of complex anatomical shapes.Our method is evaluated in three very diverse applications: (1) left ventricle atlas construction from sparse cardiac MRI slices, (2) high resolution cardiac atlas construction from CT images, and (3) atlas construction rodent brains (with multiple structures) from dense brain MRI. For these two cardiac applications, our method is able to find the anatomical point correspondence both among multiple instances of the same phase of a cardiac cycle or sequential phases of one cycle. The ability to fit the atlas to all temporal phases of a dynamic study can benefit the automatic functional analysis. For the brain application, our approach is able to discover the spatial relationship among multiple structures and construct a shape atlas for all structures.The major contributions are as follows:1.Propose a novel approach to improve the traditional AFDM by incorporating an energy term to preserve shape quality during surface deformation. Besides establishing surface correspondences, registered surfaces have high mesh qualities and are generally smooth without significantly sacrificing shape details. Furthermore, a hierarchical strategy is employed to extract shape statistics of complex shapes (with multiple structures) using a limited number of training samples.Using this approach, we solve several diverse and challenging tasks. Specifically, we create a high resolution cardiac shape atlas with many complex shape features such as papillary muscles and the trabeculae. We also effectively construct the atlas of multiple rodent brain structures (i.e., the cerebellum, the left and right striatum, and the left and right hippocampus) using a small set of samples.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related work of surface registration. Section 3 details our approach, including the whole framework (Section 3.1), different energy terms (Sections 3.2–3.4) and the extraction of shape statistics (Section 3.5). Section 4 shows the experimental results of three applications. Section 5 concludes this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we presented a novel method to construct 3D shape atlas of different anatomies. Specifically, an algorithm is designed to robustly discover geometric correspondences and effectively model 3D shapes. This method improves the traditional adaptive focus deformable model (AFDM) by incorporating a shape energy, which ensures the mesh quality during deformable registration. Besides robustly establishing surface correspondences, the registered meshes are generally smooth without sacrificing geometric details, which facilitates the extraction of shape statistics. Moreover, we employed a hierarchical strategy to learn shape statistics of complex anatomical structures including multiple parts. It is able to build accurate and concise shape atlas with a limited number of training samples. We extensively validated this method in three very diverse applications relevant with different anatomies and imaging modalities. Compared to other methods, our approach exhibits better performance in both quantitative and qualitative measurements. The proposed approach will in fact benefit many other studies. In the future, we plan to use these generated 3D shape atlas to in segmentation and tracking studies by using it as the shape prior information.Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cviu.2012.11.018.