@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Geodesic voting for the automatic extraction of tree structures. Methods and applications

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Geodesic voting is a new concept in image segmentation by one click on source point.Geodesic density is defined as the number of geodesic paths passing through a point.The metric is chosen in order to have many geodesics passing through relevant features.The method is generic and can be applied to different modalities for blood vessels, etc.Very efficient for vascular tree segmentation with precise boundary and centerline.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Geodesic voting,Fast Marching,Level set,Minimal paths,Tree structure segmentation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents new methods to segment thin tree structures, which are, for example present in microglia extensions and cardiac or neuronal blood vessels. Many authors have used minimal cost paths, or geodesics relative to a local weighting potential P, to find a vessel pathway between two end points. We utilize a set of such geodesic paths to find a tubular tree structure by seeking minimal interaction. We introduce a new idea that we call geodesic voting or geodesic density. The approach consists of computing geodesics from a set of end points scattered in the image which flow toward a given source point. The target structure corresponds to image points with a high geodesic density. The “Geodesic density” is defined at each pixel of the image as the number of geodesics that pass over this pixel. The potential P is defined in such way that it takes low values along the tree structure, therefore geodesics will migrate toward this structure thereby yielding a high geodesic density. We further adapt these methods to segment complex tree structures in a noisy medium and apply them to segment microglia extensions from confocal microscope images as well as vessels.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In this paper we present novel methods for the segmentation of tree structures. These methods are based on minimal paths and can be applied to extract numerous structures such as microglia extensions, neurovascular structures, blood vessels, and pulmonary trees. Following our main motivation, we will present applications of our methods to microglia extensions and vessel segmentation. Recent developments in imaging such as fluorescent probes and reporters combined with two photon microscopy have brought new fields of investigation in neuroscience. Researchers may now follow in vivo dynamic movements of cells in 3D. Such approaches revealed that microglia, a subtype of glial cells, are particularly motile in the Central Nervous System (CNS). Beside their highly mobile processes, microglia are the primary inflammatory effector cells in the brain and are consequently involved in most CNS diseases. Understanding the logic of microglia motility might eventually provide an efficient tool to detect early symptoms of diseases such as Alzheimer’s or multiple lateral sclerosis. Although much work is devoted to the segmentation of vascular trees in medical images, only a few attempts have been made to extract microglia extensions and those have been restricted to the main branches [1,2]. Since the microglia extensions are very thin, the centerlines of the extensions are sufficient to characterize the structure and the motion of the microglia. As opposed to vascular tree segmentation, microglia segmentation is much more difficult due to very thin branches and noise. While there are some studies dedicated to the segmentation of microglia structures, there are many studies dedicated to the extraction of vascular or airway trees. For a review of such methods see [3–8]. Among the approaches used to segment such tree structures, we consider three models, classified according to their method for extracting the tubular aspect of the tree: centerline based models; surface models; and 4D curve models. The first category focuses on directly extracting the centerlines of the tubular tree [9,10]. After extracting the centerlines a second process can be used to segment the lumen of the tree, see [11]. The second category directly extracts the surface of the vessel. These approaches includes explicit and implicit surface models. The former use a parametric representation of the tubular structure [12]. These models are not adapted to the segmentation of complex tree structures, while the latter implicit methods can evolve the surface through complex shape changes including changes in topology [13,14]. However, initialization must be performed carefully to obtain an accurate segmentation.Minimal path techniques are extensively used for centerline extraction of tubular tree structures. These approaches are robust to the presence of local perturbations due to stenosed branches of the tree or imaging artifacts where the local image information might be insufficient to guide the shape evolution process. Several minimal path techniques have been proposed to deal with this problem [15–18]. These techniques involve designing a metric from the image in such way that the tubular structures correspond to geodesic paths according to this metric [19]. Solving the problem from the practical point of view consists of a front propagation from a source point within a vessel, which moves faster along the branches of the vascular tree. These methods require the user to supply a starting point (propagation source) and end points. Each end point results in an extracted minimal path back to the source point. The points located along this minimal path are very likely to be located on the vessel of interest. A small amount of work has been devoted to reduce the need for user intervention of the user in the segmentation of tree structure to the initialization of the propagation from a single point. The authors of [20] defined a stopping criterion based on a “medialness” measure; the propagation is stopped when “medialness” drops below a given threshold. This method might suffer from the same problem as region growing since the medialness measure might drop below the given threshold in the presence of lesions or other local image artifacts. Wink et al. [16] proposed stopping the propagation when the geodesic distance reaches a certain value. However, this method is limited to the segmentation of a single vessel and the definition of the threshold of the geodesic distance is not straightforward. The authors of [21] proposed stopping the propagation according to a criterion based on certain geometric properties of the region covered by the front. In [17], assuming the total length of the tree structure to be visited is roughly given, the stopping criterion is based on the Euclidean length of the minimal path.In this paper, we present new methods to extract tree structures without using any a priori information and using only a single user provided point on the tree structure. The methods are generic, they can be used to extract any type of tree structure in 2D as well as in 3D. While a first short version of our methods was presented in conferences [22–25], we provide a more complete view here and compare our methods with each other as well as with other competing methods. The approach is based on a completely new concept, namely, geodesic voting. It consists of computing geodesics from a given source point to a set of end points scattered throughout the image. The target structure corresponds to image points with a high geodesic density. The geodesic density is defined at each pixel of the image as the number of geodesics that pass over this pixel. Since the potential exhibits low values along the tree structure, geodesics will preferably migrate toward this structure and thereby yield a high geodesic density. We introduce different approaches to segment complex tree structures in noisy media environments and apply them to segment Microglia extensions from confocal microscope images as well as vessels in medical images.In Section 2 we present the tools needed in Section 3 in order to define and study the geodesic voting method. In Section 4, we also propose a variety of possible ways to obtain both the centerline and the boundary of the vascular tree with our framework. In Section 5 we evaluate the method on 2D real data from different bio-medical images and show results for 3D data as well.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
