@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Efficient tracking of human poses using a manifold hierarchy

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A markerless multi-camera human pose tracking method is proposed.Activities are modelled by a novel hierarchical dimensionality reduction method, Hierarchical Temporal Laplacian Eigenmaps.Poses are estimated by the proposed Hierarchical Manifold Search.Comparisons with state-of-the-art methods demonstrate the accuracy and efficiency of our approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Human body pose estimation,Pose tracking,Dimensionality reduction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper a 3D human pose tracking framework is presented. A new dimensionality reduction method (Hierarchical Temporal Laplacian Eigenmaps) is introduced to represent activities in hierarchies of low dimensional spaces. Such a hierarchy provides increasing independence between limbs, allowing higher flexibility and adaptability that result in improved accuracy. Moreover, a novel deterministic optimisation method (Hierarchical Manifold Search) is applied to estimate efficiently the position of the corresponding body parts. Finally, evaluation on public datasets such as HumanEva demonstrates that our approach achieves a 62.5–65mm average joint error for the walking activity and outperforms state-of-the-art methods in terms of accuracy and computational cost.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In computer vision, human motion analysis is a rapidly growing area, because of not only the methodological challenge that motion analysis implies but also its many applications such as surveillance, human computer interaction, sports analysis and computer graphics. Human motion analysis approaches have been relying on activity recognition, pose estimation and pose tracking methodologies. Whereas activity recognition aims at classifying the type of the activity performed by a human being, pose estimation deals with estimating the skeletal position of a person for one or more frames. Although this makes the solution independent of the previous poses, this is also more sensitive to errors. Consequently, pose estimation is often integrated within a pose tracking framework where past information is exploited to estimate the current pose in a more efficient way. Human pose tracking methods that rely on markerless approaches are generally desirable because of their non-invasive nature that widens significantly their potential application. Multi-camera systems are able to mitigate the complexity of markerless approaches and to deal with the inevitable limb occlusions. Still, the variety of human postures and activity styles, and the high complexity of modelling the human body make this problem a technically demanding and computationally expensive task.In this paper, we introduce a hierarchical dimensionality reduction method, namely Hierarchical Temporal Laplacian Eigenmaps (HTLE). It goes beyond the hierarchical structure of human body parts, represented as pairwise relationships as in Yang and Lee [38], Urtasun and Darrell [33], Amin et al. [1] by considering divisions at different hierarchical levels, similarly to Han et al. [14], Darby et al. [10], Raskin and Rudzsky [25], Wang et al. [37], Tian et al. [32]. The HTLE approach allows searching each level of a posture hierarchy separately, thus modelling new, unseen poses. Furthermore, we propose a markerless, hierarchical pose tracking method, namely Hierarchical Manifold Searching (HMS), designed for multi-camera scenarios. Our framework operates in a two-phase approach; first, a training set is used in order to generate a hierarchy of low dimensional manifolds using HTLE and second, pose tracking is performed in a hierarchical manner using HMS. Therefore, unlike conventional dimensionality reduction methods which are restricted to the set of poses present in a training set, our framework is capable of moving beyond the training set and generating new poses that have never been seen before. In addition, instead of searching the whole hierarchy as performed in previous studies using computationally expensive particle filtering [10,25], the computational cost of the proposed method is reduced by using deterministic optimisation applied to a subset of manifolds in the hierarchy. Our approach also deals with style variability, i.e. pose differences for a given activity resulting from either individual’s personality or distinct conditions, by allowing an extra final level of hierarchy where each body part is individually adjusted in an unconstrained manner [24]. We show that our methodology improves computational efficiency and accuracy.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presents a human pose tracking methodology relying on two novel techniques. Firstly, a hierarchical method based on dimensionality reduction for human pose tracking is proposed. The hierarchical dimensionality reduction method, HTLE, based on TLE dimensionality reduction method, has been designed for human pose tracking as it takes into account the hierarchical representation of the human body. This allows the decoupling from the structure of the training dataset and the exploration of unseen poses.Secondly, we introduce a method, HMS, which deterministically searches through the hierarchy of low dimensional manifolds and is driven by an observation function. HMS allows searching in a constrained space for every level of the hierarchy, so it requires a low number of evaluations of the observation functions and therefore low computational resources. In addition, searching through the hierarchy is able to estimate unseen poses.Results were presented using publicly available benchmarks, such as the multi-camera HumanEva. Comparisons with state-of-the-art methods demonstrate the accuracy and efficiency of our approach.