@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
EM-GPA: Generalized Procrustes analysis with hidden variables for 3D shape modeling

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose EM-GPA algorithm to handle shapes with missing data.EM GPA combines GPA and the expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm.2D shapes can be considered as 3D shapes with missing depth information.EM-GPA finds scales, rotations and 3D shapes along with their mean and covariance.The method accurately estimates the 3D mean and covariance matrix for 3D shape modeling.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Shape alignment,Procrustes analysis,Non-rigid structure from motion,Virtual 3D shape model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Aligning shapes is essential in many computer vision problems and generalized Procrustes analysis (GPA) is one of the most popular algorithms to align shapes. However, if some of the shape data are missing, GPA cannot be applied. In this paper, we propose EM-GPA, which extends GPA to handle shapes with hidden (missing) variables by using the expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm. For example, 2D shapes can be considered as 3D shapes with missing depth information due to the projection of 3D shapes into the image plane. For a set of 2D shapes, EM-GPA finds scales, rotations and 3D shapes along with their mean and covariance matrix for 3D shape modeling. A distinctive characteristic of EM-GPA is that it does not enforce any rank constraint often appeared in other work and instead uses GPA constraints to resolve the ambiguity in finding scales, rotations, and 3D shapes. The experimental results show that EM-GPA can recover depth information accurately even when the noise level is high and there are a large number of missing variables. By using the images from the FRGC database, we show that EM-GPA can successfully align 2D shapes by taking the missing information into consideration. We also demonstrate that the 3D mean shape and its covariance matrix are accurately estimated. As an application of EM-GPA, we construct a 2D+3D AAM (active appearance model) using the 3D shapes obtained by EM-GPA, and it gives a similar success rate in model fitting compared to the method using real 3D shapes. EM-GPA is not limited to the case of missing depth information, but it can be easily extended to more general cases.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In computer vision, the study of shape using a set of landmark points is an important issue which appears in many application, such as image registration [1–3], gait recognition [4,5], shape modeling [6,7], motion analysis [8,9,4,5], and stereo reconstruction [10]. According to Kendall’s definition [11], the shape of an object is the geometrical information that remains after the effects of the Euclidean similarity transformations (rigid transforms) are filtered out. In many cases, this information can be found by aligning a set of shapes to a common reference, using generalized Procrustes analysis (GPA) [12,13]. GPA performs Euclidean similarity transforms on a set of shapes to minimize the sum of squared distances between all shapes and a reference shape. In many recent applications [14–17], however, a set of shapes have to be aligned with some missing information, which induces several problems. For example, GPA cannot be applied when aligning some rotated 3D shapes with missing depth information. If, somehow, we can align the 3D shapes by aligning 2D points with probabilistic information on depth, it will be very useful in many applications [18–21]. This can be considered to be equivalent to recovering 3D shapes and motion from a set of 2D shapes (non-rigid structure from motion, NRSfM), and many studies have solved this by using factorization methods [22–24,17]. However, those methods have ambiguity in the solution and require additional constraints to find a unique solution [25]. Recently, Torresani et al. [15,16] proposed an approach (EM-PPCA) using probabilistic principal components analysis which simultaneously estimates 3D shapes and rotations from 2D shape streams. Paladini et al. [17] proposed a least-squares approach (MP) associated with a globally optimal projection step onto the manifold of metric constraints to recover 3D shapes and motion of deformable and articulated objects. Both methods constrain the rank of deformation space to resolve the ambiguity. However, it is difficult to know the rank correctly beforehand.Unlike the other work that put a constraint on the deformation space, we conjecture that it is better to put constraints on the rigid transforms so that they are not affected by the characteristics of the deformation space. Based on this conjecture, we extend GPA, a shape alignment algorithm based on the Euclidean measure, to the case with hidden (missing) variables by using the expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm, which will be called EM-GPA hereafter. In E-step of EM-GPA, the missing information is modeled as a Gaussian distribution, and in M-step of EM-GPA, the maximum likelihood (ML) solution of the parameters is obtained by using the distribution of hidden variables computed from E-step. During M-step, some constraints that reflect the characteristics of GPA are enforced to resolve the ambiguity. These constraints align shapes with respect to (w.r.t.) the Euclidean measure, which makes the parameters related to the rigid transforms less affected by the parameters related to deformation. We show experimentally that, without any rank constraint such as in [15–17], EM-GPA can find correct solutions even in the presence of noise. EM-GPA is not limited to the case of missing depth information, but it can be easily extended to more general cases.Only with observed 2D facial shapes, EM-GPA can find scales, rotations, the mean and covariance matrix of 3D shapes, and consequently 3D shapes. The reconstructed depth information is sufficiently accurate as demonstrated in Section 5.1. The experimental results shows that EM-GPA performs excellently even for high noise and a large number of missing variables. In Section 5.2 and 5.3, we show that the mean and covariance matrix of 3D shapes obtained by EM-GPA can be used to build a 3D shape model instead of using those trained by a real 3D landmark data, which usually requires extra efforts to produce.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces some background materials on GPA. In Section 3, we formulate the problem of performing GPA with hidden variables, and propose EM-GPA. Experimental results are shown in Section 5 and the paper is concluded in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
