@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effects of different real-time feedback types on human performance in high-demanding work conditions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A model-based feedback system is applied to a low-fidelity ship simulator.Three feedback types are provided separately or combined during a stressful simulator task.Performance on a stressful low-fidelity simulator task increases when feedback is provided.Participants prefer physiological feedback over non-physiological feedback.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Stress,Virtual training,Decision tools,Cognitive errors,Human task performance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Experiencing stress during training is a way to prepare professionals for real-life crises. With the help of feedback tools, professionals can train to recognize and overcome negative effects of stress on task performances. This paper reports two studies that empirically examined the effect of such a feedback system. The system, based on the COgnitive Performance and Error (COPE) model, provides its users with physiological, predicted performance and predicted error-chance feedback. The first experiment focussed on creating stressful scenarios and establishing the parameters for the predictive models for the feedback system. Participants (n=9) performed fire-extinguishing tasks on a virtual ship. By altering time pressure, information uncertainty and consequences of performance, stress was induced. COPE variables were measured and models were established that predicted performance and the chances on specific errors. In the second experiment a new group of participants (n=29) carried out the same tasks while receiving eight different combinations of the three feedback types in a counterbalanced order. Performance scores improved when feedback was provided during the task. The number of errors made did not decrease. The usability score for the system with physiological feedback was significantly higher than a system without physiological feedback, unless combined with error feedback.This paper shows effects of feedback on performances and usability. To improve the effectiveness of the feedback system it is suggested to provide more in-depth tutorial sessions. Design changes are recommended that would make the feedback system more effective in improving performances.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
For professionals to be ready for work under stressful circumstances, such as crises, combat or disaster scenarios, they need proper training. An effective training method for decision making under stress is learning by experience (Andresen et al., 2001; Beach and Lipshitz, 1993; Cesta et al., 2014). Scenario-based training environments can be created in Virtual Reality (VR) which provide the realistic stressful situations (Peeters et al., 2014). VR seems to be able to elicit physiological stress responses in individuals (Busscher et al., 2011; Hartanto et al., 2014) but leaves out the risk of real-life crisis and disasters (Kinateder et al., 2014). Experiencing stress in VR enhances professionals’ performances in real stressful situations (McClernon et al., 2010). Adding instructions to such training would provide more advantages, especially for the training of novices (Kirschner et al., 2006). Hence, next to the VR training, other training tools are needed to help the trainee learn to perform tasks under stress.This paper focuses on real-time feedback that can be used during simulation-based training to learn to cope with stressful situations. The motivation behind this work lies in the benefits computers could bring in the acquisition of knowledge about the cognitive and affective processes and their outcomes in simulated stressful situations. Assisting trainees in VR could be done by incorporating decision support systems into the learning environment. Cognitive prostheses are systems that replace cognitive decision-making processes for the users (Wickens et al., 2004). They work well in a clearly defined decision making situation, but they do not seem to work successfully in uncertain situations since they can only make decisions on pre-programmed situations (Reason, 1987). Human decision processes are often ahead of the system (Cohen, 1993). People are also reluctant to being subordinate to a system (Gordon, 1988; Kontogiannis and Kossiavelou, 1999; Wickens et al., 2004). Cognitive prostheses also change the nature of a task from a decision task to learning to understand the system. Cognitive tools, however, are designed to provide support to the decision makers instead of replacing them (Wickens et al., 2004). They might be more appropriate for use in training settings as they support the user in learning a skill. In real-life settings, a cognitive tool can still help professionals to be more aware of negative effects of stress. Another reason to prefer cognitive tools over cognitive prostheses in uncertain environments is that they fit the decision process of professionals. Professionals do not seem to pick a decision after considering several alternatives but they rely on their experiences (Klein et al., 1986). An effective support tool should be harmonized to the decision-making processes of its users.Effective support tools for uncertain situations should focus on skill or knowledge enhancement, or control. Biofeedback methods, for example, have been used for personal stress control by providing individuals with an insight into their physiological reactions to stress. Trainees try to reduce these reactions and over time they learn to control the physiological reactions to stress. Being more aware of one׳s emotional state is said to leave more cognitive resources for the task (Driskell and Johnston, 2006; Gohm et al., 2001). Some studies demonstrated biofeedback׳s ability to reduce stress, and consequently improve performance (Bouchard et al., 2012; Prinsloo et al., 2013), but these findings may be biased due to un-blind trials (Raaijmakers et al., 2013).Support tools focussing on skill or knowledge enhancement generally offer three types of feedback: (1) outcome feedback states the current performance of a task, (2) cognitive feedback explains how to perform the task, and (3) feed-forward helps the user to anticipate on different decision options. When outcome performance is provided on its own, it does not seem to be effective in increasing task performance (Gonzalez, 2005; Lerch and Harter, 2001). It might still put the trainee in an unguided learning situation. Combining it with feed-forward feedback on the other hand, did result in increased task performance (Lerch and Harter, 2001). It seems important to support trainees in understanding feedback that shows performance levels. For example, confronting trainees with their error tendencies helps them to avoid making these errors (Dörner and Schaub, 1994). In situations with varying situational dynamics and teamwork interdependencies, the chances to make errors are relatively high. In such situations, errors often appear as a result of a lack of communication or inappropriate task allocation (Sasou and Reason, 1999). To address this, Kontogiannis and Kossiavelou (1999) have made a number of suggestions for making decision support tools more efficient for team decision making. For example, tools should provide information on team-strategy changes fitting to the situation. Furthermore, tools should also provide insight into event escalations and indicate when changes in communication are needed. And finally, they suggest that these tools should indicate when adaptations are needed in the task allocations and structures of team members.The effectiveness of feedback also depends on the timing between task and feedback. First of all, mood or state-dependent learning shows that retrieval works better when people are in the same mood as they were in when they were learning (Kenealy, 1997). If feedback is delayed to after the task it is likely that a person is in another mood, i.e. no longer stressed. Secondly, trainees will interpret the feedback in the context in which it is given. As a training scenario unfolds and the context changes the interpretation of the feedback may be altered. Effective feedback is therefore offered quickly after the task but not during the performance of the skill (Anderson et al., 1995; Wickens et al., 2004). Trainees will otherwise ignore the feedback resulting in no effect or they will be distracted from the task they are performing which might result in decreased performance. Shute (2008) drew the same conclusion in her review on the length and complexity of feedback. When feedback is too long or too complex, trainees will not pay attention to it. Contrary to this finding, there are also studies that did not find an effect of length and complexity of feedback.Based on the above literature, this paper takes the stance that trainees’ performances benefit from receiving immediate (real-time) feedback about their physiological stress response, predictions about their performance, and predictions about the chances that they will make specific errors. These types of feedback let users recognize their current stress state and their behavioural consequences of stress. Such a feedback system, based on the COgnitive Performance and Error (COPE) model, proved effective when provided to Naval students working in a high-end simulator (Cohen, 2015). The experiment presented here, continues this line of research by studying the effects of the different combinations of immediate feedback on task performance.The COgnitive Performance and Error (COPE) model (Cohen et al., 2012, 2015) shows the influences of factors in the external world, via cognitive factors, on performances. A graphical representation of the COPE model is shown inFig. 1. The COPE model starts with stimuli from the work content. Tasks that need to be performed have certain goals and task demands. The more difficult the expected reaction to the event, the higher the task demands.When a task is being perceived, the primary appraisal will state the severity of potential danger. The secondary appraisal will assess the situation as either a challenge or a threat. A task will be seen as a challenge when individuals believe they are able to cope with the task. When they feel they cannot cope with the task, it is seen as a threat. Individuals also rate a task on its level of perceived task demand. Experiencing a stressful event or task also influences the emotional state. The PAD-model by Mehrabian (1996) divides emotional state in arousal, valence and dominance. Valence indicates the level of positivity or negativity, dominance indicates the level of control, and arousal is a level of activity. Arousal can be measured objectively with physiological factors such as heart rate (HR) and heart rate variability (HRV) (Brouwer et al., 2011; Hjortskov et al., 2004; Krantz et al., 2004).The work content determines the appraisal, perceived task demand and arousal levels. Those variables have on their turn, influence on an individual׳s behaviour and actions responding to the external world. Whether a response to a task is appropriate or not, determines the level of performance. The COPE-model focusses on two types of performance: expert rated performance, a value given to the actions determined by experts; and the number of errors made during the event.Based on the COPE model, a feedback (FB) system (Fig. 2) was created that provides three types of feedback: physiological feedback (2 in Fig. 2), performance prediction feedback (1 in Fig. 2), and error-chance feedback (3 in Fig. 2). When heart rate increased, trainees could consult the other types of feedback to check what consequences the current stress had on their performance. The performance prediction feedback is a prediction about the current performance level. Although performance predictions as feedback might not be effective on its own, combined with other feedback it seems to increase performance (Gonzalez, 2005; Lerch and Harter, 2001). The third feedback type the system provided was predictions of specific error chances. The COPE model can predict four specific error tendencies (Cohen et al., 2015) namely: planning errors, communication errors, errors concerning the speed of task execution, and task allocation errors.For all three feedback types, a higher bar graph represents a higher value. The bar graphs belonging to the same feedback type were grouped according to the principle of common region (Rock and Palmer, 1990).The users were expected to see their heart rate increase when perceived stress increased. Instead of just focusing on reducing their physiological reactions to the perceived stress as one would do when only biofeedback is offered (Gatchel et al., 1978), they could see the consequences of the stress on their performances and adjust their behaviour accordingly.Although the COPE-FB system is a generic system, different scenarios require different predictive functions. Previous work showed that variables in the COPE model are influenced by tasks characteristics (Cohen et al., 2016). Therefore, the first experiment of this paper calibrates the predictive functions and also creates a set of stressful scenarios for the second experiment. In the second experiment, the COPE-FB system is used to examine the effect of providing the various types of immediate feedback by testing the following three hypotheses:1.Immediate feedback improves trainees’ performances and the perceived usability of the feedback system.Immediate (a) physiological feedback, (b) predicted performance feedback, or (c) predicted error-chance feedback improves trainees’ performances and the perceived usability of the feedback system.Offering combinations of immediate feedback types, results in an additional positive contribution on top of the effects created by individual types of feedback, on the trainees’ performances and the perceived usability of the feedback system.The first experiment was set out to calibrate the predictive models by determining the parameters, for the specific tasks and target groups in this paper. The first experiment also allowed to find stressful scenario׳s for the second study. The study was approved by the ethics committees of both TNO Soesterberg and Delft University of Technology.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
