@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Sparsity-driven bandwidth-efficient decentralized tracking in visual sensor networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A decentralized approach for multi-view multi-person tracking in VSNs.Design overcomplete dictionaries matched to the structure of likelihoods functions.Obtain sparse representation of likelihoods to reduce communication in the network.Comparison on well-known L1-solvers to choose a fast and reliable method.Qualitatively and quantitatively, our framework outperforms previous approaches.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Camera networks,Visual sensor networks,Human tracking,Sparse representation,Designing overcomplete dictionaries,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Recent developments in low-cost CMOS cameras have created the opportunity of bringing imaging capabilities to sensor networks and a new field called visual sensor networks (VSNs) has emerged. VSNs consist of image sensors, embedded processors, and wireless transceivers which are powered by batteries. Since energy and bandwidth resources are limited, setting up a tracking system in VSNs is a challenging problem. In this paper, we present a framework for human tracking in VSN environments. The traditional approach of sending compressed images to a central node has certain disadvantages such as decreasing the performance of further processing (i.e., tracking) because of low quality images. Instead, in our decentralized tracking framework, each camera node performs feature extraction and obtains likelihood functions. We propose a sparsity-driven method that can obtain bandwidth-efficient representation of likelihoods extracted by the camera nodes. Our approach involves the design of special overcomplete dictionaries that match the structure of the likelihoods and the transmission of likelihood information in the network through sparse representation in such dictionaries. We have applied our method for indoor and outdoor people tracking scenarios and have shown that it can provide major savings in communication bandwidth without significant degradation in tracking performance. We have compared the tracking results and communication loads with a block-based likelihood compression scheme, a decentralized tracking method and a distributed tracking method. Experimental results show that our sparse representation framework is an effective approach that can be used together with any probabilistic tracker in VSNs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Over the past decade, large-scale camera networks have enjoyed increased use in a wide range of applications, especially in security and surveillance. With the developments in wireless sensor networks and the availability of inexpensive image sensors, a new field has emerged: Visual sensor networks (VSNs), i.e., networks of wirelessly interconnected battery-operated devices that acquire video data.Using a camera in a wireless network poses unique and challenging problems that do not exist either in traditional multi-camera video analysis systems or in sensor networks. In most of the multi-camera video analysis systems, a centralized approach, in which the raw data acquired by cameras are collected in a central unit and analyzed to perform the task of interest, is followed. However, performing complex tasks, such as tracking, recognition, etc., in a communication-constrained VSN environment is extremely challenging. For such constraints, with a data compression perspective, the common approach is to compress images in the process of transmission to the central unit. This strategy essentially focuses on low-level data compression without regard to the final inference goal. Such a strategy may not be appropriate for use under scenarios with severe bandwidth limitations and might cause significant degradation in tracking performance with large compression ratios. We provide a more in-depth review of existing work in Section 2.In this paper, we propose a different strategy that is better matched to the final inference goal, which, in the context of this paper, is tracking. We propose a sparsity-driven tracking method that is suitable for energy and bandwidth constraints in VSNs. Our method is a decentralized tracking approach in which each camera node in the network performs feature extraction by itself and obtains image features (likelihood functions). In scenarios with overlapping cameras, tracking is performed by fusing the likelihoods obtained from each view. Instead of directly sending likelihood functions to the fusion node, we compute and transmit sparse representations of the likelihoods. By sending such sparse representations to the fusion node, multi-view tracking can be performed without overloading the network. We design special overcomplete dictionaries for the sparse representation of likelihood functions. The main contribution of this work is building a sparse representation framework and designing overcomplete dictionaries that are matched to the structure of likelihoods. In particular our dictionaries are designed in an adaptive manner by exploiting the specific known geometry of the measurement scenario and by focusing on the problem of human tracking. Each element in the dictionary for each camera corresponds to the likelihood that would result from a single human at a particular location in the scene. Hence actual likelihoods extracted from real observations from scenes containing multiple individuals can be very sparsely represented in our approach. By using these dictionaries, we can represent likelihoods with a very small number of coefficients, and thereby decrease the communication between camera and fusion nodes. To the best of our knowledge, such sparse representation based compression of likelihood functions computed in the context of tracking in a VSN has not been proposed in previous work.We have used our method within the context of two multi-camera human tracking algorithms [1,2]. We have modified these methods in order to obtain decentralized tracking algorithms. Both by qualitative and quantitative results, we have shown that our method is better than using the block-based compression scheme in [3], the decentralized tracking method in [4], the distributed tracking methods in [5,6] and a traditional centralized approach that compresses raw images acquired by each camera. The sparse likelihood representation framework we present can be used within any probabilistic tracking method under VSN constraints without significantly degrading the tracking performance.In Section 2, existing pieces of work on tracking in VSNs are reviewed. Section 3 presents our decentralized approach for multi-camera tracking in detail. In Section 4, our sparse representation framework and the details of our specially designed overcomplete dictionaries are described. Experimental results are presented in Section 5. Finally in Section 6, we provide a summary and conclusions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Using a camera in a wireless network leads to unique and challenging problems. This paper presents a novel method that can be used in VSNs for multi-camera person tracking applications. In our method, tracking is performed in a decentralized way: each camera extracts useful features from the images it has observed and sends them to a fusion node which performs tracking. Most probabilistic tracking systems involve computation of a likelihood function. Instead of sending the likelihood functions themselves to the fusion node, we compress the likelihoods via sparse representation. Special overcomplete dictionaries that are matched to the structure of the likelihood functions are designed in an adaptive fashion exploiting information about the geometry of the sensing scenario, and used for sparse representation of likelihoods. This enables us to decrease the communication between cameras and fusion nodes. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first method that uses sparse representation and specially designed dictionaries to compress likelihood functions and applies this idea for VSNs. This framework fits well within the needs of the VSN environment. By extracting image features at the camera-level, the processing capabilities of cameras are utilized. Transmitting only the most significant coefficients, obtained from the sparse representation of likelihoods, saves energy and bandwidth resources. In this manner, we have achieved a goal-directed compression scheme for the tracking problem in VSNs by performing local processing at the nodes and compressing the resulting likelihood functions which are related to the tracking goal, rather than compressing raw images.Another advantage of this framework is that it does not require the use of a specific tracking method. In our experiments, we have used two different tracking algorithms and achieved bandwidth reduction in the network without degrading the tracking performance significantly. We believe our sparse representation framework is an effective approach that can be used together with any probabilistic tracker in VSNs. Thereby, existing centralized methods can be used within our framework in VSN environments without making significant changes (e.g., using simpler features, etc.) which may degrade their performance. By using overcomplete dictionaries that are matched to the structure of the likelihoods, for the same tracking performance, we achieve more bandwidth savings compared to existing methods.In our experiments, we have also observed that there is a negative correlation between PSNR levels and the tracking error. This can be used to automatically choose an operating point (i.e., number of coefficients), e.g., based on the slope of the PSNR curve. While the absolute value of the tracking error is scenario-dependent, this automatic choice would enable one to avoid the operating points with significantly high tracking errors and achieve a low tracking error without using unnecessarily large number of coefficients. While we do not claim this is the best approach for automatic selection of the number of coefficients in our approach, we believe it certainly provides a reasonable approach demonstrating the feasibility of automatic selection. We believe that trying our sparse representation framework in nonoverlapping VSN setups, by compressing feature descriptors used for re-identification (such as in [46,51]), can be another possible direction for future work.