@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Face recognition for web-scale datasets

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Explore large-scale face identification, focusing on realistic open-universe scenarios.Release feature descriptors for a new Facebook dataset and a Facebook downloader tool.Develop an algorithm, LASRC, for realtime, accurate, and web-scale face identification.Evaluate local features, sparsity, and locality with large-scale datasets.Compare LASRC to many state-of-the-art algorithms with real-world datasets.Compare LASRC to many state-of-the-art algorithms with real-world datasets.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Open-universe face recognition,Large-scale classification,Uncontrolled datasets,Sparse representations,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
With millions of users and billions of photos, web-scale face recognition is a challenging task that demands speed, accuracy, and scalability. Most current approaches do not address and do not scale well to Internet-sized scenarios such as tagging friends or finding celebrities. Focusing on web-scale face identification, we gather an 800,000 face dataset from the Facebook social network that models real-world situations where specific faces must be recognized and unknown identities rejected. We propose a novel Linearly Approximated Sparse Representation-based Classification (LASRC) algorithm that uses linear regression to perform sample selection for ℓ1-minimization, thus harnessing the speed of least-squares and the robustness of sparse solutions such as SRC. Our efficient LASRC algorithm achieves comparable performance to SRC with a 100–250 times speedup and exhibits similar recall to SVMs with much faster training. Extensive tests demonstrate our proposed approach is competitive on pair-matching verification tasks and outperforms current state-of-the-art algorithms on open-universe identification in uncontrolled, web-scale scenarios.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Face recognition is a well-researched field with a history that can be viewed as a journey of increasing scope, realism, and applicability to real-world facial analysis problems. Perhaps this journey is described best by the many datasets introduced over the years that addressed key challenges at the time of collection. Early datasets such as AT&T (ORL) [1], AR [2], Yale [3], FERET [4], and PIE [5] were collected in the laboratory to control and explore solutions for illumination, expression, age, pose, and disguise. In such tightly controlled environments, machine learning can match or surpass humans [6] and performance is often very good at the risk of overfitting to overly structured situations. As face recognition grew beyond the confines of laboratory settings, evaluations such as FRVT [7], FRGC [8], and MBE [9] applied face recognition to real problems like mugshot and passport scanning, high resolution imagery, 3D facial scans, and outdoor scenarios. Lately, face recognition research has shifted towards realistic faces captured in more uncontrolled conditions. In particular, consumer and Internet face recognition tasks have increased in popularity with “in-the-wild” datasets such as LFW [10], PubFig [11], and various private Facebook galleries [12–14]. This has spurred the development of more robust algorithms, although humans still outperform the best approaches [11].With the increasing pervasiveness of digital cameras, the Internet, and social networking, there is a growing need to catalog and analyze large collections of photos. Because photo interest is largely determined by who appears in the picture, labeling photos with identities is particularly important. In fact, popular social networks such as Facebook allow users to place tags on photos to label people, encouraging collaboratively shared photo albums. Imagine millions of Internet users tagging their photos: such web-scale labeling problems present a real challenge and fascinating opportunity for automation by face recognition.In such consumer-driven and Internet applications, there are many unique challenges in applying face recognition: the massive-scale nature of dozens or hundreds of faces each for hundreds or thousands of people, the uncontrolled nature of illumination, age, pose, expression, a high variance in image quality, and noisy data due to human mislabeling. Although there are several large-scale evaluations like FRVT [7], FRGC [8], and MBE [9] and verification datasets such as GBU [15] and LFW [10], open-universe face identification remains a little-studied problem in the research community at large, especially with respect to large-scale web and consumer related photo tagging tasks. For instance, in a social network context, only friends should be tagged while ignoring all others (Fig. 1(b)); however, in a local newspaper publication context, a public figure is more noteworthy (Fig. 1(a)). Thus as Fig. 1 depicts, depending on the context, real-world face recognition must identify specific people reliably while rejecting all others as distractors.To address these insufficiencies when scaling face identification to web-scale applications in the real-world, we construct a very large dataset from Facebook, propose a novel and efficient algorithm named Linearly Approximated Sparse Representation-based Classification (LASRC), and perform extensive performance evaluations. Inspired by robust sparse methods [16,17] that scale poorly as the number of training images increases (often taking seconds or even minutes using the fastest algorithms on a gallery of 100,000 faces), we investigate how to reduce the high computation times of ℓ1-minimization techniques used to recover coefficient vectors relating a test face to those in a dictionary. Starting with least-squares solutions, we find the interesting result that imposing brute-force sparsity by thresholding low-magnitude coefficients can markedly improve accuracy in large-scale datasets. We establish the key insight that there exists a correlation between the high-magnitude components of ℓ2 solutions and coefficients chosen by sparse ℓ1-minimization. Our method LASRC exploits the speed of ℓ2 to quickly initialize a sparse solution and serve as an approximation to ℓ1-minimization, which accurately refines the solution. Furthermore, we show LASRC classifies 100–250 times faster than SRC with similar performance, is comparable to SVMs with almost no training required, and outperforms realtime, state-of-the-art algorithms in web-scale face recognition. We present five contributions:1.The exploration of large-scale face identification, focusing on realistic open-universe scenarios (Section 2.2).The release of feature descriptors for a new Facebook dataset and a Facebook downloader tool for analysis of large face datasets (Section 3).The development of a novel algorithm, LASRC, for realtime, accurate, and web-scale face identification (Section 4).The evaluation of local features, sparsity, and locality with large-scale datasets in an open-universe scenario (Sections 5 and 6).The comparison of LASRC to many state-of-the-art algorithms with real-world datasets (Sections 7 and 8).Finally, Section 9 concludes with a discussion and future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we present a novel Linearly Approximated SRC (LASRC) algorithm that excels at large-scale, realistic face identification tasks in open-universe scenarios where unknown and distractor faces must be rejected. Combining the speed of least-squares with the robustness of sparse representations, LASRC improves upon SRC with only one extra, easily-tunable parameter K. By selecting a small pool of K training samples for ℓ1-minimization with a linear regression approximation, classification time is greatly reduced with only a small loss in recall. We extensively evaluate traditional, sparse, and least-squares algorithms with respect to sparsity and locality under real-world scenarios on two very large and diverse face datasets: (1) a combination of PubFig and LFW and (2) a new Facebook dataset. Our results show linearly approximated sparse representations with local features are very much applicable to real-world face identification tasks. While popular algorithms may be less-suited to dynamic, web-scale scenarios because of slow training times (SVMs) or slow classification (SRC), LASRC represents a good compromise that both trains and classifies rapidly while retaining good recall and precision. LASRC exhibits the advantages of SRC with at least 100X faster classification and achieves better performance than other fast sparse methods. Furthermore, our approach compares well to SVMs while training orders of magnitude more rapidly, even against state-of-the-art algorithms designed for speed and tuned for fast, approximate training. Finally, our approach outperforms many recent realtime algorithms in speed, accuracy, and recall.In the future, better sample selection for the training set, a more sophisticated method of rejecting distractors, and tighter integration with ℓ1-minimization algorithms could benefit LASRC. For faster performance, one could reduce dimensionality during the linear regression step and reduce ℓ1-minimization iterations for speed without significantly impacting performance. Similarly, multi-threading or GPU acceleration would likely speed up LASRC by several times. For better accuracy, new feature representations could be explored. In situations where many training faces per subject or frontal faces are not available, more evaluation is needed. Performance could be boosted with expectation–maximization, where candidate samples are proposed and ℓ1-minimization evaluates them.While our presented approach is a promising step towards fast, web-scale face recognition, there is much room for improvement. We hope that by releasing descriptors for our datasets, a utility to download and create datasets from Facebook, and a MATLAB toolkit for face recognition, future researchers will be able to more easily develop and evaluate new algorithms for realistic, open-universe face recognition scenarios.