@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Free-form image registration regularized by a statistical shape model: application to organ segmentation in cervical MR

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a registration scheme that is enhanced by a statistical model.Registration is performed on MR images of 17 patients with cervical cancer.Compared to conventional registration segmentation of the evaluated structure is improved.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Inter-subject,Regularization,Abdomen,Shape model,Registration,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Deformable registration is prone to errors when it involves large and complex deformations, since the procedure can easily end up in a local minimum. To reduce the number of local minima, and thus the risk of misalignment, regularization terms based on prior knowledge can be incorporated in registration. We propose a regularization term that is based on statistical knowledge of the deformations that are to be expected. A statistical model, trained on the shapes of a set of segmentations, is integrated as a penalty term in a free-form registration framework. For the evaluation of our approach, we perform inter-patient registration of MR images, which were acquired for planning of radiation therapy of cervical cancer. The manual delineations of structures such as the bladder and the clinical target volume are available. For both structures, leave-one-patient-out registration experiments were performed. The propagated atlas segmentations were compared to the manual target segmentations by Dice similarity and Hausdorff distance. Compared with registration without the use of statistical knowledge, the segmentations were significantly improved, by 0.1 in Dice similarity and by 8mm Hausdorff distance on average for both structures.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Many medical imaging applications rely on deformable registration [1]. Deformable registration is a complicated task when it involves large and complex deformation. Registration schemes that have to deal with such deformations generally require a transformation model with a very large number of parameters. The downside of this high number of degrees of freedom is that the registration procedure can easily end up in a local minimum. For instance, the registration process may advance to a local minimum when an edge aligns to an edge of a neighboring structure. In case of complex deformations, even coarse-to-fine approaches may not suffice.Incorporation of prior knowledge of deformation into registration is a way of regularizing the optimization procedure and reducing local minima. This is a well-known approach and it is applied in many situations; a number of these will be discussed. The prior knowledge that is used by Brock et al. [2] comprises physical properties of the tissue, whereas Pennec et al. [3] regularize with statistics on the physical strain tensors within one registration. These approaches are used for intra-subject registrations, but may not be valid for inter-subject registrations, since the transformation of one person to another is not a physical one.Rueckert et al. [4] use statistical deformation models (SDMs) that model all the control points of the underlying B-spline deformation grid in a statistical way. A similar approach was taken by Loeckx et al. [5], who limit deformations to the space spanned by a trained deformation model. However, this means that a target deformation that deviates from the spanned space cannot be reached by registration, even if the image data provide enough evidence. To avoid this effect, Xue et al. [6] perform registration where statistical regularization is applied in a separate step. An integrated formulation is presented by Albrecht et al. [7], with the model used as a soft constraint in registration. To not restrict the target deformation space spanned by the training data, the span of the model is increased to all the degrees of freedom of the transformation, by the regularization method called shrinkage estimation. However, only registration examples of 2D images are shown.Rueckert et al. [4], Loeckx et al. [5], Xue et al. [6] model all displacement vectors in the image. These displacement vectors can only be obtained if a (registration) method is available that establishes correct displacement vectors for the example images. Alternatively, as is done by Albrecht et al. [7], the displacement vectors can be obtained by registering example segmentations. In the latter approach the resulting displacement vectors only carry meaningful information at the boundaries of the segmentation. All other displacement vectors in the image are based on the deformation regularization used, but will still be used for training purposes.We chose to stay close to the idea of statistical shape models (SSMs) that model only the boundary surface displacements. Heimann and Meinzer [8] give a thorough overview of the variety of SSMs that have been proposed. The key approach of SSMs (which has inspired the development of SDMs) is a reduction of the number of degrees of freedom of the transformation model in order to span only those modes of variation that are common in a training set. This resulting transformation model is used to generate shape instances in an optimization procedure to find the optimal mapping. Again, the restriction of the degrees of freedom can be a disadvantage in finding an accurate mapping [9].The registration framework we propose consists of a B-spline deformation model that has many degrees of freedom, but with prior shape knowledge, in the form of an SSM, acting as a soft constraint during optimization. Compared with Albrecht et al. [7] the trained model is more compact and computationally attractive.To assess registration quality, we will evaluate segmentations obtained from atlas-based segmentation of cervical MR images. The images are acquired for external-beam radiation therapy for cervical cancer. In this treatment the target volume should receive a high dose, while the neighboring organs should receive a dose as low as possible. For the treatment planning of cervical cancer, manual segmentations are made for the clinical target volume, bladder, rectum, sigmoid and bowel in our medical center. In our study, the manual segmentations of the clinical target volume and bladder are used for atlas-based segmentation. In atlas-based segmentation, registration is used to find the topological relation between the target image and an atlas image. This topological relation is used to propagate the segmentations of the atlas to the target.Intra-patient registration of cervical images, using contrast-enhanced CT images [10] and MR images [11] has been reported, however inter-patient registration is not described in literature. The large and complex deformations due to differences in rectum and bladder fillings, the cervical position as well as sliding organ interfaces make these registrations a challenging task. Additionally, in our institute, the MR images for cervical cancer treatment are highly anisotropic with thick transversal slices.Our goal is to improve inter-patient registration with application to cervical images. Registration quality is measured in terms of segmentation overlap and surface distance.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Large and complex deformations form a great difficulty in free-form registration. In this paper we extend free-form registration by integrating prior knowledge obtained from boundary deformations of segmentations in set of atlas images. We demonstrate our approach by inter-patient registration of cervical images.Inter-patient registration of cervical images has to deal with a number of difficulties. The topology and appearance of structures differ substantially between two persons. There is a wide variation in bladder sizes and shapes, as well in size and orientation of the uterus. Also the differences in the amount of (visceral) fat and rectum and bowel fillings between patients, make these registrations a difficult task.To evaluate the proposed approach, we compare manual segmentations with the propagated segmentations by Dice similarity and Hausdorff distance. Registration experiments were performed on the bladder and the CTV (i.e. a combination of the uterus, the cervix, the parametria and the upper part of the vagina). We show that our proposed method significantly improves segmentations of both these structures in comparison with a conventional registration.