@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A performance evaluation of statistical tests for edge detection in textured images

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present an objective performance analysis of statistical edge detection.A controlled dataset of images and tests is given and fully analysed.We show how statistical tests can outperform traditional edge detection methods.We present recommendations for the tests, giving guidelines for their use.Non-parametric tests perform best overall, giving improvements over all tests.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Edge detection,Statistical tests,Textured images,Histological images,Performance measures,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This work presents an objective performance analysis of statistical tests for edge detection which are suitable for textured or cluttered images. The tests are subdivided into two-sample parametric and non-parametric tests and are applied using a dual-region based edge detector which analyses local image texture difference. Through a series of experimental tests objective results are presented across a comprehensive dataset of images using a Pixel Correspondence Metric (PCM). The results show that statistical tests can in many cases, outperform the Canny edge detection method giving robust edge detection, accurate edge localisation and improved edge connectivity throughout. A visual comparison of the tests is also presented using representative images taken from typical textured histological data sets. The results conclude that the non-parametric Chi Square (χ2) and Kolmogorov Smirnov (KS) statistical tests are the most robust edge detection tests where image statistical properties cannot be assumed a priori or where intensity changes in the image are nonuniform and that the parametric Difference of Boxes (DoB) test and the Student’s t-test are the most suitable for intensity based edges. Conclusions and recommendations are finally presented contrasting the tests and giving guidelines for their practical use while finally confirming which situations improved edge detection can be expected.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Over recent years the advances in quantitative systems for biomedical and microscopic imaging have resulted in many applications moving from the purely qualitative analysis of image information to fully (or semi) automated Computer Aided Diagnosis (CAD) and computer aided information extraction systems. One of the key processes underpinning the success of these is the accurate segmentation of constituent image components. This process is commonly, but not exclusively, based on gradient edge information, as in the work of He et al. [1], or the active contour methods of Elmoataz et al. [2] and Svoboda and Matula [3,4], and even the watershed techniques in the work of Beucher and Lantuèjoul [5] and Krishnan et al. [6]. The edge detection process generally applied prior to this segmentation is expected to return accurate detection and location of edges, good suppression of unwanted image texture, clutter or noise and finally continuous closed edge contours.A typical application for these edge based operations is in the segmentation of stained histological images, as discussed in the work of He et al. [1] and Adiga and Chaudhuri [7]. These images generally have poorly identifiable boundaries, excessive levels of unwanted texture and often a low level of contrast (noted by Todman and Claridge [8]). In these situations it becomes important for the edge detection method to preserve the key edge information, while filtering out the high frequency unwanted texture elements. However, often the edge itself is merely the delimiter between two regions identified by different textures with little discernible step in grey level. Then gradient methods of edge detection are often supported by complementary noise filtering to suppress unwanted texture but this can prove destructive on parts of the edge interface itself. Previous studies have shown how in these situations statistical based edge detection proves more accurate and by applying the edge detection in a single unique process removes the need for any smoothing or preprocessing filtering stage [9–15].Although a number of studies have detailed the development, success and failures of different edge detection methods, notably the work of Papari and Petkov [16], there has been no presented studies covering a full objective analysis of a wide range of statistical edge detection methods, therefore the literature lacks full quantitative analysis of the accuracy of these methods. Consequently it is difficult to ascertain from the literature which edge detection technique to apply in any particular situation and where any potential improvement in accuracy may be seen. Accordingly this work aims to present an objective set of comparison tests which contrast the performance of several statistical approaches for edge detection on various textured image sets. Comparisons are presented throughout against the traditional Canny gradient edge detection method [17], which is seen as the standard edge detection technique for many applications.The statistical tests under analysis are all applied within a dual region window based edge detection filter which through the application of angle oriented pixel masks, evaluates the texture of the image to determine the edge location, strength and direction. Seven common statistical tests are applied within this technique, however many more can be applied in future studies. The tests presented represent a range of both parametric and non-parametric tests namely, the Difference of Boxes test, the Student’s t-test, the Fisher test, the Likelihood test, the Mann–Whitney test, the Kolmogorov Smirnov test and the Chi Square test. A quantitative analysis of all these tests is novel to this work and an objective performance metric determines the success of each against a pre-defined ideal ground truth edge image.To illustrate the potential improvement offered from this work images are also analysed from two typical stained histological image sets (a selection is shown in Fig. 1) and are courtesy of the Mouse Atlas and Gene Expression project [18] and the Histology Image Dataset (histologyDS) [19], both used here under the creative commons attribution license. These images represent a range of typical texture interfaces found within histological datasets and medical tissue datasets and are used as an illustration of the common problems apparent to automated segmentation. We discuss the success and failures of edge detection (both traditional and statistical) on these sample images and aim to illustrate where improved segmentation can be offered to other heavily textured datasets.This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 will review the historical developments within statistical based edge detection paying particular attention to any developments for textured and cluttered images. Section 3 will detail the implementation and the method of statistical edge detection used within this work. Section 4 then presents a full quantitative analysis of the statistical tests, detailing the experimental methodology and controls applied (sub-Section 4.1) and the objective performance measure used (sub-Section 4.2). Finally Section 5 concludes the findings from this work, presenting a list of successes and failures for the various statistical tests (Table 6) showing the overall success of each with regards to accuracy, suppression of unwanted image texture and improved connectivity of the edge detection results.Traditional edge detection methods commonly apply a first derivative computation of the image edge to assess any change in intensity profile of neighbouring pixels. Therefore a strong intensity change corresponds to accurate edge information and yields good results. Edges within histological images like the Edinburgh Mouse Atlas (MA) set or the HistologyDS set (Fig. 1) [18,19], exist between regions of differing pixel texture and low levels of intensity difference. Any differences in texture can therefore be analysed based on the statistical properties of the texture alone. The work of Davis [9] first introduced the notion of image texture analysis, confirming the noted limitations of first order derivative methods in texture analysis and indicating the potential value of region based statistical operations for texture discrimination problems. The work of de Souza [10] complements this idea by introducing the concept of statistical parametric and non-parametric region based texture analysis methods for images. These were applied for the detection of edges, particularly rib structures, in noisy X-ray imagery and the work contrasts the Student’s t-test (t-test), the Fisher test (F Test), the Chi Square test (χ2), the Likelihood ratio test, and the Tau (τ) test. Although lacking a full objective analysis of the success of the individual methods de Souza’s work clearly demonstrates their suitability for edge detection and indicated the direction for future studies. Non-parametric statistical tests are also applied for successful edge detection in the work of Bovik et al. [11]. Here the authors detail the successful use of two non-parametric ranking statistical edge detectors, namely the Wilcoxon and Median tests, and although largely theoretical and lacking a comprehensive objective analysis does clearly illustrate how these non-parametric statistical tests outperform many common parametric statistical tests on noise free and noisy sample images. Additional work by Bovik and Munsonn [20] enhanced this study, showing statistical edge detection using the local region average values in pixel texture and leading to the development of the first Ratio of Averages (RoA) edge detection method. This technique is shown to be suitable for overcoming high levels of image speckle noise and again improving over the traditional methods. Brooks and Bovik [21] also showed how when measured objectively against an ideal response, this RoA edge detector produced inconsistencies related to the localisation of edges which is often undesired. To overcome this the authors developed and compared two further statistical edge detection methods, namely the Ratio of Order Statistics detector (RoS) and the Ratio of Blues detector (RoB) [21], both of these detectors, when objectively assessed outperformed the original RoA detector both on edge localisation and noise suppression.Similar non-parametric statistical tests are also evaluated in the work of Beauchemin et al. [12], namely the Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney test (WMW). The authors work details two significant contributions to the field of region based statistical edge detection, namely how non-parametric tests are effective at overcoming a low image signal to noise ratio and also how their statistical significance is independent of the pixel texture distribution and therefore gives a tolerance against extreme observations. This work does note one significant shortcoming in non-parametric statistical tests, namely how a loss in the output efficiency is common because only the rank of the pixel distributions is used in the test.Parametric local region statistics have also been commonly applied within edge detection to effectively detect textured interfaces, most notably within the work of Guest [13] and Fesharaki and Hellestrand [22]. Guest [13] applied two common parametric statistical tests, namely the Student’s t-test and the Fisher test and showed using a subjective analysis how both tests can succeed where the Canny method fails, whereas Fesharaki and Hellestrand [22] used a similar technique alongside the Student’s t-test to offer improvements in both noise-free and noise-corrupted images. Similar non-linear region methods of edge detection are used within the work of Cafforio et al. [14] who uses a simple isotropic dual circular window for the statistical analysis to provide robust edge detection and additionally in the work of Sciascio [23] illustrating how this technique gives a comparable response to the Canny filter, albeit measured subjectively. Work by Lim and Jan [24,25] further confirms the previous work of Guest [13] and Fesharaki and Hellestrand [22] by showing how the Student’s t-test outperforms the Canny method on images corrupted with added noise. Lim and Jan [24][25] also show how this parametric t-test can be outperformed by the non-parametric Kolmogorov Smirnov (KS) test on images where the noise is of high levels, again illustrating where non-parametric tests offer an improvement. These statistical methods, while removing the need for the smoothing parameters evident in Canny and other gradient based techniques therefore negating the location problems, perform statistical confidence checks using probability values and look-up tables. Work by Bowring et al. [26] has since described the possibility of producing segmentation superior to both the Canny filter, and SUSAN filter [27] using parametric statistical methods, without the need for this confidence check. This method was further adapted by Fan et al. [28] who incorporated an Artificial Neural Network (ANN) to be a fuzzy classifier for the strength of the edge found by the statistical tests. Further confirmation of statistical methods in edge detection giving improved robustness to image noise have since been demonstrated by Ponomarenko et al. [29], Peng et al. [30] and Haldar et al. [15] who all demonstrated how statistical edge detection outperforms traditional gradient methods given images with high levels of noise and Fu et al. [31] who through statistical difference measures overcame the inherent speckle noise problems in synthetic aperture radar images.Throughout the literature performance comparisons of these statistical edge detection methods is generally confined to subjective testing and often for a limited specific set of images. A few key studies have sought to assess the improvements objectively, notably Kundu [32] who analysed a novel three phase statistical edge detector using Pratt’s Figure of merit [33] and Hou and Koh [34] who have applied the Pratt comparison measure to detail the improvement from robust statistics over derivative methods corrupted with high levels of impulsive noise. Although this work is not an exhaustive objective analysis of a range of statistical methods, the initial results show how an objective analysis can be used to indicate the measured improvements from a particular statistical technique. Where objective studies have shown an under performance of statistical techniques, namely in the work of Setayesh et al. [35] who shows a robust rank order non-parametric test being outperformed, the failures can be attributed to comparisons being made with incomplete processing. The authors in their work note that a Robust Rank Order statistical edge detection filter has no post-processing applied and therefore the objective comparison with the Canny filter (including Non-Maximal Suppression and Hysteresis thresholding) can be questioned.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we present an analysis of statistical methods for edge detection which are particularly suited to textured edge interfaces or for edges where an intensity change cannot be guaranteed. The tests presented in this work represent common two-sample parametric and non-parametric statistical tests and are applied within a dual-region edge detection technique. Each test is assessed by applying the objective Pixel Correspondence Metric (PCM) within controlled experimental tests using a range of synthetic interface images which represent different texture interfaces against a pre-defined ideal ground truth. Comparisons are then drawn against the Canny method and visual results are contrasted for real histological data. Recommendations for the use of the statistical tests are discussed throughout the results and are summarised in Table 6.Overall the non-parametric Chi Square (χ2) and Kolmogorov Smirnov (KS) tests offer the most general method for edge detection and the results presented in this work confirm how these methods of edge detection are the most successful where the statistical nature of the edge cannot be assumed a priori. Therefore in situations where both mean and variance changes cannot be guaranteed both of these non-parametric tests would be suitable edge detection methods. The results further confirm how the non-parametric tests act as edge normalisation filters, therefore giving a comparable output response to all strengths of edges. This makes them suitable for detecting faint, or difficult to detect low intensity edges where other techniques fail while also removing the need to threshold the output results at a subjectively defined level. This was confirmed further when applying the tests to a sample set of histological images taken from two typical datasets. This shows how the statistical methods give improved edge segmentation and generally gives a greater response to the textured interfaces, allowing continuous accurate edge detection with improved suppression of any unwanted inner texture detail where the Canny method fails. This was most notable in detecting continuous edge interfaces when both faint edges are required alongside heavily textured edges. The experimental results presented within this work therefore show the suitability of statistical parametric and non-parametric techniques for the suppression of unwanted image texture or clutter while giving continuous edges in complex images.