@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
AVCD-FRA: A novel solution to automatic video cut detection using fuzzy-rule-based approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We suggest a fuzzy rule-based scene cut identification approach.We incorporate spatial and temporal features to describe video frames.The proposed method is automatic and no threshold or other parameter is used.Generally, the proposed method is able to deal with camera flashlights.Our method is more robust to object and camera movements and illumination changes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Video content analysis,Video cut detection,Abrupt shot boundary detection,Hard cut detection,Fuzzy color histogram,Fuzzy-rule-base,Fuzzy logic,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Video shot boundary detection (SBD) is a fundamental step in automatic video content analysis toward video indexing, summarization and retrieval. Despite the beneficial previous works in the literature, reliable detection of video shots is still a challenging issue with many unsolved problems. In this paper, we focus on the problem of hard cut detection and propose an automatic algorithm in order to accurately determine abrupt transitions from video. We suggest a fuzzy rule-based scene cut identification approach in which a set of fuzzy rules are evaluated to detect cuts. The main advantage of the proposed method is that, we incorporate spatial and temporal features to describe video frames, and model cut situations according to temporal dependency of video frames as a set of fuzzy rules. Also, while existing cut detection algorithms are mainly threshold dependent; our method identifies cut transitions using a fuzzy logic which is more flexible. The proposed algorithm is evaluated on a variety of video sequences from different genres. Experimental results, in comparison with the most standard cut detection algorithms confirm our method is more robust to object and camera movements as well as illumination changes.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Due to the expansion of the internet along with the rapid growth in multimedia technology and availability of digital storage devices with large capacity, vast video digital libraries are developed every day. Consequently, there exists a strong demand for techniques providing instant access and efficient indexing, browsing and retrieval of video data from these huge digital databases. The challenge of automatic processing of video data motivates researchers to advise efficient methodologies that organize video data and extract semantically meaningful information [1]. Segmenting video into elementary semantic units is a fundamental step in automatic video content analysis which is known as video shot boundary detection.A video shot is a sequence of frames taken by one camera during a single continues action in time and space [1,2]. The transition between shots is categorized into two types: cut and gradual transition. The cut transition is an abrupt change between two successive shots in which, the last frame of disappearing shot and the first frame of appearing shot are connected to each other immediately. Instead, in gradual transition (GT), two shots are connected to each other during a few frames using various editing effects.Both cut and gradual shot transition detection is not a new task in automatic video content analysis and so far has been conducted great researches on this topic. Despite the recent advances, SBD on large scale video data is still a very difficult task [2]. In this paper, we focus on abrupt shot boundary detection from video sequences of different genres. Developing a cut detection algorithm that can efficiently identify cut transitions between adjacent shots which contain similar visual contents, and simultaneously is less sensitive to different types of content variations within a shot such as illumination changes and camera/object movements, is a challenging issue. Also, a useful cut detection algorithm should be able to perform well on videos from any genre.It seems unattainable to establish a method which satisfies the above requirements concurrently. However, it is very beneficial to take into account a trade-off between the ability of detecting transition between similar shots and insensitivity to content variations within a shot. Towards this goal, we suggest a method which utilizes a fuzzy approach in order to detect cut transitions and intends to overcome the mentioned challenges in a unified approach, without any post processing step. The performance of the proposed cut detection algorithm is assessed on several challenging videos from different publicly available datasets. The obtained results, in contrast with the most standard shot detection algorithms, illustrate that our new method is more capable of accurately detecting cut transitions.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a survey of some previous related works in the literature. Section 3 discusses some existing problems and our solutions toward solving them. In Section 4, the proposed method is introduced and its elements are studied in details. Experimental results are discussed in Section 5 and Section 6 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
