@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Switch on to games: Can digital games aid post-work recovery?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Hours spent playing videogames are positively correlated with overall recovery.Highly immersive games are particularly highly correlated with overall recovery.Online social support enhances the relationship between video game use and recovery.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Recovery from work,Digital games,Wellbeing,Work-related stress,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Recovery is a necessary factor in avoiding work-related strain and in feeling prepared for the next day of work. In order for recovery to be successful, an individual must experience psychological detachment from work, relaxation, mastery experiences and a sense of control, all of which have been argued to be assisted by digital game use. However, it is unclear whether these associations will be greater for certain digital game genres, or whether this would extend to other recovery-related outcomes, for instance work home interference (WHI), where the stress from work interferes with home-life. These factors may be vital in determining whether interventions aimed at improving recovery using digital games would be effective, and what form these should take. The present research surveyed 491 participants and found that the total number of hours spent playing digital games per week was positively correlated with overall recovery. Correlations varied with genre, highlighting the importance of game characteristics in this relationship: first person shooters and action games were most highly correlated with recovery. Moreover, digital game use was not related to a reduction in work–home interference. When restricting the analysis to gamers who report to have developed online relationships, online social support mediated the relationship between digital game use and recovery. Results are discussed in terms of how digital games may be utilised to improve recovery and reduce work-related stress.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The rise in mobile technologies has facilitated tele-working which in turn has enabled people to combine work with other commitments. This has had both financial and personal benefits for individuals by enabling those who may otherwise have been excluded to contribute to the workforce. For instance, the increased flexibility provided by the ability to work from anywhere, at any time, has allowed many to work around other responsibilities such as childcare, to work despite health complaints or to avoid lengthy and expensive commutes.However, the negative impacts of the resulting always-on culture are well documented. For example, Stawarz et al. (2013) looked at tablet use and argued that these devices tend to encourage people to engage in work activities even when they had planned to undertake a leisure activity. Such activities can have negative consequences because, even for those who enjoy their employment, recovery is a necessary factor in avoiding work-related strain and in feeling prepared for the next day of work. In order for recovery to be successful, an individual must experience psychological detachment from work, relaxation, mastery experiences and a sense of control (Sonnentag and Fritz, 2006).Research suggests active pastimes involving some mental engagement are better as distractions from work stresses than passive ones (Sonnentag and Fritz, 2007). While it is clear that a large number of activities may therefore be suitable for this purpose, many of these require substantial time to be completed, preventing them from being possible for those who may be most at risk of suffering the consequences of insufficient recovery. For instance, sport and exercise have been highlighted to be especially useful in promoting recovery (Sonnentag, 2001), although for some, taking time out of an evening to pursue a sport regularly may simply not be feasible due to time or location constraints. It is therefore important to identify possible other methods of recovery promotion that can be performed easily and that can be integrated into existing schedules.As one of the possible factors in declining post-work recovery is the introduction of mobile technologies (Derks et al., 2012), we were interested in whether the devices that can impede this process may also be key to reversing this. Digital games of all kinds are now available on a number of different devices, from smartphones, to tablets, to laptops. One widely held description of digital games is that constructed by Juul (2005), namely that they contain formal rules, have variable and quantifiable outcomes (with different outcomes associated with different values), involve players directly influencing the outcomes, to which the player feels attached and have consequences that are negotiable and optional. This makes digital games ideal candidates for promoting recovery.Previous research has shown that playing digital games contribute to all four aspects of recovery (Reinecke, 2009a, 2009b), and Reinecke hypothesises this may be due to the online social support now provided by many digital games. However this has not been directly investigated, nor has it been established whether this enhanced recovery also results in improvements in related factors, such as a reduction in work–home interference.We report the results of a questionnaire study that surveyed a total of 491 people. Our findings showed that the total number of hours spent playing digital games per week was positively correlated with overall recovery. Analysis of the subscales indicated that this relationship could be attributed to increased relaxation and psychological detachment experienced by those who spent a higher number of hours playing. We also demonstrate that for gamers who report to have developed online relationships, online social support enhanced the beneficial relationship between digital game use and recovery. Results are discussed in terms of how digital games may be utilised to improve recovery and reduce work-related stress.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In conclusion, digital games were found to correlate with some aspects of recovery but did not appear to have an impact on overall recovery outcomes. Although no correlations were found between digital game use and WHI, as this is the first study exploring this, more research is needed to ascertain whether this is the case when using alternative measures or samples, as well as further investigating the relationships with HWI and how these could be harnessed for beneficial occupational outcomes. These results also highlight the importance of breaking digital game use into specific genres, and demonstrates that future research should continue to do this and explore individual game characteristics that could be exploited to make recovery more efficient.