@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Adaptive stereo similarity fusion using confidence measures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose similarity fusion strategy based on stereo confidences.We propose a consensus strategy to exploit spatial correlation between pixels.Our fusion increases the accuracy of global and local stereo algorithms.We out-perform other fusion strategies.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Stereo confidence measures,Stereo similarity measure fusion,Stereo matching,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In most stereo-matching algorithms, stereo similarity measures are used to determine which image patches in a left–right image pair correspond to each other. Different similarity measures may behave very differently on different kinds of image structures, for instance, some may be more robust to noise whilst others are more susceptible to small texture variations. As a result, it may be beneficial to use different similarity measures in different image regions. We present an adaptive stereo similarity measure that achieves this via a weighted combination of measures, in which the weights depend on the local image structure. Specifically, the weights are defined as a function of a confidence measure on the stereo similarities: similarity measures with a higher confidence at a particular image location are given higher weight. We evaluate the performance of our adaptive stereo similarity measure in both local and global stereo algorithms on standard benchmarks such as the Middlebury and KITTI data sets. The results of our experiments demonstrate the potential merits of our adaptive stereo similarity measure.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The objective of stereo matching is to estimate the depth of a scene based on two rectified images that are obtained from two cameras. The resulting depth image can be used in algorithms for problems such as 3D reconstruction [1] and virtual view rendering [2].Stereo matching has been extensively researched over the past decades [3]. There are two types of stereo algorithms: sparse and dense algorithms. Sparse algorithms employ feature-based methods that match key-point locations. The resulting depth map is sparse since there are locations without depth estimation [4,5]. In contrast, dense stereo algorithms produce depth estimations at every pixel in an image using pixel-wise matching between stereo views. Dense stereo matching algorithms can be further grouped into two classes, namely, global and local stereo matching. Global stereo matching algorithms make global smoothness assumptions on the disparity image; this generally leads to high-quality depth estimates but it is computationally expensive [6–8]. By contrast, local stereo matching algorithms do not employ such smoothness constraints; as a result, they are computationally cheap but provide disparity estimates of lower quality [37,38].Stereo algorithms estimate the disparity of a scene by matching pixels/patches between the two rectified images. In general, they are composed of four steps: (1) cost initialization, (2) cost aggregation, (3) disparity selection, and (4) disparity refinement [3]. The first step is cost initialization, which is performed by matching pixels of the two rectified images. The resulting cost space is called the initial disparity space image (DSI). In the matching, a variety of different similarity measures can be used, each of which may have different characteristics. In the second step, cost aggregation is applied on the initial DSI to filter out noisy matches that may have arisen in the first step. In order to select a disparity for each pixel, most of the algorithms use a winner-take-all approach as the third step. In the winner-take-all approach, the disparity that has the lowest matching cost at a particular image location is selected as the disparity for that location. The fourth (optional) step aims to refine the resulting disparity map by filtering out wrong matches using global smoothness assumptions.An important step in both global and local stereo matching algorithms is the cost initialization. In both types of algorithms, it is essential to obtain high-quality initial DSIs in order to obtain good disparity maps [10–12]. Since stereo similarity measures may perform differently depending on texture and noise variations, the quality of the initial DSI may be improved by using different stereo similarity measures for different parts of the image. One way in which this can be achieved is by fusing similarities adaptively based on their performance on different regions of the image. (Note that adaptive fusion is very different than the non-adaptive fusion scheme of [10,11,13].) In this paper, we propose a new algorithm that fuses similarity measures adaptively based on their performance on different image regions. Figs. 1 and 2show two examples of the output of our algorithm, which illustrate that adaptive fusion of two similarities may enhance the accuracy of final disparity estimations substantially.The main contribution of this paper is a new algorithm for adaptive fusion of stereo similarity measures. Our adaptive fusion strategy can fuse any number of stereo similarity measures without introducing any similarity measure-dependent parameters. Our fusion algorithm operated by evaluating the local performance of each similarity measure at each image location using stereo confidence measures [15,14,16–18]. The resulting confidence measures are used to determine the weight of each of the stereo similarity measures: more confident similarity measures are assigned a higher weight in the final ensemble. The fusion and confidence estimation are performed on the initial DSI, which contains the pixel-wise matching scores. To exploit spatial correlations and increase the robustness of our fusion algorithm, we use a local consensus between neighboring pixels when computing the weights. Each neighboring pixel votes for the disparity of the center pixel proportional to its confidence. The disparity that has the highest consensus for the center pixel is chosen as the disparity of the center pixel. The DSIs of the similarities that support the consensus disparity are adaptively aggregated based on their confidences in order to obtain the final fused initial cost measures.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we review existing literature that relates to similarity measures and similarity measure fusion. In Section 3, we present our novel adaptive fusion strategy. The experimental results are presented in Section 4. We discuss our results and possible directions for future work in Section 5, and draw conclusions in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
