@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Tracking multiple interacting targets in a camera network

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a tracker for multiple interacting targets in a camera network.A model is developed to decide the group state of each trajectory.The tracking problem is converted to a network flow problem.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi-camera tracking,Multi-target tracking,Interacting targets,Wide-area camera network,Network flow,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper we propose a framework for tracking multiple interacting targets in a wide-area camera network consisting of both overlapping and non-overlapping cameras. Our method is motivated from observations that both individuals and groups of targets interact with each other in natural scenes. We associate each raw target trajectory (i.e., a tracklet) with a group state, which indicates if the trajectory belongs to an individual or a group. Structural Support Vector Machine (SSVM) is applied to the group states to decide if merge or split events occur in the scene. Information fusion between multiple overlapping cameras is handled using a homography-based voting scheme. The problem of tracking multiple interacting targets is then converted to a network flow problem, for which the solution can be obtained by the K-shortest paths algorithm. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm on the challenging VideoWeb dataset in which a large amount of multi-person interaction activities are present. Comparative analysis with state-of-the-art methods is also shown.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Multi-target tracking in a camera network, although attractive to researchers for a long time [1,2], still remains challenging. In particular, large illumination variations across cameras, cluttered scenarios and a camera network with both overlapping and non-overlapping views pose impediments to traditional tracking algorithms. Moreover, multiple cameras require computing associations between detected targets in different views, which can also be a challenging task. In this paper, we propose a novel camera network tracking scheme, called Switching Network Tracker (SNT), for tracking of multiple interacting targets in a cluttered camera network scene with both overlapping and non-overlapping views.Our scheme is motivated by natural scenes as shown in Fig. 1, where people interact with each other in a camera network. We see that people often congregate together in a way where it may be difficult to individually detect them, and these congregations might split either within the view of an individual camera, or in the blind areas between non-overlapping cameras. When an individual target cannot be detected, we can still get an estimate of the target’s state by tracking the group into which it merged. Therefore, it is necessary to design a tracking scheme for camera networks, which integrates group tracking and individual tracking, and switches smoothly between the two to generate robust individual tracks.Besides, a wide-area camera network usually consists of both overlapping and non-overlapping views. In order for a tracking scheme to obtain long and stable tracks for every target within and across cameras, both overlapping and non-overlapping views should be addressed. For overlapping views, cooperation among cameras is necessary to improve the system performance. For non-overlapping views, different illumination conditions and the unknown behaviors in blind area between cameras should be taken into consideration in order to obtain a stable tracking system.There are a few works which systematically address the problem of multi-target tracking in camera networks with both overlapping and non-overlapping views. The papers [3,4] extended the recent multi-target tracking framework in [5,6] to a non-overlapping camera network application. Detections of a person are associated to form a short but robust track, the so called tracklet, for this person. However, the problem of tracking targets in a cluttered scene with a large number of interacting activities has not been addressed in these works. The works in [7,8] addressed the tracking problem in overlapping views with a similar tracklet association scheme, but clutter due to people grouping together was not addressed.The proposed SNT is designed to handle a cluttered scene with multiple interacting targets. Specifically, the SNT can track individuals and groups simultaneously in a camera network. Individuals are tracked in uncluttered scenes where single targets can be clearly detected, whereas the groups are tracked for cluttered environment where individual target detection is inaccurate or infeasible with state-of-the-art detectors. We assign each detected region with a group state to define if the region is associated with a group or an individual. In order to identify a group state of a detected region, a Structural Support Vector Machine (SSVM) model is constructed, upon local features of each target and the relationships between targets, to determine the merging and splitting events occurring in the scene. In the operational phase of the system, detections that can be associated with high confidence lead to the formation of tracklets. Each tracklet is assigned with a group state by the learned SSVM based on all associated observations from cameras with overlapping views. Then, a homography based target state estimation methodology is applied to fuse tracklets in overlapping views. With the consistent tracking results on overlapping views, the problem of tracking multiple interacting targets in a camera network is formulated as a network flow problem. We show that such a problem can be converted to a mixed integer programming problem and the K-shortest paths algorithm [9,10] is used to obtain the optimal solution.In the experiments, we work on the VideoWeb dataset [11], which is a publicly available camera network dataset with both overlapping and non-overlapping camera views. To the best of our knowledge, we deal with a far more complex multi-camera scenario than previous works that have looked into this problem [3,4,7,12], in terms of the number of cameras, targets, their actions, and camera fields of view. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our tracking algorithm with thorough test results.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
