@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Accurate eye localization in the Short Waved Infrared Spectrum through summation range filters

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Geometric normalization is critical to most face recognition (FR) algorithms and is usually based off eye locations.Our proposed approach quickly and accurately determines the pupil locations across the SWIR band.Pupils are found using normalized correlation coefficients and summation range filters.It is robust to image degradations such as blur, image downsizing and image compression.The eye locations obtained from the proposed algorithm out perform other tested algorithms in both eye detection and FR results.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Eye detection,Face detection,Short Waved Infrared face images,Face recognition,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The majority of facial recognition systems depend on the correct location of both the left and right eye centers in an effort to geometrically normalize face images. We propose a novel eye detection algorithm that efficiently locates the eye centers in five different bands of the SWIR spectrum, ranging from 1150 nm up to 1550 nm in increments of 100 nm. Our eye detection methodology utilizes a combination of algorithmic steps, including 2D normalized correlation coefficients as well as summation range filters to effectively find the eyes in the aforementioned SWIR wavelengths. We validate our method by comparing our approach with currently available eye detection algorithms including a commercial face recognition software in which one of its capabilities is the extraction of the eye locations and a state of the art academic approach. Eye detection results as well as face recognition studies show that our proposed approach outperforms all other approaches, including the state of the art (originally designed to work in the visible band), when operating in the SWIR spectrum. We also show that our approach is robust to typical image degradation factors including spatial resolution changes, image compression, and image blurring. This is an important achievement that has also practical value for biometric operators. It is impractical to manually annotate thousands to millions of eye centers, therefore, a quick and robust method for automatically determining the eye center locations is needed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The past decade has seen significant progress in the field of automated face recognition as is borne out by results of the 2010 Multiple-Biometric Evaluation (MBE) organized by NIST [1]. For example, at a false match rate (FMR) of 0.001%, the false-nonmatch rate (FNMR) of the best performing face recognition (FR) system has decreased from 79% in 1993 to 0.003% in 2010. However, the problem of matching facial images remains to be a challenge when it is required to deal with diverse scenarios. Typical cases include the usage of different sensors to capture face images (e.g. 2D, 3D [13], visible, IR [16]), large datasets, as well as variations in pose, illumination and expression. However, there are inherent problems that come along with face recognition in the visible band. The varying levels and nature of illumination is among visible FR’s most insidious problems. Recent FR trends are pointing to interest in higher spectra, i.e. Short Waved Infrared (SWIR) [2,26], Mid-Waved Infrared (MWIR) [3,4] and Long-Waved Infrared (LWIR) [6]. With the prices of these camera sensors decreasing rapidly, the practical benefit of using different spectra for automatic FR is increasing. The potential to create more challenging (larger scale, different sensors) databases is becoming more of a reality for testing and developing face recognition algorithms with hopes of accurately matching visible gallery images to SWIR, MWIR, or LWIR probe images (namely the heterogeneous problem in FR, also known as cross-spectral matching).In this paper, the focus of our work is in various wavelengths of the SWIR band. The SWIR spectrum has several advantages over other bands. It allows for covert capture in nighttime environments due to the fact that the illumination source cannot be seen (considering that its wavelengths are well above the visible spectrum). Also, certain pairs of sunglasses do not reflect SWIR wavelengths as they do visible light, allowing for both eyes to be seen unobtrusively. Because of the higher wavelength in the SWIR band, it becomes more tolerant to low level obscurants. This allows for imaging of scenes or faces through certain environmental conditions such as fog, smoke, etc. Finally, because facial features that are not observed in the visible spectra can be observable in the SWIR band, these two bands can be combined to generate a more complete image of the human face. This can allow for more facial features to be revealed and exploited and, as a result, FR performance can improve.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we have proposed a novel unified eye detection method that can operate in multiple bands (i.e. 1150 nm to 1550 nm) using normalized correlation coefficients and summation range filters. After determining the location of the face, the eye regions are empirically found and summation range filters are used to accurately determine the center of the eye. The use of these simple filters yields low computational time (for 1350 images,μ=75.7ms/imageandstd=7.1ms/imageusing MATLAB R2012b) while allowing for robustness to multiple forms of image degradations, all while still achieving high face recognition rates.An extensive evaluation of the proposed method was performed, testing it for accurate eye locations across multiple SWIR bands and for robustness to scale, image compression, and image blurring. The comparison with the commercial and academic algorithms and the state of the art suggests that under the general assumptions (i.e. the location of the face is known), our eye detection is able to achieve higher accuracy and can be successfully applied to multiple SWIR bands. With e ≤ 0.9, our method outperforms every other method. Also, using the locations found through our method obtained higher face recognition results than almost all other methods across the spectra when geometrically normalizing the face. Given the reported accuracy of the overall system, we believe that the proposed method provides a reliable way to not only localize the face region in SWIR images, but to accurately determine the correct location of the eyes.As with any system, our approach has drawbacks that can cause failed eye localization. If a person is wearing eye glasses with a large reflection from the illuminating source, this can cause an uncharacteristically high value within the summation range filter, causing the system to believe the eye location is somewhere on the rim of the glasses. In our experiments, however, only 1 subject (or 10 samples per wavelength) was wearing eye glasses. Another drawback of our system is dealing with uncooperative subjects who heavily squint or have their eyes totally closed. This causes very low range amounts in the range map. Consequently, our approach has a tendency to believe that the eye corners or the eye brows is the correct location. In our system, this subsample equates to ∼4% of the database.We have many plans for future work. First, collecting more data in order to build a larger, more diverse database would allow for further validation of our approach. Secondly, collecting data and performing automatic eye detection and face recognition on long range SWIR images (up to 1 km away) at night would show the operational potential that this approach has. Finally, because of the challenges that higher wavelengths have (i.e. no iris/pupil data, low contrast, different face features, etc.), altering the approach to work in both MWIR and LWIR face images will be studied to show that this approach works not only in SWIR but across multiple spectra.