@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Slice representation of range data for head pose estimation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a new slice representation model of range data for head pose estimation.We design two slice feature descriptors, namely LSD and LSO.Slice depth integral image is designed for real-time LSD features extraction.Slice coordinates integral image is designed for real-time LSO features extraction.An automatic head pose estimation system is presented using a Kinect sensor.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Head pose estimation,Slice representation,Random forests,Range data,Kinect,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Visual estimation of head pose is desirable for computer vision applications such as face recognition, human computer interaction, and affective computing. However, accurate estimation of head pose in uncontrolled environment is still a grand challenge. This paper proposes a novel feature representation model for accurate pose estimation. In this model, a range image is divided into a set of simple slices that contain abundant geometric cues can be used to accurately describe the poses of a subject. This model provides a general framework for designing new features for head pose estimation. According to this model, design of a new feature model for describing a slice, then a new set of features is generated by combining all slices for describing range images. Due to the huge number of slices that can be generated from single range image, even a simple description model of slice can achieve robust performance. With the guide of this model, two novel range image representation models, which are Local Slice Depth (LSD) and Local Slice Orientation (LSO), are designed. LSD can be used for coarse estimation of head poses, while LSO can achieve accurate results. Moreover, in order to evaluate the performance of proposed representation model, an automatic head pose estimation method is implemented using a Kinect sensor. Firstly both color and range images captured by a Kinect sensor are used to localize and segment the facial region from background. Secondly, two novel integral images, namely slice depth integral image and slice coordinates integral image, are proposed to achieve real-time feature extraction. Finally, random forests are used to learn a stable relationship between slice feature descriptors and head pose parameters. Experiments on both low-quality depth data set Biwi and high-quality depth data set ETH demonstrate state-of-the-art performance of our method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Vision based head pose estimation refers to establish a transformation from image data to high-level head pose parameters [1]. Due to the important role of the head playing in human’s life, automatic estimation of head pose is essential for many applications such as face recognition [2], driver-attentiveness monitoring [3] and human–computer interaction [4]. Driven by its wide applications, head pose estimation has drawn great attention from academia, and a variety of techniques have been reported in the literature. However, accurate and efficient estimation of head pose is still a grand challenge in computer vision. It is difficult to establish a stable relationship between the complex and variable face patterns and head poses because of both internal factors such as expression variations and environmental variations such as illumination changes.There are mainly two types of data used for head pose estimation, which are RGB image and range image. In the past, most head pose estimation methods in the literature are based on RGB images [1] because of the wide availability of cheap RGB image sensors. Recently, with the availability of affordable range cameras such as Kinect sensor and AUSU Xtion, range data based head pose estimation methods are emerged [5–11]. Comparing with RGB image based methods, range image based methods mainly own three advantages.•Firstly, range data is a 3D physical representation of face pattern, which has directly geometric relation to head pose. So it is expected to establish a more stable relationship between range data and head pose. However, estimation of 3D head pose from RGB images is an ill-posed problem. So it is a much more challenging problem to precisely model the relationship between RGB face images and head poses. Therefore a large portion of RGB image based head pose estimation methods can only provide coarsely quantized pose angles for yaw or pitch, e.g. a number of discrete quantities such as −30°, 0°, 30°, rather than a precise and continuous description of all three pose angle parameters.Secondly, it is easier to segment the region of interest and localize the position of head area from range images.Thirdly, range images are illumination invariant but RGB image based head pose estimation methods are sensitive to environmental illumination changes.In practice, range image based method has achieved great success. Breitenstein et al. [12] developed the first real-time head pose estimation system based on high quality depth sensor and GPU computer, which is robustness against large pose changes, facial variations and partial occlusions. Fanelli et al. [5,7,8] used random forests to learn the mapping function from local depth information to head pose parameters. Fanelli’s methods achieve real time performance without relying on any specific facial features and can handle large pose changes and partial occlusions. Padeleris et al. [11] presented an accurate head pose estimation method by constructing a personalized 3D face model based on range images.Although great progress has been achieved in range data based head pose estimation, state-of-the art methods ignored the importance of feature representation and used original range data or simple and low level features of range images for head pose estimation [5,7,8,11,12]. We argue that well developed high-level feature descriptors can improve the performance of head pose estimation. Firstly, there does not exist an explicit relationship between facial range data and head pose parameters. Thus discriminant feature set is necessary to better model the head pose. Secondly, estimation of head pose with original range data is sensitive to noise and robust feature set is needed. Thirdly, detailed description of depth information is better than holistic representation. Local features achieve much better performance in computer vision. Thus local features of range data are desirable for head pose estimation. Fourthly, compact feature representation is more efficient in storage, transmission and feature matching.The objective of this paper is to propose an effective feature representation of range data for head pose estimation. Our early work has been presented in [6,9]. In this paper, we attempt to demonstrate the importance of feature representation for head pose estimation and inspire new and advanced range feature representations. A novel slice representation model is proposed. The basic idea of our model is to segment range data along depth axis to get a number of 3D slice sequences and then local depth and orientation features are derived on the patches of each slice. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time applying slice technique on range image. Such a slice representation can encode the local geometric features of range data which are useful for head pose estimation.In summary, the main contributions of this paper are threefold. Firstly, a novel slice representation model of range data is proposed to improve the performance of head pose estimation. This model provides a general framework for developing new features of range images. Secondly, two slice feature descriptors, namely Local Slice Depth (LSD) and Local Slice Orientation (LSO) are developed to achieve robust head pose estimation. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to use high-level and detailed range feature representation for head pose estimation. Our work will inspire more ideas on local feature description of range data. Thirdly, a complete system for automatic head pose estimation is presented based on the proposed slice representation using a Kinect sensor. In this system, a simple preprocessing method is developed for localizing and segmenting the region of interest for head pose estimation by utilizing both color and range images captured by a Kinect sensor. And two novel integral images, namely slice depth integral image and slice coordinates integral image, are designed for real-time feature extraction.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the advances of head pose estimation methods are reviewed. In Section 3, slice pattern representation of range data is proposed, and two sets of slice based features, which are local slice depth and local slice orientation, are presented. Section 4 introduces how slice pattern representation is used to perform head pose estimation using a Kinect sensor. Section 5 reports the experimental results on publicly available databases. Finally, Section 6 concludes this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presents a promising method for accurate head pose estimation. The main novelty of this paper is design of a slicing model for range data representation. Based on this slicing model, two sets of features, namely local slice depth and local slice orientation, are proposed to estimate head pose from the image data captured by a Kinect sensor. In order to implement a head pose estimation system, a new preprocessing method is proposed to segment facial region from range images with the assistance of color images, and two novel integral images, which are slice depth integral image and slice coordinates integral image, are designed to achieve real-time feature extraction. Experiments on public databases have demonstrated the state-of-the-art performance of our method in terms of both accuracy and efficiency.Although a promising feature representation method is proposed in this paper for head pose estimation, we believe our work will inspire more ideas on local feature description of range data. And more efforts are needed to improve the performance of head pose estimation in our future work.•A more robust and accuracy face segmentation algorithm is needed to improve the illumination robustness and accuracy of this method.A much larger database is needed to test the practical performance of head pose estimation under different conditions, including both internal (e.g. head shape, expression, aging) and external (e.g. occlusion, hair styles, makeup) variations.In this paper the slices are obtained by two cutting planes perpendicular to the depth axis. It is expected to get more slice patterns using cutting planes with different orientations. These new slice patterns can reflect the head pose information from different aspects.Extraction of novel local features from slice patterns is expected to improve the performance of head pose estimation.Machine learning techniques such as Adaboost and Lasso algorithms can be used for optimal feature selection from high-dimensional slice features.Other regression algorithms such as SVR (Support Vector Regression), PLS-regression (Partial Least Squares Regression), and deep learning can be used to learning the mapping function between local slice features and head poses.This paper mainly investigates a common and generic head pose model for all subjects. It is expected to achieve a much higher accuracy using an individually specific head pose model which is trained for each subject.Other landmark points in facial images such as eyes, lips can be combined with nose tip to achieve a robust representation of reference system for fine head pose estimation.The slicing model provides a good feature representation for range data. It can not only be used for head pose estimation, but also be applicable for other applications of range data, such as generic object pose estimation and object detection.