@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Efficient modeling of visual saliency based on local sparse representation and the use of hamming distance

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A method for the construction of saliency maps is proposed.Features are extracted via local sparse coding on image patches.The overcomplete dictionary is trained using natural images.A bio-plausible scheme based on the Hamming distance is used to compare patch representations.The algorithm is efficient both in terms of computational cost and of detection performance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Visual saliency,Attention modeling,Sparse representation,Hamming distance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Modeling of visual saliency is an important domain of research in computer vision, given the significant role of attention mechanisms during neural processing of visual information. This work presents a new approach for the construction of image representations of salient locations, generally known as saliency maps. The developed method is based on an efficient comparison scheme for the local sparse representations deriving from non-overlapping image patches. The sparse coding stage is implemented via an overcomplete dictionary trained with a soft-competitive bio-inspired algorithm and the use of natural images. The resulting local sparse codes are pairwise compared using the Hamming distance as a gauge of their co-activation. The calculated distances are used to quantify the saliency strength for each individual patch, and then, the saliency values are non-linearly filtered to form the final map. The evaluation results obtained on four image databases, demonstrate the competitive performance of the proposed approach compared to several state-of-the-art saliency modeling algorithms. More importantly, the proposed scheme is simple, efficient, and robust under a variety of visual conditions. Thus, it appears as an ideal solution for a hardware implementation of a frontend saliency modeling module in a computer vision system.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Visual environment inundates humans with a complex ensemble of stimuli that should be detected, processed, and further analyzed on a daily basis. Evolution equipped the human brain with various mechanisms for coping efficiently with these demands, minimizing in parallel the waste of valuable processing resources. In this context, whenever a visual environment is encountered, the processing procedure is facilitated by the selection of a small number of salient regions allowing for an acceleration in the neural calculations, and advancing image content understanding. This procedure can be computationally modeled via the construction of a probabilistic representation in the form of an activation map of prominent locations, known as saliency map. The assumption that a saliency map is in reality constructed in specific regions of the brain is supported by studies in neuroscience, arguing for the existence of neural mechanisms in early vision that process visual information through the formation of ‘feature maps’. In the past, different regions of the brain were proposed as suitable candidates for the formation of a saliency map, e.g. the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus [1], the pulvinar thalamic nucleus [2], and the posterior parietal cortex [3]. Given the existence of top-down influences during attention control, the exact relation of visual saliency with the attentive procedures is still an open field of research. There are studies even questioning the necessity for the existence of an explicit saliency map during attention control [4]. However, recent scientific data strongly support the formation of saliency maps via the neural activity [5], and specifically during the representation of low-level features.A saliency modeling procedure begins with the extraction of a set of attention-attracting features from the visual scene under consideration. The features of most concern are usually contrast characteristics, color information cues, and irregular texture patterns. Motion is also a very important attention-attracting characteristic when the visual input changes dynamically (e.g. video sequence). A number of different techniques can be used for the combination and normalization of the extracted features, leading on the formation of the final probabilistic representation of a saliency map. The constructed saliency map can then be employed in a wide gamut of applications. For example, it can be incorporated as a frontend in a computer vision system for lowering the image processing computational burden and improve scene interpretation [6]. Furthermore, a saliency map can be employed to facilitate image retrieval tasks in large databases. The large volume of images in such databases often involves contents of meaningful elements intermingled with useless information, e.g. objects of interest in complex backgrounds. A preprocessing stage via a saliency modeling algorithm could improve the extraction speed for the retrieval results and allow for semantic queries [7]. Finally, it should be noticed that some modern robotic applications can also benefit from the adoption of saliency modeling techniques [8], due to the connection of attention strategies in tasks such as navigation and obstacle avoidance.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
