@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
ChESS – Quick and robust detection of chess-board features

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An efficient and reliable method for detecting chess-board vertices is proposed.The detector is robust to rotation, blur, and poor scene lighting and contrast.The method provides a strength and orientation measure for each detected feature.The algorithm outperforms processes often used in calibration and structured light.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Chess-board corner detection,Feature extraction,Pattern recognition,Camera calibration,Structured light surface measurement,Photogrammetric marker detection,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Localization of chess-board vertices is a common task in computer vision, underpinning many applications, but relatively little work focusses on designing a specific feature detector that is fast, accurate and robust. In this paper the ‘Chess-board Extraction by Subtraction and Summation’ (ChESS) feature detector, designed to exclusively respond to chess-board vertices, is presented. The method proposed is robust against noise, poor lighting and poor contrast, requires no prior knowledge of the extent of the chess-board pattern, is computationally very efficient, and provides a strength measure of detected features. Such a detector has significant application both in the key field of camera calibration, as well as in structured light 3D reconstruction. Evidence is presented showing its superior robustness, accuracy, and efficiency in comparison to other commonly used detectors, including Harris & Stephens and SUSAN, both under simulation and in experimental 3D reconstruction of flat plate and cylindrical objects.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Many applications in machine vision depend on having accurately localized the vertices of a chess-board pattern, since such patterns are commonly used in camera calibration. The available methods for this process tend to suffer in the face of severe optical distortion and perspective effects, and often require hand-tuning of parameters, depending on lighting and pattern scale. Manual intervention is time consuming, requiring operator skill and prohibiting automated use.Another application needing precise vertex detection is 3D surface reconstruction, where a chess-board pattern is employed as part of a simple yet accurate structured light projector-camera system. For such use feature extraction must be highly automated and fast.We will present a robust process specifically targeting the detection of chess-board pattern vertices, which rather than requiring a binary vertex/not-vertex threshold, provides a measure of strength similar in output to the much-used Harris and Stephens [1] corner detector in the same problem-space. This permits deferral of inclusion decisions to a later stage where one is better able to exploit spatial and geometric considerations. The process is also computationally efficient and well disposed to a variety of parallel processing techniques, with a reference implementation capable of throughput of over 700 VGA-resolution frames per second on commodity PC hardware.Following a review in Section 2 of known alternative methods applicable to the problem, in Section 3 we advance a principled argument on what information needs to be sampled from an input frame in order to reliably and efficiently detect chess-board vertices. We describe the ChESS algorithm, wherein a per-pixel strength measure is calculated from the sampled pixels, in Section 4, while Section 5 contains suggestions on how best to confidently localize features from the ChESS response image. A further use of the ChESS technique, to describe a chess-board feature’s rotation, is given in Section 6. In Section 7 we present both simulated and real-world verification of the ChESS algorithm’s accuracy, computational efficiency, and resilience to noise. The paper ends with some discussion of applications and extensions, and conclusions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
