@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Adaptive estimation of visual smoke detection parameters based on spatial data and fire risk index

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The improvement of existing vision-based smoke detection methods is proposed.The quality of smoke detection depends on detection parameters.Automatic parameter adjustments are based on spatial and fire-risk data.The data is calculated using GIS-based augmented reality and computer vision.The overall quality of smoke detection is improved including the detection range.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Smoke detection,Wildfire,GIS,Augmented reality,Image analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Standard wildfire smoke detection systems detect fires using remote cameras located at observation posts. Images from the cameras are analyzed using standard computer vision techniques, and human intervention is required only in situations in which the system raises an alarm. The number of alarms depends largely on manually set detection sensitivity parameters. One of the primary drawbacks of this approach is the false alarm rate, which impairs the usability of the system. In this paper, we present a novel approach using GIS and augmented reality to include the spatial and fire risk data of the observed scene. This information is used to improve the reliability of the existing systems through automatic parameter adjustment. For evaluation, three smoke detection methods were improved using this approach and compared to the standard versions. The results demonstrated significant improvement in different smoke detection aspects, including detection range, rate of correct detections and decrease in the false alarm rate.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Throughout history, we have witnessed the devastating power of wildfires. Once a wildfire has expanded, it is almost impossible to control and extremely difficult to extinguish. Early identification of wildfires and a quick reaction are the primary factors required to prevent material damage and save human lives.Experience has indicated that in most cases of wildfires, smoke is visible long before the flame. This phenomenon is particularly evident in environments with dense vegetation. In forests, a flame is not visible until it catches the crowns, meaning that the wildfire is already expanding rapidly. Detecting smoke is therefore one of the most widespread approaches to wildfire detection.Traditional smoke detection is based on observers who monitor the surrounding environment. Observation posts, located in elevated areas with good visibility, provide visual coverage of most of the surrounding terrain. Advances in technology have led to camera-based surveillance, allowing the observer to control multiple observation posts from a single remote location. This approach has reduced the number of required observers. However, the human factor is still a main problem in remote surveillance. The concentration required to simultaneously monitor several locations is significant, and human attention can decrease over time.Automatic fire detection systems have been developed to further reduce the number of people and the amount of effort required to provide reliable smoke detection [1–8]. These systems use different computer vision algorithms, consisting of several detection phases. Most of the systems use motion detection as the first phase of the detection process to reduce the amount of data for analysis. The detected regions are then further analyzed based on visual features, such as color, texture and shape. In another of the general detection phases, the dynamic behavior is analyzed to reliably discriminate between smoke regions and visually similar phenomena. Based on these analyses, the system determines whether to employ the alarm in the given situation.However, the reliability of detection systems is still not adequate for highly critical applications, such as the smoke detection. It is important to emphasize that smoke detection systems are not fully automatic and rather considered to be an aid to the observers. Human intervention is required only in situations where the system raises an alarm.The number of alarms depends largely on the detection sensitivity. Most of the existing smoke detection methods provide detection parameters that can be manually edited to change the smoke detection sensitivity. High sensitivity may result in a large number of false alarms, while a low sensitivity may result in failing to spot a fire.To reduce the number of false alarms and simultaneously increase the number of correct detections, we propose the automatic adjustment of the smoke detection parameters. Our solution is based on integrating computer vision techniques with advanced augmented reality and GIS technologies. We have developed a novel system based on augmented reality used to calculate geographic coordinates and real-world distances of each pixel in the input image. A geographic information system is then used to modify these data into appropriate information used to adaptively estimate the appropriate sensitivity parameters for the smoke detection. Although some existing systems use different types of synthetic data to improve detection quality [9], the main advantage of our system is the ability to calculate and apply synthetic data, such as the real-world dimensions of visible objects in the image and fire risk indexes, on a pixel level with high accuracy. We also propose modifying the input image by using the calculated data to achieve higher-quality smoke detection.Note that our intention was not to develop a new smoke detection method. Rather, we propose improving smoke detection in general, by integrating several methodologies. These methodologies work together to provide reliable smoke detection, characterized by a smaller number of false alarms and extended detection range.A detailed study of existing smoke detection methods was carried out to investigate the most common phases in smoke detection methods. We thoroughly studied each phase and presented ideas for improvements (in Section 2). In Section 3, we describe the development of the augmented reality system used to calculate the geographic coordinates and real-world distances of each pixel in the input image. The data preparation using GIS and the actual adaptive estimation of the detection parameters are described in Section 4 and 5, respectively. We evaluated the proposed improvement using video sequences gathered in the Mediterranean area of Croatia. Several methods were improved by the proposed model and compared to the standard versions (in Section 6).There are many approaches to detecting smoke using computer vision. Most of the smoke detection systems simultaneously use several approaches to improve performance and reliability. Several phases of smoke detection are common to most smoke detection systems; therefore, we will cover them in the following subsections. We will also provide ideas and propose improvements based on the integration of computer vision, augmented reality and GIS.Motion detection is a common phase in most smoke detection systems. This phase is used as a filter for subsequent, computationally demanding, phases such that only the detected regions are used for further analysis. There are many motion detection approaches used in smoke detection systems, such as adaptive background estimation [2,10–13], block mean difference [14–16] or motion history image [17,18]. One parameter is common to all these approaches: the sensitivity of the motion detection.Motion detection sensitivity determines the ratio between the reliability and usability of the system. High motion detection sensitivity may result in a large number of false alarms, while low sensitivity may result in a missed detection. For most of the existing methods, motion detection sensitivity is applied to the entire image, as one global parameter.An important factor in determining the level of sensitivity is the dynamics of the observed location. The overall dynamics of the image are low when the camera is located far away from the region of interest, and increases inversely proportional to the distance. This is because the local motion of the objects in the scene (e.g., tree branches moving in the wind) is accentuated when these objects are close to the camera.As mentioned in the previous section, we propose a system that can estimate the geographic coordinates and real-world distances of the observed objects in the image. These data can then be used for the automatic adaptation of motion detection sensitivity. These parameters do not have a single value, but rather different values for different parts of the image. More specifically, a distant movement requires high motion sensitivity, while a movement in the immediate vicinity of the camera requires low sensitivity.Candidate region analysis is another phase common to the majority of smoke detection systems. Regions identified during the motion detection phase are further analyzed based on their color, texture, shape and size.Smoke is usually light to dark gray, so most of the standard methods use certain chromatic limitations. There are different approaches to chromatic analysis [19–21] using various color spaces. Additionally, some systems use the texture of the candidate region to improve the reliability of the system [22–24]. Different texture features could be obtained by using various approaches, such as a gray-level co-occurrence matrix (GLCM) [25] or wavelet analysis [26–28]. Another aspect of region analysis is examining the shape of the region. The authors in [2] show that smoke regions generally have a convex contour and an irregular shape with many aberrant lines. Most of the methods calculate the shape disorder parameter for the detected region and compare it to the reference values [19,29], or use it as an input parameter for a neural network [30].Methods based on the color, texture and shape properties cannot be significantly improved by using augmented reality and GIS. However, the perceived size of the detected region is directly dependent on the relative distance from the camera. The majority of the existing methods use a threshold, defined by the number of pixels, as the minimum size of the detected region. In our approach, the geographic location of the observed region is known, so GIS could be used to estimate its real-world size. We introduce a new threshold based on the estimated size expressed in a standard unit of measurement, such as meters.An analysis of the smoke dynamics is used for additional verification of the candidate regions. The regions are tracked during a predefined timeframe to validate consistency of smoke-like behavior. One of the primary features of interest is the growth rate of the detected region [3,10]. Smoke regions should exhibit gradual growth, as well as upward and lateral motion, especially in the incipient phase of a wildfire. The accurate growth rate of smoke regions is rather difficult to predict, as it is significantly affected by various influences, such as the wind, temperature or terrain configuration.Existing smoke detection methods define the growth rate of the detected regions by the number of pixels, similar to the region size parameter. A smoke phenomenon located a short distance from the camera, appears larger in the input image then a phenomenon of equal size located at a greater distance. Therefore, expressing the growth rate as the number of pixels could lead to false conclusions. Our solution to this problem is to express the value of growth rate parameter in standard units of measurement by using the augmented reality and GIS technology. In this way, the growth rate of the smoke region is not dependent on the type of the camera used for the detection or the location of the observed phenomena in the input image.Information about the candidate regions is accumulated throughout the detection process. The features are analyzed in the decision phase to provide the final decision about the specific region. This phase occurs only for the candidate regions that have not been eliminated in one of the previous phases.The standard methods take several aspects of the candidate regions into account, such as the amount of chromatic deviation from the reference values, the texture deviation based on texture descriptors, the dynamics of the region and other aspects specific to different detection systems. There are different approaches to the decision process, such as the Bayesian approach [12], neural networks [10,22], random forests [31–33], support vector machines [34], and the mechanism of thought [4].We propose introducing a new parameter in the decision phase. This parameter represents a local sensitivity level based on a fire risk index for the observed region. The geographic information system calculates the risk index based on the vegetation type, terrain configuration, meteorological conditions and other factors (explained in detail in Section 4.2). This parameter indicates how strong the region features need to be trigger an alarm. This approach allows the system sensitivity to dynamically adapt to specific conditions and situations in the environment where the detection takes place.The first step towards adaptively estimating the visual smoke detection parameters is calculating of spatial data, more specifically, geographic coordinates and physical distances, for each pixel in the input image. This process is called scene calibration, where the goal is to find a link between the real world and the digital elevation model based on precise topography. This model is henceforth referred to as the virtual terrain. This calibration can be achieved using the augmented reality methodology, or, in other words, using a combination of computer vision and computer graphics techniques. Note that the primary goal of our scene calibration process is not to display the virtual terrain, but to use the information gathered from the position and the orientation of the camera with respect to the virtual terrain to calculate the spatial data for each pixel in the input image.We have developed a new system dedicated to this process. The spatial data have to be further processed to achieve the proposed improvement, so an interface to GIS has been developed. More detail about GIS and calculation of these data is described in Section 4.In the following subsections we will describe in more detail the methods we used to achieve the desired results.In recent years, real-time terrain visualization has become an integral part of many GIS technologies [35–37]. Although GIS applications offer a wide range of advanced terrain manipulation functionalities, they are not designed as augmented reality systems and cannot be used during the scene calibration process. Therefore, it is necessary to develop a scene calibration system with an interface to GIS.While it was possible to develop such a system from scratch, we chose to use Capaware as a basis for our system [38]. This is open source software that, among other functionalities, has the ability to visualize a virtual terrain overlaid with other 3D models. Only developing a plugin for this software was not feasible, as we needed to modify and improve the core of the Capaware software to achieve a fully functional augmented reality and terrain visualization system.For scene calibration purposes, each camera from the real world is represented by a virtual camera. Augmented reality systems combine physical objects with computer-generated images. For this reason, it is crucial to find the most suitable model of a virtual camera that best corresponds to a real camera. A properly chosen virtual camera model ensures a reduction in the number of registration errors.Finding a suitable model for the virtual camera is associated with the problem of 3D objects registration inside an augmented reality system. The extrinsic parameters in our solution are based on information from the sensors that define the orientation and location of the real camera. The intrinsic parameters are based on an accurate calibration of the real camera. We calculate the intrinsic parameters of the real camera by using the method proposed in [39]. Because the virtual camera model (OpenGL camera) is not defined by intrinsic and extrinsic parameters, but a completely different set of parameters, we must find equations to convert from one model to another. With the known intrinsic and extrinsic parameters of the real camera, it is possible to determine parameters of the virtual camera to create identical camera views and achieve accurate alignment of the real and the virtual environment. This is further described in Section 3.2.The virtual terrain is a digital elevation model based on precise topography. Therefore, each point on this terrain is correctly georeferenced and has a corresponding point in the real world. A method of representing the surface of the real world on a plane must be chosen for our application. An experimental analysis was carried out, and several map projections were considered for our virtual terrain model. We propose the projection defined by EPSG:900913, a close variant of the Mercator projection. The experimental results are out of scope of this paper, considering the quality and widespread usage of this projection.The spatial data can be extracted from the virtual terrain, and each vertex point can be expressed by the specific coordinates that correspond to the accurate geographic coordinates in the real world. For each pixel inside a virtual camera frame, a ray can be cast and the corresponding coordinates of the virtual terrain visible at those specific pixel coordinates can be found. Finally, if the scene calibration is executed successfully, the real and the virtual cameras share the same view, and for each pixel in the image of the real camera, it is possible to calculate the correct geographic coordinates of the point in the real world.Cameras used for surveillance and monitoring usually cover an 360° area and in this way control the entire region of interest. Surveillance and monitoring can either be conducted manually by the firefighting operators, or, more commonly automatically using up to 64 predefined camera positions and zoom levels (preset positions). Because the majority, if not all smoke detection algorithms, operate in automatic mode most of the time and detect smoke only when the camera is stationary, it is reasonable to compute the required parameters only when the camera is positioned at particular preset position. In this way, we can eliminate the registration errors caused by computational delay and unexpected camera movement. The GIS data can be prepared in advance for each preset position, and thus the chosen smoke detection algorithm can be run in real-time without compromising the speed of the original algorithm.As mentioned, a connection between computer vision and computer graphics is used to develop a scene calibration system based on augmented reality. To our knowledge, only a few works compare the image formation pipelines in computer vision and computer graphics [40]. Some other works try to find spatial information without this connection [41] for the purpose of obtaining the precise position of a forest fire point. Here we describe the methods that we use to calculate the spatial data for the scene visible in the camera input image.For the representation and definition of the real camera we use a pinhole camera model, defined by intrinsic and extrinsic parameters. Eqs. (1) and (2) show the transformations and parameters required for the calculation of the pixel coordinates in the image plane of the real camera.(1)x(Xr,Yr)=PXw(2)P=K[R|T]=fx0u00fyv0001[R|T]where (Xr,Yr) are the Cartesian coordinates of the point x in the real camera image with the origin in the upper-left corner of the image plane, as shown in Fig. 1. Point Xwis a point in the real world that is visible as the point x in the real camera image. The coordinates of the point Xware defined in the three-dimensional Cartesian coordinate system used by the EPSG:900913, map projection with the origin on the equator and the x-axis along the equator, where the third coordinate corresponds to the height of the terrain. The matrix P is the projection matrix, the matrix K represents the intrinsic parameters of the real camera, where fx, fyare the focal lengths in pixels, and u0, v0 define the optical center. The extrinsic parameters are defined by the matrix R, representing the rotation matrix and T, representing the translation vector.Fig. 1 shows the graphical representation of the image formed by the real camera with all the required parameters. The focal length f in the Fig. 1 is measured in a unit of length (such as millimeters) and should be converted to pixels. Because the pixels are not always square, the focal length should be measured in both directions (fx,fy).The location and the orientation of the camera define the translation vector T and the rotation matrix R, respectively. If this information is known, any point in the real world (Xw) can be expressed as the eye coordinates (Xe,Ye,Ze), with the camera as the origin of the eye coordinate system. Therefore, the coordinates (Xr,Yr) of the point x in the image plane of the real camera can be calculated using Eq. (3) and (4).(3)Xr=fxXeZe+u0(4)Yr=fyYeZe+v0On the other hand, we use an OpenGL camera as the representation of the virtual camera. Fig. 2shows the graphical representation of the image formation pipeline in OpenGL, and the general coordinate transformations occurring in the image formation process of a virtual camera.Every point on the virtual terrain is georeferenced using the same Cartesian coordinate system used by the EPSG:900913 map projection. The coordinates of these points are transformed into the eye coordinates Xe, Ye, Zeusing the modelview matrix. Thus, the modelview matrix corresponds to the extrinsic parameters of a real camera. For this case, we use the perspective projection as seen in Fig. 2(a). The next step is using a projection matrix to transform the eye coordinates to clip coordinates Xc, Yc, Zc, as shown in Fig. 2(b). The clip coordinates are transformed into normalized device coordinates XNDC, YNDC, ZNDCusing the perspective division. The normalized device coordinates of all the visible objects range from −1 to 1 for all three axes, as seen in Fig. 2(c). Finally, the normalized device coordinates are scaled and transformed into the window coordinates using the viewport transformations (Fig. 2(d)).The projection matrix is defined by the field of view angle (in degrees) in the y direction (fovy), the aspect ratio that determines the field of view in the x direction (aspect), the distance from the viewer to the near clipping plane (zNear) and the distance from the viewer to the far clipping plane (zFar). The projection matrix is shown in Eq. (5).(5)XcYcZcWc=cot(fovy/2)aspect0000cot(fovy/2)0000zFar+zNearzNear-zFar2*zFar*zNearzNear-zFar00-10XeYeZe1Eq. (6) shows the transformation process from the clip coordinates directly into the window coordinates. In this equation x0 and y0 specify the lower left corner of the viewport rectangle, in pixels, while width and height specify the width and height of the viewport, as shown in Fig. 2(d). Parameter s is the scaling factor of the homogeneous pixel coordinate.(6)suv1=width20width2+x00height2height2+y0001XcYcZcFigs. 1 and 2 show that the coordinate systems of the virtual and real cameras do not share the same orientation. Therefore, Eq. (7) and (8) are used to calculate the coordinates on the screen of the virtual camera (Xv,Xv).(7)Xv=cot(fovy/2)aspectXeZewidth2+width2+x0(8)Yv=-cot(fovy/2)YeZeheight2+height2+y0Because the modelview matrix corresponds to the extrinsic parameters of the real camera, here we inspect the differences between the intrinsic parameters of the real camera and the OpenGL parameters that define the view of the virtual camera. We can assume that (Xr,Yr) from the Eq. (3) and (4) and (Yv,Yv) from the Eq. (7) and (8) represent the same point on the screen of the same dimensions (width,height). However, there is a difference in the orientation of the pixel coordinate systems in OpenGL and the real image. If this is taken into consideration, we can calculate the following Eq. (9)–(12), that describe the conversion process from the intrinsic parameters that define the real camera to the OpenGL parameters that define the virtual camera and vice versa.(9)x0=u0-width2,u0=x0+width2(10)y0=height2-v0,v0=height2-y0(11)fovy=2*cot-12fyheight,fy=height2*tanfovy2(12)aspect=widthheightfyfx,fx=widthheightfyaspectEq. (9)–(12), are the basis for the development of the scene calibration system. The intrinsic parameters of the real camera fx, fy, u0 and v0, can now be transformed into the parameters of the virtual camera, x0, y0, fovy and aspect. Note that these parameters only need to be calculated once for a single camera.Because the real and the virtual terrain are both georeferenced using the same coordinate system, the application of these equations results in the same view for the virtual and the real camera. Recall that for a successful scene calibration process, the location and orientation of the camera must be known as well. An example of a real and a virtual camera that share the same view is given in Fig. 3.Information such as the geographic location is stored in the virtual terrain. Also note that the distance from the virtual camera to any point on the virtual terrain is stored in the z-buffer of OpenGL. Therefore, as the final result of the scene calibration process, each pixel in the input image (either real or the virtual) is associated with both a geographic location and a distance from the camera.In the previous sections, we described how to calculate the correct geographic coordinates and relative distances from the camera for each pixel of the input image. These data represent sufficient information to estimate the dimensions of the objects visible in the scene, as well as to estimate the fire risk in a particular part of the image.To estimate the real-world dimensions of visible objects in the image, we have developed a concept of a pixel coverage map, where each pixel holds the information about the real-world dimensions expressed in standard units of measurement. Further, using GIS and additional information such as meteorological and geographical data, we calculate a fire risk index map where fire risk indexes are associated with the geographic coordinates of each point in the image plane.The pixel coverage and fire risk index maps contain the information about the environment and the current conditions prevailing in the scene. To achieve the desired quality of detection and to ensure that only the latest and the most detailed information is used, the fire risk data are dynamically calculated at pixel level.The scene calibration system is connected with a geographic information system that operates within the same geographic region and shares the same map projection and datum. This ensures the compatibility of the data and the interoperability between the two parts of the system. The GIS system automatically computes all the required data before the visual smoke detection algorithm is executed. Recall that the required data are calculated only for the predefined preset positions, which allows the system to operate in real-time.A more detailed description of the pixel coverage and fire risk index maps is presented in the following subsections.The geographic coordinates and distances from the camera of each pixel in the image plane could be directly used to produce the depth map. However, the relative distances from the camera stored in the depth map are not always useful, especially if the camera is recording while zoomed in. It is more appropriate to calculate the area of the real world covered by each pixel in the camera image plane.The actual dimensions of objects in the real world that are visible in the input image are difficult to estimate. In most cases, the information about the third dimension is irretrievably lost. We propose that the size of the object be estimated from its projection onto the plane. This plane has following characteristics: it and the observed object are equal distance from the camera and it is parallel to the camera’s image plane.It can also be concluded that each pixel in the image also represents a space in the real world. This space can be projected onto the described plane. In this way, we can estimate the size of the space visible in the pixel. A map created in this manner, where each pixel represents the size of the space visible in one pixel, is named a pixel coverage map.Fig. 4demonstrates the method used to estimate the size of the 3D space projected onto the plane that is parallel to the camera image plane inside one pixel, used for the calculation of the pixel coverage map. The pixel Tp(x,y) shown at coordinates (x,y) displays the three-dimensional space in the vicinity of the point TUTM(X,Y,Z) in the real world. Because elevation data are known for every point of the terrain, the objective is to estimate the dimensions of the space around point TUTM, or in other words the size of the projection of that space onto the plane R containing the point TUTMand parallel to the camera image plane.Two points are defined,TUTM1andTUTM2, that are equally distant from the point TUTMand positioned at the same height Z=h as the point TUTM. Additionally, the pointsTUTM1,TUTMandTUTM2form a straight line segment defined by the distance 2d. The pointTUTM1is in the image plane shown inside the pixel Tp1, and the pointTUTM2is inside the pixel Tp2. Therefore, in the image plane a line segmentTp1Tp2‾is formed, with a defined length 2dp.The lengths d and h are expressed in meters, while length dpis expressed in the number of pixels. Because d and dprepresent the same length, it is possible to calculate the relationship between those units.If we make the assumption that the pixels are square, d2 represents the area of the projected space onto the plane containing point TUTMand parallel to the camera image plane. Therefore, d2 represents one value in the proposed pixel coverage map for the observed pixel in the camera image plane.The pixel coverage map contains information about the real-world coverage area for each pixel in the image expressed in square meters, and should be calculated only once for a single preset position of the camera. Fig. 5shows a visual representation of the pixel coverage map for the image taken by the real camera shown in Fig. 6(a). The intensity of each pixel inside this visual representation of the pixel coverage map corresponds to the 3D space area that the pixel covers. Note that Fig. 5 is a grayscale image where the intensity of each pixel is limited to 255 values.In conclusion, terrain that is closer to the camera has a smaller pixel coverage area; the corresponding pixels in Fig. 5 are darker. The pixel coverage area and the distance from the camera are directly proportional; the value of pixel coverage area increases proportionally with the distance from the camera.There are several existing forest fire indexes. The European Forest Fires Risk Forecasting System (EFFRFS) [42] consists of static and dynamic forest fire indexes. The probability of fire occurrence (based on vegetation, topography and socio-economic characteristics of geographic areas) and likely damage belong to the static indexes, while the meteorological fire risk and vegetation stress fire risk belong to the dynamic indexes. The static indexes are computed once before each fire season and dynamic are calculated on a daily basis.The Canadian fire weather index [43] consists of six components: three primary sub-indexes representing the fuel moisture, two intermediate sub-indexes representing the rate of spread and fuel consumption and a final index representing fire intensity as an energy output rate per unit length of fire front. The Canadian fire weather index shows the daily variation in temperature, relative humidity, wind speed, and rain. This index is also part of the meteorological fire risk of the European Forest Fires Risk Forecasting System.Several forest fire indexes are based on estimates of the atmospheric conditions in the vicinity of combustible vegetation or the probability of a fire igniting based on the proximity of dead vegetation and fine fuel moisture. One example of a forest fire index, proposed in [44], takes into account several factors that affect the fire hazards, such as the slope of the terrain or meteorological conditions, emergency response factors, such as watch-tower proximity, and vulnerability factors, such as the population density and the value of forest resources.In [45,46] another forest fire index is proposed that is computed from topography, distance from roads and distance from settlements using a combination of remote sensing and GIS data. In [47], a forest fire index is computed as the combination of hazard factors, such as the population density or meteorological conditions, vulnerability factors, such as life and economy vulnerabilities, emergency response and recovery capability factors and exposure factors, such as the residential population or the number of livestock. In [48], a probability-based model is used to estimate the wildfire risk.Any of the developed systems can be used as the input for the visual smoke detection algorithm. Additionally, we have developed a micro-location fire risk index [49,50] that uses several GIS layers to calculate the final fire risk index: climatological and meteorological layers, a vegetation layer, terrain configuration, the history of forest fires, and sociological layers, such as layers based on the human infrastructure and layers based on human activities. Most of the layers used for the micro-location fire risk index are static and only need to be calculated once. On the other hand, meteorological data are collected twice a day, along with a forecast for the next 12h, so the corresponding layers should be updated accordingly.GIS is used to retrieve the fire risk index at specific geographic coordinates representing the point visible at specific pixel coordinates in the image plane. After iterating through all the pixels, a fire risk index map is generated and used as an input for the detection system. The fire risk index depends on dynamic data, meaning that the proposed fire risk index maps are prone to changes and should be calculated several times a day for all preset positions. Fig. 6(b) shows an example of a fire risk index map for the image shown in Fig. 6(a) during a period with a relatively high risk of wildfires.In Section 2, we have described several phases common to smoke detection processes. Using the spatial and fire risk data given in Section 4, we can adjust several standard detection parameters, as well as the stream of input images. These adjustments can be applied to the majority of smoke detection methods because they have similar detection parameters. This can be accomplished with minimal or no modifications to the source code of the algorithms. There are five main improvements based on pixel coverage and fire risk index maps:•the adjustment of the motion detection sensitivityselective blurring of input images based on point distances from the cameradefinition of the minimal candidate region sizedynamics analysis based on the detected region growth ratethe final verification using the fire risk indexFirst, the motion detection sensitivity threshold is adjusted based on the size of the pixel coverage area. It is possible to calculate a single general motion detection sensitivity parameter for the entire scene, but it is better to do this on a pixel level. This allows a more accurate selection of the regions of interest in the observed scene. As mentioned before, motion detection sensitivity is proportional to the distance of the region of interest from the camera, and therefore proportional to the pixel coverage values. The movement of the objects located at greater distances from the camera is more difficult to detect, and accordingly, the motion detection should be more sensitive in that case. On the other hand, the movement of the objects closer to the camera is accentuated and in many situations the cause of false alarms. In this case the motion detection sensitivity should be notably decreased. We use the information about the distance of the pixel to increase or decrease the sensitivity for that area by a maximum ±10%. Fig. 7shows the successful detection of distant smoke because of the higher motion detection sensitivity for the observed region.Another important adjustment is modifying the input image stream with selective region blurring. The input is blurred to reduce the unnecessary movement and image noise. The amount of blur is inversely proportional to the distance of the terrain from the camera. We propose motion blurring in the horizontal direction, as it can eliminate most of the unwanted movements that may cause false alarms. As the smoke usually moves upward, it is not significantly affected by the motion blur in the horizontal direction. An example of image blurring based on pixel coverage map is shown in Fig. 8.Another estimated parameter is the threshold value for a minimal region size. Using the pixel coverage map (described in Section 4.1), it is possible to estimate the approximate physical size of the smoke region. Although it is not possible to determine the exact size of the smoke region, due to its unpredictable movement and positioning, an approximate estimate is used to improve the candidate region filtering process. Among all the pixels that are detected as smoke, we choose the one with the lowest pixel coverage value. The chosen value, multiplied by the number of connected pixels detected as smoke, represents the real-world size of the detected phenomena. We chose this value to reduce the probability of error because the smoke that rises above the terrain can sometimes be positioned in front of the distant terrain. All detected regions covering less than 30m2 are dismissed as non-smoke regions.A change in the physical size of the region is an important indicator that allows the dismissal of regions that do not exhibit smoke-like behavior. Smoke detection methods usually define a threshold used to limit the dynamics allowed for the candidate regions. We can estimate the region dynamics threshold by using the pixel coverage map in the same manner as the threshold value for a minimal region size. It is possible to define upper and lower growth rate thresholds taking into account the estimated size of the detected region.We conducted offline measurements of the rate of spread of smoke in the early wildfire phases. The measurements were conducted on videos recorded with multiple cameras on various locations. Smoke plumes were tracked in terms of size during the incipient phase of wildfire, and we have established that the smoke behaves according to certain rules. The t location-scale distribution is the distribution with the best fit on the obtained data that describes the change in the smoke area. We have also observed the standard deviation and the average of the two-dimensional smoke rate of spread in the camera image plane. The offline data show that the average smoke area rate of spread in the image plane is 16.04m2/s with standard deviation (σ) of 76.33m2/s in the first 3min after the first occurrence.During the incipient phase of wildfire, it can be shown that over 99% of smoke area change observations fall into the interval defined by (μ−6σ,μ+6σ). Because the real smoke region size could be estimated using the proposed pixel coverage map, it is possible to eliminate any phenomena that grows or shrinks faster than the smoke in the incipient phase of wildfire. As an example, it is possible to eliminate significant changes in lighting, especially intensity changes during sunrise or sunset, shadowing caused by clouds, sunlight artifacts, etc. Details of the experimental analysis of this research are beyond the scope of this paper, but will be published separately in the near future.Finally, the candidate regions are additionally verified by using the fire risk index map, in this case the micro-location forest fire risk index, to produce a more certain final decision. More information about fire risk index map is given in Section 4.2. The fire risk index is taken into account in the last stage of detection, where the final decision about the candidate region is made. The fire risk index for the candidate region is calculated as the mean value of the fire risk indexes of individual pixels contained in the region. After the complete detection and analysis process the final decision about a particular potential alarm has to be made. The decision is made based on different aspects of the analysis of the detected region (depending on the specific detection method) and the information about the fire risk. The fire risk influences the final decision to a certain degree, depending on the preferred tuning of the system and the specific detection method.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we presented an improvement in the field of visual smoke detection based on the adaptive adjustment of smoke detection parameters and the modification of the images in the input stream. This improvement was achieved using GIS and GIS-based augmented reality to provide a more robust and reliable smoke detection. Most of the existing smoke detection algorithms are designed for general use in which the user manually adjusts the detection sensitivity parameters for the entire scene. This approach directly affects the rate of both false alarms and correct detections. We have shown that the existing methods could be improved by introducing scene-specific parameter adjustments based on spatial and fire risk data for each pixel of the input image. This improvement was achieved by integrating computer vision and augmented reality techniques.Five different aspects of the improvement to visual smoke detection are proposed in this article: the adjustment of motion detection sensitivity, selective blurring of input images based on point distance from the camera, definition of the minimal candidate region size, dynamics analysis based on detected region growth rate and fire risk assessment using the fire risk index.The evaluation conducted has shown improvement in the quality of proposed smoke detection methods for different detection aspects. The false alarms for standard methods were primarily caused by such phenomena as vegetation movement caused by wind, clouds and cloud shadows, the movements of rivers and sea or changes in lightning conditions during sunset, all of which were included in the video database used for evaluation. As reflected in the results of the evaluation, the revised methods were less sensitive to these phenomena and have shown improvement in false alarm rate, correct detection rate and detection range.The most evident improvement on global level was noted for Method 1, where the cd measure increased by more than 0.3, while the number of false alarms was reduced to the minimum level. The difference in quality between the standard and improved methods was least noticeable for Method 3. However, note that the standard Method 3 already provides good results (approximately 0.7 for cd measure). At local level, the improvements are less obvious. However, based on the Matthews correlation coefficient, an improvement is evident for all three methods.Smoke detection system must be executed in real time. Our system performs in real-time if predefined preset positions are used, and all required data are calculated prior to detection. One of the primary drawbacks of our system is the inability to operate in real time when the preset positions are not predefined. The time required to calculate the pixel coverage and fire risk index maps is several minutes, depending on the image resolution. Additional efforts are necessary in order to implement the proposed improvements into manual operation of smoke detection systems where the camera movement in unpredictable.In conclusion, we demonstrated that the overall number of sequences where smoke was detected was increased by the proposed improvements without compromising the robustness and reliability of the system. However, the operation of the improved versions is still not ideal, and there is still room for further work and improvement in all aspects of smoke detection.