@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The Zeta-image, illuminant estimation, and specularity manipulation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel log-chromaticity illumination constraint we call the Zeta-image.The new feature is equivalent to a novel application of the Kullback–Leibler Divergence.For illumination estimation the method outperforms other unsupervised methods.Post-processing any color constancy method, that method’s accuracy is improved.Using the Zeta-image we are able to manipulate specular content in the image.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Specular,Illuminant estimation,Color constancy,Zeta-image,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Identification of illumination, the main step in colour constancy processing, is an important problem in imaging for digital images or video, forming a prerequisite for many computer vision applications. In this paper we present a new and effective physics-based colour constancy algorithm which makes use of a novel Log-Relative-Chromaticity planar constraint. We call the new feature the Zeta-image. We show that this new feature makes use of a novel application of the Kullback–Leibler Divergence, here applied to chromaticity values instead of probabilities. The new method requires no training data or tunable parameters. Moreover it is simple to implement and very fast. Our experimental results across datasets of real images show that the proposed method significantly outperforms other unsupervised methods while its estimation accuracy is comparable with more complex, supervised, methods. As well, we show that the new planar constraint can be used as a post-processing stage for any candidate colour constancy method in order to improve its accuracy. Its application in this paper demonstrates its utility, delivering state of the art performance. The Zeta-image is a wholly new representation for understanding highlights in images, and we show as well that it can be used to identify and remove specularities. More generally, since the Zeta-image is intimately bound up with specularities, we show how specular content in the image can be manipulated, either decreasing or increasing highlights.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Identification of illumination is an important problem in image processing for digital cameras. The implications for a useful discounting or regularizing for light in images are substantial in various computer vision tasks such as image retrieval, colour reproduction and object detection [1].In a scene consisting of dielectric materials (e.g., plastics, and indeed most non-metals) there is typically substantive specular content. This does not necessarily mean extremely bright mirror-like reflection, but can consist for example of the glint of light reflected from blades of grass, or the sheen of light reflected from a plastic desk surface. For non-metals, this very common specular content is an important indicator of the colour of the lighting in a scene, and hence has substantial bearing on determination of a correct white balance for camera images.Many colour constancy algorithms have been proposed (see [2,3] for an overview). The foundational colour constancy method, the so-called White-Patch or Max-RGB method, estimates the light source colour from the maximum response of the different colour channels [4]. Another well-known colour constancy method is based on the Grey-World hypothesis [5], which assumes that the average reflectance in the scene is achromatic. Grey-Edge is a recent version of the Grey-World hypothesis that says: the average of the reflectance differences in a scene is achromatic [6]. Besides these simple assumptions there are other approaches that use physical image formation models in order to estimate the illuminant. These usually use the specular reflection component of light as a main source of information. Moreover, there are more complex methods to estimate the colour of the illuminant by using a model that is learned on training images.In this paper, we set out a new discovery, consisting of a planar constraint that must be obeyed, in a certain standard model of reflectance, by specular or near-specular pixels in an image. The new feature involved we call the Zeta-image, and below we show that this feature is tied to the information-theoretic concept of applying one distribution to generate bitstring codes for another; here we view chromaticity components, which add to 1, in the role of probabilities. We present a novel physics-based colour constancy algorithm based on a Log-Relative-Chromaticity planar constraint (LRCP-Constraint), which requires no training data or tunable parameters. It is easy to implement and very fast compared to more complex colour constancy methods such as gamut mapping. Our experimental results over three large datasets of both laboratory and real world images show that the proposed method significantly outperforms other unsupervised methods while its accuracy of estimation is comparable with more complex methods that need training data and tunable parameters.The paper is organized as follows. We discuss related work in Section 2, and in Section 3 we describe the fundamental process of the Log-Relative-Chromaticity planar constraint that we set out in this paper and define the Zeta-image to that purpose. In Section 4 we explicate aspects of the new planar constraint by making use of synthetic data. In Section 5 we illustrate the utility of the Zeta-image for real images and propose two colour constancy algorithms based on the LRCP-Constraint, one a search-based and then search-plus-analytic based method of estimating the illuminant, and the second a method for applying the LRCP-Constraint as a post-processing step to improve the estimate for any colour constancy method used. We compare our proposed algorithms with previous colour constancy algorithms over three standard datasets in Section 6, demonstrating the efficacy of the new insight for real images.We then go on to further make use of the association of the Zeta-image with specular content: Section 7 examines the role of the Zeta-image in manipulating specularities, in the spirit of the “dichromatic editing” procedure in [7]. Here we set out a simple and fast method for specularity manipulation, either boosting or diminishing the specular content. Finally, in Section 8 we summarize, and identify questions for further work.In forming the LRCP-Constraint, we suggest using a Relative Chromaticity, meaning the chromaticity of pixels (i.e., colour without magnitude), divided by the putative chromaticity of the illuminant. Dividing by the light chromaticity is the main innovative step in this paper: it forms an educated guess (called an ansatz in physics), that we claim will bear fruit by generating a constraint on the illuminant colour. We introduced this proposed approach in [8] and here explicate the method in detail. As well, here we set out a novel method for manipulating specular content in images, based on the Log-Relative-Chromaticity feature stemming from this ansatz. In the preliminary publication, we did not include any discussion of specularity manipulation, and as well the experimental section was not complete. In this submission we go on to set out the details of the method more comprehensively, and as well investigate the meaning of the new feature with illustrations.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
