@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Local Higher-Order Statistics (LHS) describing images with statistics of local non-binarized pixel patterns

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a new image representation for texture categorization and facial analysis.The proposed representation exploits higher order statistics of non-binarized local pixel patterns.It avoids limitations of previous methods such as hard quantization, counting statistics and heuristic pruning of feature space.We demonstrate effectiveness with extensive experiments on four benchmark datasets.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Local features,Texture categorization,Face verification,Image classification,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We propose a new image representation for texture categorization and facial analysis, relying on the use of higher-order local differential statistics as features. It has been recently shown that small local pixel pattern distributions can be highly discriminative while being extremely efficient to compute, which is in contrast to the models based on the global structure of images. Motivated by such works, we propose to use higher-order statistics of local non-binarized pixel patterns for the image description. The proposed model does not require either (i) user specified quantization of the space (of pixel patterns) or (ii) any heuristics for discarding low occupancy volumes of the space. We propose to use a data driven soft quantization of the space, with parametric mixture models, combined with higher-order statistics, based on Fisher scores. We demonstrate that this leads to a more expressive representation which, when combined with discriminatively learned classifiers and metrics, achieves state-of-the-art performance on challenging texture and facial analysis datasets, in low complexity setup. Further, it is complementary to higher complexity features and when combined with them improves performance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Categorization of textures and analysis of faces under multiple and difficult sources of variations like illumination, scale, pose, expression and appearance are challenging problems in computer vision with many important applications. Texture recognition is beneficial for applications such as mobile robot navigation or biomedical image processing. It is also related to facial analysis e.g. facial expression categorization and face verification (two faces are of same person or not), as the models developed for textures are generally found to be competitive for face analysis. Analysis of faces, similarly, has important applications especially in human computer interaction and in security and surveillance scenarios. This paper proposes a new model for obtaining a powerful and highly efficient representation for textures and faces, with such applications in mind.Initial success on texture recognition was achieved by the use of filter banks [4–8], where the distributions of the filter response coefficients were used for discrimination. The focus was on evaluating appropriate filters, selective for edge orientation and spatial-frequencies of variations, and better capturing the distributions of such filter responses. However, later works e.g. by Ojala et al. [9] and Varma and Zisserman [10], showed that it is possible to discriminate between textures using pixel values directly (with pixel neighborhoods as small as 3 × 3 pixels), discounting the necessity of filter banks. It was demonstrated that despite the global structure of the textures, very good discrimination could be achieved by exploiting the distributions of such small pixel neighborhoods. More recently, exploiting such small pixel neighborhoods or micro-structures in textures by representing images with distributions of local descriptors has gained much attention and has led to state-of-the-art performances for systems with low complexity, e.g. Local Binary Patterns (LBP) [1,2], Local Ternary Patterns (LTP) [11] and Weber Local Descriptor (WLD) [12]. Most of such local pixel neighborhood based descriptors were shown to be highly effective for facial analysis [2,11] as well. However these methods suffer from important limitations–the use of fixed hard quantization of the feature space (the space of small pixel patterns) and the use of heuristics to prune uninteresting regions in the feature space. In addition, they use histograms to represent the feature distributions. Histograms, or count statistics, are zeroth order statistics of distributions and thus give a quite restrictive representation.In contrast, we propose a model that represents images with higher-order statistics of small local pixel neighborhoods. Fig. 1shows an illustration of this representation. We obtain a data driven soft partition of the feature space using parametric mixture models, to represent the distribution of the vectors, with the parameters learnt from the training data. Hence, in the proposed method, the coding of vectors is intrinsically adapted to the data and the computations involved remain very simple despite the strengths. This helps us avoid the above mentioned limitations of the previous methods – (i) instead of a fixed quantization, we learn a data driven, and hence, adaptive quantization using Gaussian mixture models (GMM), (ii) quantizing using GMM also avoids any heuristic pruning as any low occupancy region in the feature space will be automatically ignored by the GMM learning and (iii) learning GMM allows us to use Fisher vectors [3] which are higher-order statistics of the feature distribution. We discuss in more detail on this in the following sections. A preliminary version of this work appeared in Sharma et al. [13].We validate the proposed representation by extensive experiments on four challenging datasets: (i) Brodatz 32 texture dataset [14,15], (ii) KTH TIPS 2a materials dataset [16], (iii) Japanese Female Facial Expressions (JAFFE) dataset [17], and (iv) Labeled Faces in the Wild (LFW) dataset [18]. Two dataset, Brodatz-32 and JAFFE, are relatively easier with limited variations while the other two, KTH TIPS 2a and LFW, are more challenging with realistic high levels of variation in illumination, pose, expressions etc. We show that using higher-order statistics gives a more expressive description and lead to state-of-the-art performance in low complexity settings, for the above datasets. Further, with the challenging LFW dataset as the experimental testbed, we also show that the proposed representation is complementary to the recent high complexity state-of-the-art representations. However, in case of challenging variations, like in LFW, unsupervised approach is not sufficient and hence we show that when used with supervised metric learning the performance of the proposed representation improves substantially. When combined with higher complexity methods, the proposed representation achieves the state-of-the-art performance on the challenging LFW dataset in the supervised protocol, when no external labeled data is used.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have presented a model that captures higher-order statistics of small local neighborhoods to produce a highly discriminative representation of the images. Our experiments, on two challenging texture datasets and two challenging facial analysis datasets, validate our approach and show that the proposed model encodes more local information than the competing methods and achieves competitive results. Two of the datasets we used, one each for textures and faces, were relatively simpler while two other were more difficult. The results on the simpler datasets served to demonstrate that the method is capable of having a richer appearance descriptor compared to existing methods. While on the more challenging case, we showed with experiments on the supervised task of face verification on the challenging Labeled Faces in the Wild (LFW) dataset that the proposed method achieves best results for low complexity features and is complementary to the high dimensional features. When combine with the state-of-the-art method it improves the performance to establish a new state-of-the-art on the LFW dataset when no external labeled data is used. Compared to the best method the proposed method is two orders of magnitude faster to compute and an order of magnitude compact making it a very appropriate choice for low complexity devices e.g. embedded systems.While the current state-of-the-art systems, based on deep networks trained with large amounts of external data [32–41] have gained, the proposed method is still relevant due to its speed – we could use it as an initial low complexity stage of a cascade based system. Also, in very low complexity/cost systems the size of the model might also limit the use of deep networks and make the proposed method relevant.