@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Invariant multi-scale descriptor for shape representation, matching and retrieval

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose an invariant multi-scale descriptor to represent shape contour.This descriptor is invariant to rigid transformation and articulated variations.This method is robust to partial occlusion and noise.The ADCE algorithm can find the salient feature points of shape contour.This method is compatible to existing approaches in both accuracy and efficiency.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Invariant descriptor,Shape representation,Shape matching,Contour,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Shape matching and retrieval have been some of the fundamental topics in computer vision. Object shape is a meaningful and informative cue in object recognition, where an effective shape descriptor plays an important role. To capture the invariant features of both local shape details and visual parts, we propose a novel invariant multi-scale descriptor for shape matching and retrieval. In this work, we define three types of invariants to capture the shape features from different aspects. Each type of the invariants is used in multiple scales from a local range to a semi-global part. An adaptive discrete contour evolution method is also proposed to extract the salient feature points of a shape contour for compact representation. Shape matching is performed using the dynamic programming algorithm. The proposed method is invariant to rotation, scale variation, intra-class variation, articulated deformation and partial occlusion. Our method is robust to noise as well. To validate the invariance and robustness of our proposed method, we perform experiments on multiple benchmark datasets, including MPEG-7, Kimia and articulated shape datasets. The competitive results indicate the effectiveness of our proposed method for shape matching and retrieval.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The shape of an object contour is a compact clue for object recognition. Shape matching is an essential problem in computer vision as it has been widely studied for various applications, e.g., character recognition [1], biomedical image analysis [2], hand gesture recognition [3], robot navigation [4], human gait recognition [5], etc. To capture the salient shape feature for matching, an effective descriptor is necessary. In recent years, there has been a vast set of literatures in shape matching and retrieval algorithms, which report promising results [6–10]. The geometric transformations (translation, rotation, scaling, etc.) have been handled by different methods in the literature. However, it is still a challenging problem to match shapes with intra-class variations and nonlinear deformations (noise, articulation and occlusion). The intra-class variation here specifically indicates the varying shapes of the instances from the same class as shown in Fig. 1, rather than the nonlinear deformations. The shapes with intra-class variations can be easily classified to the same class by humans, while they are very different in shape matching. The nonlinear deformations are more challenging especially when multiple deformations are combined simultaneously with intra-class variations and geometric transformations. Therefore, it is critical to extract a shape descriptor which is representative, discriminative and robust for shape matching and retrieval. The desired descriptor should not only tolerate geometric transformations, nonlinear deformations and intra-class variations, but also efficient to discriminate shapes from different classes.Most of the traditional descriptors use local or global information of shapes, which cannot solve the problems of shape deformations or intra-class variations with sufficient expertise. The local descriptors [9,11–13] are capable of representing the local shape features well, but they do not consider the global shape structure. On the other hand, the global descriptors [8,14–16] are robust to local noise and deformations, but they fail to capture the detailed local shape features and cannot deal with occlusion. To satisfy all these contrasting requirements together, it is desirable to combine the advantages of both the global descriptors and local descriptors within a single framework for an exhaustive and discriminative representation scheme. Moreover, the descriptor should be invariant for geometric transformations. A number of recent works [10,17,18] combine the global and local shape features and achieve good shape matching performances on the popular benchmark dataset, MPEG-7 dataset [19]. Besides a series of distance learning based methods [20–22] report the state-of-the-art results. However, these methods still rely on the effective descriptor to achieve a good performance.In this paper, we propose an invariant multi-scale descriptor for shape representation, matching and retrieval. The descriptor is defined with three types of invariants in multiple scales. Inspired by the characteristics of both global descriptors and local descriptors, we use smaller scales to capture shape details and larger scales to represent semi-global features, e.g., limbs, to obtain “rich” shape information. To make the descriptor discriminative, we use three types of invariants to capture salient shape features from different aspects, including: area, arc length and local central distance. These three shape features are combined to characterize shapes from different classes. The three types of invariants are normalized parameters between 0 and 1 to adaptively capture the inconsistent variations within one shape, e.g., only part of a shape is scaled. The dimension of the extracted feature descriptor for a contour point is between 9 and 15, which is much less than that of most of the previous descriptors. To extract the salient points of shape contour and improve the representativeness of shapes, we modify the discrete contour evolution (DCE) [23] algorithm in an adaptive way to preprocess a closed shape contour. We show that the contours processed by the adaptive discrete contour evolution (ADCE) is more compact. The similarity between shapes is calculated in term of the pairwise distance, and the dynamic programming (DP) [24] algorithm is employed to find the best correspondence between shapes. The pipeline of our method is shown in Fig. 2.The invariance and robustness of the proposed descriptor is evaluated through extensive experiments. The proposed method is invariant to geometric transformations and nonlinear deformations, especially to articulated variations and partial occlusion. The experimental results validate the invariance of our method to these variations. Our method is also verified to be capable of capturing the common shape features for shapes with large intra-class variations. We also validate the robustness of our method to noise. The effectiveness in shape matching is evaluated in the experiments of shape retrieval on several benchmark datasets, including: MPEG-7 dataset [19], Articulated dataset [8], Kimia’s 99 dataset and Kimia’s 216 dataset [25]. The comparable results with state-of-the-art demonstrate that the proposed method is effective for shape matching and retrieval. The distance learning method is also applied on our method to further improve the retrieval rate, and our method outperforms other distance learning based methods.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We begin by reviewing the relevant works in the next section. The proposed invariant multi-scale descriptor is presented in Section 3. Section 4 describes the ADCE algorithm for shape preprocessing. The DP based shape matching is detailed in Section 5. Section 6 gives the experimental evaluation of the invariance and robustness of our method as well as the performances of shape retrieval on the benchmark datasets. This paper is concluded in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
