@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel scheme based on local binary pattern for dynamic texture recognition

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Dynamic texture recognition method based on LBP and Michelson contrast is proposed.An adaptive threshold is proposed to compute the texture pattern in DT frames.Michelson contrast is used to compute the contrast of local image patch.A new formulation is devised to extend local binary pattern to spatiotemporal domain.Center pixel is combined with feature vector to boost its descriptive power.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Dynamic texture,Local binary pattern,Michelson contrast,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Dynamic textures (DTs) are moving sequences of natural scenes with some form of temporal regularity such as boiling water, a flag fluttering in the wind. The motion causes continuous changes in the geometry of dynamic textures thus it is difficult to apply traditional vision algorithms to recognize this class of textures. This paper proposes a scheme for modeling and classification of dynamic textures using a local image descriptor which efficiently encodes texture information in a space-time domain. The proposed descriptor extends the well-known spatial texture descriptor, local binary pattern (LBP), to spatio-temporal domain in order to represent the DT by combining appearance feature with the motion. Although, local binary patterns are used extensively in visual recognition applications due to their excellent performance and computational simplicity, but sometimes unable to differentiate different structures properly due to their dependency on center pixel as a threshold. In this paper, a new descriptor based on a global adaptive threshold is employed to compute the structure pattern of local image patch which differentiates various local image structures more efficiently. However, the LBP pattern defines the spatial structure of a local image patch but it does not give information about the contrast of local image patch. We have used Michelson contrast to compute the difference in luminance in the local texture and clubbed with local structure pattern computed using the proposed descriptor. Extensive experiments on dynamic texture databases (Dyntex, Dyntex++ and UCLA) prove the efficiency of the proposed method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Dynamic, or temporal, texture is a moving sequence of images that exhibit spatially repetitive and time-varying visual patterns. In dynamic texture (DT), the notion of self-similarity central to static image texture is extended to the spatio-temporal domain (Chetverikov and Péteri, 2005). DTs are typically videos of processes, such as waves, smoke, fire, a flag blowing in the wind or a moving escalator. DTs have gained much attention in the field of computer vision due to their usage in many areas such as surveillance applications like the detection of fire or smoke (Toreyin et al., 2006; Ye et al., 2015), environmental monitoring (Ali et al., 2008), traffic monitoring (Chan and Vasconcelos, 2005), crowd analysis and management (Chan et al., 2007), face recognition (Koelstra et al., 2010; Zhao and Pietikäinen, 2007).Various approaches have been used in the past for the recognition and representation of dynamic texture. However, in early years of DT recognition research, most studies used optical flow as a tool to represent DTs (Chetverikov and Péteri, 2005). Later, Soatto and Doretto (Doretto et al., 2003; Soatto et al., 2001) published a work on dynamic texture representation based on linear dynamic systems (LDS) model which inspired various researchers to use LDS model to describe and process DTs. Saisan et al. (Saisan et al., 2001) used the LDS model (Soatto et al., 2001) to offer auto-regressive LDS (AP-LDS) approach to recognize temporal. Chan et al. (Chan and Vasconcelos, 2007) used kernel PCA to model a wide range of DTs with chaotic motion (e.g. turbulent water). Their framework used kernel dynamic texture with martin distance (KDT-MD) to classify temporal texture exhibits different motions. Ravichandran et al. (Ravichandran et al., 2009) used a bag of word (BoW) and LDS to represent DTs for view-invariant DT recognition. Other approaches (Wang and Hu, 2015; Wang and Hu) also used BoW approach along with chaotic vector to recognise DTs. Besides LDS model, fractal analysis is also employed by various studies such as dynamic fractal spectrum (DFS) (Xu et al., 2011), 3D oriented transform feature(3D-OTF) (Xu et al., 2012), wavelet domain multifractal spectrum (WMFS) (Ji et al., 2013) to represent the DTs. These methods used fractal dimension to compute the feature descriptor which shows robustness to environmental and view changes.Recently, subspace analysis has also been used to model and classify DTs. Baktashmotlagh et al. (Baktashmotlagh et al., 2014; Baktashmotlagh et al., 2013) used the subspace analysis to extract the stationary part of the video signal from its non-stationary part. The stationary part is used to offer low dimensional feature descriptors named kernel stationary subspace analysis (KSSA), non-linear stationary subspace analysis (NLSSA) and discriminative kernel stationary subspace analysis (DKSSA), to describe the temporal texture. Author argued that the stationary signal is better representative of the class and thus can be used to devise a low dimensional feature descriptor. Other approaches such as filter based methods (Arashloo and Kittler, 2014; Rivera and Chae, 2015) are equally used to describe and recognize dynamic texture. Rivera et al. (Rivera and Chae, 2015) presented a new descriptor named Directional Number Transitional Graph (DNG) based on new 3D filter to create the signature for a dynamic texture. Arashloo et al. (Arashloo and Kittler, 2014) produced multiscale binary statistical feature descriptor (MBSIF) by binarizing the responses of a set of filters operating on local image patches at multiple resolutions.Many sparse and dense static texture descriptors like local binary pattern (LBP) (Ojala et al., 1996; Ojala et al., 2002) binarized statistical image features (BSIF) (Kannala and Rahtu, 2012), scale invariant feature transform (Lowe, 2004), Gabor (Manjunathi and Ma, 1996) have been extended to spatio-temporal domain for dynamic texture recognition (Zhao and Pietikäinen, 2007; Arashloo and Kittler, 2014; Xu et al., 2012; Gonçalves et al., 2012; Tiwari and Tyagi, 2015). Among static texture descriptors, LBP and its variants (Ojala et al., 2002; Ming et al., 2015; Qi et al., 2015) have gained much popularity in the field of image processing and computer vision due to its advantages like computational simplicity, gray scale invariance and no requirement of pre-training. Zhao et al. (Zhao and Pietikäinen, 2007) proposed volume local binary pattern (VLBP) and local binary pattern in three orthogonal planes (LBP-TOP) (Zhao and Pietikäinen, 2007) to extend LBP to spatio-temporal domain for the dynamic texture recognition. In (Ghanem and Ahuja, 2010), LBP is combined with pyramid of histograms of oriented gradients (PHOG) and linear dynamical system (LDS) to represent and classify dynamic texture. Ren et al. (Ren et al., 2013) used principal histogram analysis (PHA) with LBP to tackle the reliability issues of LBP histogram. To reduce the dimensionality of the VLBP feature vector, Ren et al. (Ren et al., 2014) offered data driven LBP (DDLBP) to learn the optimized LBP structure. DDLBP approach used the point selection method and maximal joint mutual information scheme (MJMI) to reduce the dimensionality of VLBP. Apart from long histogram, another shortcoming of VLBP approach is use of only sign information. VLBP does not include magnitude of local difference in feature descriptor which represents the contrast of local image patch. Tiwari and Tyagi (2016) argued that the inclusion of contrast information improves the performance of VLBP approach and suggested completed volume local binary pattern (CVLBP) descriptor to classify dynamic texture.In VLBP, the size of the feature descriptor depends on P neighboring pixels as it uses 3P+2 pixels along the helix to create the feature vector. As the value of P increases, the number of patterns for basic VLBP becomes very large (23P+2). Due to this, it is difficult to extend the VLBP to have large neighboring set. To overcome this, Zhao et al. (Zhao and Pietikäinen, 2007) proposed local binary pattern in three orthogonal planes (LBP-TOP). LBP-TOP used concatenated local binary patterns from three orthogonal planes to reduce the size of the feature vector. However, VLBP produces comparatively good results with small neighboring points as compared to LBP-TOP. LBP-TOP loses some important information because it does not include the center pixel in the feature vector, whereas VLBP uses the center pixels of neighboring frames in feature vector. Besides, both VLBP and LBP-TOP suffer with the limitation of the basic local binary pattern and are not able to discriminate coarse and smooth textures properly.To address these problems, we propose a new method to extend the local binary pattern for the dynamic texture domain that contains the advantageous characteristics of both LBP-TOP and VLBP. Our contributions are threefold:(a)The size of the VLBP feature vector is reduced as a new formulation is applied for feature vector computation.Center pixel is added to the feature vector to improve its discriminating power.Michelson contrast is used to compute the amount of local texture and clubbed with local structure pattern computed using the LBP.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
