@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Localizing scene texts by fuzzy inference systems and low rank matrix recovery model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Focused and incidental scene text images are processed in a separate manner.Low rank matrix recovery is exploited to process the incidental scene text images.A text confidence map was designed via fuzzy inference system.The proposed algorithm handles both Latin and Farsi/Arabic scripts.Farsi/Arabic scene texts at arbitrary orientations are localized for the first time.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Low rank matrix recovery,Scene text localization,Maximally stable extremal regions,Fuzzy inference system,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper a framework is proposed to localize both Farsi/Arabic and Latin scene texts with different sizes, fonts and orientations. First, candidate text regions are extracted via an MSER detector enhanced by weighted median filtering to adopt the low resolution texts. At the same time based on fuzzy inference system (FIS), the input image is classified into images with a focused text content and incidental scene text images which the image does not focus on the text content. For the focused scene text images the non-text candidates are filtered via an FIS. On the other hand, for the incidental scene text images apart from the FIS, an extra filtering algorithm based on low rank matrix recovery is proposed. Finally, a new approach based on the clustering, minimum area rectangle and radon transform techniques is proposed to create the single arbitrarily oriented text lines from the remaining text regions. To evaluate the proposed algorithm, we created a collection of natural images containing both Farsi/Arabic and Latin texts. Compared with the state-of-the-art methods, the proposed method achieves the best performance on our and Epshtein datasets and competitive performances on the ICDAR dataset.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Localization of scene text within an image is a significant issue in many applications such as content-based image retrieval (CBIR), visual impairment assistance system, automatic robot navigation in urban environments and tourist assistance systems. Once location of the text is determined, it could be further analyzed. Locating text in the natural images, however, due to the variations of font, scale, color, shadow and lighting conditions is very difficult. Since the primary objective of the commercial OCR systems is to recognize the text within document images scanned by flatbed scanners, they are not able to recognize the scene text well. Thus, a preprocessing stage is needed to localize text in natural images before applying the commercial OCR systems. Despite the fact that much research in this area has been done, yet the problem of localizing text in natural images, remains very challenging. In fact, since usually geometric distortions as well as unseen complex background are simultaneously available in the natural images, many proposed algorithms in the literature have problems in terms of speed and accuracy requirements [1–3]. Most research in this area can be generally categorized as: texture-based, connected component-based (CC-based) and hybrid approaches. Texture-based approaches [4,5] localize the scene text in a top-down scheme including the feature extraction, classification and multi-scale merging steps. In contrast, CC-based approaches [6,7] are actually bottom-up ones, whose main steps include candidate connected component (CC) extraction, verification and grouping. More recently, hybrid approaches [8,9] are enjoying more popularity. Intuitively, they are the combination of the two aforementioned methods.Most research in this area have focused on the Latin or Chinese scripts. A few of them, however, addressed the Farsi and Arabic scripts [10,11]. Some of the salient characteristics of the Farsi/Arabic script include existence of different connecting characters and different shapes for many characters depending on their position in the word. Most research in Latin or Chinese scene text localization has exploited the character isolation property of the text specially in the connected component (CC) based methods at the non-text filtering and grouping stages. Thus, regarding the non-isolated characters in the Farsi/Arabic script, the state-of-the-art methods in this area do not generate robust and reliable results for Farsi/Arabic scene text localization. It is worth noting that in Indic scripts such as Bangla or Devanagari, also neighboring characters due to the matra feature might become connected. The matra feature unlike Arabic script makes certain header lines in the Bangla or Devanagari scripts and therefore was exploited as a major cue for many of the Bangla or Devanagari scene text localization algorithms [12,13]. In [12], existence of the certain header lines in the Bangla and Devanagari scripts was exploited to extract the sufficiently large scene texts via morphological operations.There are a number of contributions in this paper. First, an enhanced MSER detector is proposed to extract the candidate scene text regions which are robust to the poor quality scene texts. Second, a classification stage based on fuzzy inference system (FIS) is proposed to classify the natural images into images focused on the text content and incidental scene text images. Third, an FIS is proposed to build a confidence map indicating the likelihood of being text for the extracted candidate regions and finally to discard the non-text candidates. Fourth, based on the result of the image classification block, the proposed method takes into account different approaches for focused scene text and incidental scene text images. Fifth, a novel false positive reduction approach based on low rank matrix recovery (LRMR) was proposed for the incidental scene text images. Sixth, a new approach based on the clustering, minimum area rectangle and radon transform techniques is proposed to create the single arbitrarily oriented text lines. Seventh, the proposed method handles both Farsi/Arabic and Latin scripts at the same time.Experimental results in this paper show that the proposed algorithm could promisingly address the above contributions.The organization of the rest of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we discuss the related works. In Section 3 we describe the details of the proposed method. Section 4 provides the related experimental results. We finally conclude the paper in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we have presented an effective approach to localize Latin and Farsi/Arabic scene text with different fonts, sizes and orientations in the natural images. First, two algorithm blocks have been performed at the same time. The first one extracts the candidate text regions via the MSER feature detector enhanced by weighted median filtering. In the second algorithm block, input image has been classified into focused and incidental scene text images via fuzzy inference system (FIS). Afterward for the focused scene text images, the candidate text regions extracted in the first block have been given to the non-text filtering algorithm which is also based on FIS. On the other hand for the incidental scene text images containing relatively complex background, the aforementioned candidates have been given to an extra filtering process based on low rank matrix recovery (LRMR) model before the FIS algorithm. In fact the LRMR model acts as a text-specific saliency detection method discarding the non-text regions as the non-salient regions. After filtering the non-text regions, the remaining ones have been clustered exploiting the stroke width and color features of the regions. In each cluster, close regions have been grouped together to make the bounding boxes with the help of minimum area rectangle technique. To evaluate the proposed method a dataset containing Farsi/Arabic and Latin scene texts have been provided. The experimental results show that the proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on our dataset and despite the lack of Farsi/Arabic scene texts on Epshtein dataset and also has achieved the second place for ICDAR 2011 and ICDAR 2013 datasets. Also results showing the superiority of the proposed LRMR-based saliency detection compared with the state-of-the-art saliency detection methods in terms of scene text localization task. As a future work the proposed method could be exploited for the other scripts such as Chinese, Devanagari and Bangla.