@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Computer analysis of face beauty: A survey

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Analyzing beauty with pattern analysis techniques is an emerging research field.Applications of machine beauty analysis are reviewed.Computer-based beauty analysis is surveyed.Possible future direction of research are discussed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Face image analysis,Face attractiveness,Facial features,Machine beauty analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The human face conveys to other human beings, and potentially to computer systems, information such as identity, intentions, emotional and health states, attractiveness, age, gender and ethnicity. In most cases analyzing this information involves the computer science as well as the human and medical sciences. The most studied multidisciplinary problems are analyzing emotions, estimating age and modeling aging effects. An emerging area is the analysis of human attractiveness. The purpose of this paper is to survey recent research on the computer analysis of human beauty. First we present results in human sciences and medicine pointing to a largely shared and data-driven perception of attractiveness, which is a rationale of computer beauty analysis. After discussing practical application areas, we survey current studies on the automatic analysis of facial attractiveness aimed at: (i) relating attractiveness to particular facial features; (ii) assessing attractiveness automatically; (iii) improving the attractiveness of 2D or 3D face images. Finally we discuss open problems and possible lines of research.The analysis of 2D or 3D images of humans is a main research topic in pattern analysis and computer vision. Applications exist, or are forecast, in a number of areas such as identity verification, natural man–machine interfaces, surveillance, forensics, sport performance enhancement, medical diagnosis and treatments.Special attention has been devoted to the images of hands [171,120] and faces, the tools of most human–environment interaction. In particular, the human face is by far the part of the body which conveys most information to human beings, and thus potentially to computer systems [106,118]. Such information includes identity, intentions, health and emotional states, attractiveness, age, gender, ethnicity, attention and personality traits. In several cases the analysis of this information is a multidisciplinary problem, involving areas of computer science (such as pattern analysis and computer vision), human science (such as psychology, behavioral and cognitive sciences), and medicine.At present, the most studied and successful application of face image analysis is identity recognition or confirmation [25,174,167,95]. For expressionless faces, the problem is essentially one of 3D object recognition, at least on short time intervals. Unrestricted identification may require the analysis of additional elements such as expressions and aging, involving much more complicated face models and a multidisciplinary approach.Other face analysis problems are intrinsically multidisciplinary and strictly related to human sciences and medicine. The most important are estimating age and modeling face aging, capturing and understanding human expressions, and analyzing face attractiveness. Face age synthesis and estimation, surveyed in [57], has possible application in entertainment, forensics, security controls, and cosmetology. Computer analysis of human expressions is a much studied problem. A currently well-established application is capturing human expression in order to animate the faces of virtual characters for entertainment or to reduce video-transmission bandwidth. A much more challenging problem is interpreting facial expressions, i.e. mapping expressions onto emotional states [44]. One difficulty is that there is no full agreement in psychophysiology about a model of the human emotions and of their effects on facial features [126,51]. The computer analysis research in this area has been surveyed in [173,118,126,51]. Today, research is mostly focused on affective computing, i.e. investigating new affect-sensitive paradigms of man–machine interaction.The computer analysis of face attractiveness is an emerging research area. What produces the human perception of beauty is a long standing problem in human sciences and, more recently, in medical areas such as plastic surgery and orthodontics. In the last few decades, several thousand papers and books on this subject have been published. A survey of the recent research on attractiveness in human sciences can be found in [87]. The researchers involved in these studies are social and developmental psychologists (in relation with the effects of attractiveness on human interaction), cognitive psychologists and neuroscientists (which investigate the mechanisms we use in assessing attractiveness) and evolutionary psychologists and biologists (which study the connection between the morphological characteristics connected with facial attractiveness and other human qualities such as health, fitness and, based on Darwin’s theories of natural and sexual selection [34,35], reproductive value; these works are surveyed in [61,97]). The human perception of attractiveness is also related to face identification. Experiments have shown that the recognition rate is better for attractive and ugly faces, and lower for attractively average faces [174].Studying beauty with pattern analysis and computer vision techniques is a relatively new research field. The purpose of this paper, which extends the preliminary material presented in [16], is to survey the rationale, techniques, results, applications, open problems and new possible lines of research in this emerging area. To the best of our knowledge, these topics have only been surveyed briefly before in [64].The content of the paper is as follows. In Section 2, we summarize some results about facial attractiveness presented in human sciences and medical areas. Particularly relevant are the results showing that the perception of human beauty appears largely shared by people different in culture, ethnicity and age, and thus supposedly data-driven. These findings are a rationale of computer techniques attempting to emulate the human perception on the basis of objective facial features. In Section 3, we present the applications of automatic beauty analysis. In Section 4, we briefly survey some issues relative to the representation of faces and the extraction of facial features. In Section 5, we survey the recent research on computer beauty analysis, and in particular: (i) relating attractiveness and facial features; (ii) automatically assessing face beauty; (iii) improving attractiveness of 2D face images or 3D face scans. Finally, in Section 6, we discuss new areas of research and the open problems.What is beauty? Philosopher, scientists and artists have debated the problem for centuries. A controversial long lasting question is, according to an often quoted sentence of the writer Margaret Wolfe Hungerford (1878), if “Beauty is in the eye of the beholder”, i.e. if beauty is purely subjective or not. Important personages, such as Immanuel Kant (1790), have supported the former thesis or, as David Hume (1741), the latter.In any case, from ancient Greek culture to our times, no one denied the strong influence of beauty on human life. A number of recent studies, as well as everyday common experience, show that face and body harmony is extremely important in general social life [23,4,45]. In a society that is virtually obsessed by beauty, looking unpleasant or different can deeply affect self-esteem and result in social isolation, depression and serious psychological disorders [23,131,20,125,99]. Attractive people are also likely to be regarded as better than unattractive people in a broad social sense. For instance, experimental research shows that better-looking candidates are more likely to be hired than equally qualified but less attractive people [102,75,29]. Thus, it is not surprising that more money is spent annually in the US on beauty related items or services than on both education and social services [4].Since ancient times, the supporters of the objective and measurable nature of beauty have attempted to state ideal proportions, or beauty canons, for the human body and its parts. The Greek sculptor Polycleitus was the first to define aesthetics in mathematical terms in his “Kanon” treatise. He also pointed out the importance of symmetry in the human shape. In order to define an aesthetically pleasing face, Marcus Vitruvius, a Roman architect, introduced the concept, still largely used in medicine and anthropometry, of facial trisection, or facial thirds, in which a face can be divided by horizontal lines passing through the hairline, the glabella, the subnasale and the menton (Fig. 1, left).Renaissance artists, such as Leonardo da Vinci, Leon Battista Alberti, Albrecht Duerer and Piero della Francesca, reformulated and documented the classic canons. (Fig. 1, right). The classic and neoclassic canons [13,163,49,9] have been used for centuries by sculptors, painters, and are a rough working guide for plastic surgeons. The same idea is at the base of some of today’s beauty assessing techniques, which are merely based on geometric features computed from the position of 2D/3D facial landmarks.A long lasting idea, also stemming from the classic concept of ideal proportions, is the relevance of the golden ratio to facial beauty. The golden ratio is an irrational number, approximately 1.618, related to geometric entities, such as pentagons, and to mathematical entities, such as the Fibonacci sequence [98,42]. From ancient times, it has been used explicitly, or claimed later to have been used, by a score of sculptors, painters, architects and composers, ranging from Fidia to Le Corbousier, Dalì, Mondrian and Bela Bartok, to construct aesthetically attractive shapes and even sounds [98]. Nowadays, the idea of a universal standard of beauty based on the golden ratio (Fig. 2) still has several supporters [76,93,134,144]. Marquardt derived a facial mask summarizing the ideal proportions, an idea that received some support in the plastic surgery community [76,12,84]. However, several experimental studies found little correlation between the asserted ideal proportions and the beauty scores given by human raters [82,71,10,147,104]. For instance, it was found that patients who were considered to be more attractive after orthognathic surgery were equally likely to move away from or towards the golden proportions [10] and a wide range of cephalometric values was found in a 3D research on professional models [113].Morphometric studies have been carried out in anthropology and medicine to find typical measures of facial or body features for different age, sex and ethnicity groups. In the 18th and 19th centuries most measurements were relative to bones and skull. Recently, due to the pressure of plastic surgery, the focus of these studies has moved toward the analysis of elements relevant to attractiveness, and consequently toward soft tissue morphometry. The attention has also shifted toward the soft tissue proportions in dentofacial orthopedics [138,129].Face soft-tissue morphometry has been investigated in particular by Farkas et al. [47,50], who proposed hundreds of possible facial measures and proportion indices, whose average values have been experimentally determined for several populations and compared with some of the classic canons of beauty [13,163,50,37]. Several morphometric studies have been aimed at investigating the shape of beautiful faces [146,145,113,48]. For instance, in [146], the comparison of the 3D scans of geometric features extracted from 71 normal young Italian women and a group of 24 beautiful women in the last stages of a beauty competition pointed to some differences between normal and beautiful faces, such as a larger facial upper third and a smaller lower third for beautiful women. A few studies analyzed as well the contribution to attractiveness of facial details, such as young adults’ 3D lip shape [53], eye obliquity [63], eyebrow shape [52] and periorbital zone [164].In this section we present some result relevant to the computer analysis of attractiveness, and in particular to the construction of computer systems able to emulate the human perception of attractiveness. Three kind of results support the thesis that the human perception of attractiveness is largely shared and appears to have a biological, “hard-wired” basis.•A large number of empirical tests showing high beauty rating congruence over ethnicity, social class, age and sex.Brain activity patterns due to explicit attractiveness judgments, showing a strong correlation with beauty and ugliness.The apparently innate capability of young babies to appreciate attractiveness.A large number of experiments, based on various groups both of human raters and subjects, investigated the cross-cultural consistency of the judgments of attractiveness. For instance, Pearson correlations greater than 0.9 were obtained in [32] for groups of Asian, Hispanic, Black and White Americans, male and female, both as subject and judges. Similar close agreements were obtained with Greek men as subjects and European and Asian females as raters [155], male/female White and Cruzans (Native of the Virgin Islands) as raters and Cruzans as subjects [101], Asian-American and Caucasian female [165], South African and American males and females [112], and Black and White judging males and females of both groups [31]. Other experiments used synthetic faces, [123,122], once again obtaining cross-cultural congruence of judgments between Japanese and Caucasian. In addition, high correlation of intra-class ratings between different professional groups was recorded. For instance, in [85], the correlation of ratings of clinicians specialized in orthodontics and normal hospital clerks was, on average, 0.73 for female subjects and 0.93 for male subjects, with a significantly higher correlation between ratings of professional evaluators. The temporal consistency of raters was also tested. An overall correlation between ratings given at 4weeks interval was on average 0.86 for female and 0.83 for male subjects, and, again, significantly higher for professional groups.The conclusions of these and many other empirical studies is that substantial beauty rating congruence exists over ethnicity, social class, age, and sex. Beautiful faces of different groups can have quite different shapes, but they are largely recognized as beautiful by individuals of other groups. Furthermore, it has been found that rating congruence is stronger for very unattractive and very beautiful faces [123,65], in agreement with the analysis of brain activity patterns. These findings, although very largely shared, are in part contested in [70], where the thesis is that, due to systematic misinterpretation of experiments, individual tastes matter almost as much as shared tastes.An important result in psychophysiology and neuropsychology is the detection of the brain areas where the assessment of facial beauty is processed. Activity patterns related to an explicit attractiveness judgment of 2D face images have been measured with MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging) techniques and correlated with the beauty score of the faces. Brain patterns showed a non-linear response profile, with a greater response to highly attractive and unattractive faces. In addition, the response is greater for beautiful faces of the opposite sex [170,2,74]. These experiments have been substantially confirmed using near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) [109] and event-related brain potentials (ERP) [139]. These results, although preliminary, are important, since they confirm those of the previous section, and could supply in perspective “objective” measures of the intensity of the perception of attractiveness, without the need of marks and scales whose levels are necessarily ill defined.Another empirical finding seems to indicate that appreciating beauty is an innate, “hard-wired” human capability. Newborns were found able to distinguish between faces previously rated as attractive or unattractive by adult raters analyzing the time spent by the babies in looking at each face [89,137,41]. These preferences are not likely to have been produced by stereotypes of contemporary culture, contrary to those shown among children toward their peers from 3 or 4years of age [40].The ability of automatically ranking attractiveness, and suggesting how to improve the attractiveness of a particular face, are at the basis of many applications in scientific, professional and end user areas. Some of these applications, as other face analysis applications such as identifying emotional and health states, could raise ethical concerns.Much research in human sciences requires rating face attractiveness. Automatic ratings can avoid using human panels, cumbersome to set up and manage.Several Internet sites already offer beauty ranking, or beauty ranking programs. Choosing the best photographs for home albums, social networks or personal Web sites, are possible applications in this area.Include automatically retouching and deblemishing images for advertising, magazine covers, motion pictures and special effects, preparing professional portfolio or CVs, and screening applicants for specific jobs such as entertainment and modeling where attractiveness is a basic requirement.We have underlined the large amount of money currently spent for improving female attractiveness. Then, applications able to suggest make-up and/or hairstyle not only fashionable, but also fitting a particular face, could be very successful.A large number of papers on facial attractiveness have been published in plastic surgery and orthodontics journals. Several computer tools for treatment planning have been proposed, able to present images of possible outcomes in 2D [117,130] or 3D [59,92,91], taking into account to some extent surgical constraints ([117]). How to manipulate the face images, as well as the evaluation of the results, is currently left to the surgeon’s judgment. Beauty analysis programs able to evaluate the different simulations or even to suggest how to enhance the attractiveness of a particular patient, would significantly enhance planning effectiveness.In this section we will briefly review some concepts related to face image analysis that are also relevant to the case of attractiveness analysis.The computer approaches to facial feature extraction can be roughly divided into holistic and feature based. Both approaches are aimed at extracting, for a given problem, the most useful data from the huge amount of information provided by 2D images or 3D scans. The difference is that holistic techniques perform an automatic extraction of the data, usually from the whole face, on the basis of some general rule (PCA, LDA, Gabor wavelets, etc.). The precise meaning of the data obtained, a complex combination of the original image data, is not intuitive, and difficult to relate to the usual facial features. In the feature based approach the significant features are selected a priori (e.g., nose width, intraocular distance). The meaning of these features is clear, but elements relevant to the particular problem could have been overlooked. In human science area, the same terms holistic and feature based have been used by perceptual psychologist experimentally investigating the relative relevance to human perception of the whole face and of its parts [153,166]. Anyway, both types of data have been used in computer attractiveness analysis.Automatically finding the prominent features of the face, like nose tip, eyes, and the related keypoints or landmarks is a preliminary task in most face attractiveness research. It is required not only by feature based approaches, but also by holistic techniques, for image alignment and scaling. In the 2D scenario, although there is room for further improvements, recent research is effective in dealing with changes in lighting conditions, facial expression, pose and orientation and the presence of artifacts like spectacles, hair, beards and moustaches [8,30,103,135,158,172]. References to more seasoned approaches can be found in the surveys [25,174,173,51,119]. While a comprehensive 3D survey is still lacking, references to the principal techniques can be found in [3,19,140].A useful tool for face analysis applications is the “face space” paradigm, used in both human science, for modeling human perception, and in computer analysis. In the computer science area it was first introduced in [148]. The general idea proposed was that, after proper normalization, the pixel array of a face image can be represented as a point, or a vector, in an image space. The same concept applies to other 2D or 3D face data spaces, such as depth maps, 3D textured points and deformable faces. A vast portion of vectors in these spaces does not represent faces. Human faces, constrained by symmetry and general structure, belong to a manifold, called the face space, or face manifold, whose dimensionality is much lower than that of the representation space, but whose shape is highly nonlinear [95]. Investigating the properties of the face space in relation with various face analysis problems requires techniques referred to as manifold learning[154,161,38,160]. The relation of manifold learning with computational attractiveness will be discussed in more details in Section 6.Human science researchers, and perceptual psychologists in particular, suggest, in the perceptual face space, norm-based models [159,61], where each face can be described encoding its differences from a prototype face, obtained as the average face. Such representations have been used for modeling the perception of identity [133], expressions [114] and attractiveness [127,128]. Since computer face models, such as that of Blanz and Vetter [15], are currently used to populate the perceptive face space, and various quantitative techniques such as MDS (multidimensional scaling) are applied to data analysis, the ideas of face space of computer scientist and psychologists are currently converging [127,24,72].The recent papers on attractiveness that make use of image processing, computer vision and pattern analysis techniques surveyed in this section are divided into three main groups:-papers aimed at relating attractiveness to general facial features, such as texture, shape, symmetry, averageness and sexual dimorphism;papers essentially proposing automatic beauty rating systems aimed at emulating human judgment;papers describing techniques to beautify 2D or 3D face images.Shape and texture convey different information and several studies have been aimed at investigating their relative relevance to attractiveness. It should be observed that facial texture also supplies to the human vision system 3D shape information, since reflected light also depends on the surface normal. In [54], different skin textures obtained from photographs of 169 women were applied to a common 3D face model and rendered with the same illumination in order to (partially) decouple texture from original shape. Experiments showed that the 3D models textured with the images of younger subjects were rated as more attractive than those textured with images of older subjects. Several other results support the importance of skin color texture for attractiveness [55,78], especially in intersex evaluation, a thesis also put forward by Darwin [35]. An interesting, although obviously extreme, example of the importance of texture is reported in Fig. 3, where the same 3D surface can completely change its 2D appearance when different textures are applied. In any case, we recall that both the textures retain clues of the original 3D shapes.A consequence of these findings is that simply relying on geometric dimensions related to landmarks appears insufficient for a full attractiveness analysis. This also questions the effectiveness of canons or golden ratios as efficient beauty predictors [46,142].According to evolutional theories, symmetry may reflect the potential of an individual’s genome to resist disease and maintain normal development in front of environmental perturbations, thus being a potential element of sexual mating selection [124,151]. A pioneer in these studies was Sir Francis Galton, Darwin’s cousin, who in 1879 created photographs where the images of different faces were superimposed [58]. Today researchers use image processing techniques to find the sagittal (symmetry) plane, locating facial landmarks, measuring asymmetry, and creating artificial symmetrical, morphed and average faces.Faces are more or less asymmetric around the sagittal plane (see Fig. 4). Usually, their Total Asymmetry (TA) is decomposed into a Fluctuating Asymmetry (FA), concerning random deviations, and a Directional Asymmetry (DA), involving a significant bias of the symmetry distribution towards the left or right side [162]. DA asymmetries can be estimated as the average of squared distances between mirrored left and right corresponding feature points, and FA as the average variation on the average. The effects of measured asymmetry on attractiveness perception have been investigated in several experiments [77,26,105,132,88,151,124], comparing human ratings for original and symmetrized male and female faces. Low degrees of asymmetries do not seem to affect attractiveness and some research even found a negative correlation between symmetry and attractiveness [151].The effect of averageness on attractiveness perception is a much studied problem, but the results presented are controversial. According to theories of evolutionary biology and cognitive psychology, evolutionary pressure operates against the extremes of the population, and average facial prototypes should be preferred by conspecifics [11,152,90]. In [90,60,14] composite or average 2D face images were created by normalizing the eyes and mouth position of frontal images and averaging their pixel values (as in the examples in Fig. 5). The images were then rated and their ranks compared with those of the original faces. The results are controversial. For female faces, the ratings of composite faces were better than those of the original faces. However, as pointed out in [14,5], composites are more symmetrical and fairly free of facial blemishes. For male faces, composites were found to be less attractive than normal faces [60]. A possible reason is that the most sexually attractive male faces are those that show strong features (e.g. wide jaw), which are perceived as dominance indicators and resistance to parasites [81,69,176].In [175], using the 2D normalized positions of 68 landmarks, the average face of about 500 samples was computed. Then, each test face was warped both toward and in the opposite direction of the average face. Human reaters preferred faces closer to the average face, and moving faces far from the average towards the mean point was found to be an effective beautification technique [27]. However, this result is questioned by [5,123], according to which average faces are attractive, but very attractive faces are not average. Attractive composites were found more attractive by exaggerating the shape differences from the sample means [123].A 3D analysis of the influence on attractiveness of averageness of both 3D shape and 2D texture, using the Blanz and Vetter morphable model technique [15], is described in [116]. The head shapes and the face textures of 100 young adult males and females were separately averaged, and artificial face images were created in two different ways, first by texturing the individual heads with the average texture, and then morphing individual textures onto the average 3D head. Renderings of the original, the texture-normalized and the shape-normalized 3D models were rated by a human panel, showing higher attractiveness scores than those of original faces for texture-normalized and even higher for shape-normalized images.Sexual dimorphism is the difference in facial features due to sex. While there is widespread agreement in human science that for female faces femininity is attractive, contradictory results have been presented for male faces (see [136] for a list of relevant papers). However, some recent papers using computer techniques provide results which appear to clarify this controversial point. In [143] 2D faces were morphed from masculinity to femininity according to the eigenvectors, derived from 128 facial landmarks, more significant for sexual dimorphism. The attractiveness of a set of male samples rated by a human panel was found not related to masculinity. On the contrary, significant negative correlation was found for a set of female samples. In addition, the skin color was significantly correlated with male attractiveness, showing the different role of shape and texture as attractiveness clues.A further investigation [136] was performed in a densely populated 3D face space with 50 dimensions, 25 related to shape and 25 to surface reflectivity. The ratings of four thousands synthetic male and female faces were used to build a non-linear attractiveness regressor, which showed predictions in agreement with the human panel. Using as the sexual dimorphism direction the vector joining the average male and average female faces, i.e. the direction of masculinity, or, equivalent, as the opposite vector, i.e. the direction of femininity. The gradient of female attractiveness was found to be almost parallel to the direction of femininity, while for male the direction was almost orthogonal. A further analysis, carried on separating shape and reflectivity, showed that for female the gradients due to both features pointed to the direction of femininity, while for male the reflectivity components pointed towards masculinity and the shape components towards femininity. This finding might explain the contradictory effects of masculinity on male attractiveness reported in previous work.Several papers have been aimed at automatically rating face attractiveness. Since these systems compute a single attractiveness score, their purpose, even if not explicitly stated, is to approach the average score supplied by human raters, or in other words, the “average” beauty. Till now, little investigation on personal preferences is reported [169,6].The general approach is: (i) collecting a training set of images rated for attractiveness by human panels, (ii) extracting from the images, with various techniques, data relevant to attractiveness, and (iii) using this data to construct an automatic rater, which is then compared on a test set with human ratings, assumed to be the ground truth.Attractiveness estimation in principle can be considered as a classification or a regression problem. Human raters are asked to rate face attractiveness with some integer number. Each number can be considered as the label of a class, thus making attractiveness estimation a classification problem. Classification accuracy can be estimated as the percentage of the test samples assigned to the classes chosen by human raters. Since usually, the attractiveness ratings of the human judges are not coincident, the ground truth class is the average or median score. Accuracy of estimation can be also evaluated as the Pearson correlation between automatic and human ratings over the test set, or as the Mahalanobis distance between ground truth and predicted class.On the other hand, the beauty level can be seen as the dependant variable of some kinds of regression, where the feature vector components are the independent variables. Accuracy can again be evaluated as the correlation with human ratings or through the coefficient of determination R2. The relevance to attractiveness of the different features used can be studied in various ways, such as evaluating the explanatory power of independent variables, or testing the correlation with human judgment of different variable sets.In the following discussion, the approaches presented have been divided into three groups. The first two are the approaches working with a relatively small dataset and based on, respectively, geometric, holistic or mixed features. The last group includes the approaches working with large datasets collected over the Internet.Most relevant data on several of these papers are summarized in Table 1, namely:•dataset used;score levels, i.e. levels of attractiveness used by human raters;number of raters;facial feature used;classification/regression techniques;validation method (training and test sets);comparison with human raters.Some papers also present analyses of the rating consistency. For instance, in [65], using a ten point scale, a standard deviation of 1.6 was found for the average ratings distribution on a particular subject. Lower spreads resulted for high and low marks. In [80], an average correlation of 0.92 was found by dividing at random many times the ratings into two groups, and similar results were obtained in [43]. The consistencies are in good agreement with those found by human science researchers and reported in Section 2.2.Several researchers used purely geometric features, based on the automatic or manual identification of facial landmarks. Some of such facial beauty scoring systems [1,65,66,46] rely on a set of ratios between landmark distances to first describe a face in the face space and then infer the score of a new image, showing a significant correlation between automatic and human scores. The relation of these ratios to the age, ethnicity, gender and sex of the referees and some classical beauty canons was also analyzed. For instance, in [66] it was found that female scores are likely to be higher for male faces and that vertical face proportions play a more significant role than horizontal proportions. In [46], the authors reported that the faces obtaining the top scores did not respect the Golden Proportions and, in [142], neither classic geometrical rules nor symmetry were found to be effective beauty predictors.Other approaches, such as [79,100], relied on geometric facial measures only. Some feature dimensions, such as lower lip thickness, were found in [79] to be positively associated with attractiveness, while others, such as nose size, negatively. However, the results obtained were not fully consistent across different contributive analysis algorithms. In [100], it was also found that, classifying images into 4 categories, the highest attractiveness level reached very high accuracies (96.8% correct classification with respect to ground truth scores) and the other levels a lower or much lower one, which relates with the highest labeling confidence of human raters towards highly attractive and unattractive faces.Other attractiveness rating approaches used data extracted with holistic or mixed techniques. Skin textural characteristics and geometric features were used in [80], eigenfaces, geometrical distances, hair colors and skin smoothness in [43], Gabor features, eigenfaces and geometric features in [28], data extracted with PLS (Partial Least Square analysis) and geometric techniques in [21], eigenfaces obtained with both PCA and KPCA in [157], and shape and reflectivity data in [136].The results presented in these papers about the relative relevance of geometric, textural and holistic attributes to attractiveness are rather controversial and do not contribute a shared view about this point. Geometric based beauty prediction performed better than holistic in [43] and texture based in [21], while textural features outperformed geometric ones in [28]. The integration of features of different natures, textural and geometric, provided better accuracies than the individual features [43,28]. Some attempts to analyze the relative relevance of data extracted with holistic techniques were performed. In [43], it is reported that the eigenfaces showing higher significance for the human attractiveness ratings do not correspond to the highest eigenvalues, providing a general description of hair and face contours, but to the intermediate and smaller ones, which contain clearer details of facial features like nose, eyes and lips. On the contrary, the PLS factors found more relevant in [21] appeared related to averageness, symmetry and sexual dimorphism.Several researchers have attempted to use larger training databases, collecting images from the Internet. In this case, a major challenge to face is related to the large variability and low quality (i.e., different resolutions, orientations, illuminations and expressions) of the images used. Another relevant issue is obtaining human ratings for such a large numbers of images. To solve this problem, researchers often relied on images taken from hotornot.com, a site that allows users to rate, on a 10 point scale, the attractiveness of photos submitted voluntarily by others. In particular, a selection and rectification of the best images between 30.000 rated samples downloaded from this site, was performed and described in [168] This set, contains 2097 female and 1527 male images and, among the others, was also used in [36] for constructing an average face model that evolves as a function of attractiveness score and allows to analyze the differences of the facial traits at different beauty levels.As for small databases, different approaches to assessing attractiveness have been proposed, often resulting in contrasting findings. In [150], geometric ratios and eigenfaces were experimented in different classifiers, showing a better accuracy for eigenfaces. Different data, including eigenfaces, edge information and data extracted by various layers of local filter banks were used in [62] to train various regression models. Top correlation with the attractiveness scores was obtained using multilevel filter banks, outperforming by far eigenface results. Another study on female face portraits [33], analyzed different facial features (i.e. geometric features, color characteristics, and non-permanent traits as make-up and expression) and photographic aesthetics (i.e., image format and resolution, illumination and so on). Face shape and clues of the person’s weight and baby-faceness were found more relevant that non-permanent traits, while image quality was marginal.In [169], rather than attempting to develop a “universal” attractiveness predictor, the authors tried to build an automated scoring system for learning the personal preferences of individual users from their ratings of a set of example images. Eigenfaces, Gabor filters, edge orientation histograms, and geometric features were used to train a SVM regressor. However, results were not particularly promising, with a top average Pearson correlation with human scores (0.28) obtained with Gabor filters. A similar approach [6], based on a combination of geometric and textural features, attempts to learn the personal relative ranking of facial attractiveness, i.e. sorting a set of faces in order of perceived attractiveness rather than assigning a beauty level to an incoming image. Results are in good agreement with users’ personal taste.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
