@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Global structure constrained local shape prior estimation for medical image segmentation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Propose a novel target-oriented shape prior modeling method.Measure the intrinsic similarity between the target shape and the training shapes.Incorporate the shape model into an optimized search based segmentation method.Exhibit better performance than other existing methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Target-oriented shape modeling,Manifold learning,Manifold assumption,Medical image segmentation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Organ shape plays an important role in clinical diagnosis, surgical planning and treatment evaluation. Shape modeling is a critical factor affecting the performance of deformable model based segmentation methods for organ shape extraction. In most existing works, shape modeling is completed in the original shape space, with the presence of outliers. In addition, the specificity of the patient was not taken into account. This paper proposes a novel target-oriented shape prior model to deal with these two problems in a unified framework. The proposed method measures the intrinsic similarity between the target shape and the training shapes on an embedded manifold by manifold learning techniques. With this approach, shapes in the training set can be selected according to their intrinsic similarity to the target image. With more accurate shape guidance, an optimized search is performed by a deformable model to minimize an energy functional for image segmentation, which is efficiently achieved by using dynamic programming. Our method has been validated on 2D prostate localization and 3D prostate segmentation in MRI scans. Compared to other existing methods, our proposed method exhibits better performance in both studies.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Medical image segmentation plays a crucial role in a wide range of applications, particularly in diagnosing diseases and evaluating the effects of therapy. Manual delineation is still used by radiologists, which, however, is a tedious and time consuming procedure. Thus, automatic segmentation methods are highly desired. A large number of different segmentation methods have been proposed in the past [12]. The existing methods can be roughly divided into two categories: low-level feature based methods such as region based [9] and boundary based [19], and high-level feature based methods like model based [12,13] and atlas based [31,16]. Nevertheless, due to various kinds of perturbing factors, such as noise, partial volume effect and missing information, medical image segmentation is still a challenging problem.In recent years, model based segmentation approaches have been proven to be quite successful for medical image analysis [12]. Deformable model based segmentation turned out to be one of the most successful techniques for incorporating prior knowledge, which is widely used in medical image analysis [8,34,30]. This kind of approaches is more stable against local image artifacts and perturbation than the conventional low-level feature based algorithms. In other words, it is conducted in a top-down fashion because of containing high-level information such as shape and appearance of the structure of interest from a number of training shapes by statistical means.A milestone in this direction is the active shape model (ASM) introduced by Cootes et al. [8]. Shape modeling is one of the most important factors affecting the accuracy of segmentation in deformable model based methods. Point distribution model (PDM) has been successfully used in modeling shape statistics [10]. PDM is a statistical approach, which is able to extract a compact representation from a set of training instances. In the framework of PDM, dimensionality reduction is an indispensable step in constructing a statistical shape model. In the existing works, most of them have employed linear learning techniques such as principal component analysis (PCA) [8].PCA-like algorithms generally focus on a linearized shape space with small deformation modes around a single mean shape. Although successfully applied to various types of shapes (hands, faces, organs) [8], PCA may not always be able to generate shape prior suitable for the targeted structure for two reasons. Firstly, PCA is most useful in the cases, where all the shapes lie in or at least approximately in a linear subspace of the data set. Nevertheless, this assumption may be often violated by data obtained from the real-world. Secondly, PCA-like algorithms can only perform well when the learning shape set is composed of similar shapes.To overcome the limitations imposed by the linearity requirement, a number of non-linear shape statistics learning methods were reported in the past decades. [23] proposed a hierarchical framework for shape clustering and statistics learning without using explicit models. The method was used for shape retrieval with improved efficiency. [26] presented a method for constructing a Riemannian manifold of curves for tracking deforming objects by prediction and filtering. By using a geometric metric in the space of curves, the manifold can be obtained and used for shape modeling. Those studies showed that shapes are embedded in a manifold structure, which can be efficiently used for shape modeling.For parametric curves, the explicite manifold structure has been exploited for shape modeling. Srivastava et al. [24], Kurtek et al. [15], Younes et al. [32] presented methods for directly computing the geodesic paths over the manifolds using differential geometric techniques. Shape analysis based on those ideas was performed and improved results were demonstrated.In stead of performing shape modeling in the original high-dimensional shape space, we look for a more compact representation of the shape model in a lower dimensional space by using the manifold learning techniques. There has also been some work on building non-linear statistical shape model in this direction. For example, Sozou et al. proposed non-linear PCA based on polynomial regression [21] and multi-layer perceptrons [22] for natural representation of variations based on bending and rotation. Twining and Taylor [29] employed Kernel PCA, which is more general than other methods. Etyngier et al. [11] tried to use diffusion maps as a framework for shape modeling. Owing to the limitation of diffusion maps, only shapes on the manifold composing a triangle around the target shape is used. In addition, the manifold assumption is not considered, which leads to the accuracy of shape prior estimation interfered by the “noise” shapes. Although the above methods consider the two limitations of PCA-like algorithms, they failed to exploit the specificity of the patient.In this paper, our work combines the non-linear statistical shape model and the specificity of the patient to further improve the performance of segmentation. We propose a new segmentation method to estimate target-oriented shape prior. The contributions of our work are threefold:1.A new target-oriented shape prior estimation method us proposed. We model a category of shapes as a smooth finite-dimensional sub-manifold of the infinite-dimensional shape space.Considering the manifold assumption, shape prior is refined by the similarity of training images measured by the intensity information.A new shape prior term for image segmentation through a non-linear energy term is introduced to attract a shape towards its projection onto the manifold.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the motivation of target-oriented shape prior model is presented. In Section 3, a novel target-oriented shape prior estimation method is proposed to improve the accuracy of the segmentation. In Section 4, the proposed shape prior estimation method is incorporated into a deformable model based framework for image segmentation. In Section 5, a series of experiments are conducted to validate the performance of the proposed method. The paper is concluded in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
