@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Part-based deformable object detection with a single sketch

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Contour-based object detection scheme uses a single sketch as input model.An automatic part decomposition method segments the given model sketch into partsMulti-stage coarse-to-fine locally affine-invariant part-based matching strategyFirst, a PS-based framework is used to roughly identify some candidate locations.A detailed Contour Tracing then evaluates these initial detections more thoroughly.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hand-drawn sketches,Contour-based object detection,Part-based models,Dynamic Programming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Object detection using shape is interesting since it is well known that humans can recognize an object simply from its shape. Thus, shape-based methods have great promise to handle a large amount of shape variation using a compact representation. In this paper, we present a new algorithm for object detection that uses a single reasonably good sketch as a reference to build a model for the object. The method hierarchically segments a given sketch into parts using an automatic algorithm and estimates a different affine transformation for each part while matching. A Hough-style voting scheme collects evidence for the object from the leaves to the root in the part decomposition tree for robust detection. Missing edge segments, clutter and generic object deformations are handled by flexibly following the contour paths in the edge image that resemble the model contours. Efficient data-structures and a two-stage matching approach assist in yielding an efficient and robust system. Results on ETHZ and several other popular image datasets yield promising results compared to the state-of-the-art. A new dataset of real-life hand-drawn sketches for all the object categories in the ETHZ dataset is also used for evaluation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Object detection is an important problem in Computer Vision. The basic idea is to search for an object in an image and find its boundary or bounding box given some information about the object. Such information may be in the form of a single or a set of images of the object, or even a hand-drawn sketch. There are two main approaches to this problem that have been considered in the literature: feature-based [1–5] and contour-based [6–9], although some authors have also tried to combine both these ideas [10,11]. While feature-based methods are currently most popular, they have the limitation that the different appearances and articulations of the object are difficult to model without a very large training set. For many texture-less objects (like brand logos), shape is the sole dominant discriminative feature. Additionally, as observed by Dickinson [12], though humans use many visual cues to recognize an object, shape information retrieved from image contours is sufficient for recognition; other features like color, texture, shading, and depth information are not so essential for the task. Hence, it can lead to a robust, flexible and efficient system, invariant to object appearance such as color, texture and illumination, for object detection without the need for learning from a large set of images.However, challenges are also manifold. First, it is not so easy to distinguish the object (shape) contours from other edges due to the presence of object and/or background texture. Second, the gradient along the object boundary may become very weak in certain portions due to the presence of a matching background. Third, the object may undergo some deformations due to articulations or a change in the viewpoint. Last but not the least, there are variations within the input sketches provided and between different objects in the same object category.In this work, we address several challenges of a contour-based methodology in a pictorial structure-like framework, which we believe have not been fully addressed before. In order to make the problem tractable, we require the user to have a rough understanding of the general structure of the object and be able to draw in a manner which is not very sloppy and indeed draw a sketch that resembles the object silhouettes. This will be discussed later at length in the paper. Our system does not solve the general problem of learning object models, but the proposed system offers a fast and flexible sketch-based class-specific modeling with minimal training. The sketch should actually be recognizable as the object silhouettes, tailored to be good for recognition by a shape matching system (as opposed to real-life sketches [13]). Apart from the application of sketch-based image retrieval using input from touch-based devices, the method can be a component of a complete contour-based learning-detection system if one or multiple sketches of the object can be learnt from training data [14,15].The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses some related works in this problem domain. Section 3 describes our part decomposition algorithm. The Coarse Matching strategy to detect the objects in a deformable and locally affine-invariant way is described in Section 4. Contour tracing to verify the detection and trace the object contour is described in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 shows the results of experiments on several datasets.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
