@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Global optimization for coupled detection and data association in multiple object tracking

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Coupling detection and data association of object tracking in a single function.A new sparsity-driven object detection method that infers mutual occlusions.An optimization scheme to suppress false alarms without non-maximum suppression.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sparsity-driven detection,Network-flow data association,1-bit de-quantization,Dual decomposition,Multiple object tracking,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We present a novel framework for tracking multiple objects imaged from one or more static cameras, where the problems of object detection and data association are expressed by a single objective function. Particularly, we combine a sparsity-driven detector with the network-flow data association technique. The framework follows the Lagrange dual decomposition strategy, taking advantage of the often complementary nature of the two subproblems. Our coupling formulation avoids the problem of error propagation from which traditional “detection-tracking approaches” to multiple object tracking suffer. We also eschew common heuristics such as “non-maximum suppression” of hypotheses by modeling the joint image likelihood as opposed to applying independent likelihood assumptions. Our coupling algorithm is guaranteed to converge and can resolve the ambiguities in track maintenance due to frequent occlusion and indistinguishable appearance between objects. Furthermore, our method does not have severe scalability issues but can process hundreds of frames at the same time. Our experiments involve challenging, notably distinct datasets and demonstrate that our method can achieve results comparable to or better than those of state-of-art approaches.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The interpretation of the motion of large groups of individuals is a challenging problem in computer vision. A complete multi-object tracking system typically consists of three phases: object detection, temporal data association (i.e., the assignment of current observations to object tracks) and an optional step of state estimation for each object. These modules are usually arranged sequentially in the system so each subproblem itself is optimized independently. However, due to the lack of robust methods for object detection in uncontrolled environments and poor scalability to large numbers of objects, current tracking systems do not generalize well on challenging datasets. Most previous efforts have therefore followed two distinct directions of research: building stronger object detectors and designing better data association methods. As a result, almost all existing tracking systems use a “detection-tracking design” with two separate modules to address the detection and data association tasks.The detection-tracking design has the inherent weakness that it requires the output of the detection module to be reliable in order for the data association module to work properly. Detection errors such as “false alarms” and “missed detections” otherwise propagate to the data association module and false matches need to be corrected later. In contrast, we show that error propagation from detection to data association can be avoided if both tasks, detection and data association, are combined into a single module and solved simultaneously by optimizing a single objective function. In addition, we show that temporal information could significantly improve the performance of an object detector in our coupling framework. The coupling idea appears attractive but introduces new challenges as well:1.What type of objective function should be used? Many existing detection methods have not even been formalized as an optimization problem.How can the new objective function be solved? Many current data association methods are complicated, approximate solutions to intractable problems. A new objective function that couples detection and data association might be even more difficult to optimize.How can scalability of the proposed method be ensured? Computer vision systems face demands for being able to track large numbers of objects in dense formations. Given such large input sizes, an efficient algorithm to optimize the new objective function must be found.In this paper, we address all the questions above with a formulation of a coupling function and a method to optimize it. In particular, we propose a detection method with the classic sparse-signal recovery technique [1] for the dense-object tracking scenario when a foreground estimation technique is available. This method can be used to detect objects moving on the ground plane as well as objects moving in free 3D space. The sparsity constraint is important here because it can significantly reduce the number of false alarms and serves as a replacement of the heuristic technique of non-maximum suppression of hypotheses. We have to take care, however, that the approach does not lead to overly sparse results, that is, missed detections. To further boost the detection accuracy, we also impose a smoothness constraint from the data association aspect where we assume the state of each object follows a first-order Markov process and adopt the classical network flow formulation [2].Unlike previous coupling formulations that rely on a coordinate descent technique [3], our overall objective function has a simple form and can be solved through Lagrange dual decomposition. The method distributes the coupling formulation to subproblems and coordinates their local solutions to achieve a globally optimal solution. For each subproblem, a very efficient off-the-shelf algorithm is available. The proposed paradigm also permits distributed computing. Finally, our method was tested both for monocular and multi-view videos, and achieved consistent robustness across several challenging, notably distinct datasets. In summary, our contributions are:1.A novel and flexible framework for coupling the subproblems of detection and data association of multiple-object tracking in a single objective function, which permits using a straightforward global optimization technique.A new sparsity-driven object detection method that takes binary foreground/background segmentation as input, infers mutual occlusion relationships, and achieves a high detection rate even when objects are severely occluded.A general mechanism to suppress false alarms without “non-maximum suppression” either in the detection or in the data association stage.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
