@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A statistical feature based approach to distinguish PRCG from photographs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A method to distinguish photographic images and photorealistic computer graphics is proposed.A customized statistical feature, named texture similarity, is defined.Proposed method used Homomorphic filtering to highlight the image detail information.Proposed method is robust for content-preserving manipulations.Proposed method provides satisfactory detection accuracy and generalization capability.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Distinguishing PRCG from photographs,Contourlet transformation,Homomorphic filtering,Detection accuracy,Robustness,Generalization capability,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We present a passive forensics method to distinguish photorealistic computer graphics (PRCG) from natural images (photographs). The goals of our work are to improve the detection accuracy and the robustness to content-preserving image manipulations. In the proposed method, Homomorphic filtering is used to highlight the detail information of image. We find that the texture changes are different between photographs and PRCG images under same Homomorphic filtering transformation, and then we use the difference matrixes to describe the differences of texture changes. We define a customized statistical feature, named texture similarity, and combine it with the statistical features extracted from the co-occurrence matrixes of differential matrixes to construct forensics features. Then we develop a statistical model and use SVM as classifier to distinguish PRCG from photographs. Experimental results show that the proposed method enjoys following advantages: (1) Proposed method reaches higher detection accuracy, synchronously, it is robust to tolerate content-preserving manipulations such as JPEG compression, adding noise, histogram equalization, and filtering. (2) Proposed method is provided with satisfactory generalization capability, it will be available when the training samples and the testing samples come from different sources.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the rapid growth and widespread using of digital cameras and mobile phones, photos and pictures can be obtained when and where. At the same time, rapid development of computer vision and computer graphic technologies, make it is more convenient to generate the photorealistic computer graphics (PRCG). These PRCG are so realistic that it is very difficult to differentiate them from photographs and pictures by human eyes. See Fig. 1. The old adage of “seeing is believing” is no longer true. This trend has brought new issues and challenges for us concerning the authenticity of digital images. Therefore, identifying PRCG from photographs has become an important topic in the field of media application.Photographs are those pictures that are captured from real-world by imaging device such as camera. PRCG are scene images that does not exist in reality; it is generated only by computers and graphic software through the following process: first, a 3D polygon model is built to simulate a desire shape, then color, texture and simulate light irradiation are given to this model. At last, PRCG is imaged using a virtual camera. Recent advances in computer graphics are bring an amazing result, that is, it is possible to create models that are physically accurate without visual artifacts and lighting inconsistencies. Therefore, distinguishing PRCG from photographs is a very challenging problem.There are many established methodologies to distinguish PRCG from photographs in recent years. The majority of existing methods in literature are based on statistical learning model, in which, the features of inconsistency between photographs and PRCG are used for classification. Therefore, the main difference of existing approaches lies on the features extraction, and features extraction methods can be classified into two categories, the first is based on transform domain and the second is based on the physical characteristics of the imaging equipment.Taking a general survey on existing methods, there are some problems such as lower detection precision, weaker robustness and unsatisfactory stability. In our work, we aim at improving the detection accuracy, robustness, and generalization capability, and seek for new features that are able to distinguish photographs and PRCG. We find that the texture changes are different between photographs and computer-generated images under same Homomorphic filtering transformation, so we use Homomorphic filtering to highlight the image detail information. Considering that the Contourlet transformation has multi-direction selectivity and anisotropy, and can be used to describe the inherent characteristics of image, we use the statistic features of the Contourlet sub-bands to construct the distinguishing features. We define a customized statistical feature, named texture similarity, and combine it with the statistical features extracted from the co-occurrence matrix of differential matrixes to construct forensics features. Then we develop a statistical model, and use the least squares SVM as a classifier to classify PRCG from photographs. Experimental results show that the proposed method not only possesses satisfactory detection accuracy, also, it is robust to tolerate content-preserving manipulations, and provides satisfactory generalization capability for different image data sets.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the relational works. The proposed method is described in Section 3. Section 4 contains experimental results. Finally, a short summary are presented in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Nowadays, computer imagery and computer generated images touch many aspects of our daily life. Computer graphics are getting so photorealistic that it has brought new challenges towards the credibility of digital images. Identifying photorealistic computer graphics from photographs has become an important topic in the field of media application.In this paper, we aimed at improving the detection accuracy, robustness, and generalization capability, simultaneously, proposed a new approach to identify photorealistic computer graphics from photographic images. In the proposed method, the Homomorphic filter is used to highlight the image detail information, the statistical features of the Contourlet sub-bands of the image are used to construct the distinguishing features, and then the least squares SVM is used for classification. Experimental results show that the proposed method reaches high detection accuracy. Also, the algorithm is robust to tolerate content-preserving image manipulations, and it has satisfactory generalization capability in different data sets.