@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Different strokes for different folks? Revealing the physical characteristics of smartphone users from their swipe gestures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examine if the length of a person׳s thumb can be revealed from how they interact with a smartphone.From thumb length, we can infer other physical characteristics such as likely standing height.We examined 19,000 swipe gestures captured from 178 volunteers.People with longer thumbs complete swipe gestures faster than those with shorter thumbs.Males and females differ in the amount of pressure applied to the screen.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Touchscreen gestures,Behavioural biometrics,Physical biometrics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Anthropometrics show that the lengths of many human body segments follow a common proportional relationship. To know the length of one body segment – such as a thumb – potentially provides a predictive route to other physical characteristics, such as overall standing height. In this study, we examined whether it is feasible that the length of a person׳s thumb could be revealed from the way in which they complete swipe gestures on a touchscreen-based smartphone.From a corpus of approx. 19,000 swipe gestures captured from 178 volunteers, we found that people with longer thumbs complete swipe gestures with shorter completion times, higher speeds and with higher accelerations than people with shorter thumbs. These differences were also observed to exist between our male and female volunteers, along with additional differences in the amount of touch pressure applied to the screen.Results are discussed in terms of linking behavioural and physical biometrics.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The ability to accurately link a physical person to their activities conducted in the digital realm is an increasing challenge for our intelligence and law enforcement agencies. The present work was inspired through collaboration with the large multidisciplinary project Super Identity11SID: an exploration of super-identity, EPSRC. 2011–2015. http://www.southampton.ac.uk/superidentity.whose overarching aim is to model links between a wide range of physical/digital identity measures in order to build new identity attribution techniques.The theme of this paper was inspired by a need to address a specific real-world problem: how to identify criminals who conduct their activities using temporary burner mobile phones that are unregistered to them by name. Our main objective is to establish whether touch interaction dynamics can be leveraged to provide usable evidence as to the physical characteristics of their creator.In this paper, we present initial findings from an exploration into whether it is feasible to infer a single specific physical characteristic of a person – specifically the length of their thumb – from the way in which they perform a common smartphone interaction gesture, the ‘swipe’. If such a link could be made, we suggest that by following a route through known proportional relationships between that digit length and other human measurements, we would conceivably be able to infer various other physical characteristics of the person who created the gestures. To provide an example, to possess a long thumb suggests a longer hand length, a longer hand length suggests a longer forearm length and a longer forearm length suggests a taller standing height.As classically illustrated by Da Vinci in ‘Vitruvian Man’ (Fig. 1), studies of anthropometrics (e.g. Drillis et al., 1964; Doczi, 1981; Gordon et al., 1989; Fromuth and Parkinson, 2008) have shown that numerous segment lengths of the human body follow a common proportionality, approximating the ‘golden ratio’ of 1:1.618. This ability to predict the length of one body segment length (e.g. a persons height) from another (e.g. the length of their forearm) has found utility in multiple domains, most notably forensic science and ergonomics.Such is the importance of access to accurate anthropometrics data for the purposes of human tool and clothing design, large corpura of detailed body measurement data have been collected over the last century. Larger datasets include works conducted by the U.S. Military (e.g. Gordon, 1989; White, 1980; Garrett, 1971) and NASA (e.g. Webb Associates, 1978). The anthropometric data provided by ‘Kodak׳s Ergonomic Design for People at Work’ (E.K. Company, 2004) is a frequently cited classic resource within the field of ergonomics and product design.Analysis of the proportional relationships between various body segment lengths continues to produce the support to forensic and medical science, often to assess their suitability as a usable predictive tool. The ability to predict the length of a missing body segment (e.g. a femur bone) is for example useful in forensic anthropology, where the need to perform reconstructions of bodies from incomplete skeletal remains is a frequently encountered task. Results of a number of studies that have specifically considered the hand offer promising evidence that a predictive route from thumb length to larger body segment lengths is available. The close relationship between hand length measurements and standing height has been reported by Ilayperuma et al. (2009), Abdel-Malek et al. (1990), Meadows and Jantz (1992) among others, while similar analyses examining the relationship among hand length, foot length and standing height can be found in Sanli et al. (2005).When held one-handed, interacting with the touchscreen of a smartphone is naturally restricted to the use of the thumb only. In this paper, we hypothesise that when a smartphone is used in this way, evidence as to the likely length of its user׳s thumb is revealed by dynamics of their gestural touch interactions (such as their length and drawing speed). If this were indeed the case, it would provide a useful link between what would be considered a behavioural biometric, to a soft physical biometric for that individual.In the present study, we obtained an accurate measure of the length of each of our participants’ thumb, before then capturing a number of their touchscreen swipe gestures using an instrumented smartphone. Swipe gestures were drawn and captured in multiple directions. To maximise any potential correspondence between thumb length and the resultant characteristics of swipes created using that thumb, we restricting our participants’ interaction with the device to one-handed use only, with the device held in portrait orientation.The swipe gesture (sometimes referred to as flick or fling) involves placing a finger or thumb on the screen and – while maintaining contact with the screen – quickly swiping it in the desired direction. Akin to flicking through the pages of a book, the swipe gesture is frequently used to support content navigation, such as navigating a photo album or paging through a list. The swipe gesture was selected for this investigation over other touch gestures (e.g. drag, or multitouch gestures such as pinch-to-zoom) primarily because of its high frequency of use, but also for its high range of extractable features across a number of dimensions, including length, drawing speed and touch pressure.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Our results thus far offer positive signals that a route between a behavioural biometric and a physical biometric is potentially available via features of a common touchscreen interactional gesture. Our work so far has uncovered some evidence to support the notion that a physical characteristic of a person – namely their thumb length relative to population trends – could be detectable from characteristics of their behavioural touchscreen interactions.Future work will build upon the relationships we have observed here, and will seek to examine other feature extractions along with assessing the predictive capability of the features we have examined thus far. Future studies will also seek to increase our population sample and to examine free input (using finger instead of thumbs) along with devices of different form factors.