@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Collaborative error reduction for hierarchical classification

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Hierarchical classification is faced with the problem of error propagation.We propose to utilize the semantic relationship for reducing the errors.The method is extended to enable multiple branch selection using more relations.Joint utility of multiple relationships provides more reasonable branch selection.Our methods achieve a satisfactory balance between effectiveness and efficiency.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Concept detection,Large-scale hierarchy,Error propagation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Hierarchical classification (HC) is a popular and efficient way for detecting the semantic concepts from the images. The conventional method always selects the branch with the highest classification response. This branch selection strategy has a risk of propagating classification errors from higher levels of the hierarchy to the lower levels. We argue that the local strategy is too arbitrary, because the candidate nodes are considered individually, which ignores the semantic and context relationships among concepts. In this paper, we first propose a novel method for HC, which is able to utilize the semantic relationship among candidate nodes and their children to recover the responses of unreliable classifiers of the candidate nodes. Thus the error is expected to be reduced by a collaborative branch selection scheme. The approach is further extended to enable multiple branch selection, where other relationships (e.g., contextual information) are incorporated, with the hope of providing the branch selection a more globally valid, semantically and contextually consistent view. An extensive set of experiments on three large-scale datasets shows that the proposed methods outperform the conventional HC method, and achieve a satisfactory balance between the effectiveness and efficiency.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the increasing demand for organizing the large-scale image data effectively, image classification, a problem of labeling a target image with a set of predefined semantic concept label (s) [1,2], has received intensive studies in the last decade. The task is usually simplified as a binary classification problem, in which a binary classifier is learnt for each concept and used on-the-fly to determine the semantic content of the target image. The binary classification scheme, even has been popularly employed and demonstrated encouraging performance, is impractical when facing large-scale datasets (e.g., ImageNet [3] which includes 21,841 concepts with each of them associated with 1000 images), because all classifiers have to be called at runtime for every image.To tackle the scalability issue, hierarchical classification is commonly adopted. Instead of applying all classifiers to a target image, hierarchical classification organizes concept classifiers into a hierarchy (e.g., Fig. 1) according to the semantic relationship among concepts, and only selects a small set of classifiers for testing. The selection procedure usually starts from the root of the hierarchy and proceeds in a top-down manner that, for each node under investigation, hierarchical classification first applies the classifiers of the child nodes to the target, and then selects the child node(s) with the highest response(s) on its (their) classifier(s) as the next node(s) to investigate. The procedure repeats recursively and results in a path (paths) from the root to a leaf node (e.g., Animal-Fish-Salmon), on the basis of which all the concept labels on the path will be assigned to the target image.By reducing the number of classifiers to be visited, hierarchical classification significantly improves the efficiency of multiple concept detection, and thus has been widely employed (e.g., web categorization [4,5] and gene function prediction [6]). However, as pointed out by Bennett et al. [5], the improvement is paid at the price of sacrificing effectiveness of the classification. More specifically, the top-down classification procedure will make the classification errors included at the higher levels of the hierarchy be propagated to the lower levels, and in turn significantly degrades the accuracy of those leaf nodes. We argue that the major cause of the error propagation is the arbitrariness of the branch selection. It is well known that the performance of visual concept detectors is still not satisfactory in a general sense, and thus selecting a branch under a unreliable node may seriously ruin the classification procedure follows. In addition, the branch selection strategy is lack of global perspective, in the way that the classification only focuses on the local responses of the nodes to be investigated, but never verifies if these responses are valid or globally consistent to other related concepts. With Fig. 1 as an example, assuming that a target image includes a fish, the classification will be led to the branch under Dog if the classifier for Dog is unreliable and outputs higher response than that of Fish. When deciding next node to move on, the classifiers of the Pug Dog and Hunting Dog (if reliable enough) will output low responses. Globally speaking, this is conflicting to the semantic relationship in the hierarchy, in the sense that a parent node is with high response while all of its child nodes are with low responses. However, the procedure will never “doubt” the decision at the node Dog and continue to select between Pug Dog and Hunting Dog, resulting in further error propagation.In this paper, we propose a novel branch selection scheme to address the arbitrariness of the branch selection. Instead of selecting the node(s) with the highest response(s), we introduce an error recovery scheme which first verifies the consistency between the observation of the candidate node and those of its semantically and contextually related concepts, and then adjusts the output of the node accordingly. The decision of which branch to go will be delayed when the verifications of all candidate nodes are finished, and the decision is made only when more observations are available and it is “confident” to do so. Compared with the highest-response-first strategy, this is more reliable because the proposed branching decision is made collectively by investigating the responses of the candidate node and its relatives instead of that of the candidate node alone. In the example mentioned above, the scheme is able to detect the inconsistency among the observation of Dog and those of its children nodes, and thus increase the chance of leading the classification to the correct branch (i.e., that under Fish in this example).The main contribution of this work is the proposal of collaborative error reduction method for addressing the issue of error propagation in hierarchical classification, which is a problem rarely studied in the literature. The employment of proposed approach for both single-branch and multi-branch hierarchical classification methods is also demonstrated. Particularly, multiple concept relationships are novelly encapsulated in provision of a more globally consistent branch selection procedure. Eventually, a satisfactory balance between effectiveness and efficiency can be achieved.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
