@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multiphase segmentation using an implicit dual shape prior: Application to detection of left ventricle in cardiac MRI

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Novel segmentation algorithm is presented incorporating shape prior.Segmentation algorithm is developed in a variational framework using level sets.The prior uses the anatomical shape similarity between endo- and epicardium.Their dissimilarity is modeled following a Gaussian distribution.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Segmentation,Shape analysis,Implicit shape prior,Level set function,Magnetic resonance imaging,Left ventricle,Cardiac disease,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has been extensively used in the diagnosis of cardiovascular disease and its quantitative evaluation. Cardiac MRI techniques have been progressively improved, providing high-resolution anatomical and functional information. One of the key steps in the assessment of cardiovascular disease is the quantitative analysis of the left ventricle (LV) contractile function. Thus, the accurate delineation of LV boundary is of great interest to improve diagnostic performance. In this work, we present a novel segmentation algorithm of LV from cardiac MRI incorporating an implicit shape prior without any training phase using level sets in a variational framework. The segmentation of LV still remains a challenging problem due to its subtle boundary, occlusion, and inhomogeneity. In order to overcome such difficulties, a shape prior knowledge on the anatomical constraint of LV is integrated into a region-based segmentation framework. The shape prior is introduced based on the anatomical shape similarity between endocardium and epicardium. The shape of endocardium is assumed to be mutually similar under scaling to the shape of epicardium. An implicit shape representation using signed distance function is introduced and their discrepancy is measured in a probabilistic way. Our shape constraint is imposed by a mutual similarity of shapes without any training phase that requires a collection of shapes to learn their statistical properties. The performance of the proposed method has been demonstrated on fifteen clinical datasets, showing its potential as the basis in the clinical diagnosis of cardiovascular disease.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cardiovascular disease is one of the leading causes of death in western countries [28]. Since 1919, cardiovascular disease remains as the foremost cause of death in the United States [7]. Noninvasive cardiac imaging is now central to the diagnosis and management of patients with cardiovascular disease [3]. Several imaging modalities are extensively used to aid in the diagnosis and surgery of cardiovascular disease. Most popular ones include magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), positron emission tomography (PET), single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), ultrasound (US), and computed tomography (CT). The advance of these imaging technologies enables us to better understand the relation between the anatomy of human organ and its functional properties. Although echocardiography is currently used as the most common modality in the diagnosis of cardiac disease [2], the use of MRI plays an important role in clinical studies related to the treatment of cardiac abnormalities. In particular, cardiac MRI is generally considered as the gold standard for the volumetric analysis of left ventricle (LV) since it can provide high-resolution anatomical information on cardiac chamber volumes, functions, and myocardial mass [18]. MRI has become increasingly an important modality to assess the cardiac anatomy and its function related to the cardiac abnormalities [11]. Examples of cardiac MRI in end-systolic (ES) and end-diastolic (ED) phases are presented in Fig. 1.Assessment of the variation of the LV volume between diastole and systole is essential, as it allows calculation of the parameters that can serve as a diagnostic and prognostic predictor of coronary artery disease. Segmentation of LV is a fundamental and crucial prerequisite for the derivation of clinical heart parameters, such as, wall motion, end-diastolic volume (EDV), end-systolic volume (ESV), and ejection fraction (EF) [8]. In particular, the delineation of endocardium and epicardium is essential in this quantitative analysis [13]. In addition, segmentation of LV plays an important role in a variety of applications including computer-aided diagnosis, localization of pathology, and image-guided interventions [25,11]. However, it usually involves manual interventions that are prone to large inter- and intra-observer variations. Therefore, it is significant to develop an unsupervised and automated segmentation algorithm that can provide precise and reproducible results replacing human interactions that are tedious and time-consuming. However, automated LV segmentation remains a challenging task and the difficulty mainly stems from the complex anatomy of the heart, limited and non-isotropic resolution, highly variable pathology and anatomy, and cardiac and respiratory motion [11].A number of segmentation approaches have been proposed to address this problem in the past. A comprehensive survey on LV segmentation can be found in [24,11]. One of the widely used segmentation methods is an edge-based segmentation method that characterizes the boundary of objects using edge indicator functions and attracts segmenting contours called snakes toward the vicinity of edges [12,20]. In [27], the snakes-based segmentation method was proposed to tackle segmentation of LV on MR images. Segmentation using the snake technique is performed by evolving a segmenting curve defined in the image domain under the influence of the energy that consists of internal and external forces. In classical active contour models, an edge detector is used to derive the external force, and the internal force regularizes the curve preferring a smooth boundary. However, the drawback of this approach is that the object boundaries are mainly characterized by image gradients that may not be strong enough to define boundaries. In addition to low contrast, image noise is a degrading factor in an edge-based segmentation. Thus, a region-based approach has been proposed in order to deal with low contrast and insignificant details adopting a more global partitioning that integrates intensity over the entire image domain [21,4] where a segmenting curve is represented by the zero level set of a high dimensional embedding function. The level set representation is preferable since it can naturally deal with topological changes in contrast to the parameterized curve representation.In recent years, a model-based approach [32,29,6] has drawn a lot of attention as an alternative for image segmentation applications to deal with incomplete image information. It incorporates shape prior knowledge to improve the segmentation results overcoming poor image contrast, noise, and missing object boundaries. In modeling of shapes, its representation is introduced in either explicit or implicit way and each method has its advantages and disadvantages. The parametric point distribution model [5] with landmarks is an example of the explicit representation. Despite its efficiency due to low dimensionality, it has several drawbacks such as fixed topology or need of pairwise correspondences. To overcome these limitations, the level set method is employed as an implicit shape representation using signed distance function that has been adopted in the level set segmentation method [32,29,6]. The implicit contour representation has several advantages over the explicit one in that it does not depend on a specific parameterization. For example, Mitchell et al. [19] presented the model-based approach using active appearance model and Lorenzo-Valdés et al. [16] proposed a probabilistic atlas-based segmentation method for segmentation of 4D cardiac MR images.In order to reduce the dimensionality of shapes that reside in a high dimensional space, principal component analysis (PCA) has been widely used to compute shape statistics. For example, Leventon et al. [15] proposed a shape prior energy to restrict the flow of the geodesic active contour, where the prior was derived by performing PCA on a collection of signed distance functions of the training shapes. Shape incorporating segmentation [22,32] generally imposes shape prior knowledge in guiding segmenting boundary in the presence of noise or subtle boundary. However, it requires building the training shape data, which is labor intensive. Yang et al. [35] proposed a method for segmentation of LV by incorporating a neighbor prior constraint using level set representations. In addition, Kohlberger et al. [14] proposed to use a soft constraint using signed distance functions to give explicit control over the wall thickness as a fixed constant. Although myocardium is known to be nearly incompressible, 5% volume variation is usually observed [17].There are other segmentation approaches based on intensity-based fuzzy connectedness framework [23], thresholding [9] and region-growing [1]. In particular, in [23], the authors employed a temporal intensity difference as a characteristic feature and applied the Hough transform for approximating the region of the left ventricle. For better localization of the left ventricle, an intensity-based fuzzy affinity was introduced using polar coordinates and a dynamic programming scheme was used in the optimization procedure. However, a geometric shape information was not utilized in their work as a prior knowledge while our method imposes a geometric constraint on the segmentation energy functional.In the segmentation of LV in cardiac MRI, it is noted that the detection of epicardium is more challenging than that of endocardium since the background contrast is lower than the blood pool contrast, resulting in a partially missing epicardium boundary. In addition to the low contrast, heterogeneous characteristics of the epicardium region make it more difficult to determine its boundary. In this work, we aim at developing an accurate LV segmentation algorithm for cardiac MRI. A preliminary version of this method was reported in our previous work [34]. In this work, we report a complete algorithm design and provide new validations on both synthetic and cardiac data. In particular, we modify the assumption on the underlying shape distribution and improve the energy on the shape prior that imposes a shape similarity between the endocardium and the epicardium. In addition, in the evaluation of the algorithm, we perform extensive experiments on more clinical data and the MICCAI Challenge data [26]. We also compare the proposed method against a Random Walker segmentation method [10]. Furthermore, this work provides a clearer and better structured description of the proposed method. In order to resolve the problems mentioned above and provide robust segmentation results, we propose to use a novel shape constraint; namely, the implicit dual shape prior, without a training procedure, based on the assumption that the endocardium and epicardium shapes are anatomically similar. Specifically, we propose an energy functional using coupled level set functions that represent endocardium and epicardium and their shape discrepancy is measured based on the difference between their signed distance functions. Cardiac MRI at end-diastolic (ED) and end-systolic (ES) phases are used in our numerical experiment and quantitative tests on fifteen subjects demonstrate the accuracy and robustness of the proposed model.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Our segmentation model and the associated energy functional are presented in Section 2 where an implicit shape knowledge is also described. In Section 3 presents experimental results of LV segmentation on cardiac MRI. Discussion is provided in Section 4 and concluding remarks is given in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
