@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Local binary patterns on triangular meshes: Concept and applications

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel framework for computing local binary patterns on triangular mesh manifolds.Mesh-LBP evidences uniformity and repeatability aspects.Mesh-LBP descriptors can cope with mesh irregularities and global deformations.Mesh-LBP can be deployed in both local and global shape analysis.Experiments on 3D texture classification, retrieval and 3D face recognition.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
3D local binary patterns,Mesh manifold,Ordered ring facets,3D texture classification,3D texture retrieval,3D face matching,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we introduce an original framework for computing local binary like-patterns on 2D mesh manifolds (i.e., surfaces in the 3D space). This framework, dubbed mesh-LBP, preservers the simplicity and the adaptability of the 2D LBP and has the capacity of handling both open and close mesh surfaces without requiring normalization as compared to its 2D counterpart. We describe the foundations and the construction of mesh-LBP and showcase the different LBP patterns that can be generated on the mesh. In the experimentation, we provide evidence of the uniform patterns in the mesh-LBP, the repeatability of its descriptors, and its robustness to moderate shape deformations. Then, we show how the mesh-LBP descriptors can be adapted to a number of surface local and global analysis including 3D texture classification and retrieval, and 3D face matching. We also compare the performance of the mesh-LBP descriptors with a bunch of state of the art surface descriptors.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The rapid advancement of the 3D imaging technologies resulted in a new generation of acquisition devices capable of capturing the 3D objects geometry in the physical three-dimensional space. High-resolution 3D static scanners as well as devices with 3D dynamic acquisition capabilities that provide a continuous flow of the 3D geometry of a scene are now available. In addition to this, the geometric and RGB information are often captured in a synchronized way. In this respect, the interest and the widespread use of Kinect-like cameras in consumer and research applications is one of the most evident advancement in the field.The geometric information captured by such 3D acquisition devices is typically in the form of a cloud of points, which represent the three-dimensional coordinates of a set of samples of the 3D object surface. However, the direct processing of these point clouds is not convenient or even possible, so that other representation formats have been established. Depth images are one of the most commonly used imaging modality, since they permitted a direct extension to the depth dimension of many computer vision and pattern recognition solutions developed for analyzing the photometric information in 2D images. Though the possibility of a straightforward extension of 2D techniques is attractive, this modality loses the full 3D geometry, by reducing it to a 2.5D projection. The full 3D shape information is instead preserved and encoded in a simple, compact and flexible format by the triangular mesh manifold modality. This is widely used in many fields, such as animation, medical imaging, computer-aided design and many others. The recent advances in shape scanning and modeling have also allowed the integration of both photometric and geometric information into a single support defined over a 2D mesh-manifold. However, despite the abundance and the richness of the mesh manifold modality, the number of solutions for shape representation that exploit the full 3D geometry of the objects is still limited, and not comparable with the large variety of methods available in 2D. Indeed, many effective solutions capable of capturing discriminative information have been developed for 2D still images and videos, but their 3D counterpart is often not available.An example of such successful 2D descriptors is represented by the local binary pattern (LBP). Since its first formal definition by Ojala et al. [1,2], the LBP has established itself as one of the most effective local shape descriptors for image representation. It has been originally introduced for representing 2D textures in still images, but its computational simplicity and discriminative power attracted the attention of the image processing and pattern recognition community for other different tasks. Rapidly, LBP has found applications in visual inspection [3,4], remote sensing [5–7], face recognition [8–11], facial expression recognition [12], and motion analysis [13,14]. However, the LBP-based methods developed so far operate either on photometric information provided by 2D color images or on geometric information in 2D depth images. The few solutions that extract surface features directly in 3D (typically in the form of surface normals), resort to the 2D case by converting the 3D extracted features to depth values, and then use ordinary LBP processing on 2D images [15–17]. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is no a framework that allows the computation of LBP on a mesh manifold. Since LBP requires an ordered support for its computation, the major factor that contributed in this lack is the absence of an intrinsic order in the triangular mesh manifold. On the contrary, computation of LBP on 2D images, either photometric or depth, benefits from the implicit ordering of the pixels in the 2D image array.Motivated by these facts, in this paper we address the challenge of computing LBP on a mesh manifold by proposing an original framework that we call mesh-LBP, which allows the extraction of LBP-like patterns directly from a triangular mesh manifold, without the need of any intermediate representation in the form of depth images. With this framework, we can therefore build on the current 2D-LBP analysis methods, extending them to mesh manifolds as well as to the modality that also embeds photometric information into mesh models. To motivate our solution and to relate it to the state of the art approaches, next we provide an overview of the LBP literature.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we presented mesh-LBP as a novel framework for computing local binary patterns on triangular mesh manifolds. This framework keeps the simplicity and the elegance characterizing the original LBP and allows the extension of all its variants, developed in 2D image analysis, to the mesh manifold. The mesh-LBP reliefs object surface data from normalization and registration procedure required when using depth images, while it extends the spectrum of LBP analysis to closed surfaces.The experiments performed on mesh surfaces collected from different sources, brought evidence of a mesh-LBP “uniformity” aspect for the different types of scalar functions, pretty similar to the one noticed in 2D-LBP. We also demonstrated that mesh-LBP descriptors can cope with mesh-irregularities to a great extent. We showcased the ability of the mesh-LBP to be deployed in both local and global shape analysis. The experiments carried on 3D texture classification showed clear evidence of the appropriateness of the mesh-LBP descriptors for such a task, and their superior discriminative power as compared to other competitive shape descriptors. In summary, the angle between facets normal and the Gaussian curvature seem to be the more effective surface descriptors to be used within the mesh-LBP framework as emerges throughout all the performed experiments. The mesh-LBP performance superiority of 3D texture classification is nearly preserved for moderate and uniform global deformation apart for the shape index variant. While qualitative, and despite employing basic techniques, the experiments on 3D texture retrieval revealed their great potential of the mesh-LBP descriptors and the incapacity of the standard descriptors for such a task.The mesh-LBP allows a straightforward extension of the 2D-LBP face matching paradigm to the facial mesh surface modality. We proposed a simple yet effective method for constructing global facial shape signature. Compared to its depth image counterpart, our framework relieves the process from the constraining data normalization and depth map extraction tasks, in addition of avoiding self-occlusion effect. We proposed presentation composed of a three-band grid of facial points to which are attached mesh-LBP region descriptors. The experiments showed a net improvement when using the top and middle bottom only as the bottom band is the most sensitive to facial expressions. On the other hand, considering the lower part of the face as missing data, the obtained results revealed the ability of our method to successfully handle partial face matching to a great extent, even in the presence of facial expressions. Overall the obtained results are quite promising and showed to outperform other competitive methods.The comparison of the α1 and α2 operator functions across the different mesh-LBP applications results, gives more credentials the second function, especially in 3D texture retrieval and face recognition. However, the compactness of the descriptor obtained with the α1 operator, and the resulting lower computational complexity required to compare descriptors, vote for this solution when time constraints are relevant.In conclusion, we believe that our proposed mesh-LBP opened-up new perspectives in mesh manifold analysis, as showcased by the newly investigated tasks, namely 3D texture classification and retrieval, that have not been approached before, to the best of our knowledge, at least using mesh manifold modality. The texture retrieval experiments evidence the ability of the mesh-LBP not only for retrieving textured surfaces, but also detecting specific 3D shape patterns. As a final remark, we want also to point out our framework is not meant to handle general 3D shapes. Being based upon a notion of local description, our mesh-LBP framework is rather appropriate for the class of manifold objects exhibiting texture or shape variation. So, it is more related to intra-class classification/retrieval, where objects in that class have a very similar global structure and different local shape characteristics.As future work, we plan undertaking a deeper investigation of the different applications approached in this work. In addition, to exploring further the different mesh-LBP variants and their appropriate and optimal usage.