@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Real-time pose estimation of rigid objects in heavily cluttered environments

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A method for pose estimation of multiple mutually occluding objects was proposed.Normal information reduces number of false positive detections.Combining surface normals and edge information with multiplication performs better for nearly planar objects.Iterative pose hypothesis selection improves detection rate for mutually occluded objects.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
object pose estimation,textureless surfaces,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we present a method for real-time pose estimation of rigid objects in heavily cluttered environments. At its core, the method relies on the template matching method proposed by Hinterstoisser et al., which is used to generate pose hypotheses. We improved the method by introducing a compensation for bias toward simple shapes and by changing the way modalities such as edges and surface normals are combined. Additionally, we incorporated surface normals obtained with photometric stereo that can produce a dense normal field at a very high level of detail. An iterative algorithm was employed to select the best pose hypotheses among the possible candidates provided by template matching. An evaluation of the pose estimation reliability and a comparison with the current state-of-the-art was performed on several synthetic and several real datasets. The results indicate that the proposed improvements to the similarity measure and the incorporation of surface normals obtained with photometric stereo significantly improve the pose estimation reliability.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Visual inspection systems are often crucial for the detection of defects in manufactured products and for diagnosing problems in a manufacturing process. Currently, one characteristic of automated visual inspection systems is their specialization. With few exceptions, nearly all of the existing automated visual inspection systems have been designed to inspect a single object or a part of one whose position is highly constrained [1]. Positioning is usually achieved by a mechanical manipulation of the object, which can be expensive, space and/or time consuming, or simply impossible in some scenarios. A visual inspection system that could inspect arbitrarily positioned objects would bypass the need for mechanical manipulation of the inspected parts, thus reducing the cost of the system and increasing its flexibility. It would also enable inspection in scenarios that were previously thought unfeasible.For visual inspection in mechanically unconstrained environments, the system needs to detect and localize the objects, before the inspection can take place; this can be challenging because of variable object appearance, changes in the environment, mechanical properties, and background clutter. On the other hand, the fact that most industrial lines produce millions of similar products provides several opportunities to exploit. For example, 3D models are in most cases readily available, and even if they are not, the fact that the assembly lines handle millions of objects, makes an acquisition of such a model economically justifiable.In this paper, we present a method for real-time pose estimation in heavily cluttered environments. The method estimates the poses of multiple objects of the same type that are arbitrarily positioned in an image acquired by a single camera. We present three ideas that allow us to achieve a fast, reliable, and accurate operation: an improvement of the template matching algorithm proposed by Hinterstoisser et al. [2], a combining of the orientation of depth edges with the surface normal orientation obtained by photometric stereo, and an iterative procedure for selecting pose hypotheses.The primary goal of this research was to develop a robust and reliable system for real-time pose estimation in cluttered environments that could be used for on-line analysis of objects in mechanically unconstrained environments (Fig. 1).The paper is organized as follows. Brief overview of the related literature is presented in Section 2. Template matching is described in Section 3, followed by a description of hypotheses generation and selection in Section 4. An evaluation and the comparison to the existing state-of-the-art are in Section 5. Section 6 contains a discussion of the results, followed by the paper’s conclusion in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
