@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A value-oriented and culturally informed approach to the design of interactive systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Values and culture are approached in design in a joint, explicit and informed way.Theoretical and methodological basis from different areas are articulated.Introduction and explanation of informed artifacts created to support designers.Instantiation of a process for involving values and culture in design activities.Case study explains the process in action and shows its contributions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Culture,Values,Design,Evaluation,Process,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Cultural aspects such as values, beliefs, and behavioral patterns influence the way technology is understood and used, and the impact it may cause on the environment and on people. Although there is influential literature devoted to the subject of values and culture in Human–Computer Interaction, there is still a lack of principled and practical artifacts and methods to support researchers and practitioners in their activities. In this paper, we present a Value-oriented and Culturally Informed Approach (VCIA) to sensitize and support Computer Science and Engineering professionals in taking values and culture into consideration throughout the design of interactive systems. The approach is grounded on theoretical and methodological bases of Organizational Semiotics, Building Blocks of Culture, and Socially Aware Computing. VCIA offers a set of artifacts and methods articulated to support the design process in its different stages and activities: from the identification of stakeholders and their values, to the organization of requirements and the evaluation of the designed solution. In this paper, we present VCIA’s principles, artifacts, and illustrate its usefulness in bringing values into consideration, supporting a socially aware system design.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Interactive systems are a growing reality worldwide, and people use them for different purposes, through different devices, and in quite different and complex contexts. We are surrounded by both positive and negative examples of what interactive technology causes in our social environment: from privacy protection to security issues, from digital exclusion to people’s autonomy, from services availability to excessive techno-dependency, to name a few. Although new techniques and technologies have been developed, they are most often presented in theoretical isolation, and as a solitary technical solution (Bødker, 2006).Winograd (1997) had already argued that the designer’s role goes beyond the construction of an interface to encompass all the interspace in which people live, requiring a shift from seeing the machinery to seeing the lives of people using it. The author suggests the existence of a complex interplay between technology, individual psychology, and social communication, which demands that attention be given to relevant factors that become hard to quantify and even identify—values and culture are surely among them.Bannon (2011) provides interesting examples of the need for values to be considered in the context of “Ambient Assisted Living”. He argues that designers and researchers often conduct their researches and develop their products hoping they will support elderly people living independently, so as to better their quality of life at home instead in an institution, and to prevent them from becoming a burden on other people or on the state as they grow older. Nevertheless, although much of this work aims at empowering elderly people through independent living, they are in fact providing 24/7 remote monitoring rather than adding quality of life, dignity, or empowering this group of people to remain autonomous.Sellen et al. (2009) highlight transformations that are changing the way people relate to and through technology. The authors recognize values as a critical issue when designing technologies for the digital age, as people are not just using technology, but living with it. The authors highlight that human values, in all their diversity, should be investigated and understood according to the way they are promoted or inhibited by technologies. In Bannon (2011)’s example, the real needs, concerns, and values of the involved people are secondary. Thinking of technology development or medical assistance before understanding the different stakeholders and their values may prevent the understanding of more basic issues, such as people’s need to be in contact with family, friends, and neighbors in a natural way; the need to manage their privacy and autonomy; etc.Evidence of the implications of values (or their lack) in the design of computer systems are present everywhere. However, they are usually too subtle and only noticed when a social rule is violated, a behavioral pattern is broken, or a conflict of interest arises. In fact, as Knobel and Bowker (2011) discuss, because conversations about and analysis of values in technology generally occur after the product design and launch, values are often highlighted as a disaster that needs to be managed. As Friedman (1996) highlights, although the neglect of moral values in any organization is disturbing, it is particularly damaging in the design of computer technology because, unlike people with whom we can disagree and negotiate values and their meanings, we can hardly do so with technology.Some authors have even suggested the emergence of a new moment in the field of Human–Computer Interaction (HCI). Harrison et al. (2007) discuss the emergence of a third paradigm for HCI; while the first and second ones focus on issues of ergonomics and cognitive factors respectively, the third paradigm must deal with the establishment and multiplicity of meaning in situated interactions. Bødker (2006), in turn, speaks in terms of a third wave in HCI where new elements of human life are included, such as culture, emotion, and experience; the third wave focus is on culture and on an expansion of the cognitive to the emotional.These new elements, traditionally left to the margin of approaches to technology design, should be moved to the center. Considering all these different issues and speaking in terms of either waves or paradigms, the fact is that we are experiencing a new moment in the HCI field that requires a revision of its theories, methods, practices, artifacts, and tools. Bannon (2011) claims that a reformulation of the HCI discipline demands an exploration of new forms of living with/through technologies that give primacy to human actors, their values, and their activities. Sellen et al. (2009) assert that HCI experts must broaden the field’s scope and search for new methods to be used in the 21st-century sociotechnical environments.Of the core areas in Computer Science listed by ACM11〈http://www.acm.org/education/curricula-recommendations〉.(Association for Computer Machinery), HCI is the area that must deal with issues that are universal and transversal to other areas and, in parallel, must consider specific aspects (social, cultural, economic, political, and geographic) of the environment in which its application occurs. This highlights the inherent complexity that characterizes the area and the need for a multidisciplinary view. Nevertheless, curricula in Computer Science and Information Technology traditionally do not provide opportunities for students to deal with social issues in technology design. Moreover, authors, such as Bannon (2011), Baranauskas (2009), Bødker (2006), Miller et al. (2007), Sellen et al.(2009) and Schikhof et al. (2010), emphasize the need for developing and publishing studies that support practitioners and researchers as they manage the complexity and varied requirements that current technologies demand. More important than including issues related to values and culture in the agenda, is the need to facilitate the recognition of these issues by professionals who are unfamiliar with the social sciences, thereby supporting designers not only in what they must do, but in how they can do it.In this paper, we introduce VCIA: a value-oriented and culturally informed approach to design that offers artifacts and methods to address values and culture in a theoretically founded and explicit way. VCIA is grounded on the Organizational Semiotics theory (Liu, 2000), the Building Blocks of Culture (Hall, 1959), and the Socially Aware Computing view for design (Baranauskas, 2009, 2014; Baranauskas and Bonacin, 2008). VCIA encompasses different design stages: from the problem clarification and the organization of requirements, to the evaluation of prototypes and the final solution. We have experienced VCIA in different design contexts and it has shown promising results for supporting design activities within the HCI’s new moment.Previous literature has acknowledged the importance of addressing values and cultural aspects in technology design and adoption, (e.g., Del Gado and Nielsen, 1996; Friedman, 1996; Isomursu et al., 2011; Marcus, 2001; Noiwan and Norcio, 2006). Moreover, as Schikhof et al. (2010) show, there is a lack of solutions, explanations, and examples of how to deal with these issues in an explicit manner. Our research adds to the existing literature by integrating culture and values issues, articulating theoretical bases, and offering a set of artifacts and methods to support designers throughout the design process. The discussion and examples presented in this paper illustrate VCIA in action, and may inspire researchers and practitioners in other contexts.The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses background research on values and culture in design. Section 3 introduces and discusses VCIA, its main principles, theoretical and methodological foundation, and artifacts. Section 4 instantiates VCIA in a practical setting related to the design of a social network for Brazilian teachers in the special education field, presenting and discussing results. Section 5 discusses the main issues about VCIA and the case study. Section 6 concludes and indicates directions for future research.In the field of Design, the concern with peoples’ culture and values has been somewhat present in design practices and theories. Papanek and Fuller (1972), for instance, challenged the way design was understood and practiced, claiming for a socially and ecologically responsible design of products, tools and infrastructures. In the HCI domain, defining, understanding and dealing with values and culture has been a challenging task. Authors, such as Bannon (2011), Friedman (1996) and Sellen et al. (2009), draw attention to the importance of thinking about values when designing interactive systems, and agree that the HCI discipline must revisit its methods and techniques in order to support researchers and practitioners in their activities.In fact, the concept of value has been an important matter of discussion across several disciplines, receiving different focus and interpretations. Williams (1979) discuss how the term “values” has been used to refer to interests, pleasures, preferences, moral obligations, desires, wants, goals, needs, attractions, and other kinds of selective orientations, defending that the core phenomenon in values is the presence of criteria or standard of preference. The author highlights the challenge of assuming a definition for values, arguing that while a comprehensive initial view for the field of valuing must identify generic characteristics, for specific purposes more restrictive conceptions should be formulated as needed.In this paper, we consider values from Williams’ (1979) perspective: as core conceptions of the desirable within individuals and society that serve as standards or criteria to guide not only action, but also judgment, argument, evaluation, choice, etc. This perspective is in accordance to Schwartz (2005) definition for values: desirable and trans-situational goals that vary in importance and that serve as principles that guide people’s lives. Moreover, this perspective also encompasses Friedman et al. (2006)’s definition for values in the context of technology design: something that is important to a person individually or to a group of people.Hall (1959) also defends the cultural nature of values suggesting the importance of technology as both cause and result of cultural changes in a society. Indeed, technology itself does not have values—people do. Depending on the way technology is designed, it will afford behaviors that are intrinsically related to individuals and the complex cultural context in which they are using it. Individuals will interpret and behave through the technology influenced by their cultural systems (e.g., values, beliefs, behavioral patterns). Their behavior may be in disagreement or agreement with their values and the values of other people. This, in turn, will promote or inhibit certain values over others.Some initiatives have explicitly focused on values in technology design. Steen and van de Poel (2012) show that design is beset with values from the start, drawing attention to the need for making values explicit during the design process. Cockton (2005) proposes a framework to support what he named a Value-Centered Design, suggesting some activities and artifacts to support designers in the development of value-centered systems. According to him, the focus of his framework is on the understanding of technology design as a process of delivering something valuable. From a different perspective, Friedman (1996) has been working on an approach she named Value-Sensitive Design. This approach is intended to support the concern with values in the design of computer systems, especially ethical values.Other authors have reported experiences with design activities where the concern with values was made explicit. Schikhof et al. (2010) explored the role of monitoring systems in small-scale housing for elderly people with dementia. The authors incorporated principles of Value Sensitive Design in a human-centered design process. However, they identified a lack of guidance in HCI terms to support the process of understanding how to focus on human values, how to identify those that are critical and that must be considered in a design context, and how to actually conduct value-oriented design.Isomursu et al. (2011) proposed a method based on Schwartz’s circular model (Schwartz, 2005) for modeling the subjective value perceived by users of a new technology. The model was used in the context of value analysis to test the adoption of a technology-supported attendance control system (e.g., smart cards, mobile phone, web portal) in a primary school. The results indicate the importance of considering values during the first stages of the design process and the authors conclude that the product could have met the target users’ values if values had been explicitly considered when the system was designed.Although there are some initiatives which contemplate values in technology design, Le Dantec et al. (2009) and Isomursu et al. (2011) claim that the existing models and approaches usually restrict the analysis to a set of preconceived values, rather than encourage professionals to inquire about other values that may appear and that are relevant to a particular usage context. Isomursu et al. (2011) also highlight that models which consider global values and do not account for their cultural nature, if strictly followed, may prevent the identification and understanding of some important culturally specific values.Moreover, although the relationship between values and culture has been clearly recognized, these two issues are usually approached separately. Some authors have dealt with the subject of culture in technology design, particularly by investigating cultural issues in usability evaluation (Del Gado and Nielsen, 1996; Winschiers and Fendler, 2007), as well as proposing new methods (Salgado et al., 2012) and studying current HCI design methods from a cultural perspective (Gasparini et al., 2011; Maunder et al., 2007; Salgado et al., 2011; Yeo, 2000). Culture is underlying researches related to Internationalization/Globalization (Marcus, 2001), although values are not usually explicitly approached.El-Shinnawy and Vinze (1997) examined the impact of technology and culture on the process and outcomes of group decision-making. Their findings indicate that group decisions are a function of the medium of communication and the cultural setting in which the decision is taken, confirming the importance of considering cultural aspects when studying group processes. According to the authors, technology affects group decision-making, and the extent of the impact varies according to the group’s cultural norms.Noiwan and Norcio (2006) investigated the effects of animated graphic colors on attention, and perceived usability by users from different cultures, concluding that culture influences users’ overall performance, overall retention, and overall self-reports of usability. Swigger et al. (2004), in turn, investigated how cultural factors affect the performance of distributed collaborative learning teams, and identified that the teams’ cultural composition is a significant predictor of their performance on programming projects.In the context of persuasive computing, Vasalou et al. (2010) investigated social network sites focusing on how designers motivate users to create content and to keep coming back to the website. In this study, the authors identified that experience with the website and culture have effects on users’ motivations, the way they use the website, as well as on the time they invest on it.Noiwan and Norcio (2006) argue that although HCI researchers recognize culture as an important factor, cultural studies in HCI are still unsubstantial. They mention that recommendations regarding interface design for international users are mainly based on collective knowledge, personal experiences, and few case studies. In fact, as Sellen et al. (2009) highlight, despite recent efforts there is still a need for developing ways to support the design of technology for the digital age.In the context of HCI and culture, Hofstede (1991) investigated cultural differences in an international technology company, and proposed a framework with five cultural dimensions (Power Distance Index, Individualism, Masculinity, Uncertainty Avoidance Index, and Long-Term Orientation Index). His framework has been used to support the analysis of cross-cultural issues. However, similar to the value-oriented frameworks cited previously, it does not favor the identification of aspects that may emerge from the context being analyzed, such as the ones related to behavioral patterns that do not fit the framework dimensions (e.g., play, fun, subsistence).Contextual Design (Beyer and Holtzblatt, 1997) is a user-centered design process that offers a set of methods to support the design of products based on the collection, interpretation and use of data about users in the field. This process provides the Cultural Model: a model to support designers to represent the most important culture and policy that influence how the work is conducted in an organization, how people are constrained and how they deal with those constraints to conduct their work (Holtzblatt and Beyer, 2013). The model supports designers when analyzing the collected data; no model is offered to support designers to think about values and culture in other stages of the process, such as the data collection and requirements clarification (e.g., Contextual Inquiry stage) and the evaluation of the designed solution.In a certain way, the Personas Technique may support designers to make cultural issues explicit and to think about the values of different stakeholders. Popularized by Cooper (1999), a persona tries to characterize and describe a typical user of the proposed solution as though s/he was a real person. Holtzblatt and Beyer (2013) suggest that personas require a rich contextual data in order to be relevant. In fact, this technique heavily relies on designers’ background and ability to create representative personas, not favoring the identification and understanding of cultural values in the design context and its different stakeholders.From the previously cited works that address issues related to values and culture in technology design, the Value-Sensitive Design has been perhaps the most influential. According to Friedman et al. (2006), Value-Sensitive Design is a theoretically grounded approach to the design of technology that accounts for human values throughout the design process. It involves an integrative and iterative tripartite methodology that consists of conceptual, empirical, and technical investigations, encouraging moral discussions in relation to the development of products and services (Miller et al., 2007).On the one hand, our work adds to Value-Sensitive Design and Contextual Design by proposing artifacts and methods that may support some of their different activities, such as the identification of stakeholders and their values, the analysis of existing technical solutions, the organization of requirements related to values, and the mapping of the possible impact of these requirements on the stakeholders. On the other hand, it differs substantially from Value-Sensitive Design and Hofstede (1991)’s cultural dimensions by explicitly addressing the cultural nature of values, and by integrating the proposed artifacts and methods into a well-defined design process.In many different ways, culture influences what people pay attention to and what they ignore, the way they behave and the way they interpret someone else’s behavior, what they value and what they do not. For Hall (1977), the natural act of thinking is strongly modified by culture. Values are learned and determined by culture (Hall, 1959; Rokeach, 1979; Schwartz, 2005) such that it is not possible to fully understand them outside their complex cultural context. In this sense, if we are to approach values in technology design, we must pay attention to their cultural nature and complexity.VCIA is a Value-oriented and Culturally Informed Approach to the design of interactive systems that involves a set of artifacts and underlying theories and methods articulated to support the explicit consideration of values and their cultural nature during different design stages. VCIA aims to address important issues pointed out in the HCI literature by having three key-principles: (1) Values and Culture are intertwined and inseparable; (2) Designers need practical artifacts and methods to support their activities; (3) Designers need a well-defined design process.First principle: Values and Culture are inseparable. VCIA considers values and culture in an articulated way informed by different theoretical and methodological basis. While a value indicates something that is important and needs to be taken into account, the cultural context explains why such value is important, helping designers to understand the possible implications of its promotion or negligence, and other issues that are direct or indirectly related to it. As presented in Section 2, although there are important works in literature addressing both culture and values in technology design, to our knowledge, no existing approach supports the involvement of both culture and values in an explicit, informed, and integrated way throughout the design process.Second principle: Practical artifacts and methods are needed to support a value-oriented and culturally-informed design. VCIA addresses the gap identified in literature which claims the need for theoretically grounded artifacts and methods for supporting professionals that have little (or no) experience with social subjects to account for culture and values. The artifacts were created to support designers in their different activities. On the one hand, the artifacts interact with each other providing inputs and outputs that suggest a natural order of use; on the other hand, they are independent and could be used in isolation for specific purposes according to users’ needs. Each artifact is intended to lead designers to think beyond obvious issues, expanding and clarifying their understating of the problem domain and the solution to be designed. They look for a balance between offering guidance and supporting critical and creative thinking.Third principle: A well-defined design process, in which values and culture are embedded concepts, is needed to support a value-oriented and culturally informed design. The literature in HCI also indicates a lack of guidance regarding how to concretely address values and culture in design activities. VCIA integrates the artifacts in a design process that articulates informal, formal, and technical aspects of information systems and that favors interactive systems designers to think about values and culture, keeping them in mind during design activities. VCIA supports the use of the proposed artifacts to move from informal discussions to the design of technical solutions in a socially responsible manner.VCIA draws upon Baranauskas’ Socially Aware design model (Baranauskas, 2009, 2014; Baranauskas and Bonacin, 2008) and proposes artifacts to serve specific purposes—see Fig. 3. The artifacts and their usage were created on the grounds of Organizational Semiotics theory (Liu, 2000) and the Building Blocks of Culture (Hall, 1959).Hall (1959) recognizes culture as a term that has been given different meanings, and uses it to refer to people’s ways of life, their learned behavioral patterns, attitudes, values, and material things. To him, culture is related to the very different ways of organizing life, of thinking, and of conceiving underlying assumptions about the family, the state, the economic system, and even of mankind. Hall approaches culture as a form of communication, giving emphasis to the nonverbal form. What people are able to communicate verbally would only be a fragment of an entire complex system of communication, and probably the most obvious one. Aiming at formalizing the characterization, analysis, and comparison of different cultures, he proposed 10 Primary Messages Systems, or areas, named the basic Building Blocks of Culture: Interaction, Association, Learning, Play, Defense, Exploitation, Temporality, Territoriality, Subsistence, and Bisexuality.In Hall’s theory, a culture is understood as an evolution of human behaviors and interactions mapped by a combination of the 10 areas. Moreover, cultures also develop values with regard to the ten areas. For instance, values in “Defense” are related to the rules, strategies, and mechanisms developed in order to protect space (physical or personal), the objects used to guarantee protection, the medical therapy adopted/preferred, etc. In this framework, religions may be understood as a way of protecting the society from itself by inhibiting potentially harmful behaviors. Values in “Play” are related to the kind of sporting activities preferred in a society, the importance given to leisure and the day of the week used to rest, preferred places for playing, and so on. Values in “Exploitation” are related to the preferred tools, objects, instruments, and procedures for working, playing, learning, protecting, eating, etc.Values may also be developed in the intersection of different areas. For instance, Britannica22〈http://www.britannica.com/bps/dictionary?query=identity〉, last access: Jul 24th 2014.defines identity as “the distinguishing character or personality of an individual”. The value of “identity” in a society may be understood as a value developed in the intersection of all the ten areas. Identity refers to individuals’ “self”, the expression of elements of a person’s personality and individuality: who the person is in space and over a period, in its widest sense. The conception and importance of “identity” vary according to the culture being considered.Besides the attempt to structure and organize the study of culture, perhaps one of the most important contributions of Hall’s works is the introduction of the notions of informal, formal, and technical levels in which humans operate and understand the world (Hall, 1959). According to him, each level is present in any situation, but one will always dominate in a given instant of time, and is dealt with separately. Sometimes, the shifts (and boundaries) between these levels are subtle and rapid, but understanding them is the basic requirement to understand the process of change.The Organizational Semiotics theory proposes a structure named “Semiotic Onion” (Stamper et al., 2000) to explain how these levels coexist in the context of organizations and information systems—seeFig. 1: the key idea is that any technical artifact is embedded in a formal system that, in turn, is embedded in an informal one. The informal system represents the organizational culture, customs, and values that are reflected as beliefs, habits, and individual behavior patterns of its members. The formal corresponds to aspects that are well established and accepted, becoming social conventions, norms, or laws. Finally, the technical, situated at the core of the onion, represents aspects that are so formalized that they can be technically approached and supported.The Organizational Semiotics considers an organization and its information system as a social system in which human behaviors are organized by a system of norms (Liu, 2000). For Stamper et al. (2000), these norms govern how the members think, behave, make judgments, and perceive the world, and are directly influenced by culture and values. The Organizational Semiotics explores the use of signs and their effects on social practices, and provides a set of methods (e.g., Problem Articulation Method, Norm Analysis Method) and artifacts (e.g., Stakeholders Identification Diagram, Semiotic Ladder, Ontology Charts) to deal with information and information systems in a balanced way, taking into account technological issues as well as human aspects of information resources, products, and functions.In her Socially Aware Computing view of design (Baranauskas, 2009; Baranauskas and Bonacin, 2008), Baranauskas articulates ideas inspired by Organizational Semiotics (Liu, 2000) and Participatory Design (Schuler and Namioka, 1993), proposing a framework that considers a dialogue with design materials and, mainly, among individuals in their different roles (e.g., designer, developer, user, other stakeholders) in order to conduct participatory work in interactive system design. In her view, the technical aspects of a system design depend on and impact on the formal and informal aspects of organizations and society. A technically centered perspective prevents those involved in a design context from a wider sense-making of the problem being handled and the solution being proposed.In this sense, Baranauskas (2009, 2014) argues that any design process must be understood as a movement from the outside to the inside of the Semiotic Onion, crossing the informal and formal layers of signs towards the construction of the technical system, because this movement favors the identification, articulation, and formalization of relevant aspects of the social world (e.g., values and culture)—see the arrows inFig. 2. Yet, the movement returns back from the technical system impacting the formal and informal layers, and the society in an informed way, reflecting an understanding of the social world, making sense to users and, potentially, promoting acceptance and adoption.The dashed ellipse in Fig. 2 indicates the design process in action. It starts in the social world, crossing the informal layer where activities are conducted to clarify the problem (e.g., identify the stakeholders, their cultural differences, interests, and expectations). Design progresses from the informal to formal layer where activities support the elicitation of requirements, the decision-making informed by the knowledge constructed during problem clarification, and the solution modeling. The design process continues towards the construction of a technical system through activities that support interactive prototyping, the codification, experimentation of design alternatives, and their evaluation.As the ellipse indicates, the process does not finish in the technical level, but continues crossing back to the formal and informal layers. This means the design product will potentially trigger changes that may require updating the model, reviewing agreements, justifying design decisions, as well as it may impact established processes, formal norms and laws. Therefore, the design product also impacts the shared understanding about the problem and solution, its importance to the different stakeholders, and so on. The process will progress iteratively and incrementally as much as necessary.Underlying the VCIA model is an understanding that the design of solutions that make sense to people, meet their demands, respect their values, culture and other social requirements, and, ultimately, does not produce harmful side-effects, requires an understanding of the way different stakeholders value and react to a proposed innovation, seeing the world from their view and cultural particularities.VCIA considers three main design stages proposed by Baranauskas and Bonacin, (2008): Analysis, Synthesis and Evaluation. These happen in a non-linear order, indicating that understanding and describing a problem, finding a solution, and implementing it, does not occur in fixed, predefined sequences, but in an interactive, iterative and incremental process.The stage of Analysis happens mainly when designers are clarifying the problem and conceiving a solution. It also occurs when designers are defining, organizing, and evaluating requirements as well as investigating existing solutions, technical possibilities, restrictions, and so on. The stage of Synthesis occurs mainly when the results of discussions are converted into requirements or project decisions, and materialized into design solutions. It can also occur when the problem is being clarified and technical alternatives are being considered. The stage of Evaluation, in turn, is clearly visible during the inspection of prototypes and the justification of design decisions; but also occurs when models are validated, decision are made to solve conflicts, and when expectations, values, meanings, and intentions are shared and confronted.Fig. 3 shows an overview of the VCIA model, with the artifacts created or adapted to support design activities surrounding the Semiotic Onion. The artifacts are placed within the layer of the onion in which they contribute the most, suggesting a feasible, although flexible, order of use. These artifacts articulate the theoretical and methodological basis previously presented, leading designers to keep values and cultural aspects in mind, considering such aspects explicitly throughout the design process.Each artifact has a specific purpose and supports different activities for a value-oriented and culturally informed approach to design.•Stakeholder Identification Diagram (Kolkman, 1993): helps designers think beyond obvious classes of stakeholders (e.g., user, client, manager), paying attention to the parties’ different levels of involvement, interests, and expectations.Value Identification Frame: invites designers to think about the different values each stakeholder brings to the project and that must be considered in the design activities.Value Comparison Table: supports designers in the comparison between different design alternatives when they are investigating existing/related solutions.Culturally Aware Requirements Framework: helps designers identify and organize requirements related to the values and culture of the different stakeholders involved in the design context.eValue: helps designers evaluate whether the solution was designed accordingly, i.e., whether design decisions are reflecting the understanding about the values and the culture of the different stakeholders.In VCIA, the design process does not have a pre-defined number of iterations, but continues as far as the problem and its solution need to be improved. All the stages encompass different activities, are supported by different artifacts and methods, and cross the informal, formal, and technical layers, although they are more concentrated in one of them. The artifacts presented in Fig. 3 are intended to support designers in their practices, serving as a complement to the techniques and tools they already use.During the Analysis stage, the identification of stakeholders is one of the first activities to be conducted. Different stakeholders bring different perspectives to the innovation being proposed, and have different interests, views, needs, values, and culture.The Stakeholder Identification Diagram has five layers (see Fig. 5 for details). The project/solution to be designed is represented by the core of the artifact (“Operation”), and stakeholders are distributed into different categories: from the actors directly involved in the design (“Contribution”) and the sources of information (“Source”), to the partners and competitors (“Market”), and the people who may not use the solution but may affect, or be affected by, it (“Community”). The closer stakeholders are to the core layer, the more they are directly impacted by the solution (and vice-versa). The artifact’s input is the problem being clarified, and the output is a map of the different stakeholders involved in the problem and its solution.Practical steps for using the Stakeholder Identification Diagram:1.Start with a brief description of the problem being clarified.Highlight all the interested parties (stakeholders) that appear in the description.Find the most suitable layer in the artifact for each stakeholder.For the layers of the Stakeholder Identification Diagram, answer:•Who are the principal actors responsible for finding and building a solution to the problem?Who are the clients and providers that will require and supply resources (information, budget, people)? Who will be the direct users of the solution?Who are the collaborators that may contribute to the design, and who are the main competitors?Who are the legislators and other entities whose activities and resolutions may influence the design context? Who are the bystanders who will not use the solution but may be positively as well as negatively affected by its design and use?Some stakeholders may be related to more than one layer of the artifact, indicating it has different roles and influences that should be considered. The key issue when filling the artifact is not to identify the correct layer in which the stakeholder should be placed, but to map these different stakeholders according to their different levels of involvement with the problem.The Value Identification Frame may be used as soon as any stakeholder has been identified. The artifact’s input is the list of stakeholders identified through the Stakeholder Identification Diagram, and its output is a list of the values each different stakeholder brings to the design problem.Practical steps for using the Value Identification Frame:1.Select each stakeholder from the Stakeholder Identification Diagram.For each stakeholder, answer:•What are the main values for this stakeholder?What are the needs and expectations about the problem and its solution?What should characterize an ideal solution for this stakeholder?What positive or negative impact the solution may cause on this stakeholder?Is there any conflict between the values already listed for this stakeholder? And between other stakeholders’ values?From the answers to the questions in step 2, list the concepts that represent values for the related stakeholder and highlight possible conflicts.When completing this artifact, designers need to look beyond their own experiences and consider the point of view of stakeholders with different levels of involvement. The Stakeholder Identification Diagram and the Value Identification Frame help designers think of the diversity of stakeholders and their values, keeping them in mind during the design of a solution.The Value Comparison Table was created to support both analysis and evaluation from a technical perspective, helping designers in the comparison of different existing solutions. With this artifact, designers explore existing solutions, questioning and analyzing how they reflect values. The artifact has a column for the areas of culture, a column for the list of values to be analyzed (and other values that may be identified during its usage), and a column for each solution that will be analyzed. The artifact’s inputs are the areas of culture, a list of values, and the solutions to be analyzed. The output is a mapping of the way different solutions reflect values.Practical steps for using the Value Comparison Table:1.Select the existing solutions to be analyzed.Explore the main features of each solution.For each area of culture, list the values that will be investigated for all the analyzed solutions.For each value:•Explore each solution and evaluate the way it is (not) supporting the value, taking notes.If a new value is identified, insert it into the corresponding column and analyze it.Once completed, the Value Comparison Table provides designers with a map of how values are reflected by/on/through each solution: each cell presents reasoning about a given value in a specific solution; each line makes it possible for designers to identify the pros and cons of each application regarding a given value, and allows designers to highlight which values might inspire them when designing a new solution, or alert them about what they should avoid. Additionally, each column provides a picture of the values perceived in a given solution, the way they are being supported, and designers’ impressions about them.During the stage of Synthesis, it is necessary to define and specify the way stakeholders’ values and culture would be effectively considered, dealt with, and represented through either the design’s decisions/constraints or the system’s functionalities. The Culturally Aware Requirements Framework supports designers in this task. The artifact’s basic assumptions are: values are culturally developed according to the building blocks (or areas) of culture (Hall, 1959). Depending on the way the innovation is designed, it will affect different aspects of these areas, promoting or inhibiting the different stakeholders’ values. For instance, the innovation my cause negative impact on aspects of stakeholders’ subsistence, requiring them to learn a new technology and affecting their autonomy. The designers’ task is to identify requirements related to the values of the different stakeholders according to the 10 areas, defining priorities among these requirements, and dealing with potential conflicts. The artifact’s inputs are: the 10 areas of culture, the stakeholders identified through the Stakeholder Identification Diagram, the values mapped for each stakeholder through the Value Identification Frame, and any documentation designers may have produced (e.g., problem description, solution proposal, and interviews with stakeholders). The output is a ranked list of requirements related to the stakeholders and their cultural values. See Fig. 6 for details.Practical steps for using the Culturally Aware Requirements Framework:1.Select the most important stakeholders, creating a column for each one.Insert each value from each selected stakeholder as a new line in its corresponding column.Identify requirements related to each value, writing them in their corresponding column.•What features should the solution have to promote or respect this value?What actions are required?Is there any design constraint?Can it influence in any design decision?Identify requirements for each area of culture, writing them in their corresponding column.•Read the descriptions and explanations.What requirements are related to this area?Are the requirements related to any value? What values?How will the problem and its solution affect the stakeholders regarding this area?Think about possible conflicts.•Can the requirement affect or influence other stakeholders’ values? How?Does it require new decisions or actions? Which?Does it generate new requirements? Which?Define priorities.•How critical is the satisfaction of the requirement?How important is that value for the stakeholder?What is the importance of this requirement when compared to others?The key point when using the artifact is not to find and relate the requirements and values to the correct area of culture, but to think about requirements that will allow designers to identify and specify features, restrictions, and quality attributes for the solution being designed, recognizing the importance of these requirements, and thinking about the possible impact on the stakeholders. These requirements will complement other existing requirements (which can also be mapped into the artifact), guiding designers in the prototyping and implementation of their solution.Once requirements have been identified, designers may use their preferred techniques and tools to create the first prototypes for the solution being designed. Then, in the Evaluation stage, the eValue artifact supports designers as they evaluate whether the prototypes or the final solution was designed accordingly, i.e., whether design decisions reflect the understanding of the different stakeholders’ values and culture (see Fig. 9 for details).With the eValue artifact, the designers’ task is to explore the designed solution, questioning and analyzing the way the design communicates values and affects users’ cultural aspects, and compare it to the documentation produced (e.g., values in the Value Identification Frame, requirements in the Culturally Aware Requirements Framework), taking notes and proposing design alternatives. The artifact’s inputs are the areas of culture, the list of values from the Value Identification Frame (and other values designers may find important to consider), and the solution to be evaluated. The output is a mapping of what values are being reflected by/on/through the analyzed solution, and the way it is done. It also presents evaluators’ reasoning about each value, identifying pending questions, critical issues, ideas, and possible improvements that may guide a redesign activity, or, minimally, serve as a list for future reflection.Practical steps for using the eValue:1.Read the documentation available for the solution (e.g., description of the problem, proposal of solution, requirements, design rationale).Explore the solution and its features.For each value, analyze whether there is any feature or attribute of the solution that is reflecting/representing the value.If the value was identified:•Discuss whether the application was properly designed to support the value accordingly, and leave comments, suggestions, and highlights.If the value was not identified:•Verify whether it does not apply or it is being neglected/forgotten in the project.If neglected/forgotten:Think about the possible impacts of not considering the value.Suggest means of supporting the value in the solution.All the artifacts presented in this section have been experienced and evaluated in different design contexts, e.g., social applications for Interactive Digital Television (Pereira et al., 2013b); applications for supporting cross-cultural collaboration (Pereira and Baranauskas, 2012); and inclusive social network (Pereira et al., 2011, 2013a). Templates for all the artifacts are available for download33〈http://www.nied.unicamp.br/ecoweb/products/artifacts〉.and a web-based case tool is being designed to support their usage.In this section, we instantiate VCIA in the context of the design of a social network for Brazilian teachers in the Special Education field—teachers who work with students that have some kind of disability.Over the last few years, Brazilian public policies that promoted the inclusion of students with disabilities in mainstream schools resulted in the creation of the Specialized Educational Services area (MEC, 2009). In order to qualify professionals in this field, teachers from all over the country started specialization courses through e-learning environments. These courses were limited in duration and lacked follow up, leaving teachers on their own to apply these new ideas in the classroom.Aiming to create lifelong learning support for these teachers, researchers in the Education and Computer Science fields are working together on a research project intended to investigate and design a social network system for connecting and supporting teachers from all over the country in their day-to-day work. The system is named “Todos Nós em Rede”, TNR, (All of Us Networked). It values the expertise (authority) of its members and has as premises the teacher’s autonomy and self-regulation. It aims for the construction of knowledge about issues related to specialized services through the discussion of problems (cases) teachers encounter in their professional practice with students.Designing a social network for connecting teachers across the country that supports the socialization of their practices and their collaboration is a challenging task. It requires that designers consider the different stakeholders and the values they are bringing to the design context, dealing explicitly with them. Inclusive education in Brazil is a recent achievement that is still being consolidated and has been marked by political, pedagogical, and economic conflicts. Brazil is the fifth largest country in territory and population, having a very heterogeneous population in terms of ethnicity, and social and economic conditions (IBGE, 2012); habits, behaviors, and needs vary profoundly according to the region of the country. Usually, teachers are not used to computer technologies, and may have an impairment themselves (e.g., visual). They also have their personal customs, preferences, procedures, values, etc., that must be taken into account. Teachers and professionals working in schools are not often open to engage in research projects because of a shared feeling that their collaboration will not be retributed as benefits to them or their schools. Moreover, researchers, funding institutions, and the community also have their particular interests, expectations, and values that must be considered.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
