@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Learning weighted part models for object tracking

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Part models are formulated with a graph structure for object tracking.Weighted part models are used to handle target appearance change and occlusion.GMMs are used as weight models for describing dynamic evolution of object parts.Weight models are used to dynamically adjust the part appearance models.Weight models are used to control the sample selections for part model update.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Part graph model,Gaussian Mixture Model,Weighted model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Despite significant improvements have been made for visual tracking in recent years, tracking arbitrary object is still a challenging problem. In this paper, we present a weighted part model tracker that can efficiently handle partial occlusion and appearance change. Firstly, the object appearance is modeled by a mixture of deformable part models with a graph structure. Secondly, through modeling the temporal evolution of each part with a mixture of Gaussian distribution, we present a temporal weighted model to dynamically adjust the importance of each part by measuring the fitness to the historical temporal distributions in the tracking process. Moreover, the temporal weighted models are used to control the sample selections for the update of part models, which makes different parts update differently due to partial occlusion or drastic appearance change. Finally, the weighted part models are solved by structural learning to locate the object. Experimental results show the superiority of the proposed approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Visual tracking is one of the fundamental problems in computer vision and serves as a preprocessing step for many applications including human machine interaction, video surveillance, or higher tasks like scene understanding and action recognition. In recent years, significant progress has been made for visual tracking. However, designing a robust tracker for general object tracking is still a major challenge, especially when object occlusion and appearance variation happen. Many approaches have been developed to address these problems, such as tracking-by-detection approaches proposed by Avidan [1]. This kind of solutions treats the tracking problem as a detection task and transfers some detection ideas to tracking as proposed in [3,20,22]. Through online training a classifier, the target is distinguished from the background. During the tracking process, the classifier is used to locate the object with maximum classification score and collect proper samples for parameter update. By leveraging the detection techniques into tracking, the tracking performance has yield great improvements in recent years. However, these kind of approaches can often hardly deal with the problems such as part occlusions or continuously appearance change.Due to the success of the part based object detection approaches proposed by Felzenszwalb et al. [5], tracking object with parts also shows its advantage in [20]. During tracking, target object together with its related parts and the inherent structural relationship are modeled together in a uniform framework. The part based models show favorable properties such as robustness to partial occlusion and articulation. The existing part based tracking approaches as proposed in [20,22] often adapt same part sample selection strategies and update the part appearance parameters controlled by the appearance scores. However, object appearance variation is not a uniform process, and different parts may change significantly different over time from each other. The change rates of different parts also vary significantly. Therefore, it is not proper to treat each part’s contribution equally as this may cause the failure of tracking when drastic appearance variation occurs. Take the “lemming” sequence as an example, in the first row of Fig. 1we can see that the appearances change differently for different parts with the target moving. This indicates that in the tracking process, different parts of the target should have different weights and update strategies based on the temporal evolution of the tracked target.In this paper, we present a robust object tracking approach based on weighted part models. As illustrated in Fig. 2, given an input sequence, the first frame with the target annotation is used for model initialization, and the object is modeled by a mixture of deformable part models with a graph structure. Then the weighted part model tracker is used to predict the target location during the tracking process. The prediction results are further used for parameter update, which includes the parameters for both discriminative appearance models and temporal weighted models.As shown in Fig. 2, the weighted part models with spatial constrains effectively enhance the tracking robustness, the temporal dynamic evolution of each part is modeled with a Gaussian mixture distribution that serves as an important implementation. The proposed weighted part model tracker exceeds traditional part models for two reasons. On one hand, the weights of the parts assist to adjust the importance of the corresponding appearance models. On the other hand, they also help control the sample selections for model update by judging whether the samples are fit for the historical distributions. The second and the third row of Fig. 1 illustrate the weights and the final tracking results varied over time, respectively.The main contribution of this paper is summarized as follows,1.We propose a weighted part model based tracking approach to effectively deal with target appearance change and partial occlusion.Through modeling the dynamic evolution of each part with a mixture of Gaussian distribution, we dynamically adjust the importance of each part by measuring the fitness to the historical distributions.The temporal weighted model of each part is used to control the sample selections for the effective update of the corresponding part model, which makes different parts update differently under complex scenes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
