@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Hybrid structural and texture distinctiveness vector field convolution for region segmentation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A hybrid structural and texture distinctiveness active contour method is proposed.We combine texture distinctiveness and intensity variation into multifunctional VFC.We used texture distinctiveness to enable automatic active contour initialization.Our approach improves and accelerates convergence.Experiments using 3 datasets showed better or comparable segmentation accuracy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Texture distinctiveness,Active contours,Vector field convolution,Difficult image background,Segmentation,Image processing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The segmentation of objects has been an area of interest in numerous fields. The use of texture has been explored to improve convergence in the presence of cluttered backgrounds or objects with distinct textures, where intensity variations are insufficient. Additionally, saliency and feature maps have been applied for contour initialization. However, taking advantage of texture to improve initialization and convergence has not been extensively explored. To address this, we propose a hybrid structural and texture distinctiveness vector field convolution (STVFC) approach, where both the structural characteristics and the concept of texture distinctiveness are incorporated into a multi-functional vector field convolution (VFC) model. In this novel approach, texture distinctiveness is used to enable automatic initialization and is incorporated with intensity variation to improve and accelerate convergence towards the object boundary. Experiments using three datasets, containing natural images and Brodatz textures, demonstrated that STVFC achieved better or comparable segmentation accuracy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Object segmentation has been an area of great interest due to its many applications in the fields of robotics [1,2], medical imaging [3,4] and remote sensing [5]. Numerous approaches have been proposed over the years including a popular group of approaches called active contours. The active contour model or snake, initially proposed by Kass et al. [6], uses an energy minimizing spline to extract an object’s boundary. The spline adapts to the object contour using internal and external energy components. The internal energy enforces a smoothness constraint or prior upon the snake while the external energy attracts the snake towards the object’s boundary using image characteristics. Many approaches have built upon this idea [7–12], adapting the internal and external energies to overcome drawbacks of the original model. These drawbacks include user initialization or supervision problems [7–9], poor convergence to boundary concavities [10,11], slow convergence and parameter dependencies [12].In particular, the limitation of contour initialization has been explored to improve active contour performance. Approaches have tried reducing the snake’s sensitivity to the initialization by increasing the snake’s dynamics [13]. Other approaches have used user initialization or an automatic initialization of short snakes at high intensity gradients [14–16], but have shown difficulties with boundary concavities [16,17]. Methods introduced which are able to handle boundary concavities [18,19] have their limitations: requiring user initialization, complex computation and noise sensitivity [12].Texture has been proposed to drive active contours toward more accurate segmentations [20–24] by using local binary patterns and Gabor features in images. These approaches, however, do not use texture information for initializing the contour. In order to define the initial contour, saliency or feature maps have been used [25–30], however with no implementation for segmentation. Moreover, these approaches make use of only intensity information without taking advantage of color, which can also be a distinguishing feature of an object. An approach which explicitly considers the textural characteristics of natural images for initialization and improves convergence towards object boundaries in natural and cluttered images would be of great interest.The main contribution of this paper is a new external energy functional: the hybrid structural and texture distinctiveness vector field convolution (STVFC) for a multi-functional VFC framework with improved automatic snake initialization. The concept of texture distinctiveness is used to develop the initial contour and is also incorporated into the external energy functional to improve snake convergence in images with weak edges and/or highly textured scene content. Texture distinctiveness explicitly considers textural characteristics in the image to determine the distinctiveness of a region. This feature is used to characterize texture variation and is incorporated into a hybrid external energy functional that also includes intensity variation (the image’s structural characteristics). The texture variation helps to overcome the issues shown in Fig. 1, where a cluttered background or weak structural variation normally causes snakes to attract to local minima in the background. The resulting hybrid variation not only improves STVFC’s ability to handle strong textural objects and backgrounds, but also high curvature (see Fig. 2). To investigate the STVFC’s potential, it is evaluated against seven state-of-the-art approaches including parametric and non-parametric approaches, some of which consider texture for contour evolution using a variety of performance evaluation metrics. Experimental results using automatic and common initializations for three public datasets show the superior performance of STVFC when compared to existing contour detection methods.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we investigated the use of the texture distinctiveness within the active contour model. The consideration of texture distinctiveness in the external vector field as well as contour initialization improved the convergence and segmentation performance of the active contour. The STVFC approach provided more accurate segmentation performance than the traditional VFC as well as the other compared approaches. The largest tendency of the analyzed approaches was to converge to local minima in images with cluttered backgrounds. The contour initializations was also an important factor which impacted the performance of the compared methods. The Harris-based approaches (HVFC and HGVF), initialized the contour using selected Harris-based points which were subject to incorrect initializations due to strong textures and backgrounds. Using an identical elliptical and texture-guided initializations for all approaches showed improved results for the Harris-based approaches however STVFC still showed the best segmentation performance due to its use of texture distinctiveness. Testing on Brodatz images also showed that STVFC is not limited to the use of color is able to effectively segment grayscale images with strong texture. By performing the texture-guided initialization, the proposed STVFC approach is fully automatic and its use of texture distinctiveness allows for more accurate segmentation.