@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Activity detection using Sequential Statistical Boundary Detection (SSBD)

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a novel activity detection scheme tailored for home environment scenes.We introduce three new action datasets for action detection evaluation.Fast spatio-temporal action localization with the use of statistical tools.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Activity localization,Activity detection,Activity recognition,Motion segmentation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The spiralling increase of video data has rendered the automated localization and recognition of activities an essential step for video content understanding. In this work, we introduce novel algorithms for detecting human activities in the spatial domain via a binary activity detection mask, the Motion Boundary Activity Area (MBAA), and in the time domain by a new approach, Statistical Sequential Boundary Detection (SSBD). MBAAs are estimated by analyzing the motion vectors using the Kurtosis metric, while dense trajectories are extracted and described using a low level HOGHOF descriptor and high level Fisher representation scheme, modeling a Support Vector Data Description (SVDD) hypersphere. SSBD is then realized by applying Sequential Change Detection with the Cumulative Sum (CUSUM) algorithm on the distances between Fisher data descriptors and the corresponding reference SVDD hyperspheres for rapid detection of changes in the activity pattern. Activities in the resulting video subsequences are then classified using an multi-class SVM model, leading to state of the art results. Our experiments with benchmark and real world data demonstrate that our technique is successful in reducing the computational cost and also in improving activity detection rates.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The automated analysis of real world videos is a challenging problem, as it requires the reliable discovery of unknown activities both in space and time, that may occur at any moment, followed by their accurate classification, which is particularly demanding due to the various realizations of activities that may occur. In this work, we address both problems, that of activity discovery and that of recognition, by introducing novel, theoretically well-founded methods that are shown to lead to accurate detection and recognition rates, at a reduced computational cost.The spatio-temporal localization of activities is a necessary precursor to activity recognition in video sequences of long duration. In the literature, it is common to localize activities in space and time by deploying spatio-temporal sliding windows to detect activity subsequences, and then recognize the activities in them using a high level classifier. This is usually performed by applying two classifiers: a human detector for spatial localization and an activity classifier, usually a multi-class model, to recognize the activity that takes place inside each spatial window (i.e. human location). The spatio-temporal sliding window framework entails the sequential process of the video frames with an overlap and multiple spatial and temporal windows in order to deal with scale variance, which significantly increases the computational cost and renders these techniques inappropriate for real-life scenarios, such as the localization and recognition of activities of daily living (ADLs) in videos of long duration.In this work only regions of interest are examined in each frame, namely pixels where varying motion occurs, to reduce computational cost and improve the subsequent temporal localization of activities and recognition rates. These regions correspond to a spatial binary mask, the Motion Boundary Activity Area (MBAA), that contains the regions in each video frame where varying motion occurs. We leverage the MBAAs for a first stage, coarse localization of activities in time, which leads to a reduction in the duration of the video analysis to almost half of real time. In particular, we consider that the frames where MBAA trajectories are present correspond to an activity subsequence, and we only analyze the data in them. To achieve this, interest points are detected in the MBAAs and are tracked, as detailed in Section 4. The video subsequences are considered to end when the trajectories in the MBAAs end. The resulting subsequence may still contain multiple activities in it, however it requires less processing than the entire video, and will result in fewer false alarms due to the lack of uninformative frames with constant motion (or no motion).In addition to performing coarse temporal localization, MBAAs are used for spatial activity localization, in order to extract human trajectories from the scene and describe the activities that occur inside them. This technique cannot separate trajectories that originate from different individuals, so it cannot be used for the recognition of multiple activities in a scene, which forms part of our future research. This work focuses on the detection of one dominant activity per scene, which may involve one individual or an interaction between two or more people (e.g. handshake, talk), for which it introduces novel methods that reduce the high computational cost of the current sliding window based state of the art techniques.For precise temporal segmentation, we introduce a novel method, Sequential Statistical Boundary Detection (SSBD), which leads to quicker and more reliable recognition outcomes at a much lower computational cost. This algorithm processes video frames sequentially using a non-overlapping sliding window, and extracts activity boundaries quickly via Cumulative Sum (CUSUM) sequential statistical change detection applied to the outcomes of a discriminative SVDD classifier. We first create a one-class classifier for normal activity patterns using a Support Vector Data Description (SVDD), and then calculate the instantaneous log-likelihood ratio (llr) between reference and current activity patterns. The llr is used in conjunction with the CUSUM termination test statistic for fast but robust activity localization, resulting in accurate activity classification.Fig. 1 shows the main differences between the sliding window and SSBD approaches. Sliding window methods search through the entire video over multiple spatial and temporal scales in order to discover desired activities, while SSBD uses only a small number of frames (the reference data) to train its model. Initially, MBAAs spatially localize the activity in the video frame, eliminating the need for a costly thorough spatial search with multiscale windows. MBAAs are also used for initial coarse temporal segmentation, by terminating video subsequences when the MBAA pixels are all equal to zero, as this indicates that motion in them does not change any more. SSBD then uses the current (most recent) frames to estimate the log-likelihood ratio and incorporate it in the CUSUM test to find if a change from the normal (reference) pattern occurs, and detect the precise temporal boundaries of the activity to be classified.This work is organized as follows: Section 2 presents some of the key work in the literature, Sections 3 and 4 describe the spatial localization algorithm and the activity representation adopted in this work, respectively. Section 5 presents our approach for the detection and classification of ADLs in videos. Experiments on datasets from real scenarios are provided in Section 6, in order to evaluate the overall system.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
