@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
PSTG-based multi-label optimization for multi-target tracking

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A paratactic–serial tracklet graph (PSTG) is introduced for tracklet analysis.A PSTG-based framework is proposed for multi-target tracking.It helps improve tracking performance with group information and integrity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Group,Paratactic–serial tracklet graph (PSTG),Multi-label,Multi-target tracking,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Many recent advances in multi-target tracking have grown concern over latent corresponding relation among observations, e.g. social relationship. To handle long-term occlusion within group and tracking failure caused by interaction of targets, various correlations among tracklets need to be exploited. In this paper, a paratactic–serial tracklet graph (PSTG) theory is proposed for inter-tracklet analysis in multi-target tracking to avoid tracking failure caused by long-term occlusion within group or crossing trajectories. Contrary to recent approaches, a novel PSTG is defined to describe the correlation among all tracklets in spatio-temporal domain to model the mutual influence among trajectories. Paratactic–tracklet graph extends the potential relationship among tracklets which show similar motion patterns in spatio-temporal neighbor. Serial–tracklet graph enhances the integrity and continuity of trajectories which represent two trajectory fragments of a certain target in different periods. Furthermore, a PSTG-based multi-label optimization algorithm is presented to make the trajectory estimation more accurate. A PSTG energy is minimized by multi-label optimization, including group, integrity and spatio-temporal constraints. Experiments demonstrate the anti-occlusion performance of the proposed approach on several public datasets and actual surveillance sequences, and achieve competitive results by quantitative evaluation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Tracking of multiple targets from a video sequence is a challenging problem and a research hot spot in computer vision. The aim of the task is to automatically locate targets, give a certain label to each, and recover their trajectories which mean the continuous position sequences for all targets in the camera scenes. In many applications, such as motion analysis and video content understanding, one of the key technologies is recovering the spatio-temporal trajectories accurately. Though there has been significant progress in tracking technology in recent years, current state-of-the-art multi-target tracking algorithms are no match for human abilities of tracking, both in terms of accuracy and precision. Invisible correlation among observations and unknown number of targets lead to more complicated problem in real scenario. Besides image evidence given by a target detector, direction, appearance, moving group, spatio-temporal continuity and interaction among targets should also be taken into consideration in tracking task.Many of the perfect tracking approaches adopt the tracking-by-detection framework, in which detections are the target hypotheses extracted from the background by the detector (e.g.[1]) in all frames and then associate them into trajectories. Using a target detector can help to reduce the number of model drift when a target has been lost and convert tracking problem into association problem. Association based approaches are powerful at dealing with extended occlusions between targets. The detector produces the per-frame image evidence for each target. Hence, when tracking a single target, the problem is to estimate a trajectory which can fit those evidences well. Obviously, the task is significantly more difficult in the multi-target tracking, since all these data associations must be settled at the same time. Intuitively speaking, one has to establish a unique label for each target, and then simultaneously estimate the motion patterns of all targets and the assignment of detections to the targets.Andriyenko et al. [2] follow the tracking-by-detection framework. a label cost based energy minimization is used to get local optimum for multi-target tracking. The energy in [2] falls into two categories: continuous part and discrete part. Continuous energy is used to illustrate the goodness of trajectories and discrete energy is mainly to describe the data association among image evidences. Because the optimization with two kinds of energy uses local terms, the tracking problem becomes more challenging. As a result, the consequences of detection errors caused by interaction among targets, such as ID switch, trajectory fragment, etc., become more obvious when optimized with label cost only using these local terms.A paratactic–serial tracklet graph (PSTG)-based multi-label optimization method for multi-target tracking is proposed in this work. Unlike other current approaches, PSTG optimization is proposed to exploit various correlations among tracklets and minimize the energy of PSTG. The correlation among tracklets describing in PSTG optimization algorithm can be paratactic or serial. Moving group, integrity and spatio-temporal constraints are reflected in the correlation among tracklets (track fragments, usually short [3]). Moving group constraint mainly illustrates the group relations of moving targets, which means the targets in same group should have similar trajectories. Using our paratactic–tracklet graph (PTG), such paratactic tracklet group information can be effectively found, which can partly settle detection errors or trajectory fragments caused by occlusion. Integrity constraint means any trajectory that is continuous and has only one pair of endpoints (start point and end point), which can be implemented by our serial–tracklet graph (STG). The relationship of tracklets in temporal and spatial domain is reflected in spatio-temporal constraint, e.g., two concurrence tracklets respectively express two distinct targets at the same time. To solve the above problems, a PSTG-based multi-label optimization algorithm is presented to express the energy function including all these constraints (group, integrity and spatio-temporal). We run extensive experiments on various datasets and achieve very competitive results to demonstrate our PSTG optimization algorithm.The main contribution of this work is a PSTG-based model for multi-target tracking that(i)defines a novel PSTG-based describe method which can embody the correlation among all tracklets in spatio-temporal domain;includes direction, appearance, moving group, spatio-temporal continuity and interaction among targets;explicitly handles long-term partial or full occlusion within group;can effectively avoid the tracking failures caused by close or crossing trajectories.Furthermore, (v) a multi-label optimization framework for multi-target tracking is also proposed. And multi-label consists of proposal labeling, group labeling, track ID labeling in this paper. Through the multi-label optimization, correlation among trajectories is introduced to make multi-target tracking more accurate.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: related work is discussed in Section 2; graph approach for inter-tracklet analysis is given in Section 3; Section 4 describes the multi-label optimization for multi-target tracking framework; experiments are shown in Section 5, followed by conclusion in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
