@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A framework for live and cross platform fingerspelling recognition using modified shape matrix variants on depth silhouettes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Live fingerspelling recognition using modified interpretation of shape matrix.Cross platform solution for ISL, ASL, NTU datasets.Region, contour, and depth based shape matrix variants.Recognizes both one and two handed postures.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Depth sensing,Shape matrix,Line of reference,Principal axis,Fingerspelling recognition,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Automatic recognition of fingerspelling postures in a live environment is a challenging task primarily due to the complex computation of popular moment-based and spectral descriptors. Shape matrix offers a time-efficient alternative that samples the shape region through the intersection points of adjacent log-polar sections. However, sparse sampling of the region by discrete log-polar intersection points cannot capture salience of the shape. This manuscript proposes modified forms of the shape matrix which can capture salience of the fingerspelling postures by the precise sampling of contours and regions. For effective segmentation and subsequent description, hand postures are acquired through the depth sensor. Proposed shape matrix variants are evaluated for fingerspelling recognition with one-handed and two-handed postures. Experiments are rigorously performed on three datasets including one-handed signs of American Sign Language (ASL), NTU hand digits, and both one-handed and two-handed signs of Indian Sign Language (ISL). Proposed shape matrix variants supersede the benchmark shape context and Gabor features by obtaining 94.15% accuracy on ISL dataset with minimum mean running time of 0.029 s. On ASL and NTU datasets, 91.86% and 95.11% accuracies are obtained with 0.0172 and 0.0483 s mean running times, respectively.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Fingerspelling signs are the basic communication tool for hearing and speech disabled persons, which include hand postures for alphabets and digits of the pertaining sign language. The task of vision-based fingersign recognition is daunting in itself. Even with one-handed postures, self-occlusions and out-of-plane rotations always pose challenges. When one of the hands touches or overlaps the other to articulate a combined posture, the task becomes complex by many folds. It is very tough to implement a general hand posture recognizer due to multiplied degrees of the freedom of each hand that results into a galore of new shapes. Nevertheless, it is possible to realize context specific systems with appropriate acquisition mechanisms, features, and tolerable assumptions. The context might be universal, e.g., fingersign recognition or it can be defined to suit a specific need like identification of the postures for virtual 3D interfaces, robotic control, and hand grasp analysis. A solution to the automatic fingerspelling recognition is important as it not only targets a social cause but also motivates to resolve small context specific posture subsets. Systems working offline [1–6], on prerecorded videos [7–9], and in constrained acquisition setups [10–14] are readily available. Live and deployable hand posture recognition systems, capable of recognizing both one and two-handed postures, and performing across the contexts in a generalized perspective are required.Features such as shape matrix [15] can prove to be efficient for the live recognition environments. The shape matrix aligns the shape with a circular grid and samples it through the intersection points of adjacent log-polar sections. Each cell corresponding to a sampled point is set in the binary shape matrix. The matrices of the two shapes are matched using XOR operation to determine the extent of their similarity. Although the feature is quite compact and fast, its posture recognition performance suffers due to the discrete sampling of the region which misses fine shape details and reliance on the maximum radius line as an axis of reference. The proposed work aims to develop a framework for the live fingerspelling recognition targeting both one-handed and two-handed postures of Indian Sign Language (ISL) with modified interpretations of the shape matrix. ISL dataset, customized to accomplish the task, comprises of 19 two-handed and 7 one-handed postures as shown in Fig. 1. The contributions of the presented work are:1.Modifications to the shape matrix are introduced to capture contour and region salience by; selecting the principal axis as a more stable axis of reference, selective radial subdivisions, and inclusion of the distance and the depth in log-polar sections.Versatility of proposed features is verified on cross context fingersigns through experiments on the benchmark one-handed fingerspelling ASL dataset [16] and hand digits NTU [17] datasets.Experiments are carried out with varying levels of depth patch exposure to evaluate the fitness of proposed features on the varying forearm portion of the hands.The system is evaluated through k-Nearest Neighbor (kNN) classifier. It is experimentally shown that the proposed versions of the shape matrix are capable of achieving adequate accuracy within the real-time constraints.Further, Section 2 discusses the relevant work in hand postures and fingerspelling recognition with an aim to explore live systems. Section 3 explains the arrangement of the depth-based posture acquisition and real-time execution. Shape matrix based description of the fingersign postures is explained in Section 4. An analysis of the selection of a reference line is given here to make the description invariant to arbitrary transformations. Section 5 explains experimental details with an introduction to the datasets employed in this work. A discussion on the obtained results is conducted under the same section. Finally, the manuscript is concluded in Section 6 highlighting the further research aspects and shortcomings of the proposed framework.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A framework to recognize one-handed and two-handed fingerspelling postures is developed in this manuscript. As the motive is to complete the task within deadlines of live systems, modified variants of the shape matrix are introduced with demonstrated short running times while giving adequate recognition performance. The experiments reveal that shape matrix variants are sufficiently robust to in-plane rotations, scales, and translations. Apart from region and contour SM variants (SMos, SMc, SMcs, SMcd1, SMcd2), a depth shape matrix variant (SMoz) is also introduced to capture implicit 3D information in silhouettes like ridges and pits. Application of principal axis as reference vector and radial subdivision strategy enables SMos, SMcd1, SMcd2, and SMozto extract subtle posture details. Depth based acquisition of hand gestures mitigates the effects of ill segmentation usually faced with 2D cameras. In the correct classification of the highly correlated shape matrix features, simple yet effective kNN strategy plays an important role. To consolidate the claims on the accuracy and running time, apart from two-handed ISL fingerspelling dataset, experiments are also conducted on the one-handed ASL fingerspelling and NTU hand digits dataset. Recognition accuracy delivered by the proposed individual descriptors without association of any other feature is noticeable.In order to abide by the strict deadlines, several assumptions are made in which appearance of the ROI closest to the depth sensor is primary. To convert the presented framework into a full-fledged hand posture recognition system, a number of issues including the detection of ROI in generalized depths (with clues in skin color and depth textures), tracking and recognition of postures on disconnected hand blobs, invariance to out-of-plane rotations need to be addressed. Further, in order to recognize dynamic gestures, a multi-state probabilistic model like HMM or DTW (Dynamic Time Warping) needs to be employed.Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 10.1016/j.cviu.2015.08.001