@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Light field distortion feature for transparent object classification

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We introduce the light field camera for transparent object classification.We model the distortion of the light field caused by a transparent object.Background-invariant light field distortion (LFD) feature is proposed.Classification for a transparent object can be done by a single light field image.Experimental results show our method works well under various conditions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Light field,Object classification,Distortion feature,Bag of features,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Local features, such as scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT) and speeded up robust features (SURF), are widely used for describing an object in the applications of visual object recognition and classification. However, these approaches cannot apply to transparent objects made of glass or plastic, as such objects take on the visual features of background scenes, and the appearance of such objects dramatically varies with changes in the scenes. Indeed, transparent objects have the unique characteristic of distorting the background by refraction. In this paper, we use a single-shot light field image as input and model the distortion of the light field caused by the refractive property of a transparent object. We propose a new feature which is called the light field distortion (LFD) feature. The proposed feature is background-invariant so that it is able to describe a transparent object without knowing the texture of the scene. The proposal incorporates this LFD feature into the bag-of-features approach for classifying transparent objects. We evaluated its performance and analyzed the limitations in various settings.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Visual object recognition and classification are useful and important to robotics and computer vision applications. Statistical learning methods such as bag-of-features (BoF) are very active currently in the research of image annotation and object recognition. These methods commonly use local features, such as scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT) [1] and speeded up robust features (SURF) [2], for visual object recognition. However, these features and learning algorithms cannot apply to transparent objects. Our daily environments, kitchen, living room, and office, are filled with many transparent objects, such as glasses, bottles, bowls, jars, vases, and windows, to name a few. The appearance of a transparent object is highly depending on the backgrounds, and it drastically changes when the object moves or background varies. The transparent objects do not have features entirely of their own, but rather transmitted background images. Using the standard approaches requires modeling local features not of the transparent object but the background. In this paper, we propose a novel object feature that can describe a transparent object in an image, and we call it light field distortion (LFD) feature. We discuss how the LFD feature models and visually classifies transparent objects, which to date have been ignored as exceptions in applications of visual object classification or annotation.Transparent objects are made of refractive materials, such as glass or plastics, and distort rays emanating from the background scene. Different objects produce different distortions, each carrying intrinsic characteristics of the transparent object, namely the refractive index of material and the shape of object, both of which influence the distortion. The LFD feature is calculated from a light field image, a single shot captured by a light field camera, and describes this distortion of the field caused by the refraction in transparent object. Compared with conventional cameras, which capture 2D images from a single perspective, light field cameras obtain richer 4D images that include both the angular and positional information of the light ray space. The LFD feature models the distortion from differences in corresponding points between viewpoints in the 4D light field, whereas common features, such as gradients or edges, model the appearance. This is an entirely original concept for feature description with the advantage that LFD is less affected by background changes, as it uses patterns of ray distortions caused by the transparent objects, not patterns from the appearance of objects.The light field camera was originally proposed for image-based rendering for use in the graphics community, and has been used for a variety of different visualization applications, such as generating free-view images, 3D graphics, and digital refocusing. Early light field camera systems made by multiple cameras, e.g. Stanford multi-camera array [3], were usually huge and quite expensive. Fortunately, the latest light field cameras consisting of a micro-lens array between the sensor and main lens are becoming inexpensive and compact [4,5], some of these are available in the commercial market [6–8]. We can also emulate a light field camera by moving a conventional camera in a plane, in order to capture the light field image when the light field camera is not available. But this method can only capture the static scenes while real light field cameras can capture dynamic scene by one shot. Because the light field image records richer information than that captured by conventional cameras, and the equipment is easy to get nowadays, we believe that light field is useful in computer vision applications, and such kind of applications are becoming popular. In our task, we need relatively large disparities to describe the distortion of the backgrounds, and the system can be working under dynamic scenes. Therefore, relatively large baseline is preferred, and we use a camera array as input device in our experiments.The contribution of this paper is (1) in tackling a difficult computer vision problem, transparent object classification with a single-shot image, (2) in proposing a new feature, called the LFD feature, which can describe a transparent object, and (3) in applying a light field image to object classification application. We implemented our method based on the BoF approach and performed laboratory and real experiments, using eighteen objects and various different backgrounds, to assess the effectiveness of the LFD features. Our result shows that the LFD feature can classify transparent objects without explicit physics-based refraction analysis and refraction models.This paper is the extended version of our previous conference publication [9]. We describe the detail of the background filtering technique in Section 4. The dataset for performance evaluation is enlarged from 7 objects with 5 backgrounds to 18 objects with 10 backgrounds. We utilize an optical flow algorithm with more accuracy [10] for tracking the corresponding points, and get better classification performance for the larger dataset. Moreover, we explain how to get the optimal parameters, and analyze how the rotation in different directions, the number of the viewpoints, and the noise affect the classification accuracy.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
