@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Visual tracking using spatially weighted likelihood of Gaussian mixtures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Gradient based method for tracking.The object model is described by weighted Gaussian mixture models.The likelihood is maximized in order to track the object between frames.Scale adaptation, rotation and model update are handled.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Visual tracking,Kernel-based tracking,Target representation,Target localization,Gaussian mixture model (GMM),Expectation-Maximization (EM),Weighted likelihood,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A probabilistic real time tracking algorithm is proposed where the target’s feature distribution is represented by a Gaussian mixture model (GMM). The target localization is achieved by maximizing its weighted likelihood in the image sequence. The role of the weight in the likelihood definition is important as it allows gradient based optimization to be performed, which would not be feasible in a context of standard likelihood representations. Moreover, the algorithm handles scale and rotation changes of the target, as well as appearance changes, which modifies the components of the GMM. The real time performance is experimentally confirmed, while the algorithms has comparative performance with other state-of-the-art tracking algorithms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The application of spatial kernels in visual tracking algorithms was proposed in [1]. Masking the object with a kernel allows for gradient-based optimization instead of a brute force search for target localization and real-time performance may be achieved on a standard personal computer. The shape of the target is approximated by an ellipse and its color distribution is modeled by a histogram. Combining the ellipse with a spatial kernel eliminates the effect of varying object dimensions (e.g. a long thin object) and allows tracking of a wide variety of targets. Using a histogram instead of a continuous distribution of the color allows the acceleration of the optimization procedure. However, if the feature dimension increases the histogram bins increase exponentially. It is also assumed that the color distribution of the object does not change significantly along the image sequence, which does not hold in many scenarios.In this work, we address both problems of feature dimensionality and changes in model appearance. We present a tracking algorithm relying on a probabilistic representation of the object to be tracked and its subsequent localization in the image sequence. It is assumed that the appearance of the target may be described by a Gaussian mixture model (GMM) instead of a histogram or histogram signatures, as it is the case in [1–3]. Using a GMM instead of a histogram has certain advantages. At first, GMM provides a more compact representation of the feature space as few parameters are generally sufficient to model the color distribution of the target. At second, if high dimensional features are employed the bins of a standard histogram increase exponentially, while the number of GMM components remains relatively low.In this framework, masking the object with a spatial kernel results to a weighted likelihood which inherits the advantages of kernel based approaches. First, the pixels of the target do not contribute equally to the likelihood of the target but they are weighted with respect to their distance from the center of the object. Following the assumption adopted in kernel-based tracking methods [1,2,4,5], it is considered that pixels near the center are more probable to belong to the object and they contribute more to the total likelihood. On the other hand, pixels which are more distant from the center may be part of the background and their contribution to the object’s likelihood should be smaller. Second, the weight at each pixel depends on the target location and the maximization of the likelihood is easily obtained with respect to it. This is not the case for a standard GMM likelihood function which cannot be employed in this framework. The localization of the target is obtained by maximizing the weighted likelihood along the frames of the image sequence. Another significant advantage of the method is that the spatial regularization induced by the weight make the similarity function to be smooth and therefore suitable for gradient descent optimization methods.Furthermore, changes in the appearance of the object are handled by updating the GMM which represents the target. The proposed approach is independent of the target appearance and motion model. When a new color component is observed, it is not generally known if it belongs to the background or the object. The ambiguity is resolved by integrating a new component into the GMM of the target and tracking the target backwards in time. If the backward trajectory does not vary significantly from the forward trajectory, the new color component is accepted as a target’s GMM component. Moreover, the algorithm handles scale and rotation changes of the object and numerical experiments showed that it provides, in general, more accurate target localization than state of the art algorithms.A preliminary version of this work was presented in [6]. Herein, we present a more detailed theoretical description of the model, we incorporate the scale adaptation procedure, an approach to handle rotations of the target, we propose a principled update procedure of the GMM and we show the relation of the tracking algorithm to mean-shift. We have also made a more extended evaluation of the proposed method by including more experimental datasets and comparison measures.In the remaining of the paper, Section 2 reviews the related literature on visual tracking, the tracking algorithm relying on the maximization of the weighted target likelihood is described in Section 3, experimental results are presented in Section 4 and conclusions are drawn is Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
