@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Stereo reconstruction using high-order likelihoods

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Novel high-order likelihood model for window-based stereo matching problem.Efficient optimization using pairwise clique reduction technique.Efficient parallelization and implementation on GPU (graphics processing unit).

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
High-order likelihood,Markov random field,Stereo vision,Global matching framework,Graph cuts,High-order cliques,Occlusion handling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Under the popular Markov random field (MRF) model, low-level vision problems are usually formulated by prior and likelihood models. In recent years, the priors have been formulated from high-order cliques and have demonstrated their robustness in many problems. However, the likelihoods have remained zeroth-order clique potentials. This zeroth-order clique assumption causes inaccurate solution and gives rise to undesirable fattening effect especially when window-based matching costs are employed. In this paper, we investigate high-order likelihood modeling for the stereo matching problem which advocates the dissimilarity measure between the whole reference image and the warped non-reference image. If the dissimilarity measure is evaluated between filtered stereo images, the matching cost can be modeled as high-order clique potentials. When linear filters and nonparametric census filter are used, it is shown that the high-order clique potentials can be reduced to pairwise energy functions. Consequently, a global optimization is possible by employing efficient graph cuts algorithm. Experimental results show that the proposed high-order likelihood models produce significantly better results than the conventional zeroth-order models qualitatively as well as quantitatively.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Graphical models based on Markov random field (MRF) have become dominant in low-level computer vision problems such as image denoising, segmentation, and stereo vision. The ill-posed nature of these problems necessitates a strong presence of regularizing priors. MRF provides an effective representation of local dependency between the target variables. Efficient global optimization algorithms such asα-expansion, partial quadratic pseudo-Boolean optimization (QPBO) fusion, and belief propagation allow convincing estimates of the minimum energy states [3,7,20,26,30] of such models. The MRF framework has proven effective for incorporating smoothness priors into pixel labeling problems.Recently, considerable progress has been made in modeling priors. The first-order priors are the most popular because these can be implemented directly in pairwise MRFs. In addition, second-order and high-order priors are introduced for the stereo and segmentation problems [14,35]. The success of the high-order models for priors has encouraged the development of high-order energy minimization algorithms, which also have become a persistent topic in computer vision [11,17,19]. The high-order models yield more accurate results than their low-order counterparts, though with an increase of computational time. To solve this problem on a conventional optimization framework, the larger cliques are first reduced to pairwise cliques before the optimization procedure.However, high-order likelihoods have not been considered yet and the independent distribution has often been assumed so far. If we narrow our perspective to the stereo vision problem, the matching cost (likelihood) is modeled as a sum of single-variable functions, while the surface smoothness cost (prior) is modeled as the sum of two-variable or three-variable functions. Although various window-based and segment-based matching costs have been proposed, the matching costs have been nominally encased in the zeroth-order potentials until recently. Under the conventional zeroth-order clique assumption, the left and right images are filtered before matching. Note that due to this simple assumption, the conventional methods suffer form inaccuracy in matching and have noticeable undesired artifacts such as fattening effect around the disparity discontinuity. While it is desirable to filter the non-reference image after it is warped to the reference image plane, it causes high-order cliques because a pixel value in the filtered image becomes a function of many disparities inside the supporting window.In this paper, we investigate the global matching framework and the subsequent high-order likelihood modeling for the stereo reconstruction problem. This paper differs from the previous works in proposing the elevation of the existing window-based matching costs to high order. We demonstrate how the global matching framework provides a natural interpretation for the high-order likelihoods. Furthermore, the global optimization is made possible through the pairwise clique reduction. Many of the previously introduced matching costs, such as those calculated by mean subtraction and census filters, are modeled as high-order likelihoods and optimized using graph cuts. The tests of various matching costs show that the elevation of likelihood to high order significantly eliminates the fattening effect that is inevitable when using the window-based zeroth-order likelihoods. Although the proposed method has high computational complexity due to the large neighborhood system and non-submodular edges, we show that the use of parallel implementation of the optimization algorithm on graphics processing unit (GPU) is an effective way to compensate the penalty. The early version of this paper was published in [12]. In this paper, it is expanded significantly to accommodate all high-order linear filters with L2 distances, in addition to the Census filter discussed in [12].The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces previous works related to the proposed approach. Section 3 describes the high-order likelihood from the global matching framework. In the same section, the pairwise clique reductions are provided for high-order matching costs obtained with linear and census filters. The fusion move allows asymmetrical occlusion handling by combining multiple proposal states. In Section 4, the energy minimization technique and its parallel implementation on GPU are described. Section 5 presents the experimental results, in which different high-order likelihoods are compared for various regularizing values. Section 6 gives concluding remarks.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
