@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evaluations on multi-scale camera networks for precise and geo-accurate reconstructions from aerial and terrestrial images with user guidance

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Use of planar fiducial markers for automatic accurate camera calibration.Online user feedback and quality visualization for image acquisition.Integration of ground control points and GPS measurements in the bundle adjustment.Accurate and easy-to-use 3D reconstruction pipeline with automatic geo-registration.Unified document with extensive evaluations and insights to large-scale 3D modeling.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Photogrammetric computer vision,Unmanned aerial vehicles,Image-based 3D reconstruction,Mapping,Camera calibration,Image acquisition,Online feedback,Structure-from-motion,Georeferencing,Fiducial markers,Accuracy evaluation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
During the last decades photogrammetric computer vision systems have been well established in scientific and commercial applications. Recent developments in image-based 3D reconstruction systems have resulted in an easy way of creating realistic, visually appealing and accurate 3D models. We present a fully automated processing pipeline for metric and geo-accurate 3D reconstructions of complex geometries supported by an online feedback method for user guidance during image acquisition. Our approach is suited for seamlessly matching and integrating images with different scales, from different view points (aerial and terrestrial), and with different cameras into one single reconstruction. We evaluate our approach based on different datasets for applications in mining, archaeology and urban environments and thus demonstrate the flexibility and high accuracy of our approach. Our evaluation includes accuracy related analyses investigating camera self-calibration, georegistration and camera network configuration.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Creating and visualizing realistic and accurate 3D models is becoming a central ambition of research in the field of spatial data acquisition. In this domain passive cameras have become very popular as measurement devices due to their inherent flexibility and low cost compared to traditional surveying equipment. As passive cameras are also very light-weight they can be mounted on UAVs (unmanned aerial vehicles), which have emerged in recent years as a promising platform to perform close range aerial data acquisition and surveying tasks (Rehak et al., 2013).UAVs help to overcome geometric constraints and combine the advantages of both aerial and terrestrial photogrammetry and also serve as a low-cost alternative to the classical manned surveying. Typical applications reach from agriculture and environmental monitoring, surveying tasks for mining, archaeology or architecture as well as inspection of objects that are difficult and dangerous to reach for human operators. Multi-copter UAVs in particular, are able to capture highly overlapping images from almost terrestrial camera view points to oblique and nadir aerial images, due to the ability to navigate at very low airspeed and hover at nearly any position.Together with an automated multi-view processing pipeline, dense 3D point clouds from images are generated in a flexible, fast and cheap way and can compete with point clouds from laser scans in terms of accuracy (Leberl et al., 2010). Such multi-view processing pipelines have been integrated in many software packages (e.g. VisualSfM, Acute3D, Pix4D, Agisoft PhotoScan, PhotoModeler, etc.). These pipelines are able to calculate the intrinsic and extrinsic camera parameters as well as scene structure represented as a (sparse) 3D point cloud from an unordered set of images. In subsequent steps, the model gets refined to generate a denser point cloud (Furukawa and Ponce, 2009; Hirschmueller, 2005).Many of the afore mentioned software packages show increasing robustness and result in high quality and visually appealing 3D models (Tscharf et al., 2015). However, there are three main drawbacks.The first drawback is that the reconstruction errors of the models are not always clear and so they are often not directly suited for photogrammetric applications.The second drawback is that nearly all of the software packages include manual steps e.g. for indirect georeferencing to establish tie point correspondences and aligning the reconstructions in a world coordinate frame.The third drawback is that none of these software packages provides the operator with sufficient information to judge the completeness of the reconstruction at acquisition time. Especially complex object geometries require high overlap and a very dense image network to guarantee completeness, which cannot be ensured by using terrestrial or aerial nadir images exclusively. Only a combination of terrestrial and aerial viewpoints is able to guarantee completeness of the model.In this context, we see the need for a user-friendly, fully automated processing pipeline including user guidance during image acquisition, an easy to use camera calibration procedure and accurate georeferencing of reconstructed models in a world coordinate system having absolute geographic position and orientation with predictable reconstruction accuracy (Fig. 1).In the first part of our paper (Section 2) we present our fully automated multi-scale end-to-end workflow (Fig. 1) to create precise and geo-accurate reconstructions in complex environments by the combined use of different camera platforms (aerial and terrestrial). Our contribution is three-fold. Firstly, we present and advocate the use of planar fiducial markers as a target pattern to obtain accurate and reliable camera calibration. Secondly, with known ground control point (GCP) positions or GPS measurements of the camera positions, we are able to automatically set the generated 3D model into its geographic reference coordinate frame. By additionally integrating GCPs and camera self-calibration in the bundle adjustment optimization, we are able to create precise and geo-accurate 3D reconstructions without any manual interaction. Lastly, we integrate user guidance (Hoppe et al., 2012) into the data acquisition step to ensure that acquired images are suited for automated photogrammetric processing (Section 3). Photogrammetric methods need to cope robustly with unordered sets of images, where scale, depth and ground sampling distance (GSD) changes are immanent. Our online feedback approach thus ensures that the final Structure-from-Motion (SfM) reconstruction meets predefined accuracy requirements and results in a complete reconstruction of the object. To our knowledge, this is the first approach of this kind.The largest part of this paper (Section 4) gives insights how we evaluated and describes what is important during image acquisition to obtain highly accurate reconstructions. We present accuracy related analyses investigating camera self-calibration, georegistration, camera network configuration and ground sampling distance and show how to obtain geo-accurate reconstructions for complex object geometries with high precision using aerial UAV imagery in combination with terrestrial images.We evaluate our approach based on five different scenarios for applications in mining and archaeology, as well as urban environments and demonstrate the flexibility and high accuracy of our approach.In this section, we describe our fully automated multi-view processing pipeline to reconstruct geo-accurate 3D models and camera positions with input images captured with different cameras at different scales and view points. The reconstruction pipeline is roughly divided into four parts: camera calibration; determination of the exterior parameters of camera positions and orientations together with the reconstruction of sparse 3D object points; geo-registration by transforming the 3D model into a geographic reference coordinate frame; densification of the object points and finally generation of a polygonal surface model and texturing. The reconstruction step takes pre-calibrated images from different sources, groups them according to their intrinsic parameters and processes them jointly to finally generate a textured polygonal surface model.Accurate intrinsic camera calibration is critical to computer vision methods that involve image based measurements. Traditional SfM pipelines such as Bundler, Agisoft, etc. employ a direct use of uncalibrated views for 3D reconstruction, and can inherently deal with a dataset having images taken at varying focal length, scale and resolution. However, in our experience, we have found that accuracy of Structure-from-Motion computation is expected to be higher with an accurately calibrated setup (Irschara et al., 2007; Strecha et al., 2008).In most of the calibration literature (Zhang, 2000), a strict requirement on the target geometry and a constraint to acquire the entire calibration pattern has been enforced. This is often a source of inaccuracy when calibration is performed by a typical end-user. Additionally, these methods tend to fail when images are taken at considerably different distances to the object. Hence, aiming at the accuracy of target calibration techniques while factoring out image space variations due to occlusion, reflection, etc., we advocate the use of a recently proposed fiducial marker based camera calibration method (Daftry et al., 2013). The calibration routine follows the basic principles of planar target based calibration and thus requires simple printed markers to be imaged in several views (Fig. 2).Each marker includes a unique identification number as a machine-readable black and white circular binary code, arranged rotationally invariant around the marker center (Fig. 3).A novel technique for robustly estimating the focal length and determining the calibration matrix K is employed, where an error function is exhaustively evaluated to obtain globally optimal values of focal length f, principal point and radial distortion. For details on the calibration routine please refer to the original paper (Daftry et al., 2013).There are significant qualitative and quantitative benefits of the presented calibration method towards a multi-scale robust image sequence. Fig. 4shows a reconstruction of a facade that, although visually correct in appearance, suffers from geometric inconsistencies (significant bending) that is prevalent along the fringes when using standard calibration and undistortion results from OpenCV (Bradski, 2000). In contrast, our method results in an almost straight wall.In our findings, this method works very robustly and performs much better for a multi-scale image sequence acquired at varying depths to the object, as compared to traditional methods that employ a non-linear minimization technique for intrinsic parameter estimation. In addition, we facilitated the method with an easy to use GUI. Our calibration software is available online.11https://aerial.icg.tugraz.at/Calculation of the exterior camera orientations called Structure-from-Motion (SfM), or Aerial Triangulation (AT), includes feature extraction and feature matching, estimation of relative camera poses from known point correspondences and incrementally adding new cameras and computation of 3D object coordinates of the extracted feature points (Hartley and Zisserman, 2004). Camera orientations and 3D coordinates of the object points are then optimized using bundle adjustment.For our method we assume pre-calibrated images, i.e. images that have already been undistorted together with an initial guess of the focal length (see Section 2.1). We group all input images into subsets sharing the same camera and focal length in a preprocessing step. The grouping and assignment to an initial calibration and focal length is performed according to meta information from specific tags provided with the image file (e.g. Exif information in JPEG or TIFF images), or given by the user.The first processing step in our pipeline is feature extraction on every image in all subsets. A variety of methods exist for automated detection of feature points. The scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT) (Lowe, 2004) proved to be very robust against rotation, illumination changes and view point variations and scaling. It is therefore ideally suited to match images automatically from different view points, i.e. aerial images from a UAV and terrestrial images as well as inside views of an object taken with different cameras into one single reconstruction. The only prerequisite is that there is overlap between the images showing sufficient texture and salient features that can be matched across the views. The extracted features for all images are then stored and further processed.Matching of the extracted features is performed between all images and all subsets. Since we assume that no further information about the images is known, feature matching would require an exhaustive comparison of all the extracted features in an unordered image set between all possible pairs of images to preserve as many image measurements as possible for an object point. Exhaustive comparison in an unordered set of images, however, requires a lot of computation time and is the most time consuming step in every Structure-from-Motion pipeline. The expense related to correspondence search and matching is thus quadratic in terms of the number of extracted feature points in the scene, which can lead to a critical amount of time in data sets with several thousands of images. To speed up the correspondence analysis in large data sets, methods based on vocabulary trees are applied to achieve a rough pre-selection of similar image pairs (Nistér and Stewenius, 2006; Sivic and Zisserman, 2003). The computation time for feature extraction and matching is additionally reduced through the extensive use of graphics processing hardware (GPUs).Established feature correspondences between images are then used to estimate the relative camera orientations between pairs of images. Geometric verification of the relative camera orientations is performed using the five-point algorithm (Nistér, 2003) within a RANSAC loop (Fischler and Bolles, 1981). Starting from an initial image pair, new images are incrementally added to the reconstruction using the three-point algorithm (Haralick et al., 1991). The relative orientations between cameras are represented in a graph structure, the so-called epipolar connectivity graph (Fig. 5). Images in the graph are represented by the nodes and the relationships between them (based on common feature points and overlap) are represented by the edges of the graph that correspond to the relative orientations between cameras.Camera orientations and triangulated 3D feature points are then simultaneously refined by minimizing the reprojection error between the projected 3D point and its corresponding 2D feature measurement in the image in a bundle adjustment step (Triggs et al., 2000). Optimization in the bundle adjustment is carried out based on Google’s Ceres Solver for non-linear least squares problems Agarwal et al.Reconstructions created by purely image-based approaches like the method described here are initially not metric due to the lack of scale information in the images. A metric scale of the reconstruction can be accomplished easily for example by one known distance in the scene. This might be a distance measure between two distinct points that is also easily recognizable in the digitally reconstructed 3D model, or a known distance between two camera positions.However, in most cases and in surveying applications in particular, the absolute position of object points is important. In addition, we want the created 3D model stored and displayed in position and orientation in its specific geographic context.Georegistration is achieved by a rigid similarity transformation (also called 3D Helmert transformation (Watson, 2006) or 7-parameter transform) of the model into a desired metric target coordinate system using at least 3 known non-collinear point correspondences between model points and points in the reference coordinate system (control points). A more robust transformation result is obtained by a larger number of points and a robust estimation of the transformation parameters for rotation, translation and scaling. The method of least squares within a RANSAC loop (Fischler and Bolles, 1981) improves clearly the registration quality of the model in the presence of noise and outliers.Flying platforms for aerial data acquisition are often equipped with a GPS receiver, that allows positioning of the aircraft in flight, stabilization and, depending on the application autonomous navigation between waypoints. Recording of GPS data during the flight enables to track and monitor positions and travelled distances of the UAV. It is then necessary to link the recorded images to the corresponding position data in order to use the GPS information for georeferencing (Nilosek and Salvaggio, 2012). This is achieved by synchronized timestamps of the images with the GPS signal. Several professional products instead offer a direct interface between on-board GPS receiver and camera to instantly assign a GPS location to a captured image and store the information in the meta data of the image file. Recorded information from inertial sensors may also be available in the meta data, providing information about the platform orientation of the aircraft at the time of capturing the image, given by the rotation angles for roll, pitch and yaw. During SfM, this additional information of approximate camera positions is used for guidance to speed up the search for neighboring images and match image features through guided matching.Position data stored for each image is now used to metrically scale the previously calculated reconstruction and to transform the model into a desired reference system. However, the quality and accuracy of location data is not sufficient in most cases to allow an accurate three-dimensional reconstruction and reliable measurements in the scene solely based on GPS positions and IMU (inertial measurement unit) data. Due to weight restrictions of UAVs and a maximum payload depending on the used aircraft, usually very small GPS receivers are used that allow only limited accuracy in the range of 1-2 meters in position and 1-2° orientation accuracy (Pfeifer et al., 2012). But, the accuracy is sufficiently high for a rough positioning and metric scaling of the image-based reconstruction because transformation parameters can be estimated robustly when using a large number of images. The more images and GPS positions, the more robust the transformation gets. The accuracy of the absolute positioning of the reconstruction might be low, but the precision of the metric scaling is high enough, because relative position errors between GPS positions are better distributed and compensated, the larger the number of position measurements, i.e. the number of images.Pure image-based approaches suffer from systematic errors. We experienced that especially for a few datasets showing long elongated, large-scale scenes our pipeline resulted in large errors up to a few meters due to a deformation of the whole image block introduced in the bundle adjustment. Depending on the fixed reference point locations from the georegistration step, the errors drift away from these fixed points and cause a bending-effect like in the railway dataset shown inFigs. 6–7and Table 1.Observed camera block deformations are very often caused by incorrectly estimated radial distortion parameters of the camera. As a consequence the reprojections of 3D points onto the image plane are not correct and thus cause wrong error measures in the bundle adjustment process. Furthermore, the reprojection error as the sole evaluated error measure has impact on many independent parameters (3D positions of the object points as well as intrinsic and extrinsic camera parameters). Errors can be passed back and forth during the optimization and camera positions may undergo large changes.These systematic errors can be avoided by either a more accurate initial camera calibration or by adding external constraints in the bundle adjustment. For photogrammetric applications, we therefore use (roughly) known GPS positions of the cameras determined by an on-board GPS receiver and fixed control points to allow for camera self-calibration within the optimization.Georegistration of the reconstruction as described in the previous subsection alone does not solve this issue. The model deformations are still present due to the shape-preserving character of the transformation. Instead, after rough georegistration and GPS-alignment, we use known GPS locations of the images in an additional bundle adjustment step to constrain the positions of the cameras and to reduce an initial distortion of the image block. We do that by calculating the deviations of the calculated camera positions from the Structure-from-Motion result and penalize the deviation to their measured GPS positions in the optimization step. The influence of the deviation between the measured position is weighted by a Huber loss function (Huber, 1964). The camera positions can move only within a certain range around their measured positions and thus, are softly linked to their measured GPS positions. This leads to smaller residuals on the one hand, and on the other, a direct transition from the model coordinate system into a desired geographic reference system is accomplished simultaneously. The bundle adjustment step is again carried out based on Google’s Ceres Solver for non-linear least squares problems Agarwal et al.In addition, ground control points (GCPs) are also used to correct distortions or a small geographic misalignment of the model and to tie the reconstruction to a certain geographic position. Besides camera positions and 3D points we therefore use the GCPs also for self-calibration in the bundle adjustment step and optimize common intrinsic camera and distortion parameters for each camera group.GCPs signal points that are usually easily recognizable natural or artificial landmarks in the scene. Their position is known and for example determined by means of conventional survey methods or DGPS (Differential Global Positioning System) with high accuracy. For this purpose, the bundle adjustment is further extended to the use of control points and their corresponding image measurements. The additional information is seamlessly integrated into the reconstruction process. The reprojection error between the image measurements and projected control points is additionally weighted and penalized in the bundle adjustment in a similar way to the mass of natural features obtained by the SIFT keypoint detector. Important in this case is an appropriate weighting that balances the residual reprojection errors of the GCPs compared to the SIFT-generated points. Usually, low number of GCPs (around a couple of dozen) is confronted with a large number of natural feature points (hundreds of thousands or millions of points).For GPS positions and ground control points together, the optimization problem is defined as(1)f*=min{R,t,K},{P},{R},{S}∑PE(P)+λ∑REgcp(R)+ω∑SEgps(S),with R, t as the rotation and translation of the cameras and K the intrinsic camera matrix. {P}, {R} are the sets of natural 3D points and reference points represented by the GCPs, including their 2D image measurements. {S} denotes the set of GPS measurements and the corresponding camera positions. E, Egcpand Egpsare the error functions for 3D points, GCPs and GPS camera positions. λ and ω denote scalar weighting factors.The error function for 3D points is defined as(2)E(X)=∑xi∈XPρ(CP(Γi(X),xi)).ρ denotes the robust Huber loss function, Γiprojects a 3D point X into image Ii. For the point case CP, a common choice is the 2D reprojection error defined as the Euclidean distance between the projected 3D point (Γi(X)) and the observed 2D measurement (xi). GCPs are handeled in the similar way.In case of GPS measurements for camera positions, Eq. 2 simplifies to(3)E(C)=∑M∈Sρ(Cgps(M,C)).Cgpsis the Euclidean distance in 3D between the measured GPS position (M) of the camera and the reconstructed camera center (C).The weighting terms λ and ω in Eq. 1 are dynamically selected depending on the number of 3D points |{P}|, GCPs |{R}| and GPS measurements |{S}| to balance the weights between them such that all parts contribute equally.Integrating both mechanisms (using ground control points and GPS positions of the cameras) distributes the residual errors equally over all cameras and object points and allows for 3D reconstructions with very low geometric distortions. Furthermore, in the case of regular camera networks we experience that an additional cross flight and images at different scales taken at different distances to the object help to stabilize the intrinsic camera parameters. 2D image measurements, feature matches across overlapping images and triangulated 3D points are then better constrained. This leads to a more robust self-calibration result and furthermore to a more stable image block and increased point position accuracy even for very large, elongated surveying areas (Figs. 6 and 7).The results of the previous steps so far are the external orientations of the cameras, optimized intrinsic camera parameters and a 3D point cloud from triangulated object feature points. Due to the comparably low number of triangulated feature points (approximately 5000 features per image, depending on the texture) and their non-uniform distribution on the surface compared to the dense number of pixels in one image (millions of pixels), the modeling of the surface is only an approximation of the real surface. To increase the number of 3D points, stereo (Hirschmueller, 2005) or multi-view methods (Furukawa and Ponce, 2009; Irschara et al., 2012) are used for pixel-wise image matching.For better visualization and for further use as a digital surface model (DSM) for surveying tasks, we extract a closed surface from the point cloud using a method based on 3D Delaunay triangulation and graph cuts (Labatut et al., 2007). The method produces watertight triangle meshes from unstructured point clouds very robustly even in the presence of noise and gross outliers in the raw 3D sample points. The meshes can then be textured (Waechter et al., 2014) from the input images to generate a photorealistic representation of the scene. Fig. 1 shows a comparison between a sparse reconstruction, a densified point cloud and a reconstructed triangle surface mesh of a quarry wall consisting of about 10 million 3D points.To evaluate the presented workflow and the achieved accuracy, several image flights were carried out to record datasets typical for urban, mining and archaeological applications.We used different platforms and cameras to acquire each of the datasets. One is a Falcon 8 octocopter by AscTec, equipped with a Sony Nex-5N digital system camera or alternatively with a GoPro Hero 3+ action camera. The second flying platform is a senseFly eBee, a small fixed-wing UAV with a Canon IXUS 127HS compact camera. The main advantages of multi-copters are their flexibility and the ability to fly at very low airspeed to record datasets with high overlap, hover and observe objects from any possible position, even very close to an object to capture images at a very high level of detail. The fixed-wing UAV, however, is able to fly and survey large areas in short time with certain details not been detected due to the in general larger flying altitude and higher airspeed. In addition we use a Canon EOS 5D full-frame digital SLR and a consumer-grade Panasonic compact camera for terrestrial images in areas, where highly detailed views from the inside of an object are required and an airborne mission cannot be performed. A compiled summary of cameras and sensors used is given in Table 2.To guarantee a certain accuracy, a desired image overlap and minimum ground sampling distance has to be defined beforehand. Based on Eqs. 4 and 5 for nadir image acquisition in aerial photogrammetry,(4)PixelSize=SensorWidth[mm]ImageWidth[px],(5)GSD=PixelSize[mmpx]*ElevationAboveGround[m]FocalLength[mm],we estimate a maximum flying height above ground and imaging distance to the object, respectively.The field of view (FOV) calculates from Eq. 6,(6)α=2·arctanSensorWidth[mm]2·FocalLength[mm].The scene coverage for one image captured from height h above ground is calculated from Eq. 7,(7)c=2·h·tanα2≈ImageWidth[px]·GSD.The baseline b between views then calculates from the overlap ratioor=ocwith o being the overlapo=2·h·tanα2−btob=(1−or)·c.To enable analysis of which parameters influence the reconstruction accuracy we oversample the scenes and record images at the minimum of 70% overlap in previously defined distances and heights from the object.Apart from the imaging distance, the baseline between particular cameras has a strong influence on the triangulation geometry and ray intersection. Especially for the canonical stereo configuration with parallel optical axes, the distance to baseline ratio is a good parameter to quantify the quality of a camera network. Small baselines lead to small triangulation angles and to high depth uncertainty. But to enable feature matching, high image overlap and intersection angles below 30° are optimal (Zeisl et al., 2009).We support image acquisition by an online feedback system to assess the recorded images with respect to the parameters of image overlap, ground sampling distance and scene coverage defined in the previous section to ensure completeness and redundancy of the image block.The automated offline pipeline described in Section 2.2 yields high accuracy, as we will show in Section 4. However, processing takes several hours, thus, results are only available hours later. If the reconstruction result does not meet the desired expectations, e.g. due to a lack of images in areas that would have been relevant to the survey, a repetition of the flight is necessary which cause additional costs and time delays. In order to be able to already judge the results on site whether the captured images are suited for fully automated processing, we apply a recently developed method for online Structure-from-Motion (Hoppe et al., 2012). The method calculates the exterior orientation of the cameras and a sparse point cloud reconstruction already during or right after the flight on site.We expect that a user does not acquire images in a totally random order. Further, we assume that a new input image has an overlap to an already reconstructed scene part. We can then split the SfM problem into two tasks that are easier to solve: localization and structure expansion (Irschara et al., 2009). More formally, given a freshly acquired input image I and a reconstructed scene M, we find the position of I within M and finally, we expand the map M. The presented method is similar to visual SLAM, but it matches wide-baseline features instead of tracking interest points. Since some of the features are already used for the triangulation of 3D points, we can directly establish 2D-3D image correspondences between I and M. Given a set of 2D-3D correspondences and a calibrated camera, we solve the absolute pose problem robustly in a RANSAC loop (Fischler and Bolles, 1981).The images may be streamed down from the UAV via Wi-Fi to a laptop computer on the ground. High-resolution images can be processed in real time on a standard notebook computer. The method requires a stream of consecutively captured images and needs about two seconds to determine the outer orientation of a 10 megapixel image and calculating new object points. The online reconstruction does not claim high accuracy, because we restrict image matching and bundle adjustment to immediate neighboring cameras. However, the method allows online feedback to estimate the achievable reconstruction quality and is very beneficial to determine completeness of the final reconstruction during image recording.For the user, the quality of the reconstruction can be judged only poorly from the triangulated sparse feature points. Two main relevant parameters determine the accuracy: redundancy, which states how often a surface point is seen, and the ground resolution. To determine both parameters from the actual reconstruction, a surface is incrementally extracted from the sparse points (Daftry et al., 2015; Hoppe et al., 2013). The surface extraction method is based on Labatut et al. (2007), which uses a Delaunay triangulation of 3D points and robustly labels the tetrahedra into free and occupied space using a random field formulation of the visibility information. Having defined all terms for our random field formulation, we are then able to derive a globally optimal labeling solution for our surface extraction problem using dynamic graph cuts. The surface is extracted as the interface between free- and occupied space.We visualize the current ground sampling distance and image redundancy as quality indicators on the surface model to guide the user throughout the acquisition (see Fig. 8). For the user it is then obvious, how often parts of the scene are observed and at which ground resolution they can be reconstructed. This assists the pilot in planning the next steps of the flight so that a uniform coverage of the scene with constant ground resolution can be achieved.To demonstrate the benefits of our feedback system, we asked a user experienced in image-based 3D reconstruction to acquire images with sufficient overlap (from the inside and outside) of a complex (non-convex shaped) building entrance which we then processed with our online SfM system. We performed the experiment twice: One time with user feedback and one time without. For the first experiment 100 images were acquired without feedback. 74 of them were successfully integrated in the reconstruction. 26% of the images could not be integrated, mainly because of missing features on the object through underexposure, and overexposure in the background which the user did not recognize during acquisition time.With user feedback, missing correspondences between images and the reconstruction are instantly reported to the user (see Fig. 9). After three images that failed to be aligned, the acquisition strategy and camera settings where adapted successfully. In the end, 100 images out of 118 were successfully integrated into the reconstruction, which is a rate of 15% missed images compared to 26% in the experiment without feedback (Hoppe et al., 2012).Fig. 10shows a sample image of a reconstructed building overlaid by the redundancy and resolution information. The images were acquired by a manually controlled UAV. The redundancy map shows that images where mostly captured at the center part of the building whereas the resolution is distributed equally within the atrium of the building. The overall shape of the inner part of the building is extracted correctly, but the outer parts are missing. The visualization of the 3D geometry and color coding helps to select new camera positions and obtain a complete 3D model of the building.Quantitatively, our method achieves the same accuracy as state-of-the-art methods but reduces the computational effort significantly. The difference in computational effort is mainly caused by the definition of the energy function. Other methods such as Labatut et al. (2007) have to perform a full raycast for each ray, the used methods from Daftry et al. (2015); Hoppe et al. (2013) only have to identify the tetrahedra in front and behind the vertex and the first triangle that is intersected by the ray. Hence, the combination of the dynamic graph cut with the energy formulation of Daftry et al. (2015) allows to extract the surface from an increasingly growing point cloud independent of the overall scene size in real-time.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
