@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Eye blink detection based on motion vectors analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Introduces eye blink detection algorithm while outperforming most of the related work.Introduces the largest real-world dataset on eye blink detection with more than 1800 annotated eye blinks.Proposes the way how to evaluate eye blink detection algorithms.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Eye blink detection,Motion vectors analysis,Statistical standard deviation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A new eye blink detection algorithm is proposed. Motion vectors obtained by Gunnar–Farneback tracker in the eye region are analyzed using a state machine for each eye. Normalized average motion vector with standard deviation and time constraint are the input to the state machine. Motion vectors are normalized by the intraocular distance to achieve invariance to the eye region size. The proposed method outperforms related work on the majority of available datasets. We extend the way how to evaluate eye blink detection algorithms without the impact of algorithms used for face and eye detection. We also introduce a new challenging dataset Researcher’s night, which contains more than 100 unique individuals with 1849 annotated eye blinks. It is currently the largest dataset available.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Recently, there has been an increased attention to eye blink detection mostly because of face liveness detection (Pan et al., 2007; Szwoch and Pieniazek, 2012) (photo can not blink). Eye blinks are often used as a way of interaction between disabled people (Grauman et al., 2003) and computers. Eye blink frequency and duration are reliable signs of sleepiness (Dinges, 1998) that can be used to detect driver’s fatigue (Bergasa et al., 2006; Danisman et al., 2010) and eventually to prevent microsleep.Application of this work can be for example a measurement of user’s blink rate with common cameras in order to monitor dry eye syndrome (Divjak and Bischof, 2009). One of the main causes of dry eye syndrome is low blink rate. A healthy human blinks 10 to 15 times per minute. 70% of computer users have decreased blink rate up to 60% (Blehm et al., 2005). Dry eye syndrome is often accompanied by symptoms like eyestrain, soreness, irritation, red eyes or blurred vision. Each blink renews the tear film which protects and moisturizes the eye.Eye blink is defined as a rapid closing and reopening of eyelids. Endogenous eye blink typically lasts from 100 to 400 milliseconds (Stern et al., 1984). Mostly due to dry eye syndrome, only partially closed eye blink often occurs and this is called an incomplete blink (Portello et al., 2013). Extended blinks (Rodriguez et al., 2013) are the opposite when the eye closure (fully closed eye) lasts from 70 ms to around 1 s. Some people blink multiple times in a sequence; for example double blinks or even quadruple blinks can occur.We focus on detection of endogenous eye blinks, thus a standard camera with 25–30 frames per second (fps) is sufficient. Eye blink detection can be based on motion tracking within the eye region (Divjak and Bischof, 2009). Some methods try to estimate the state of an eye (open, closed (Lee et al., 2010) or the eye closure (Garcia et al., 2012)) for individual frames which is consequently used in a sequence for blink detection. Other methods compute a difference between frames (pixels values (Kurylyak et al., 2012), descriptors (Malik and Smolka, 2014), etc.). We built our algorithm upon the successful method of Drutarovsky and Fogelton (2015) which is a motion tracking state-of-the-art method with very low false positive rate.One of the major problems within eye blink detection algorithms is the data insufficiency and subsequent over-fitting on existing datasets. We collected new, more challenging datasets during an event called Researcher’s night where more than 100 unique people were recorded and 1849 blinks annotated. Another problem is the evaluation procedure that is often not specified within published algorithms. We propose an evaluation based on intersection over union metric to define the detected blink. We extend an annotation of individual videos with the face and eye corner positions. Consequently, performance of an eye blink detection algorithm is measured without an influence of used face and eye detection method.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
