@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A resource-efficient multimedia encryption scheme for embedded video sensing system based on unmanned aircraft

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
By studying the resources constraints with their development trends in video sensing system, an information-utility-value-oriented multimedia encryption optimization model under resources constraints is given.A video-compression-independent speed-adjustable lightweight encryption scheme with its improved version based on the previously proposed model is given.A DSP and ARM based embedded secure video sensing system is designed, and the proposed encryption scheme has been implemented in it.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Video sensing,Multimedia big data,Video encryption,Generalized information security,Embedded system,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Battery-powered unmanned aerial vehicle based video sensing system is more cost-saving and energy-saving than traditional aircraft based systems. However, high-volume real-time sensing data is more vulnerable in unmanned system than that in manned system. Meanwhile, the computation and energy resources in such system are very limited, which restricts the use of complex encryption process on video data. Therefore, how to achieve confidentiality of video data under limited resources efficiently needs to be addressed. Firstly, resources constraints with their development trends in video sensing system are studied. Secondly, an information-utility-value-oriented resource-efficient encryption optimization model under resources constraints is given. Thirdly, based on this model, a video-compression-independent speed-adjustable lightweight encryption scheme with its improved version is proposed. Fourthly, a DSP and ARM based embedded secure video sensing system is designed, and the proposed encryption scheme has been implemented in it. In addition, theoretical analyses based on information theory and experimental analyses on throughputs show that the proposed encryption schemes can meet the real-time requirements of system under the tight resources constraints.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Real-time video data in embedded video sensing system has a high bandwidth. However, as to battery- powered system, limited computation and energy resources restrict the usage of full encryption process on video data. Firstly, this research analyses the discrepancy between encryption resources and volume of real-time data, and then draws a conclusion that the discrepancy would not converge because the increase of encryption ability is difficult to catch up with the increase of data volume. Secondly, to get a better optimization for encryption scheme, impacts of encryption optimization on attacker׳s behavior are discussed. And then, information-utility-value-oriented encryption optimization model for multimedia data under resources constraints is proposed. Such model can optimize the distribution of limited resources, then minimize the probable information utility value which could be stolen by attacker. Thirdly, based on aforementioned model a video-compression-independent speed-adjustable fast encryption scheme and a packet-oriented improved version are proposed. Fourthly, an embedded video sensing system has been designed, and the proposed encryption schemes have been implemented in data storing and transmission module respectively. Theoretical analyses based on information theory and experimental analyses indicate that the performance of the proposed scheme is effective enough to support the encryption of real-time data in embedded video sensing systems.