@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
MDWiZ: A platform for the automated translation of molecular dynamics simulations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The MDWiZ platform for the one-click, automated translation of molecular dynamics simulation is presented.MDWiZ version 1.0 allows conversions from GROMACS to LAMMPS independently of the force field used and simulation set up with a 10−9kJmol−1 internal numerical accuracy for energies.A rigorous validation on a set of molecular systems with complementary chemical topologies is presented.MDWiZ version 1.0 is freely accessible as a web portal.The MDWiZ platform is being extended to other software engines and force fields to automate format conversion and aid the accurate comparison of alternative simulation protocols.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Software,Force field,Language barrier,Molecular simulation,MD Wizard,Validation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A variety of popular molecular dynamics (MD) simulation packages were independently developed in the last decades to reach diverse scientific goals. However, such non-coordinated development of software, force fields, and analysis tools for molecular simulations gave rise to an array of software formats and arbitrary conventions for routine preparation and analysis of simulation input and output data. Different formats and/or parameter definitions are used at each stage of the modeling process despite largely contain redundant information between alternative software tools. Such Babel of languages that cannot be easily and univocally translated one into another poses one of the major technical obstacles to the preparation, translation, and comparison of molecular simulation data that users face on a daily basis. Here, we present the MDWiZ platform, a freely accessed online portal designed to aid the fast and reliable preparation and conversion of file formats that allows researchers to reproduce or generate data from MD simulations using different setups, including force fields and models with different underlying potential forms. The general structure of MDWiZ is presented, the features of version 1.0 are detailed, and an extensive validation based on GROMACS to LAMMPS conversion is presented. We believe that MDWiZ will be largely useful to the molecular dynamics community. Such fast format and force field exchange for a given system allows tailoring the chosen system to a given computer platform and/or taking advantage of a specific capabilities offered by different software engines.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The use of computer simulations is increasingly relevant in various fields of molecular sciences. As a result, users from different backgrounds become interested in performing molecular simulations despite little formal training. A variety of popular molecular dynamics (MD) simulation packages such as AMBER [1], CHARMM [2], DESMOND [3], DLPOLY [4–6], GROMACS [7–9], GROMOS [10–12], LAMMPS [13], NAMD [14], NWChem [15], OpenMM [16], TINKER [17] were independently developed in the last decades to match diverse scientific needs. A brief history of the origins of this software development was presented [18]. These software engines allow performing MD simulations with alternative underlying force fields and numerous simulations setups, which are often difficult to be compared within single simulation packages. For example, this leads to the problem of validating results from different research groups or correctly reproducing data generated with force fields that have alternative mathematical forms of the energy terms, which requires entirely new software implementations to be performed [19].In various fields of science, researchers agreed on general format requirements for sharing and validating data of common interest to the field. For example, structural biologists agreed upon the Protein Data Bank format as a common text format to store atomic level information of molecular structures. However, such a common ground has not yet been reached in the field of chemical theory and computation. The independent and non-cooperative development of software, force fields, and analysis tools for molecular simulations gave and still gives rise to an array of equally popular software formats to prepare the simulation input and generate the trajectories. Consequently, an increasing number of researchers spend an unreasonable amount of time to convert data that largely contains redundant type of information among different software tools (e.g. a dihedral potential term that represent a same energy function, yet is expressed following different dihedral conventions).This Babel of computational modeling languages cannot be easily and univocally translated one into another leading to one of the major technical obstacles to the preparation, translation, comparison, and public accessibility of simulation data that users and developers face on a daily basis. Indeed, useful tools to aid the automated preparation of simulation topologies have been proposed. Yet, they either help users of specific software engines [20–22] or aid solely structural/chemical file format conversion (e.g. the Babel family of tools [23]). The latter approach is extremely valuable for a number of modeling scenarios, yet it is not sufficient to translate input files between molecular simulation software engines using alternative definitions of the underlying parameters and potentials. Therefore, a major problem in the molecular simulation field remains the translation of input files and formats and a rigorous assessment of what a force field comparison involves. This study is our first step to contribute with a practical solution to some of these issues.Aiming to overcome this limitation, we present the MDWiZ platform, an online portal designed to perform fast and reliable preparation (e.g. input, topology, coordinate file formats) and parameter conversion (e.g. actual parameters in those files) across molecular dynamics software engines. The translation includes force fields and models with different underlying potential forms and any required format conversion (including different number of input files) for the desired software. The general structure of MDWiZ is presented and the features of version 1.0 are detailed. MDWiZ allows a user to transform in one single click a set of input files for a given combination of software engine and force field into various alternative combinations, as summarized by the workflow in Fig. 1. This release focuses on translating input files from GROMACS to LAMMPS using different force fields followed by an extensive validation. MDWiZ is freely accessible to the public in the form of an openly accessible web interface, which includes features for user support, tutorials, and examples. The source code is also available upon request to the authors.The diverse set of molecular systems simulated for validation of MDWiZ, ranging from methane to proteins, is summarized in Fig. 2. Initial coordinates for the methane, ethane, propane and butane were generated with GaussView (version 5) [24]. N-methylacetamide and alanine dipeptide coordinates were generated manually. Initial coordinates for the solute atoms of the Trp-cage mini-protein were taken from the structure by Neidigh et al. [25] (PDB ID: 1L2Y) and the coordinates for the Triclinic Hew Lysozyme from the structure by Walsh et al. (PDB ID: 4LZT) [26]. Each system was independently simulated under vacuum and solvated conditions. Table 1summarizes the system set up for the simulations in solution. In all cases, standard preparation, minimization, and simulation procedures were performed using the GROMACS software (version 4.6.1; compiled in double precision) [7–9]. We note that MDWiZ is also compatible with GROMACS 4.5.X versions.A variety of force fields and simulation setup were compared in this study, as summarized in Table 2and Supporting Information, Tables S1 and S2. Validation of MDWiZ conversions from GROMACS to LAMMPS was carried out using three different force fields. The GROMOS parameter set 53A6 was used [27] with the SPC water model [28] and compatible ion parameters [29]; the AMBER ff99SB [30] parameter set was chosen as representative of the force field family with the TIP3P water model [31] and compatible ion parameters [1,29]; transformation using the OPLS all atoms force field was employed [32] with the TIP3P water model [31] and compatible ion parameters [29]. The initial configurations were solvated under rectangular periodic boundary conditions in a (pre-equilibrated) water box large enough to avoid interactions between mirror images along the entire MD trajectory. A first steepest-descent energy minimization was performed in order to relax the initial solvent and ion configuration and to eliminate any residual strain. MD simulations were initialized from the energy-minimized configurations with atomic velocities taken from Maxwell–Boltzmann distributions at 300K. All simulations were carried out in the N, V, T ensemble by separately coupling the temperature of solute and solvent degrees of freedom to a heat bath through a weakly coupled algorithm [33] (relaxation time 0.6ps). Newton's equations of motion were integrated using the leap-frog algorithm [34] with a 1fs time step. The water molecules were kept rigid using the SETTLE algorithm [35] in the GROMACS and using the SHAKE algorithm [36] in LAMMPS. To avoid inconsistent comparison of simulations in GROMACS and LAMMPS, because different algorithms are currently implemented for approximation of the long-range interaction algorithm types in GROMACS and in LAMMPS, no long-range interaction was taken into account during the runs. Instead, all non-bonded interactions were directly calculated within a cut-off of 1.4nm [37]. In all cases, the non-bonded interaction list was updated at every step. MD snapshots were extracted every 1ps from each trajectory in full precision and used for analysis.Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jmgm.2013.12.006.The following are Supplementary data to this article:We note that to reproduce the results presented in this study, the double precision trajectories from GROMACS (.trr files) are needed, as using compressed trajectories would lead to numerical inconsistencies. Conversion from GROMACS to LAMMPS trajectories was performed using the VMD software [38]. These double precision trajectories were used as input for LAMMPS rerun calculations. As described in Section 3, this procedure was undertaken in order to allow a direct validation of the transformation performed by MDWiZ, as identical structures are employed to calculate the energy terms of Table 2 and Supporting Information, Tables S1 and S2. Relative accuracy up to 10−9kJmol−1 was used for all calculations. During the LAMMPS rerun calculations the force field energies were printed every step to compare to GROMACS ones. VMD [38], inkscape (inkscape.org), and xmgrace (http://plasma-gate.weizmann.ac.il/Grace/) were used to prepare the graphical representations. The first release of MDWiZ (version 1.0) can be freely accessed through a web interface at: http://barongroup.medchem.utah.edu/tools, which includes features for user support, tutorials, and examples. MDWiZ source code is programmed in C language in order to maintain direct transferability with the GROMACS libraries, and is available upon request to the authors.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have presented the first release of the MDWiZ tool, an online platform for the fast and reliable conversion of MD simulations input files. MDWiZ allows the user to translate different MD engine setup options, including force fields and models with different underlying potential forms. MDWiZ is freely accessible to the community as a web interface. The platform allows for: (i) force field comparison across software engines; (ii) to take advantage of specific features of different MD software packages without dealing with new topology formats and the learning curve associated with new pre-processing tools; and, (iii) easy matching of code efficiency to computer architecture for a system that was initially generated with a MDWiZ supported input format. Overall, MDWiZ will be useful to the broad computational chemistry community for avoiding waste of time and resources in file and format conversion, for enhancing the reproducibility of simulation data, and for helping the accurate comparison of alternative simulation protocols. However, we believe that a broader solution and a general agreement on formats specification similarly to what done for the Protein Data Bank formats would be extremely beneficial on the longer period for the molecular simulation field. We hope this study will contribute to stimulate a general agreement in this direction.