@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Identification and characterization of a glycosaminoglycan binding site on interleukin-10 via molecular simulation methods

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Coulomb potential analysis identifies a distinct GAG binding region on IL-10.Dynamic Molecular Docking yields two putative GAG binding poses.Energy and H-bond analysis reveal outstanding role of R107 for GAG binding.R107A mutation shows that no other residue is able to compensate the loss of R107.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Glycosaminoglycan,Interleukin-10,Molecular modeling,Molecular dynamics,GAG binding,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The biological function of the pleiotropic cytokine interleukin-10 (IL-10), which has an essential role in inflammatory processes, is known to be affected by glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). GAGs are essential constituents of the extracellular matrix with an important role in modulating the biological function of many proteins. The molecular mechanisms governing the IL-10–GAG interaction, though, are unclear so far. In particular, detailed knowledge about GAG binding sites and recognition mode on IL-10 is lacking, despite of its imminent importance for understanding the functional consequences of IL-10–GAG interaction. In the present work, we report a GAG binding site on IL-10 identified by applying computational methods based on Coulomb potential calculations and specialized molecular dynamics simulations. The identified GAG binding site is constituted of several positively charged residues, which are conserved among species. Exhaustive conformational space sampling of a series of GAG ligands binding to IL-10 led to the observation of two GAG binding modes in the predicted binding site, and to the identification of IL-10 residues R104, R106, R107, and K119 as being most important for molecular GAG recognition. In silico mutation as well as single-residue energy decomposition and detailed analysis of hydrogen-bonding behavior led to the conclusion that R107 is most essential and assumes a unique role in IL-10–GAG interaction. This structural and dynamic characterization of GAG-binding to IL-10 represents an important step for further understanding the modulation of the biological function of IL-10.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Interleukin-10 (IL-10) is an immunoregulatory cytokine whose biological relevance has been extensively reviewed [1]. Its most prominent function is to limit and eventually terminate inflammatory responses via its ability to inhibit effector functions of T cells, monocytes, and macrophages, and by inhibiting the synthesis of inflammatory cytokines such as IFN-γ and TNF-α[2–4]. Malfunction of IL-10 leads to improperly regulated immune reactions: IL-10-deficient mice spontaneously develop acute and chronic inflammation [5]. On the macroscopic scale, IL-10 has a crucial impact on tissue repair [6]. Despite the observed anti-inflammatory effects of IL-10, the attempts to use it directly as a therapeutic agent in various inflammatory conditions yielded disappointing results [7]. The IL-10 system turned out to be more complex than initially assumed, and it was found that its functions largely depend on its structural micro-environment [8], and the specific immune environment in which it is released [9]. Furthermore, it was found that IL-10 also has pro-inflammatory effects in certain conditions [10], pointing towards an incredibly multifaceted role of IL-10 in biology. Likewise, IL-10 is often called a pleiotropic cytokine.IL-10 has been shown to bind glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) [11,12]. GAGs are essential building blocks of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and can be characterized as unbranched, negatively charged polysaccharides composed of repeating disaccharide units [13]. Based on the configuration of these disaccharide building blocks, GAGs are grouped into five classes: hyaluronan, chondroitin sulfate, dermatan sulfate, keratan sulfate, and heparan sulfate/heparin. GAGs play a critical role in many biological processes. Their multifarious biological activity arises from their ability to interact with and directly affect the biological activity of many cytokines, chemokines and growth factors [14–18]. Salek-Ardakani et al. demonstrated that GAGs may modulate IL-10 function by showing that soluble GAGs inhibit the IL-10-induced expression of CD16 as well as CD64 on monocytes and macrophages, revealing a dependency of the inhibition strength on the GAG sulfation degree. Interestingly, they also showed that sulfated cell surface-bound GAGs were required for IL-10 to trigger its biological function towards corresponding cells [11]. A recent NMR study showed that GAG sulfation is prerequisite for binding to IL-10: heparin was found to be the strongest binder, and the binding affinity of different GAG types decreased with the sulfation degree. No binding was detected for hyaluronan [12]. In essence, the molecular mechanisms of these effects are unclear so far. Thus, insights into the structural principles underlying the interaction between IL-10 and GAGs are required for understanding the biological role of IL-10–GAG interaction.Here, we report the identification of a GAG binding site on IL-10 and the detailed characterization of the molecular interaction between IL-10 and GAGs in this site based on simulation methods. The calculation and analysis of the Coulomb potential of IL-10 in solution allowed us to locate a GAG binding region on its surface. We then employed Dynamic Molecular Docking (DMD), a recently published specialized method based on molecular dynamics (MD) simulations [20], to investigate the IL-10–GAG interaction in further detail. With DMD we performed exhaustive conformational space sampling while GAG and protein were treated as entirely flexible, and solvent was taken into account explicitly. The DMD calculations yielded two putative GAG binding pose models as well as ensemble-derived single-residue energetics and hydrogen bonding data. These data allowed the identification of those IL-10 residues being most important for binding GAGs. Our results shed light on possible molecular mechanisms governing GAG-mediated IL-10 function modulation.The analysis described in the present work was based on the X-ray structure of human IL-10 with PDB ID 2ILK (1.6Å resolution) [20]. The biologically active unit of IL-10 is known to be a homodimer comprised of two intercalated IL-10 monomers and characterized by a twofold rotational symmetry [21,22]. We have built this homodimer by extending the monomeric 2ILK structure with a copy of itself, rotated by 180° around the crystallographic twofold axis as defined in the PDB entry.The GAG molecules heparin (HP) dp4, HP dp6, hyaluronan (HA) dp4, HA dp6, chondroitin-4-sulfate (CS4) dp6, chondroitin-6-sulfate (CS6) dp6 (“dp” denoting the degree of polymerization; i.e. the number of sugar rings per molecule) were built with LEAP [23] and parameterized using GLYCAM 06 [24] as described previously [20]. MD snapshots of these molecules are depicted in SI Fig. S1.The GAG molecules heparin (HP) dp4, HP dp6, hyaluronan (HA) dp4, HA dp6, chondroitin-4-sulfate (CS4) dp6, chondroitin-6-sulfate (CS6) dp6 (“dp” denoting the degree of polymerization; i.e. the number of sugar rings per molecule) were built with LEAP [23] and parameterized using GLYCAM 06 [24] as described previously [20]. MD snapshots of these molecules are depicted in SI Fig. S1.The electrostatic potential of IL-10 was calculated with a finite-difference numerical solver applied to the linearized Poisson–Boltzmann (PB) equation, using the PBSA program shipped with AmberTools 13 [23]. In the PB model applied here, IL-10 is represented as a dielectric body with vacuum permittivity whose shape is defined by atomic coordinates and radii. The solvent is treated as a continuum with a relative permittivity of 80. The net electrostatic potential of IL-10 was calculated as the sum of its vacuum Coulomb potential and the corresponding solvent reaction field, using PBSA default parameters and a finite element grid spacing of 1Å. IL-10 atomic coordinates were taken from the IL-10 dimer structure described above. The atomic radii and point charges of the protein were parameterized according to the FF99SB molecular mechanics force field [23]. Source code modification of the PBSA software was required for writing the discretized scalar data in compliance with the OpenDX data format and in units of kcal/(mole) (whereas 1kcal/(mole)=∧4.18kJ/(mole) for appropriate post-processing in VMD [25]. Corresponding software patches were contributed back to the AmberTools project (see SI for further information about these modifications).The electrostatic potential of IL-10 was calculated with a finite-difference numerical solver applied to the linearized Poisson–Boltzmann (PB) equation, using the PBSA program shipped with AmberTools 13 [23]. In the PB model applied here, IL-10 is represented as a dielectric body with vacuum permittivity whose shape is defined by atomic coordinates and radii. The solvent is treated as a continuum with a relative permittivity of 80. The net electrostatic potential of IL-10 was calculated as the sum of its vacuum Coulomb potential and the corresponding solvent reaction field, using PBSA default parameters and a finite element grid spacing of 1Å. IL-10 atomic coordinates were taken from the IL-10 dimer structure described above. The atomic radii and point charges of the protein were parameterized according to the FF99SB molecular mechanics force field [23]. Source code modification of the PBSA software was required for writing the discretized scalar data in compliance with the OpenDX data format and in units of kcal/(mole) (whereas 1kcal/(mole)=∧4.18kJ/(mole) for appropriate post-processing in VMD [25]. Corresponding software patches were contributed back to the AmberTools project (see SI for further information about these modifications).The interaction between IL-10 and GAG molecules was investigated via Dynamic Molecular Docking (DMD), a recently published targeted molecular dynamics (tMD)-based docking method especially accounting for the effects of receptor flexibility and system solvation [20]. The DMD principle is schematically visualized in Fig. 1. Its cornerstone is the creation of an ensemble of MD trajectories by repetitively pulling a ligand molecule towards a predefined binding region on a receptor protein. Subsequent analysis of the trajectory data and the ensemble of ligand poses provides atomic information about the ligand–receptor interaction.The geometrical DMD parameterization requires definition of a so-called core atom, an atom in the protein core with as little mobility relative to the bulk of the protein as possible, as well as a focus point near the protein surface at the center of the anticipated binding region. The straight line connecting focus point and core atom determines the directionality of the relative ligand–receptor movement when the ligand is being pulled towards the receptor. The distance between core atom and focus point corresponds to the so-called target distance. For a more complete definition of these terms see SI Fig. S2 and the previously published DMD methodology [20].The geometrical DMD parameterization requires definition of a so-called core atom, an atom in the protein core with as little mobility relative to the bulk of the protein as possible, as well as a focus point near the protein surface at the center of the anticipated binding region. The straight line connecting focus point and core atom determines the directionality of the relative ligand–receptor movement when the ligand is being pulled towards the receptor. The distance between core atom and focus point corresponds to the so-called target distance. For a more complete definition of these terms see SI Fig. S2 and the previously published DMD methodology [20].In the first stage of a so-called DMD run, the ligand molecule is slowly pulled towards the receptor molecule, starting from a distal position, as schematically visualized in Fig. 1. This pulling process is implemented with a time-dependent harmonic potential applied to the distance between the core atom and a central ligand atom. The pulling potential competes with the canonical molecular mechanics potentials and with the thermal fluctuations applied in the simulation. Hence, while being directed, the trajectory of relative movement between receptor and ligand remains random. When the target distance is reached, the pulling potential is switched off, and the second stage of the DMD run is performed, which is an unrestrained (“free”) molecular dynamics simulation for relaxing the system and for collecting data. A DMD study consists of a large number of DMD run repetitions (see Section 3 for the exact numbers applied in our studies), independently performed with different random seeds, yielding an ensemble of MD trajectories and ligand docking poses.The geometrical DMD parameterization (i.e. the selection of core atom and focus point as introduced above) used for the work presented here was based on the observations made in the Coulomb potential analysis (cf. Section 3). Correspondingly, the DMD focus point was centered on the region comprised of residues R102, R104, R106, and R107, as visualized in SI Fig. S2. The C-alpha atom of IL-10 residue M154 was selected as the core atom. This choice was mainly driven by the goal to maximize the target distance, because a large target distance leads to a wide spatial distribution of ligand molecules (among the runs within a DMD study) around the focus point, and therefore allows for exhaustive Cartesian space sampling. Focus point and core atom selection as specified above led to a target distance of 20.5Å, causing DMD to sample a significant fraction of the surface of IL-10 (see SI Fig. S2). This geometrical parameterization complies with the guidelines formulated in the original DMD method description [20].The geometrical DMD parameterization (i.e. the selection of core atom and focus point as introduced above) used for the work presented here was based on the observations made in the Coulomb potential analysis (cf. Section 3). Correspondingly, the DMD focus point was centered on the region comprised of residues R102, R104, R106, and R107, as visualized in SI Fig. S2. The C-alpha atom of IL-10 residue M154 was selected as the core atom. This choice was mainly driven by the goal to maximize the target distance, because a large target distance leads to a wide spatial distribution of ligand molecules (among the runs within a DMD study) around the focus point, and therefore allows for exhaustive Cartesian space sampling. Focus point and core atom selection as specified above led to a target distance of 20.5Å, causing DMD to sample a significant fraction of the surface of IL-10 (see SI Fig. S2). This geometrical parameterization complies with the guidelines formulated in the original DMD method description [20].Independent DMD studies were performed for each of the six different GAG molecules listed in Section 2.1. Molecular dynamics system parameterization, minimization, heat-up, equilibration and production protocols were chosen as described earlier [20]. The tMD simulation time and the duration of the free MD stage were chosen to last 3ns and 10ns, respectively. Summed over all DMD studies performed for the presented work, about 30μs of raw MD trajectory data were created and analyzed. The simulations were performed on a cluster of graphics processing units using Amber's pmemd.cuda [26]. End-point free energy calculations were performed using the MMPBSA.py framework [27] as described earlier [20]. In summary, the MMPBSA method was used for obtaining a free energy of binding estimate ΔG for each docking pose, and the MMGBSA method was used for obtaining a single-residue energy decomposition (SRED) thereof.Crucial component of the DMD method is the analysis of the ensemble of MD trajectories created in a single DMD study, yielding converged ensemble properties with statistical significance. Here, ensemble-derived single-residue energy decomposition was obtained as described previously [20]. Additionally, we implemented an approach for ensemble-derived hydrogen bonding analysis: for each free MD trajectory within a DMD study, the occupancy of single donor and acceptor atoms was tracked over time, enabling to filter those IL-10 residues being most involved in IL-10–GAG hydrogen bonding. Hydrogen bond detection was based on atom type, distance, and angle criteria as implemented in the MD trajectory analysis software CPPTRAJ [28].The spatial clustering method applied here for identification of the most frequently occurring GAG binding poses was based on the DBSCAN algorithm [29]. It involved a custom similarity metric optimized for GAG molecules, and was wrapped within a custom clustering parameter optimization procedure for ensuring reproducibility and comparability, as outlined previously [20]. In particular, clustering was performed with the boundary condition that the minimal number of clusters to be found is 1, and that the minimal number of members within each cluster is 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In conclusion, application of innovative in silico methods yielded compelling evidence that binding of GAGs to IL-10 may occur in a well-defined region. Furthermore, the analysis presented here reveals an outstanding role of R107 for GAG binding, and in silico mutation of R107 to alanine suggests that its contribution to binding cannot be resembled by any other residue of IL-10. To further support this hypothesis, future experiments could test the binding affinity of different IL-10 mutants for GAGs, e.g. by means of NMR or calorimetry methods. Furthermore, the effect of R107A mutation on the biological activity of IL-10 could be investigated. Our results provide important insights about the determinants of IL-10–GAG interaction and shed light on the molecular basis of the functional role of GAGs in IL-10 biology.