@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Can structural features of kinase receptors provide clues on selectivity and inhibition? A molecular modeling study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model kinase inhibition using receptor-focused in-silico molecular docking.Results show key role of family-specific active site features in kinase inhibition.Toxicity can be addressed by combining pathway information with simulation results.Drug types give clues to the micro-environment of the target receptor active sites.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Kinase drugs,Docking,Activity,Mutation,Cross-reactivity,Biological Pathways,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Cancer is a complex disease resulting from the uncontrolled proliferation of cell signaling events. Protein kinases have been identified as central molecules that participate overwhelmingly in oncogenic events, thus becoming key targets for anticancer drugs. A majority of studies converged on the idea that ligand-binding pockets of kinases retain clues to the inhibiting abilities and cross-reacting tendencies of inhibitor drugs. Even though these ideas are critical for drug discovery, validating them using experiments is not only difficult, but also in some cases infeasible. To overcome these limitations and to test these ideas at the molecular level, we present here the results of receptor-focused in-silico docking of nine marketed drugs to 19 different wild-type and mutated kinases chosen from a wide range of families. This investigation highlights the need for using relevant models to explain the correct inhibition trends and the results are used to make predictions that might be able to influence future experiments. Our simulation studies are able to correctly predict the primary targets for each drug studied in majority of cases and our results agree with the existing findings. Our study shows that the conformations a given receptor acquires during kinase activation, and their micro-environment, defines the ligand partners. Type II drugs display high compatibility and selectivity for DFG-out kinase conformations. On the other hand Type I drugs are less selective and show binding preferences for both the open and closed forms of selected kinases. Using this receptor-focused approach, it is possible to capture the observed fold change in binding affinities between the wild-type and disease-centric mutations in ABL kinase for Imatinib and the second-generation ABL drugs. The effects of mutation are also investigated for two other systems, EGFR and B-Raf. Finally, by including pathway information in the design it is possible to model kinase inhibitors with potentially fewer side-effects.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cancer continues to be a major cause of death among the human diseases. As per the latest statistics [1], new US cancer cases and deaths continues to be a major health concern, and for 2014 they are estimated to be around 1,665,540 and 585,720 respectively. Hence, there is an urgent need for novel cancer drugs with fewer side effects. Protein kinases are enzymes that help carry out the transfer of a phosphate group (phosphorylation) from ATP to substrate proteins [2–4] and play an important role in cancer and signal transduction pathways. So far, approximately 518 kinase genes [5,6] have been identified in the human genome, which amounts to about 1.7% of the total 20-25K genes. Protein phosphorylation is, in most cases, initiated by extracellular signals and acts like a switch to control a substrate's binding affinity, receptor's enzymatic activity, and the cellular location of their products. These actions can, in turn, influence down-stream gene/protein functions. Kinases also act as effectors and participate in a wide-range of important cellular functions ranging from cell cycle modulation, DNA repair, immunity, growth, and apoptosis. Since kinase activity influences many cellular functions, its regulatory role is usually kept under tight control. Kinase phosphorylation is a reversible reaction, and enzymes called phosphatases catalyze the removal of phosphate groups from substrate proteins and make it ready for the next cycle [4].Kinase dysregulation, in majority of cases, is the result of unchecked activity resulting in over-expression of proteins or downstream genes, and such a state of increased activity has often been positively correlated with many human diseases such as cancers, metabolic disorders, and infectious diseases. Several events that modify kinases and leave them in elevated active states have been identified [7]. A short list of these events include mutation [8], up-regulation (gene amplification) [9], simultaneous expression of multiple kinases [10], and increased expression of transporters [11].Kinase dysregulation can be best understood by studying Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML). CML is a unique disease caused by unregulated kinase activity of a single malfunctioning gene, BCR-ABL [12], and is commonly invoked to understand the uncontrolled behavior of kinases. This disease is caused by the aberrant genetic material called the Philadelphia chromosome, formed when a section of DNA from chromosome-9 translocates to a region after the BCR gene in chromosome-22. This creates a fusion gene, BCR-ABL, which expresses a protein product also called BCR-ABL [6,12]. Unlike normal ABL, the fusion protein is constitutively active and does not require activation by external signals. Hence, BCR-ABL remains active and participates in cell-cycle pathways, and strongly influences cell-division and growth processes, leaving the affected cell in a highly unstable state.Other than aberrant genetic material formation, mutations in and around the kinase active site can also influence kinase activity [13]. For example, it had been observed that a small fraction of Philadelphia-positive (ph+) patients who are undergoing Imatinib therapy can relapse and offer resistance to the therapy. This resistance has been attributed to the mutations in the active site that reduces the drug's ability to bind and inhibit activity. Other forms of resistance to treatment have also been documented. Notably, tumor cells tip the balance of regulating phosphorylation–dephosphorylation in their favor by specifically down-regulating the phosphatase to indirectly overcome receptor inhibition [7].Malfunction arising from a single gene such as BCR-ABL, can in turn affect other down-stream pathway genes to create non-local effects. Since most cancers are associated with dysregulation of multiple genes involved in different pathways, the effect of malfunction can spread more rapidly than the single gene disease to even affect far-away expressed gene products. Constitutional rogue kinase activity or malfunction due to mutations can be controlled by using either small molecule inhibitor drugs or humanized antibodies. The later approach of using a humanized antibody, Trastuzumab, to target ERBB2 receptors for treating breast cancer has shown some potential, but the benefit is not universal [14].In cancer treatment, the idea of targeting multiple receptors using one or more drugs is not new [3,7,11,15,16]. Imatinib, a drug known for inhibiting BCR-ABL, has also been identified to inhibit platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), stem-cell factor (SCF) and c-KIT receptors. Imatinib (marketed as Gleevec [http://www.gleevec.com]) is currently being prescribed as a primary drug for treating both CML [12] and GIST [11]. The justification for inhibiting multiple, but related, genes involved in disease proliferation has been clearly illustrated [7] using the tyrosine kinase inhibitor PP121. PP121 was shown to inhibit PI3K and its downstream gene mTOR simultaneously, thus providing additional benefit of blocking both the negative feed loop initiator (mTOR) and the oncogene, PI3K.Using experimental and modeling data, a class definition for the inhibitors (Type I/II) based on their chemistry and ability to trap the kinases in an active or inactive conformation [17–22] has been proposed. It is not clear whether the inhibitors force the kinases toward a particular conformation or the receptors influence the drug molecules to take a specific binding pose. Recent studies [17,19,21,23] have identified several key issues in kinase inhibition. Of significance is the work by Davis et al. [18,19]; the most elaborate study known to date. These authors used 72 inhibitors to create a selectivity profile for more than 80% of the known 518 kinases. The important points arising from this study [19] are that the inhibitor Type (I/II) does not guarantee selectivity and, most importantly [24], the structural features that are presented by the receptor during the binding often controls selectivity and therefore the choice of the best inhibitor. These findings will most likely have a profound impact on basic research and future kinase drug development.To test these findings, receptor structure focused self- and cross-docking simulations were performed using the experimentally available small molecule kinase drug-bound PDB structures (19 in total) to analyze the respective binding modes and their corresponding estimated affinities. Our results qualitatively agree with the known kinase inhibition profiles and that of Davis et al. [18,19]. Based on our data set, we find that receptor features dictate ligand inhibition and Type II ligands in general are competitive for DFG-out conformation. On the other hand, Type I ligands show less selectivity. Lapatinib appears to behave like a Type II molecule based on its strong affinity for inactive receptor folds but based on its atypical receptor conformation (DFG-out and c-alpha helix conformation) requirements [19], we have decided to place Lapatinib along with Type-II ligands but without a Type classification. Additional simulations carried out on the wild-type and mutated protein system, ABL, confirm that the receptor structural features can qualitatively capture the change in binding affinities [13], and might be useful for identifying potent family-specific inhibitors. The influence of mutations on the binding affinity was further analyzed using EGFR and B-Raf kinase systems and the docking results show the change in the binding affinity and mean binding energy indicative of the negative effect of selected mutations on binding. Finally, using the common pathway information from our gene set, we explore the possibility of single drug or drug combinations that might be useful for advanced stage cancers.Protein kinase structures co-crystallized with drug molecules were downloaded from RCSB-PDB (http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/) and used for docking simulations. Kinase families studied in this work include ABL, KIT, ITK, BTK, SYK, LCK, LYN, MAP, EGFR, erbB4, and BRAF kinases (see Table 1). The small molecules examined in this study are Dasatinib, Erlotinib, Sunitinib, Gefitinib, Bosutinib, Lapatinib, Sorafenib, Nilotinib, and Imatinib (see Fig. 1). Note that these are marketed small molecule drugs currently being used for the treatment of different types of cancers and tumors. Each kinase family was searched in RCSB-PDB database for the availability of 3D structures that have been co-crystallized with drug molecules from our list; the best structure with high quality from the list was eventually picked for docking simulations (see Table 1).The kinase receptor families (shown in bold face) used in this study along with their RCSB PDB IDs (shown in parentheses) are: ABL1/2 (3UE4, 1OPJ, 3UE4, 3GVU, 3CS9) [25–28], C-KIT (1T46) [29], ITK (3MIY) [30], BTK (3k54) [31], SYK (1XBB) [32], LCK (2PL0) [33], LYN (2ZVA) [34], SRC (3G5D, 2OIQ) [35,36], EGFR (1M17, 1XKK, 2ITZ) [37–39], ERBB4 (3BBT) [40] , MAP (3GP0, 3GCS) and B-RAF (1UWH) [41] (Table 1).The 3D coordinates for the kinase-inhibitor complexes were downloaded from RCSB (http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/). Molprobity (http://molprobity.biochem.duke.edu/) was used for analyzing the PDB structures, adding hydrogens, and applying residue (ASN/GLU/HIS) flips wherever applicable. The output from Molprobity was further analyzed using the SwissPdb Viewer (http://www.expasy.org/spdbv/) and Discovery Studio [ver. 3.5, Accelrys Inc., San Diego, CA]. The protein structures were kept rigid except during the flexible in silico mutation experiments (see Section 2.5), where only the mutated residue was allowed to rotate. AutoDockTools (ADT, version 1.5.6 rc3), a graphical-user-interface for AutoDock, was used to prepare the molecules in AutoDock suitable formats (pdbqt). Gasteiger-PEOE partial charges for molecules were added using ADT. AutoDock input parameter files for grid and docking (GPF, DPF; provided in the Supplemental Pages) were also prepared using ADT. Note that we did not make any attempt to build any missing receptor residue segments that are either away from the binding pocket or not involved in the binding.Ligand structures (Fig. 1) were downloaded from the NCBI Pubchem database (http://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) and read into Discovery Studio (Accelrys Inc., San Diego, CA) for further modification and analysis.AutoDock [42–45] is an automated docking [46] method for identifying the binding modes of ligands with biomolecule receptors. AutoDock Vina [47] is the latest software from the AutoDock family, but uses a different approach for identifying the binding modes and is also significantly faster than AutoDock. In the present study, AutoDock (ver 4.2.3; [45]) and Vina (ver 1.1.2) were used for modeling the binding modes and/or estimating inhibition constants [48] because they both perform unbiased docking and use atomistic details for describing the molecules [49,50]. A brief summary of the AutoDock is provided in the Supplementary Pages S1. Also, these two programs force fields had shown great potential in reproducing crystal-bound conformations with high accuracy. AutoDock (vers. 3 and up) uses a modified force field [44] that allows the user to also predict binding affinities along with the binding free energies.AutoDockTools [45] was used for reading PDB files, adding H's and Gasteiger charges, and generating AutoDock input (pdbqt) files. AutoGrid with a grid spacing of 0.375Å (AutoDock: spacing parameter) was used as a default spacing parameter in our simulations. The grid box size was chosen to contain 100×100×100 grid points (x, y and z direction) which was found to be large enough to cover the kinase active site and important neighboring residues (see Supplementary figure, Fig. S1). The center of the map was chosen for each system using the co-crystallized ligand center of mass position. ADT was used for generating the grid parameter file (GPF) and the Docking Parameter File (DPF). The AutoDock Genetic Algorithm runs were set as follows: ga_run 200, population size is 300, maximum number of energy evaluations is 2.5×107 (# of torsions ≤10) or 5.0×107 (# torsions >10). We have invoked the AutoDock post-processing step to carry out conformational clustering on the final docked conformations. Tolerance (rmstol) for the cluster analysis was set to 2.0Å. Binding energies from the top-cluster were averaged and reported as the mean-binding energy. A detailed list of non-default AutoDock parameter options used in this study is also presented the Supplementary Section S1.AutoDock Vina's scoring function and the method is detailed elsewhere [47], here we review only the key points. Vina's scoring function is based on X-score [51] and had been further adjusted using PDBbind [52–54]. Vina's scoring function was developed to take advantage of both knowledge-based schemes and empirical methods. Unlike AutoDock, Vina does not use explicit hydrogen atoms or the partial charges for atoms in the simulations. Optimization in Vina starts with a mutation of the ligand conformation followed by a local optimization. The optimization algorithm used is the Iterated Local Search Global Optimizer [55,56], and the acceptance or rejection follows the Metropolis criterion [13]. Sample of Vina input template config file is shown in Supplementary Section S2.The docking simulations were run on a Linux cluster (Intel Xeon; nehalem) with the Ubuntu operating system (12.04.02). Linux C-shell scripts developed locally were used for PBS (portable batch job) submission, post-processing and analysis. After the simulations, the docked ligand conformations were extracted and compared with the crystal-bound conformation to estimate whether the docking had identified the crystal-bound conformation in the top ranking solutions. For this, root-mean-squared-deviation (RMSD) between the docked solutions and crystal-bound conformations were computed using locally developed FORTRAN software (f77 and f90; additional info in Supp. Section S3). The post-analysis and figures were made using Discovery Studio software (Accelrys Inc., San Diego, CA).To analyze the role of receptor structural features of mutated kinase systems in inhibitor binding, we first focused on the ABL kinases. The reason for choosing this system is because ABL kinases are well-studied and the BCR-ABL related disease, CML, had been classified as a single-gene disorder. Hence, it is relatively easy to study this system compared to other kinases. A 2009 study by Radaelli et al. [13] analyzed several key mutations that occur in this kinase and their impact on the activity by monitoring the IC50 fold changes. We used the data set from this study as our main reference for comparisons. Of all the mutations reported in the above mentioned work [13], we focused our modeling efforts on two highly resistant mutations, T315I and V299L. Mutated systems were prepared from the corresponding wild-type kinase structures: ABL1-Imatinib (PDB: 1OPJ), ABL1-Bosutinib (PDB: 3UE4), ABL1-Dasatinib (PDB: 2GQG) and ABL1-Nilotinib (PDB: 3CS9).To study the impact of active site residue mutations on drug binding and kinase activity, we examined the existing crystal structures of ABL kinase systems with T315I mutation. Three structures (PDB: 3QRI, 3QRJ, 3QRK) [57] have been reported with the T315I mutation. Upon structure comparisons of our T315I modeled structure with these three crystal structures, we found that with the mutated sequence still retained the WT fold with a similar local conformation around T315. For the V299L mutation, our searches of the RCSB PDB database did not identify any relevant experimental 3D structures. The two residues (V and L) involved in this second mutation are both non-polar, side-chain flexibilities are from low to moderate, and both could make minimal VDW interactions with no possibility of forming H-bonds. So, we believe that ABL should be able to accommodate the V299L point mutation and fold similarly to the wild-type. Starting from the wild-type structures, we introduced single point mutations in positions T315 and V299 separately to create two mutant structures (ABL-T315I and ABL-V299L). The mutated structures were further energy minimized using Discovery Studio (ver. 3.5) to relieve any strain introduced by the mutation. AutoDock has the capability of modeling a limited number of flexible residues. We invoked this option to also carry out both rigid and flexible docking simulations for each mutated system. Finally, we also extended our impact analysis to include two additional kinase systems, EGFR (1M17:T766M; 1XKK:T790M) and B-Raf (1UWH:E500G), to model the impact of selected mutations that occur in the active sites of B-Raf and EGFR [58–60]. Note that 1UWH:E500 occupies position E501 in the Uniprot sequence, P15056. System preparation and the analysis for EGFR and B-Raf and simulations were carried out as described above for the ABL systems.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study examined the interaction of nine commercially available kinase inhibitors with different kinases and selected mutants. These results show that the overwhelming majority of the docking experiments (90%, 17/19, RMSD <3Å, see Table 2) were able to correctly identify the experimentally observed binding mode within the top 4 ranked conformations. The estimated inhibition constants also qualitatively follow the experimentally observed trend, thus highlighting the need for incorporating the characteristic conformation of the receptor (active or inactive) as a key early step in modeling kinase inhibition. One of the goals of this work is to see whether insight into cross-reactivity can be gained. Our results show that drug molecules that belong to Type II (e.g. Imatinib, see Tables 3 and 4) are more selective of the receptor structural features during binding when compared to Type I (e.g. Erlotinib, see Tables 3 and 4) ligands. This appears to follow from the fact that the active kinase conformations are more open and similar to each other when compared to the inactive ones. On the other hand, inactive active site functional group arrangements are different from each other and contributes to the selectivity of the drugs that favor these conformations [19]. To further explore the importance of the effect of kinase conformations on the selectivity, two key mutations, T315I and V299L, of the ABL gene (Table 5A) were examined. The docking results were able to qualitatively capture the effects of these key mutations for the most common first and second generation drugs used for treating CML patients with these mutations. Mutation effects were further examined by analyzing two additional systems, EGFR and B-Raf. The results show (Table 5B) that wild-type inhibitors lose key binding interactions upon receptor mutation; the weakening effect is reflected in the increase of the inhibition constants.Kinase conformations retain clues on its selectivity for the inhibitors; hence a specific drug can be an effective inhibitor for two different receptors as long as these proteins can provide the common conformation (e.g. inactive or active form) with similar active site residues. Also, the ligand Types can be used to understand cross-reactivity, but it is kinase family-specific and there are exceptions.It is well-known that modeling kinase inhibition is a challenge. A recent study using a large data set was able to identify key issues such as structural features and the roles of ligand Types in kinase inhibition [19]. Using these observations as basis, a receptor-focused modeling and docking approach can correctly predict the kinase profile across a wide-range of kinase families. Ligand Types are often characterized based on their abilities to target the receptor ATP binding pocket when the activation loop is either present in the compact inactive or active open conformations. When the ligand contains an extra functional group(s), they fail to behave like the parent ligands [20]; hence the focus should be on the receptor. Even though there are experimental methods that are successful in identifying the common binding mode of kinase inhibitors, the concept of dynamic equilibrium during kinase activation cannot be ignored [20]. As elegantly pointed out by Chene [66] and others, the influence of pharmacokinetics [20] and slow off-rates continue to daunt [38] the prediction efforts. Specifically, ligands that target active kinase forms prefer to bind near the edge of the active site region and have portions of their molecule exposed to the solvent. In such cases, for example the simulation systems like Gene/PDB_ID (BTK/3k54, SYK/1XBB, LYN/2ZVA, EGFR/2ITZ), solvation effects may dominate the binding and hence an accurate description of these effects have to be included in the modeling to properly estimate binding affinities. As noted by Kitchen et al. [46], in such cases scoring and further ranking the docking solutions becomes difficult. In spite of these issues, by focusing on the structural features, these docking simulations were able to correctly predict binding modes and the trends in kinase inhibition. Future efforts should focus on three fronts: (a) Developing a receptor-based pharmacophore with spatial constraints to include receptor residues as exclusion areas to improve the estimation of binding affinities; (b) Inclusion of the impact of conformational changes of key residues in the active site on the estimation of inhibition constant; and (c) A combined approach of using analytic learning methods along with docking simulations to model cross-reactivity and toxicity [73].