@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Voxelwise atlas rating for computer assisted diagnosis: Application to congenital heart diseases of the great arteries

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper presents a voxelwise atlas rating approach for computer-aided diagnosis.The method relies on multiple atlas databases, but does not require annotated images.The method reports an accuracy of 97.3%, which is higher than other state-of-the-art methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Computer-aided diagnosis,Voxel rating,Image synthesis,Atlases,Congenital heart diseases,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Atlas-based analysis methods rely on the morphological similarity between the atlas and target images, and on the availability of labelled images. Problems can arise when the deformations introduced by pathologies affect the similarity between the atlas and a patient’s image. The aim of this work is to exploit the morphological dissimilarities between atlas databases and pathological images to diagnose the underlying clinical condition, while avoiding the dependence on labelled images. We propose a voxelwise atlas rating approach (VoxAR) relying on multiple atlas databases, each representing a particular condition. Using a local image similarity measure to assess the morphological similarity between the atlas and target images, a rating map displaying for each voxel the condition of the atlases most similar to the target is defined. The final diagnosis is established by assigning the condition of the database the most represented in the rating map.We applied the method to diagnose three different conditions associated with dextro-transposition of the great arteries, a congenital heart disease. The proposed approach outperforms other state-of-the-art methods using annotated images, with an accuracy of 97.3% when evaluated on a set of 60 whole heart MR images containing healthy and pathological subjects using cross validation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the last years, atlas-based techniques (Rohlfing et al., 2004) have become a well established method for medical image segmentation. In this approach, intensity images within an atlas database are first registered to an unseen or target image. The obtained transformations are used to map the set of atlases into the target image space and, once transformed, the label images from each atlas are combined into a final consensus segmentation by applying a fusion criterion.Despite its widespread use, atlas-based segmentation remains to have two major drawbacks. First, the morphological similarity between the atlases and the target image must be guaranteed. When this condition is not satisfied, the deformations induced by the morphological dissimilarities may affect the atlas registrations, leading to unrepresentative segmentations. This situation is common when pathologies introduce morphological alterations in the affected organs. Second, atlas-based segmentation relies on the availability and quality of labelled images. In a clinical scenario or research project with limited resources, gathering a sufficient amount of good quality annotated images of pathology-specific, or even healthy subjects, is a challenge.Recent research has tried to address the problem of morphological dissimilarity in several ways. Based on the segmentation stage that they tackle, we classify existing methods into four categories: atlas construction, atlas or model selection, image registration and segmentation analysis. A common characteristic of all these families of methods is that they do not solve the dependence on labelled images.Methods that fall into the atlas construction category try to minimise the errors produced by image dissimilarity by optimally constructing a single atlas, from the set of atlases, that is the most representative of the population (Fischl et al., 2002; Guimond et al., 2000; Joshi et al., 2004). To account for the variations introduced by pathologies, the constructed atlas can include probabilistic map (Lorenzo-Valdes et al., 2004) to provide spatially and temporally varying a priori information.Model selection techniques aim to select an on-the-fly atlas subset that fits best the target image, and remove potential outliers that affect the final segmentation. Results have shown that it performs better than single atlases in different applications (Hammers et al., 2003; van Rikxoort et al., 2010; Zuluaga et al., 2013). As a consequence, model selection approaches have gained popularity and several research groups have explored automatic model selection techniques. Typically, these techniques address atlas selection by performing an atlas ranking via a global (Aljabar et al., 2009; Leung et al., 2010), a local criterion (Cardoso et al., 2013; Išgum et al., 2009) or a combination of both (van Rikxoort et al., 2010).More recently, a novel method has been proposed in which the problem of morphological dissimilarity is addressed at the image registration stage. The proposed approach makes use of low-rank image decomposition to formulate a registration framework capable of handling images containing large pathologies and large deformations (Liu et al., 2014). Although this is a promising alternative, the method still needs to be better evaluated on datasets with ground truth tissue labels (Liu et al., 2014).The last family of algorithms, denoted here as segmentation analysis methods, analyses the results obtained through the use of different atlases to improve the accuracy of the final segmentation (Hanna et al., 2011; Kutra et al., 2012) or to exploit the information obtained from the analysis within the context of computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) (Zuluaga et al., 2014).In this work, instead of trying to minimise the errors induced by morphological dissimilarities, we exploit the variations introduced by pathologies. Following the principle developed by Zuluaga et al. (2014) that an unrepresentative atlas is more likely to lead to a poor segmentation, we assume that an atlas will be morphologically more similar to the target when both share the same clinical condition. The method, called voxelwise atlas rating (VoxAR), exploits morphological dissimilarities between atlas and target images at the local scale. This method relies on multiple atlas databases representing different conditions and does not require labelled images. VoxAR uses a local image similarity measure to assess the morphological similarity between atlas and target images. A rating map displaying for each voxel the condition of the atlas most similar to the target is then defined. As in Zuluaga et al. (2014), the proposed method is used within the context of CAD and, more specifically, CAD of congenital heart diseases. For this purpose, a diagnosis is established by assigning the condition of the database with the highest number of occurrences in the rating map.This paper is organised as follows: Section 2 provides an overview of CAD methods for cardiovascular diseases, motivates the selection of an atlas-based approach for this task and describes the data to be used. The proposed method, VoxAR, is detailed in Section 3. Section 4 describes the experiments that were performed and the obtained results. Section 5 discusses the results and, finally, Section 6 presents the conclusions.The use of computer aided diagnosis in cardiovascular diseases has not been as widely used as in other areas (Chen et al., 2011; Drukker et al., 2005; Summers et al., 2000). As in other domains, pathology must be defined in how it deviates from normality. Methods can be classified into two groups based on how differences are detected: those which represent images as a set of extracted features (Teßmann et al., 2009; Zuluaga et al., 2011a, 2011b), and those which compare them to a model or atlas built using a healthy population (Lorenzo-Valdes et al., 2004; Zhang et al., 2010; Duchateau et al., 2011; Lombaert et al., 2012). The first group of methods has been applied mainly to the diagnosis of ischemic heart disease, whereas the second has been used to identify abnormalities in ventricular volumes (Lorenzo-Valdes et al., 2004), cardiac motion (Duchateau et al., 2011), myocardial fibre orientation (Lombaert et al., 2012) and congenital heart disease (Zhang et al., 2010). A common limitation in both groups is that methods can only differentiate between normal and abnormal, without providing further information on the pathology.Atlas-based methods have been successful in cardiac CAD due to the morphological alterations that pathologies introduce in the heart. These cause registration errors that can be exploited to provide insight into how a pathology deviates from normality. This concept was first used by van Rikxoort et al. (2010) in a segmentation framework capable of selecting the atlas closest to the target image under the rationale that the most similar atlas to the target image is expected to provide the best segmentation. Zuluaga et al. (2014) extended this idea in the context of cardiac CAD. Where atlas sets with different morphologies are available, it is possible to segment an image with the different sets and then use the measured quality of the obtained segmentations to determine which of them provides the best fit. It is assumed that the best fitting atlas share the same clinical condition as the target.Congenital heart disease (CHD) is a broad term which refers to abnormalities of the cardiac structure and function caused by abnormal or disordered heart development before birth (Zhang, 2007). Although a lifetime follow-up is usually required, it has been shown that not enough physicians have a specialised training for the number of adult CHD patients (Gurvitz et al., 2005). For this reason, it is common that patients are lost to follow-up, and can be examined by clinicians who have no experience of imaging CHD. Under such scenario, semi or fully automated methods that can assist non-experts in diagnosis are highly desired. The morphological alterations caused by the abnormal heart development make suitable the usage of atlas-based methods for their diagnosis.The clinical focus of this study is the diagnosis of dextro-transposition of the great arteries (d-TGA). This condition is a congenital heart defect in which the two major vessels that carry blood away from the heart, i.e. the aorta and the pulmonary artery, are switched. Neonates born with d-TGA require surgery immediately after birth. There are two different procedures to repair d-TGA at birth: arterial switch (ASO) and atrial switch operation (Senning or Mustard procedure). In ASO, which is the most common procedure, the arteries are switched to their usual positions, i.e. the pulmonary artery arising from the right ventricle and the aorta from the left ventricle, and the coronary arteries are reattached to the aorta. In atrial switch operation, the arteries are left in place, but a baffle is created between the top chambers of the heart, allowing oxygen-poor blood to move from the right atrium to the left ventricle and out the pulmonary artery to the lungs. Returning oxygen-rich blood moves through the baffle from the left atrium to the right ventricle and out the aorta (Fig. 1).As it is common with CHDs, a characteristic of both ASO and atrial switch is that the “normal” morphology of the heart is not recovered. Monitoring of the patient across their lifetime is crucial as infants who have these surgeries are not cured and might have lifelong complications.The identification of the anatomical variations caused by the correcting procedures is a complex task which requires high clinical expertise. Although echocardiography tends to be the modality of choice in CHD diagnosis, it has shown limited value for the assessment of the great vessels (Fenchel et al., 2006). Cardiovascular MR (CMR) has proven to provide a reliable and accurate assessment of CHD (Hirsch et al., 1994; Fenchel et al., 2006). Nevertheless, diagnosis remains challenging, especially in children and young adults (Fenchel et al., 2006), and it is often missed during screening.We acquired 3D, electrocardiography- and respiratory-gated CMR images from 60 cases – 20 anatomically normal hearts and 40 patients with d-TGA who had undergone either an ASO (20), or an atrial switch operation (20). All imaging was done as part of routine clinical practice. The study had institutional approval, and all patients (and/or their parents or guardian) gave informed consent for the use of their data for research purposes.CMR imaging was performed using a 3D whole-heart MR angiography sequence. The images, covering the entire heart, were obtained in a sagittal orientation by using a magnetisation-prepared, 3D balanced, steady-state free precession sequence (TR 3.0 ms, TE 1.5 ms, flip angle 90°, number of lines per segment acquired per cardiac cycle 30−40, sensitivity-encoding factor 2.0, bandwidth per pixel 590 Hz, field of view 280 × 280 × 120 mm3, acquisition matrix 192 × 192 × 80 and iso-volumetric voxel size 1.5 × 1.5 × 1.5 mm3). In all cases, 3D whole-heart imaging was performed 5–10 min after the administration of routine gadolinium contrast agent.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
