@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Simulating the influences of groundwater on regional geomorphology using a distributed, dynamic, landscape evolution modelling platform

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Integration of a coupled hydrological component into a landscape evolution model.Baseflow-return can transition morphology between differing steady-states.Model used to assess the role of groundwater in shaping regional geomorphology.Groundwater alters the distribution of sediment flux during storm events.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cellular automata,Sediment transport,Groundwater,Landscape evolution,CAESAR-Lisflood,CLiDE,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A dynamic landscape evolution modelling platform (CLiDE) is presented that allows a variety of Earth system interactions to be explored under differing environmental forcing factors. Representation of distributed surface and subsurface hydrology within CLiDE is suited to simulation at sub-annual to centennial time-scales. In this study the hydrological components of CLiDE are evaluated against analytical solutions and recorded datasets. The impact of differing groundwater regimes on sediment discharge is examined for a simple, idealised catchment, Sediment discharge is found to be a function of the evolving catchment morphology. Application of CLiDE to the upper Eden Valley catchment, UK, suggests the addition of baseflow-return from groundwater into the fluvial system modifies the total catchment sediment discharge and the spatio-temporal distribution of sediment fluxes during storm events. The occurrence of a storm following a period of appreciable antecedent rainfall is found to increase simulated sediment fluxes.CLiDEAndrew BarkwithBritish Geological Survey, Environmental Science Centre, Keyworth, Nottingham, NG12 5GG, UK. E-mail: andr3@bgs.ac.uk2013WindowsC#GNU licensed freeware

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Simulation of distributed dynamic environmental systems is often based on the solution of differential equations that can be difficult to solve without simplification (Toffoli, 1984) or large computational resources. Cellular automata (CA), first developed by von Neumann (1951, 1966) to investigate self replication, provided an alternative to solving the governing equations, allowing a fast, exact numerical simulation of a physical system. Since their inception CA have been applied to a host of physical research areas focussed around fluid dynamics and natural systems (see for example, Margolus et al., 1986; Somers, 1993; Chen and Doolen, 1998; Chopard and Masselot, 1999). CA discretises space into regular two- or three-dimensional cells, each of which contain physical property information for that region of space. Each cell is able to pass and gather information about neighbouring cells and subsequently modify its contents based on a transfer function. Interaction with neighbouring cells for two-dimensional cases usually consists of either a Moore-type method, where all surrounding cells interact with the central node, or a von Neumann (Manhattan) neighbour-type method where interaction is solely with adjacent cells (Fig. 1). Initial cell states are user defined, and with each time step states are simultaneously updated based on the transfer function and states of neighbouring cells.The impacts of surface hydrological processes on geomorphology, and thus topography, have been studied using numerical methods for a number of years. With advances in computer processing power available to researchers, the development of landscape evolution models (LEMs) has progressed from simulating water routing effects on nodal elevation (Ahnert, 1976), to representing detailed fluvial and hillslope processes (for a full review see Tucker and Hancock, 2010). Recent advances in this field have seen increases in domain sizes and resolution, irregular gridding techniques, and the move from hypothetical to real catchments becoming common place (e.g., Pazzaglia, 2003; Coulthard et al., 2012). Currently, LEMs based on regular, square, gridded digital elevation models (DEM) are popular as slope attribution does not need to be determined manually. These DEM-based models also have the advantage of allowing run-time landscape adjustment in response to runoff, erosion and deposition (Hancock et al., 2011). Current models contain representations of surface hydrology but they all either use highly simplified representations of groundwater influx to rivers (as a constant baseflow) or ignore groundwater processes entirely (Huang and Niemann, 2006). An exception to this is Keesstra et al. (2014), who capture the transient nature of baseflow in an LEM environment suitable for simulating relatively small catchments.There are a number of mechanisms by which groundwater can have an impact on erosional processes. Within cohesive soils or sediments, in a process similar to overland flow, the formation of subsurface channels from groundwater scour can cause near-surface fractures or cracks in the overlying surface (Dunne, 1988). These pipes can collapse, leading to the formation of extensive gully networks. This process tends to occur in shale-dominated, arid or semi-arid regions (Howard and McLane, 1988). The seepage of groundwater to the surface can locally enhance the erodibility of cohesive soils or sediments by increasing their susceptibility to a range of physical and chemical weathering processes (Laity and Malin, 1985). Chemical weathering at depth, which subsequently leads to enhanced erosion when a unit is exposed, can also be attributed to groundwater processes (Kelly, 2012). In less cohesive sediments the seepage of groundwater to the surface can provide buoyancy to particles, reducing the flow velocities required to entrain them and increasing the development of channel features (Fox et al., 2007). Groundwater flow operates on longer temporal scales than direct surface runoff and, in its simplest form, introduces a mechanism to lag surface water flow and impart a smoothing effect on surface fluvial systems (Changnon et al., 1988). Through this process, the fluvial flow velocities that drive sediment flux can be modified at multiple spatio-temporal scales.Due to the limited extent of tunnel-scour erosion and long time-scales associated with physical and chemical weathering, these processes are not considered in this study, which focusses on sub-annual to centennial geomorphological evolution. Although the groundwater seepage buoyancy process is known to be important locally, the impact on differing sediment classes and under differing groundwater regimes is not well constrained. Due to its conceptual simplicity and potential applications, it is the representation of baseflow-return to the fluvial system and the impacts that this can have on catchment morphology and sediment transport that forms the basis of this study.The time taken for water to enter the groundwater system through recharge, until its contribution to a surface water body as baseflow, is influenced significantly by topography, geology, vegetation, land use and climate factors. Aquifer recharge through channel infiltration during storm events can be large enough to modify the commonly observed power law relationship between discharge and basin area (Goodrich et al., 1997), although many LEMs assume this relationship to be linear. If the return of this water to the surface as baseflow coincides with future rainfall events, the increase in storm flow can be significant (Sklash and Farvolden, 1979; Buttle, 1994; Kirchner et al., 2000). Spatial variability of baseflow is generally highly heterogeneous across a catchment, often increasing surface river flows in the lower reaches. The combination of these spatial and temporal groundwater influences on surface water dynamics can create a highly complex system. Modelling surface water flow dynamics accurately under these complex hydrological conditions without a groundwater component is often not possible. The characteristics of catchments with greatest susceptibility to complex hydrological interactions are: those with large ranges between topographic highs and lows, creating a strong subsurface hydraulic flow gradient; those with highly heterogeneous hydraulic conductivity and specific yield, formed for example by changes in geology; those where groundwater exhibits a strong seasonal signal and hence a variable baseflow-return to rivers, for example sandstone aquifers; and those that are unconfined, allowing the return of water to the surface.Depending on the baseflow contribution to surface flow components, groundwater process could have major impacts on the development of terrestrial landscapes at a range of scales. If the focus of a particular study is on representing catchment discharges at time-scales beyond millennia, average values could justifiably be used within LEMs to represent the baseflow components in river flow for a simple groundwater dominated catchment. However, there are situations where the spatial and temporal addition of baseflow-return could be too complex to represent using catchment wide, temporal averages, as they are likely to be highly variable at the sub-annual scale and potentially nonlinear in nature. These occur: at shorter time-scales (centennial and below), where variability of storm events becomes important; in complex groundwater situations; or where the spatial distribution of morphological change is of critical importance to a study.In this study we describe the development of distributed surface and subsurface hydrological components for a LEM designed to operate at sub-annual to the centennial time-scales. The hydrological components of the resultant modelling platform are verified against analytical solutions. A sensitivity analysis of morphological change under differing groundwater regimes in a small, uniform idealised catchment is subsequently undertaken using the platform to assess the groundwater impacts on fluvial and sediment discharge. Finally the platform is applied to a heterogeneous catchment in north-west England where we examine the role that baseflow plays in controlling sub-annual to decadal scale fluvial and sediment transport properties that can shape catchment scale geomorphology.The Dynamic Environmental Sensitivity to Change (DESC) project at the British Geological Survey, on which this paper is based, couples CA modelling from various backgrounds and has produced the CAESAR-Lisflood-DESC (CLiDE) platform; a geomorphological simulator that allows a variety of Earth system interactions to be explored. This platform is based upon the extension of the well established Cellular Automaton Evolutionary Slope and River (CAESAR) model (Coulthard and Van De Wiel, 2006), CAESAR-Lisflood (Coulthard et al., 2013), which incorporates the Lisflood-FP hydrodynamic model (Bates et al., 2010) to simulate channel and overbank flow. The two-dimensional modular design allows great versatility in the range of simulated spatio-temporal scales to which it can be applied. CAESAR has been used to investigate a variety of sediment transport, erosional and depositional processes under differing climatic and land use pressures in river reaches and catchments (e.g., Hancock et al., 2011). The addition of Lisflood-FP to the code (see Coulthard et al., 2013) improves the representation of surface water flow within the model by incorporating momentum. This allows a non-steady flow solution compared to the steady-state flow models of nearly all other LEMs. As with other LEMs, CAESAR-Lisflood simplifies the representation of some of the hydrological processes and their interactions. Specifically, it does not simulate groundwater flow and groundwater discharge to rivers. To address these limitations, the non-Lisflood-FP controlled surface hydrological processes within the CLiDE platform are replaced with a distributed hydrological model that includes a groundwater model. This groundwater model is coupled to the surface model through the exchange of water as groundwater recharge and baseflow-return to rivers.The coupling of modules in the CLiDE platform, and their distributed nature, allow inter-disciplinary environmental system feedbacks to be explored at a range of scales. A flow chart outlining platform processes and their interactions is shown in Fig. 2. Initialisation of the CLiDE platform requires a number of input items in the form of either gridded or list based ascii files. Spatially discretised initial model inputs are entered as Cartesian grids, with header information containing cell size, domain dimensions and geo-referencing details. Distributed DEM, land use, soil hydrological characteristics, daily rainfall and evapotranspiration datasets are used to initialise and force the surface hydrology model. The sediment transport components of the platform use the same DEM as the hydrological components but also require bedrock elevation referenced to the same datum to determine the thickness of the sediment store layer. Grain size distributions, as determined by field measurement or through a calibration process, are required by CLiDE. A detailed characterisation of the sediment transport, vegetation and slope process components used by the CAESAR algorithms in the CLiDE platform is provided by Van De Wiel et al. (2007).Surface and subsurface hydrological processes that ultimately control sediment transport in CLiDE are represented by a distributed coupled CA model. A flow chart of the coupled hydrological components within the platform is presented in Fig. 3. To partition rainfall between evaporatranspiration, surface water runoff and groundwater recharge we implement a soil water balance model (SLiM) based on the conceptualisation of the soil as a single store. Spatially distributed soil types, vegetation types, near surface soil moisture, evapotranspiration and distributed rainfall are considered in calculating the soil water balance and in determining surface water depths and groundwater recharge. Surface water is routed using the Lisflood-FP model (Bates et al., 2010), which takes topographical gradient and terrain frictional proprieties into account. Subsurface flow is modelled using a two-layer, forward-difference or explicit (Wang and Anderson, 1982), finite difference model, which can be considered as a CA approach (Ravazzani et al., 2011). The upper subsurface layer represents water flow along the bedrock-soil interface (saturated soil in Fig. 3) and the lower layer water within the bedrock (groundwater in Fig. 3). Laterally heterogeneous hydraulic conductivity and specific yield allow versatility in the range of hydrogeological environments that can be represented. The coupled surface-subsurface hydrological component of CLiDE is driven by climate data and constrained by terrain and subsurface properties.For each of the platform components, space is discretised into uniform, square cells. The soil water balance and groundwater flow model components employ a daily time step, while surface water routing is implemented on an adaptable sub-daily time step. The spatial resolution of the rainfall and potential evapotranspiration datasets for water partitioning should be at the same or coarser resolution than the model resolution, as the code can factor spatial resolutions (from coarser to finer resolution) automatically. If spatial factoring is required, the finer model cells must be coincident (in terms of alignment and the factor used) with the coarser grid, allowing data to be imprinted directly from the lower to higher resolution grid without interpolation.We implemented a technique that represents potential groundwater recharge (soil drainage) and runoff processes based on spatio-temporally distributed soil moisture conditions. Soil moisture is influenced by rainfall, potential evapotranspiration, topography, soil type and vegetation (see Fig. 4). Our approach dynamically captures the impact of these processes on soil water properties by responding to variable soil water storage properties (see Rushton, 2003) and vegetation growth stages (see Allen et al., 1998). Within our scheme, rainfall that does not evaporate or contribute directly to runoff can be either intercepted by plants or reach the ground surface and infiltrate into the soil. The latter has the effect of increasing near-surface soil storage and reducing the soil moisture deficit, SMD [L]. Soil water can be extracted by plant roots for transpiration or drawn to the bare soil surface for evaporation. When soil moisture reaches field capacity, and the soil is unable to store additional water, water drains freely in the saturated soil.Additional water inputs to the soil, when field capacity is exceeded, result in the potential for recharge (soil drainage) and lateral surface runoff (routed by Lisflood-FP) if a gradient exists towards adjacent locations. This water, which is not accounted for in soil storage, evapotranspiration or uptake by vegetation is termed excess water, Ew[L3]. Excess water is divided between runoff and recharge to groundwater based on a baseflow index parameter, BFI [-], except when the rainfall intensity is greater than the infiltration capacity of soil, where all precipitation is routed as surface runoff (bypass surface runoff in Fig. 4). Baseflow index is an average surface to subsurface water partitioning ratio reflecting the permeable nature of the catchment in addition to other catchment characteristics. The baseflow index parameter may be derived through a calibration process or more commonly is estimated from data by performing a baseflow separation on a river flow time-series (see Eckhardt, 2008). Surface runoff, Ro[L3], and recharge to the groundwater model, Re[L3], are calculated using Eqs. (1) and (2).(1)Re=Ew·BFI(2)Ro=Ew·(1−BFI)In general, greater runoff and reduced recharge is observed in areas with steeper slopes (see for example, Lange et al., 2003; Haan et al., 2006). The baseflow index represents a long-term average ratio reflecting, in part, the characteristics of average catchment slope. Runoff and recharge can therefore be understood in terms of how local slope at a particular location compares with a catchment average slope. Consequently Eqs. (1) and (2) can be modified to allow average (S¯) and nodal (S) terrain slope [o] to be factored into a calculation of recharge and runoff (Eqs. (3–5)). Using this novel technique, runoff on below average slopes (Eq. (3)) is calculated directly as a function of local to average slope ratio, and runoff on greater than average slopes (Eq. (4)) is a product of catchment runoff for an average slope and that additional amount provided by the local slope angle exceeding this.(3)Ro=Ew·(1−BFI)·SS¯(ifS≤S¯)(4)Ro=(S−S¯)·Ew·BFI(90−S¯)+Ew·(1−BFI)(ifS>S¯)(5)Re=Ew−RoRouting of surface runoff and channel flow is controlled by a stripped-down version of the Lisflood-FP model (as used by Coulthard et al., 2013). Lisflood-FP is a one-dimensional inertial model that is applied in the x and y directions to simulate flow in two dimensions over a raster grid. To calculate the flow between cells (Qsw[L3T−1]), Eq. (6) (Bates et al., 2010) is used:(6)Qsw=qsw−ghflowΔtΔ(h+z)Δx(1+ghflowΔtn2|qsw|/hflow10/3)ΔxHere qsw[L3T−1]is the surface water flux between cells from the previous time step, g [LT−2] is acceleration due to gravity, n [-] is Manning's roughness coefficient (see Arcement and Schneider, 1989), h [L] is nodal water depth, z [L] is elevation, hflow[L] is the water depth difference between adjacent cells, x [L] is the grid cell width and t [T] is time. Having established the discharge across all four boundaries of a cell, the cell water depth (h) is updated using Eq. (7), where i and j are cell co-ordinates.(7)Δhi,jΔt=Qswxi−1,j−Qswxi,j+Qswyi,j−1−Qswyi,jΔx2To maintain stability, the Lisflood component calculates the maximum allowable length of the next time step (Δtmax) for which a converging solution is highly likely to be maintained. The calculation is based on the shallow water Courant-Friedrich-Levy (CFL) condition, in which:(8)Δtmax=αΔxghThe coefficient α is typically defined as being between 0.3 and 0.7 (Bates et al., 2010), and is used to enhance the model's robustness, as the CFL condition is a necessary but not sufficient condition for nonlinear systems. As Eq. (8) demonstrates, this is strongly influenced by the grid cell size and the water depth. A typical Δtmaxfor a 50 m grid spacing, an intermediate α and with surface water present is in the order of a minute.Lisflood-FP has been extensively tested and benchmarked by Bates et al. (2010) and Neal et al. (2011), demonstrating that the model is capable of simulating flow depths and velocities within 10% of codes that solve the full two-dimensional shallow water equations.Subsurface flow is simulated at the near-surface (saturated soil in Fig. 3) and deeper subsurface (groundwater in Fig. 3) using a two-dimensional lattice of square cells interacting according to the von Neumann-type neighbourhood in a technique similar to that utilised by Rothman (1988). Both the near-surface and deeper subsurface components are similar conceptually and can pass water within and between themselves. The near-surface component represents an unconfined fully-saturated flow within the soil along the bedrock-soil interface, with the top of the bedrock defining the flow base. The deeper groundwater component is again unconfined, but flow is within the bedrock itself. Here the lower surface is at a predefined datum. The flow properties of the near- and deep-subsurface can be defined separately within the platform and both use the same algorithms to simulate flow. To ease model validation and sensitivity analysis (see Section 3), the near-surface component is not enabled in this study (potential recharge and baseflow are passed between the surface and deeper groundwater). However, its description is included for reference and it uses the same equations as the groundwater component described in this section.Nodes representing groundwater consist of distributed, lateral, hydraulic conductivity, K [LT−1], specific yield, Sy [–], and aquifer head (the unconfined potentiometric surface), h [L]. The difference in aquifer head between two adjacent cells drives inter-cell water flow. The governing equation for steady-state groundwater flow is defined by Bear (1979) as:(9)∇T∇h+W=0,where transmissivity, T [L2T−1], can be approximated by multiplying hydraulic conductivity by groundwater depth, and W [L2T−1] represents additional source and sink terms. From this, the one-dimensional, steady-state flow, Qgw[L2T−1], may be defined as:(10)Qgw=−Tsdhdswhere, s is the coordinate aligned with flow direction. Integrating between two different groundwater heads (hiand hj) separated by a distance (we use Δx as it corresponds to the cell width in the flow direction x) yields:(11)Qgw=T¯hi−hjΔxUnder a heterogeneous transmissivity, where abrupt changes may cause instability in the model, a flux limiting harmonic mean of the transmissivity for the two points i and j is used to calculate an averaged transmissivity,T¯:(12)T¯=2TiTjTi+TjThe total flux to a central cell, Q*gw[L3T−1], is a combination of fluxes from the neighbouring cells (using Eq. (11) for the four adjacent cells as per the von Neumann scheme, see Fig. 1) and the additional source and sink term. Recharge from the surface hydrological component provides the source term and baseflow-return to the surface acts as a sink. Total fluxes are used to update groundwater heads at each point in the aquifer domain simultaneously at each time step (Δt) using the discrete mass balance equation:(13)ht+Δt=ht+1SyQgw∗Δx2ΔtTwo user defined lateral groundwater boundary condition types have been implemented into the CLiDE platform. Specified (Dirichlet) boundary conditions fix aquifer head at the boundary and a no-flow (Neumann B) condition sets flux across the boundary to zero. The base of the aquifer is bound with a specified boundary allowing leakage, which is included in the flux algorithm as a secondary source or sink term. The surface boundary allows a flux of water to be returned to the surface component as baseflow where aquifer head is greater than surface water, r [L], for a particular node. The volume of water returned to rivers, qbf[L3T−1], is dependent on the specific yield of the groundwater node and the thickness (RBb[L3]) and hydraulic conductivity (RBk[LT−1]) of the river bed using a modified version of the equation derived by Haitjema (1995):(14)qbf=Sy(h−rcΔx2)(15)c=RBbRBkTo ensure model stability when passing water laterally, the cell Reynolds number, Rn [-], is calculated at each node for each time step and a flag is raised if it exceeds unity. Reduction of the Reynolds number is possible by reducing the time step (undertaken automatically by the platform for the entire domain if a flag is raised for any particular cell) or increasing the cell size (this can be undertaken manually by adjusting the resolution of the input datasets). Roache (1976) defines the Reynolds number as:(16)Rn=4TSyΔt(Δx)2There are several sediment transport models that could be used to evaluate landscape evolution at the decadal to centennial time-scales required for the CLiDE platform. Coulthard (2001) and Merrit et al. (2003) review these, and an overview of the theory behind modelling landscape evolution is presented by Tucker and Hancock (2010). The ability of current models to employ distributed fluvial and erosional processes is an advantage over previous approaches (see Kinnell, 2010). Current models are based on DEMs, include distributed soil depths, allow surface runoff, and can automatically determine inter-cell slope gradient and transport of sediment. For this study, CAESAR-Lisflood was selected to provide the sediment transport and Graphical User Interface (GUI) functionality for the CLiDE platform, as it has a modular, versatile design and has been verified in a range of environmental settings.The ability of CAESAR/CAESAR-Lisflood to predict soil erosion has been tested against experimental field data for a small catchment (see Coulthard et al., 2012), where predicted suspended sediment and bedload yields showed a close correspondence in both volume and timing of field measured data. Due to its adaptable nature, CAESAR has been used for many applications including: modelling the response of river systems to environment change (Van De Wiel et al., 2011); human impact on fluvial regimes and fluxes of sediment (Hoffmann et al., 2010); influences of vegetation on river development (Tooth et al., 2008); catchment response to environmental change (Coulthard et al., 2005); and, more recently, determining catchment soil loss rates (Hancock et al., 2011). The remainder of this section describes the major features of CAESAR that have been built upon by CLiDE. See Coulthard and Van De Wiel (2006) and Coulthard et al. (2013) for further detail regarding the equations that drive sediment transport within CAESAR.Using the water fluxes between cells from the surface hydraulic model (Eq. (6)), velocities in the x and y directions are calculated. The resultant velocities are then used to calculate a cell shear stress that provides an input into a choice of two well established sediment transport laws: Wilcock and Crowe (Wilcock and Crowe, 2003) or Einstein-Brown (Einstein, 1950). These formulae are selected as they both calculate total sediment transport from the sum of individual grain size fractions, which is important for grain the sorting processes within the platform.The Wilcock and Crowe method can transport sediment within a catchment as both a suspended load and a bedload. Both depend on the volume of sediment transported per time step, where the sediment transported from a central cell to a neighbouring cell is calculated by equating a coefficient to either slope, for bedload transport, or velocity, for suspended load transport. The calculation of suspended load transport is simplified, as it assumes an equal distribution of sediment throughout the water column. Sediment deposition also differs between the two transport types, with bedload sediment deposited (and subsequently re-entrained) at every time step, and suspended sediment deposition based on fall velocities. Under a quasi-uniform sediment grain-size regime, the computationally less expensive Einstein-Brown method for transport may be employed. The formulation evaluates the forces moving and restraining a particle. A bedload transport rate can be calculated from these forces and used to approximate the flux of sediment between cells. The amount of sediment that can be transported is calculated and moved from an active layer, which integrates sediment transport across the multiple grain-sizes (see Van De Wiel et al., 2007).The incorporation of multiple grain-sizes, selective erosion, transport and deposition of the different size fractions is important and results in spatially variable sediment size distributions. Since this variability is expressed not only horizontally but also vertically, it requires a method of storing subsurface sediment data. This is carried out by using a system of layers comprising: the active layer representing the stream bed; multiple buried layers (strata); a base layer; and, if required, a non-erodible bedrock layer (Van De Wiel et al., 2007). It is worth noting that the size of an individual grain is not allowed to evolve during the simulation.Non-fluvial sediment transport occurs through instantaneous debris flow and a slower creep process. Debris flow is computed using a two-dimensional sand-pile algorithm (Metha and Barker, 1994) based on a critical slope angle. Where this angle is exceeded, an iterative process, contained within a single time step, moves material down slope to lower cells until the critical angle is no longer exceeded. Soil creep is calculated using a gradient in elevation between cells on a monthly basis through a diffusion equation (Culling, 1960).Vegetation cover in the model is implemented by specifying areas where vegetation covers the surface layer, which has the effect of binding sediment and reducing erodibility (see Murray and Paola, 2003). A simple alluvial vegetation growth model (see Coulthard and Van De Wiel, 2006) is included, allowing linear growth of vegetation over time if it is not submerged. When vegetation has grown beyond a specified limit it restricts fluvial erosion to a percentage of that for uncovered sediment (default value is 10%). If flow shear stress exceeds a threshold the vegetation can be removed, thus exposing the sediment below to unhindered erosion. If vegetation becomes covered by sediment it can re-grow through the sediment layer, re-stabilising it.Bench-marking of the groundwater component was undertaken through comparison to steady-state and transient analytical solutions. To ensure correct functioning of the groundwater model it was subjected to tests similar to those described by Ravazzani et al. (2011). These tests were undertaken on a 2 km wide, square domain with 10 m cell spacing and groundwater parameters representing an unconfined aquifer with a hydraulic conductivity of 2.5 m d−1 and a specific yield of 0.1. Two tests allowed an assessment of steady-state and transient flow behaviour.In the first test a steady-state solution of the subsurface model was compared to an analytical result by simulating the response of groundwater level to constant uniform recharge. Northern and southern boundaries were set to the no-flow condition and eastern and western boundaries to Dirichlet conditions, which represented fixed stage (constant elevation) streams at 22 m (west) and 16 m (east). Recharge was constant in time and space at 0.5 mm d−1 and an initial groundwater head of 16 m applied to all regions. The simulation ran until a steady-state solution was reached and a cross section (west to east) of groundwater levels compared to the analytical solution (see Harr, 1962). The simulated and analytical solution show excellent agreement (a root mean square error (RMSE) of below 0.01 m) after a couple of hundred iterations (Fig. 5).The second stage of testing involved the simulation of groundwater head in response to a constant pumping rate and comparison to an analytical solution. A modified approximation of the Theis solution, valid for unconfined aquifers (Barry et al., 2000), was used with a small extraction depth to aquifer thickness ratio. Initial head was set at 50 m for all nodes, with a constant pumping rate of 150 m3 d−1 from the central node and a time step of 360 s. Dirichlet boundary conditions were set to match the initial head along all lateral boundaries and groundwater levels monitored at four sites set at 50 m intervals between 100 m and 250 m from the well. The match between transient simulation and analytical solution is good, with close agreement at all well distances (Fig. 6).By modifying the specific yield and hydraulic conductivity of the subsurface, the groundwater residence times and groundwater storage volume are changed, and subsequently the baseflow-returns to surface flow are perturbed. A numerical experiment was devised to test the sensitivity of baseflow-return and sediment transport within an idealised catchment to differing groundwater regimes with identical boundary conditions (rainfall, potential evapotranspiration and initial topography). Analysis of the sensitivity allows impacts of the differing groundwater regimes to be assessed for a simple catchment.To keep topographic effects to a minimum a catchment with simple topology of a gentle V shaped valley, as per Coulthard and Van De Wiel (2006), was created (Fig. 7). A cell width of 10 m was selected, allowing a reasonable simulation time (approximately 3 days per simulation for a standard desktop with an octa-core processor) whilst maintaining stability in the groundwater model: a higher spatial resolution would require shorter time stepping (see Eq. (16)).A total of 0.1 m rainfall was applied uniformly over the catchment for the first hour of each day during each of the 3600 days of simulation. Potential evapotranspiration was set to 0.01 m d−1 for the duration of each simulation. Land use and soil type, which determine the partitioning of soil water in the SLIM module (see Section 2.1.1.), were fixed and representative of arable land sitting on an unconsolidated, macroporous soil with little by-pass flow (see Boorman et al., 1995). Sediment grainsize was 4 mm across the catchment and all sediment transport treated as bedload.To assess the changes in water and sediment fluxes, seven scenarios with differing hydrological characteristics were created (see Table 1). Scenario 0 allows both recharge and baseflow-return with specific yield and hydraulic conductivity set at intermediate values. Scenario 1 simulates recharge from the surface to groundwater, but has no baseflow-return component. This is representative of a deep, unconfined water table. Scenario 2 is representative of an impermeable surface, not allowing recharge or baseflow-return. The remainder of simulations (scenarios 3 to 6) allow both recharge and baseflow-return with differing specific yield and hydraulic conductivity. For all scenarios groundwater boundaries were set to the no-flow condition. Groundwater levels and baseflow-return were monitored across the catchment, while sediment yield and fluvial flow were recorded at the outflow point at the base of the catchment.The groundwater properties in scenario 0 represent an unconsolidated silt, which produces a relatively stable daily groundwater head under the simulated fluctuating surface hydrological conditions. The result is a permanent river flow at the base of the catchment. Over the length (temporal) of the simulation river flow increases and groundwater heads decrease. The lower areas of the catchment are provided with water for longer periods than they would receive solely through runoff during rainfall events. Scenario 1 represents a deep groundwater table with no baseflow-return to the surface. Here, water can still be stored at the surface as soil moisture, but no water is transported back from the subsurface, creating an ephemeral river, which disappears shortly after the daily rainfall episode ceases. This scenario produces the lowest daily river discharges as water is not returned to the surface as baseflow. Scenario 2 is representative of an impermeable surface that does not allow the transfer of water between the surface and subsurface. Under these conditions all water is either transported across the surface, stored at the surface as soil moisture (with no lateral or horizontal flow), or removed through evapotranspiration.Scenario 3 uses a high hydraulic conductivity, resulting in a much quicker flow of water within the subsurface compared to the baseline (scenario 0). There is an initial flux of water from the ground to the surface, as groundwater heads adjust themselves to a new equilibrium position from the initial conditions (see Fig. 8). As incision of the central channel progresses, further water is released from the subsurface store to the river as the groundwater levels seek a new equilibrium position within the altered landscape. The low hydraulic conductivity in scenario 4 reduces groundwater flow (when compared to scenario 0) and, as there is sufficient rainfall, creates groundwater levels that are highly dependent on local surface elevation. This is apparent in Fig. 8, where groundwater volumes across the catchment increase from their initial starting point up to the local surface elevation over the first 200 days of simulation. Although a central channel is created during the simulation, groundwater levels at any particular point reflect local surface contours. Therefore, only a minimal amount of water is released from the groundwater store, resulting in a gradual loss of water from 300 days onwards in the simulation (Fig. 8).The comparatively high specific yields in scenario 5 create a stable groundwater level that is highly influenced by the lowest elevation in the catchment. Recharge is not sufficient to maintain groundwater heads as subsurface water is lost to the river as baseflow. As there is a relatively large volume of water held in the aquifer, channel incision has the potential to release a large amount of water from the subsurface to the surface. This is due to incision along the channel length lowering the water table and introducing water from the groundwater store to the surface, leading to an increase in river discharge (see Fig. 9) and a large drop in groundwater volume (see Fig. 8). Low specific yields create highly variable groundwater levels with a dependency on recharge rates. Assuming no flow in or out of a node, the specific yield used in scenario 6 produces a 1 m rise in groundwater levels for every 5 mm of recharge. As there is adequate rainfall, groundwater levels sit at the ground surface across the catchment during rainfall events and excess water is routed across the surface. During the intervening periods, hydraulic conductivity is not sufficient for groundwater levels to recede. As the overall volume of water contained in the aquifer is low, the carving of the central channel does not release a significant amount of water from the ground for contribution as river baseflow.Cumulative sediment discharge is presented in Fig. 10. Initially scenario 5 (high baseflow contribution) creates the highest rate of sediment discharge, however after 500 days of simulation scenarios 3 (flashy baseflow) and 6 (low baseflow) create the highest rate of daily sediment discharge. Scenario 1 (no baseflow) initially has the lowest sediment discharge, however a switch in behaviour after 1250 days increases sediment discharge rates similar to those exhibited by scenarios 3 and 6. Catchment sediment discharge for the intermediate groundwater, impermeable surface and low hydraulic conductivity scenarios (0, 2 and 4 respectively) produce quasi-linear rates of catchment sediment discharge without experiencing the same marked change in rates experienced during the other scenarios.There do not appear to be any clear relationships between daily river discharge and sediment discharge when the scenarios are assessed cumulatively. When river and sediment discharge are plotted against each other through time (Fig. 11and Fig. 12) some clear trends begin to emerge. For each scenario the changes in sediment discharge rate are not constant with respect to time, but instead are held for a number of years before abruptly transitioning to the next discharge rate. The small range in river discharge values throughout each simulation highlights these horizons, by producing a banding of the data with interspersed points in Fig. 11 and Fig 12. A similar behaviour is exhibited in all scenarios (excluding scenario 5), albeit with differences in the sediment discharge rates and the time held at a particular value.The intermediate groundwater scenario (scenario 0, Fig. 11) initially outputs 200 m3 d−1 sediment discharge for around 500 days, and then quickly establishes a new catchment sediment discharge rate of 280 m3 d−1, which it maintains until the end of the simulation. This behaviour is similar to that exhibited by scenario 4 (Fig. 12). The scenarios producing the highest rates of sediment discharge (3 and 6) have the same temporal sediment-river discharge signature. As these simulations progress, sediment discharge increases from 200 m3 d−1 up to peak of around 425–450 m3 d−1 at around 500 days into the simulation. Sediment discharge then drops slowly, to around 325 m3 d−1 where it remains until the end of the run. Scenario 5 (high baseflow) is the only setup where a significant change in daily river discharge occurs, increasing by 5000 m3 d−1 over the simulation. Despite both not having a groundwater input, scenarios 1 and 2 exhibit markedly differing temporal sediment-river discharge signatures. Scenario 2 (no losses to recharge) has a relatively uniform daily river discharge, with sediment discharge initially starting at 200 m3 d−1, rising for a short period to 300 m3 d−1 before falling back to its initial rate. Scenario 1 (losses to recharge) has a river discharge that changes as the simulation progresses, producing horizons of sediment transport at differing points in time and river discharge. The end of this scenario exhibits the highest sustained rate of discharge from the catchment, despite the lowest river discharge rates.Comparison of the temporal sediment-river discharge signatures (Fig. 11 and Fig. 12) confirms that there is no overarching relationship that can be defined for river and sediment discharge at the catchment outlet. They highlight the finer details of the sediment discharge rates through time, in particular their propensity to remain at a steady-state sediment discharge for a period of time before abruptly moving to a differing steady-state discharge rate. These changes represent differing internal morphological dynamics occurring within the catchment itself. Differences between the scenarios are formed by the feedbacks that individual hydrological characteristics create with their surrounding morphology. Morphology is initially the same for all scenarios. However, following initialisation each hydrological scenario creates unique distribution of fluvial flow velocities along the river reach, each producing a different value for sediment transport and hence erosion characteristics. Once a morphological feature is well-enough defined for a particular cell, it will start to have an impact on the surrounding cell fluvial characteristics. This feedback can in some cases create rapid changes in morphology between steady-states. For example, a depression forming in the channel at the base of the catchment can accelerate flow velocities immediately upstream, leading to their erosion to the same depth as the initial depression. This process can rapidly cascade upstream until there is insufficient water available to continue the process (the river reach does not extend to the top of the catchment in these scenarios). In the majority of the sensitivity analyses scenarios this process leads to rapid incision of the main channel from the base of the catchment after 500 days of simulation, creating the inflection in sediment discharge responses (see Fig. 10). It is also responsible for the move away from the initial steady-state (lightest grey horizons in Fig. 11 and Fig. 12) to subsequent steady-states in the sediment-river discharge plots. Exceptions to this were scenario 1, where the main channel incised after 1,250 days, and scenario 5, where incision occurs immediately after initialisation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Modification of the system hydrology, by means of changing the surface or subsurface properties, creates a range of river discharge responses at the catchment outlet. Sediment discharge at the outlet is not a function of daily river discharge, but transitions through a series of steady-state values independently of the daily river discharge value. This behaviour is controlled by the internal morphological dynamics generated from the feedbacks between localised peak fluvial velocities and the evolving channel morphology.At the catchment scale, evolving morphology can have an impact on the hydrological processes. This is particularly evident when the channel incises and the drop in river stage reduces surrounding groundwater heads (see Fig. 8, scenario 5) and increases river discharge (see Fig. 9, scenario 5). These effects would be strongest for a scenario with high specific yields and hydraulic conductivities, which would make a large volume of water available for baseflow return as the channel incises and groundwater heads fall over a large area without much time-lag.Given that the morphology of a simple catchment can evolve in a variety ways based on local hydrological conditions, an accurate representation of baseflow-return influences on regional scale landscape evolution for a groundwater dominated catchment may be essential. To test this hypothesis we assess the impact of baseflow-return on shaping the morphology of a test catchment, the upper Eden Valley, UK.The role of groundwater in shaping catchment-scale surface geomorphology in the upper Eden Valley, a region where baseflow is a major contributor to surface water, is examined. Two scenarios were simulated: with- and without-groundwater recharge and baseflow-return. Aside from this, both have identical initial conditions and external forcings. For the without-groundwater scenario the groundwater module is not enabled. Therefore, baseflow-return is non-existent and all excess water (see Fig. 4) is available at the surface for routing as runoff (equivalent to scenario 2 in Section 3.2). As baseflow is no longer contributing to the surface hydrology, there will be less fluvial flow between rainfall events. As recharge is no longer removed during rainfall events, there is a potential for a higher fluvial flow rate. However, there is also no baseflow-return during these events so the difference in surface peak flow between the two scenarios should be dependent on the previous rainfall history and the hydrogeological characteristics. For both scenarios, the basin sediment yield and DEMs showing morphological changes are recorded. This allows an evaluation of the impact of groundwater on the geomorphology of the basin.The Eden catchment, located in north-west England, is an upland area of 2288 km2 (see Fig. 13). The Eden Valley sits between the Lake District National Park to the west, and the Pennines, a range of hills which divide North West and North East England, to the east. The most steeply elevated sections of the catchment are located on the eastern side of the valley, whilst the western side is flatter. The land mainly consists of pasture and is considered an important study area due to its water resources (Fowler et al., 2007), significant biodiversity and recent history of large-scale flooding events (Malby et al., 2007). Rainfall in the Eden Valley is above the UK annual average, with approximately 1000 mm y−1 on low-lying areas and 1500 mm y−1 on the higher ground (Daily et al., 2006). The major river within the region is the River Eden, which runs from the Pennines to the Solway Firth estuary, at the border between Scotland and England.The study area is set in the upper part of the Eden catchment, above Temple Sowerby, an area covering 615 km2. The Eden tributary has three gauging stations along its reach. Due to their positions relative to the model boundary, only the Temple Sowerby station allows calibration to gauged river flow data.Catchment geology is composed of sedimentary units deposited between 450 and 220 million years ago, with central valley sections consisting of Permo-Triassic sandstones, and the surrounding upland of Carboniferous limestone (Fig. 13). Two major aquifers are contained in the Permo-Triassic sandstone formations, separated by the Eden Shale Formation. The Penrith Sandstone Formation (early Permian), which supplies large quantities of groundwater for public use through a series of boreholes, is confined to the east by the shale formation and to the west by drift cover. Parts of the Penrith Sandstone Formation are silicified, having a significant effect on the subsurface flow characteristics, with mean hydraulic conductivity of 0.8 m d−1 (Allen et al., 1997). Upper sections of the St Bees Sandstone Formation (early mid-Triassic) are also considered to be of hydrological importance, with mean hydraulic conductivity of 0.24 m d−1 (Allen et al., 1997). The surrounding Carboniferous Limestone Formation is also significant in this study area as it provides baseflow-return to streams in the sub-catchments of the upper Eden Valley and generates springs along the western margins (Mayes et al., 2006). The sandstones that run down the centre of the Eden catchment were eroded into a valley before the last glaciation. Subsequently, glacial processes formed drumlins and, in some areas, scoured hollows into small basin features.Due to the shallow depth of the water table in lowland areas, groundwater flow in the upper Eden Valley is dominated by discharge to the River Eden (Butcher et al., 2006; Bennett et al., 2003), with contributions from the subsurface along the majority of its length. Groundwater levels in upland regions of the study area may be up to 100 m the below surface. However, groundwater recharge in these regions drives subsurface flow and discharge rates in the valleys below. For a detailed review of the baseflow-return mechanisms, the reader is directed to Payn et al. (2012), whose study provides and assesses the spatio-temporal relationships during a seasonal baseflow recession.