@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A spatially-distributed computational model to quantify behaviour of contrast agents in MR perfusion imaging

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A finite element model of myocardial MR perfusion imaging is proposed.A parameter space study is performed for models of both healthy and diseased tissue.Clinical metrics non-monotonic with respect to changes in extra-vascular diffusivity.Signal upslope a more robust clinical metric than peak signal value.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Magnetic resonance imaging,Myocardial perfusion,Contrast agent,Finite element method,Idealised modelling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Contrast agent enhanced magnetic resonance (MR) perfusion imaging provides an early, non-invasive indication of defects in the coronary circulation. However, the large variation of contrast agent properties, physiological state and imaging protocols means that optimisation of image acquisition is difficult to achieve. This situation motivates the development of a computational framework that, in turn, enables the efficient mapping of this parameter space to provide valuable information for optimisation of perfusion imaging in the clinical context. For this purpose a single-compartment porous medium model of capillary blood flow is developed which is coupled with a scalar transport model, to characterise the behaviour of both blood-pool and freely-diffusive contrast agents characterised by their ability to diffuse through the capillary wall into the extra-cellular space. A parameter space study is performed on the nondimensionalised equations using a 2D model for both healthy and diseased myocardium, examining the sensitivity of system behaviour to Peclet number, Damköhler number (Da), diffusivity ratio and fluid porosity. Assuming a linear MR signal response model, sample concentration time series data are calculated, and the sensitivity of clinically-relevant properties of these signals to the model parameters is quantified. Both upslope and peak values display significant non-monotonic behaviour with regard to the Damköhler number, with these properties showing a high degree of sensitivity in the parameter range relevant to contrast agents currently in use. However, the results suggest that signal upslope is the more robust and discerning metric for perfusion quantification, in particular for correlating with perfusion defect size. Finally, the results were examined in the context of nonlinear signal response, flow quantification via Fermi deconvolution and perfusion reserve index, which demonstrated that there is no single best set of contrast agent parameters, instead the contrast agents should be tailored to the specific imaging protocol and post-processing method to be used.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
There were more than 80,000 deaths due to coronary heart disease in the UK, during 2010 alone (Townsend et al., 2012). Associated treatment of the disease has been estimated at costing £1.8 billion, with an overall cost to the economy of £6.7 billion (Townsend et al., 2012). Earlier diagnosis of coronary heart disease therefore has the potential both to increase life expectancy and to reduce healthcare and other economic costs.To achieve this, contrast agent (CA) enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of myocardial perfusion (Coelho-Filho et al., 2013b) has been proposed as being able to provide a non-ionising, non-invasive, early indication of disease in the coronary circulation. This modality aims to yield a direct representation of the underlying physiological state of local perfusion (Barkhausen et al., 2004), by revealing areas of the myocardium that are receiving lower than normal blood flow. Common causes for these regional deficiencies in blood perfusion are stenosis of one or more of the main coronary arteries, and microvascular disease. Prolonged exposure of tissue to hypoperfusion can lead to functional consequences such as myocardial hibernation (Frangogiannis, 2003) and ultimately death of myocytes.Various other imaging modalities exist for detecting these conditions, for example, Computed Tomography (CT) or MR angiography provide direct representation of any stenoses. However this structural diagnosis does not perfectly correlate with the functional diagnosis that perfusion imaging provides, nor does it detect microvascular disease. While nuclear medicine techniques such as Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT) or Positron Emission Tomography (PET) can provide robust absolute quantification of perfusion, and even target specific metabolic consequences of tissue perfusion (Beller and Zaret, 2000), MR perfusion imaging realises significantly higher spatio-temporal resolution. This resolution enables the observation of localised perfusion defects which might otherwise be obscured. An additional advantage of using MRI is that the perfusion imaging can be combined with that of cardiac function, scar and other diagnostic targets within a single session, providing useful clinical flexibility. Finally, the lack of ionising radiation makes MRI safe and suitable for regular follow-up imaging of patients.The basic protocol for performing cardiac perfusion imaging begins with the injection of a dose of contrast agent into a peripheral vein. This dye is then transported through the right ventricle, lungs and left ventricle, from where it is pumped into the myocardial circulation. Three imaging planes are taken along the short axis of the heart, at an approximate resolution of 1.2×1.2×10 (mm). The gadolinium-based CA boosts the MR signal of the blood relative to the surrounding tissue, such that areas which are under-perfused appear much darker in the image than those which are well-perfused. These images are then viewed by the clinician, who makes an expert judgement regarding the health of the patient’s heart based on the spatial distribution of contrast agent within the ventricle walls.Beyond expert visual assessment is the potential for much greater information to be extracted from these images. There are now various methods that derive quantitative metrics of the perfusion state specifically and the disease state in general. For example, flow quantification is approached by calculating the maximum upslope of a the myocardial signal (Aquaro et al., 2013) or by using signal deconvolution techniques, either on segment-averaged data (Jerosch-Herold et al., 1998) or more recently on voxel-wise signals (Zarinabad et al., 2012). Other metrics include transmural perfusion gradients, which may discern between large-vessel and microvascular disease (Hautvast et al., 2011), and the perfusion reserve index which reflects the spare capacity in the myocardial circulation to adapt to stress conditions (Jerosch-Herold et al., 1998).However, despite these promising aspects, the technique still possesses some limitations. Among the more significant drawbacks include: artifacts due to patient motion (Stegmann et al., 2005); quantification errors due to ECG trigger failures (Knesewitsch et al., 2013); a saturation of the signal response curve that prevents straightforward perfusion quantification (Ishida et al., 2011); reconstruction errors arising from under-sampled imaging sequences (Plein et al., 2007); dark rim artifacts (Di Bella et al., 2005); errors due to a combination of nonlinear signal response properties and partial volume effects in the sampled image. Furthermore, the diffusive nature of currently-used contrast agents such as Gadobutrol can confound quantification of blood flow and generates both false-positives and false-negatives in data interpretation (Barkhausen et al., 2004). These issues are compounded by the multi-modal causes of perfusion defects, from both arterial stenosis and diabetes-induced microvascular damage. Taken altogether, these considerations mean that experimental determination of optimal protocols is prohibitively expensive and time consuming.To address these issues, existing models, typically lumped parameter in nature, have been used to investigate the transport of MRI contrast agents. These have been reviewed by Tofts et al. (1999) who used various ordinary differential equation (ODE) models andT1-weighted MRI to estimate the kinetic parameters of diffusible tracers, in an attempt to standardise these models. However, ODE models of this transient transport process lack the ability to reproduce spatially-varying phenomena, such as the delineation of a perfusion defect boundary and effects due to the regional variation of cardiac physiology.In previous publications, we have developed multi-compartment porous media models of myocardial perfusion (Michler et al., 2012; Cookson et al., 2012) and shown their suitability for simulating the phasic spatial/temporal changes in coronary perfusion. With these models, which couple 1D representations of the coronary arteries to 3D continuum porous models, both large-vessel and microvascular disease can be represented. The reduced area of an arterial stenosis can be specified in the 1D model and the permeability and porosity of the porous medium model varied locally to represent microvascular disease. However, to assess all of the necessary parameter variations of CA transport on a full multi-compartment, three-dimensional simulation would be extremely computationally expensive, producing large amounts of data that are difficult to interpret. Thus, in this study, a simplified approach to the problem is employed. It is important to clarify that the purpose of this model is to provide a simplified version of the 3D physiologically-realistic, multi-compartment porous medium model, so as to yield useful insights about its behaviour; as such it is not intended to be the simplest such reduction possible.Applying this approach the principal aims of this study are: to provide a quantitative characterisation of the range of behaviour possible for different CAs, encompassing both current and possible, future compounds; to assess the likely errors associated with quantification of the perfusion state for different contrast agents parameters; and to understand the relationship between diagnostic precision and contrast agent properties with respect to the identification of a perfusion defect. The knowledge gained from these simulations will enable better interpretation of the results from the 3D simulations performed in physiologically-realistic geometries, and also to provide guidance for the use of different contrast agents.Porous media and poroelastic models have been previously used to simulate perfusion in the work of Huyghe et al. (1992), Vankan et al. (1997), May-Newman and McCulloch (1998), Chapelle et al. (2010), Chapelle and Moireau (2014), and more recently our studies applying this approach within physiologically-realistic left ventricle geometries (Michler et al., 2012; Cookson et al., 2012). In the latter papers a multi-compartment Darcy model is used, which contains multiple separate fluid networks, in order to permit a parameterisation that best captures the wide range of vessel length scales, and the widely-varying spatial distribution of blood flow that results. The work of Hyde et al. (2013a,b) has demonstrated how this type of multi-compartment Darcy continuum model can be effectively parameterised from the discrete vascular data collected by van den Wijngaard et al. (2013).However, given that the principal transfer of contrast agent to the tissue occurs in the capillaries, it is sufficient for the purposes of this study to consider here a standard, single-compartment porous medium. The porous medium, in the domain Ω, therefore contains two phases, fluid and solid (superscripts f and s, respectively), which have volume fractions, or porosities ϕ, defined as follows:(1a)ϕf=VfVΩ(1b)ϕs=1-VfVΩwhere(2)VR=∫RdRfor a given region R. Assuming saturation, these definitions imply thatϕf+ϕs=1.The flow of blood through this medium can be described by Darcy’s law:(3a)μw+K·∇p=0inΩ,(3b)∇·w=φinΩ,wherewand p denote the Darcy (or perfusion) velocity and pore pressure, respectively. The remaining quantities areμ>0, the dynamic viscosity of the fluid,K, the permeability tensor (symmetric positive definite) of the porous solid, and φ, the volumetric source term. Note that the Darcy velocity is related to the fluid velocityufin the following way:(4)w=ϕfufwhich indicates the interchangeability of velocity and porosity for a given Darcy flow. Some details of the numerical method used to solve this system are given in Section 4.1.Broadly there are two types of contrast agents in which we are interested. The first are blood-pool CAs (intravascular CAs), which bind to blood proteins, typically albumin, and are therefore unable to penetrate the vessel wall and hence are confined to remain within the vessel lumen. The second are freely-diffusive CAs (extracellular CAs) which are able to diffuse through the vessel walls into the extracellular space of the myocardial tissue.Using the velocity field obtained from Eq. (3), the transport of contrast agent by the blood can be determined. In the general case, two equations are required. The first is an advection–diffusion equation to describe the transport of CA in the blood, and the second is a diffusion equation that describes the movement of CA within the extracellular space.In the fluid phase the transport of CA is described by the following advection–diffusion equation (Beaudoin et al., 2007):(5a)∂ϕfcf∂t+∇·(ϕfufcf)=∇·(ϕfDf∇cf)-f¯+qThe mass concentration of CA, defined relative to the phase volume, is denoted c. The productϕctherefore gives the value of concentration per total volume. Conversely, the source term q is defined per unit total volume, as the amount of CA injected into the patient is independent of the myocardial porosity. The velocityufis determined by solving Eq. (3) andDfis the diffusion coefficient of CA in the blood. The additional sink termf¯accounts for the transfer of CA from the blood into the tissue. Once in the tissue, the transport of the CA through the extracellular space is described by the following diffusion equation:(5b)∂ϕscs∂t=∇·(ϕsDs∇cs)+f¯wheref¯now appears as a source term andDsis the diffusion coefficient of CA in the tissue.There are several possible interface conditions that could be chosen for the transport of CA across the vessel wall, the simplest being continuity of concentration. The form taken here assumes that the wall can sustain a concentration gradient, and that the flux through it occurs at a rate proportional to that gradient across the interface. At the microscale the flux, f, is therefore:(6)f∝(cf-cs)At the macroscale, which is a continuum representation of the average behaviour of many vessels within a given volume element, the same proportionality holds. Following Gerke and van Genuchten (1993), the mass transfer term becomes:(7)f¯=αϕfϕs(cf-cs)The constants of proportionality are thusα,ϕfandϕs. In an analogous way to the other concentration gradient term∇Dϕf·∇cin Eq. (5a), porosity does not directly multiply the concentration values. This is because the volume of a pore can be increased while keeping surface area constant (through an appropriate reconfiguration of the pore geometry), which preserves the value of the flux. In addition, this relationship naturally enforces the observation that should the porosity of either phase go to zero, then no mass transfer to/from that phase can occur. Finally, other properties being equal, the case ofϕf=ϕs=0.5yields maximal flux between the two phases.The parameter α represents both the permeability of the vessel wall to the contrast agent and the efficiency of the vascular geometry at mass transfer. The value of this constant will in future be determined from experimental data. A value ofα=0corresponds to a blood-pool CA, andα>0the freely-diffusive agents. Therefore, the qualitative binary distinction between these two classes of CA is condensed into a single parameter value in the model. Finally, it is assumed that the vessel wall membrane is equally permeable in both directions of mass flux.A nondimensionalisation of the governing equations is performed to provide insight into the key physical processes of the system, as well as to reveal the main relationships between the various parameters. Furthermore, by reducing the set of parameters to the minimum necessary to describe the system, the parameter space study is faster to perform and the results more straight forward to analyse.Before performing the nondimensionalisation, some additional assumptions are made regarding the material fields. In this study, both spatial and temporal gradients of porosity and the diffusion coefficient, D, are ignored. Future studies will allow these fields to vary so as to enable more specific parameterisations of different disease states. In the Darcy model, with unit inflow/outflow boundary conditions, the velocity field is set to be divergence free. Under these conditions the equations simplify to(8a)∂cf∂t+uf·∇cf=Df∇2cf-αϕs(cf-cs)+qϕffor the blood, and(8b)∂cs∂t=Ds∇2cs+αϕf(cf-cs)for the extracellular space. The following scalings are used to nondimensionalise the system (following the example of Shipley and Chapman (2010)),u=Uu′,t=dUt′,c=Cc′andx=dx′, where U is a typical velocity, C a typical concentration and d an inter-capillary length. This produces:(9a)∂cf∂t+uf·∇cf=1Pe∇2cf-Da(1-ϕf)(cf-cs)+qϕf(9b)∂cs∂t=DrPe∇2cs+Daϕf(cf-cs)where all variables are now the nondimensional versions but with the prime omitted for conciseness. A summary of the four dimensionless parameters is given below.1.Peclet number(Pe)=UdDf, characterises the relative time scales of advective and diffusive processes in the blood.Damköhler number(Da)=αdU, characterises the relative rates with which contrast agent passes through the vessel wall and is advected past it by the blood.Diffusivity ratio (Dr)=DsDf, indicates the relative importance of diffusive processes in the intra- and extravascular spaces.Fluid porosityϕf, the volume fraction of the porous medium occupied by the blood.A summary of the numerical methods used to solve this coupled system is given in Section 4.2.Fig. 1shows the layout of the 2D domain, marked with the location of the point source and direction of flow. Two different configurations will be used to account for healthy and diseased cases. The healthy myocardium is represented by a spatially constant isotropic value of permeability,K=I. For the diseased case, the associated regional perfusion defect is characterised by very low flow within a localised area of the myocardium. This reduction in flow rate is accomplished by imposing a circular region of near-zero permeability in the Darcy model, as implemented in Nolte et al. (2013). For reasons of numerical compliance,Kcannot be set exactly to zero. Additionally a transition region is defined that spans two or three elements, which is accomplished using a hyperbolic tangent function. The precise form of this masking function is given by Eq. (10), the parameters of which can be tuned to alter the size and sharpness of the boundary region of the defect:(10)Kmask=0.5(tanh(-50(x2+y2)1/2+15)+1)This is applied to the unit permeability field in the following way:(11)K=I(1-γKmask)In this study,γ=0.999and the resultant permeability and axial velocity fields are shown in Fig. 2. Three sizes of defect are investigated with radii0.065,0.17and 0.29, within a domain one unit in width and five units in length.The freely-diffusive nature of some contrast agents means that a quantity of CA becomes stored in the tissue for time scales longer than the injection and clearance of the CA in the blood pool, confounding the correct interpretation of the underlying physiological state. In clinical terms, during perfusion imaging, a false-negative result would be that hypoperfusion was present, yet there were no identifiable perfusion defects in the MR images. A false-positive is the opposite to this, whereby blood perfusion of a healthy subject is under-estimated. Both of these scenarios have the potential to occur as a consequence of the temporary storage of CA in the tissue.For the case of a false-positive, there are two contributing causes. The first is a local enhancement of the signal at the point where CA diffuses into the tissue, producing an over-estimation of perfusion. The second cause is the removal of CA from the fluid into the tissue leaving less CA available downstream and therefore, for equal blood volumes, the downstream portion will emit a lower signal, producing a false-positive effect of under-estimation. These two effects can combine to produce a disparity in signal between two regions of tissue that are identically well-perfused, complicating quantification of blood flow.The under-estimation due to this effect will clearly depend on the Damköhler number, and the downstream distance of the sampling point. For small values of Da, this effect is likely negligible, but larger values have the potential to create significant errors in the quantitative interpretation of the perfusion state.The false-negative effect occurs when a freely-diffusing contrast agent diffuses through the tissue phase from a region of healthy perfusion to a region of under perfusion, thereby producing signal in an unperfused area which should have none. The previously-described models for healthy and diseased tissue simplify the analysis of results by separating these two effects.In the clinic, the contrast agent is generally injected into a peripheral vein as quickly as is practicable, so as to approximate a Dirac delta function, though in reality it will be a triangular or top-hat function. Alternative injection strategies have been proposed, for example the injection of a pre-bolus that is a fraction of the main bolus in order to enable signal calibration (Ishida et al., 2011), however an analysis of this approach is outside the scope of this work.After having travelled to, and through, the right ventricle and lungs, this input bolus becomes smeared by dispersion. For an MRI region-of-interest located in the blood pool of the left ventricle, the concentration time-signal of this bolus now approximates a slightly-skewed Gaussian function. This signal is known as the arterial input function, as it is taken to be the input seen by the myocardial circulation, and it can be used in deconvolution techniques for quantifying perfusion (Hautvast et al., 2012). As a first approximation to this injection and subsequent dispersion, and neglecting the small skewness of arterial input function, a transient Gaussian source term, Eq. (12), is used in the advection–diffusion equation.(12)q=1σ2πe-12t-Tpeakσ2This source term is applied at a single mesh node (0.0, −2.0) i.e. on the centreline 0.5 units from inflow boundary. The variance of the bolus isσ2, which reflects the speed of the injection into the system, t is time andTpeakis the mean of the Gaussian which sets the time value at which the peak value of the bolus occurs. For ease of analysis the integral value of the source term is kept at 1.The equations outlined in Section 2.2 calculate the evolution of contrast agent concentration in fluid and solid phases. One confounding factor to absolute quantification of perfusion is the fact that for a given imaging voxel, the resultant signal intensity is determined by an unknown mixture of signals from the fluid and solid. Therefore, we wish to calculate the total signal produced for these values of concentration. Typically the contrast agent signal response curves are formed by a linear region, followed by an almost-complete saturation, in which further increases in concentration yield only very small increases in signal intensity.In this study it is mainly assumed that the imaging is performed within the linear range of the signal response curve. This enables the greatest applicability of the results and reduces the amount of confounding information in their analysis. Furthermore, a full parameterisation of the nonlinearity would be, in combination with the existing PDE parameter space, too large to consider here. However, in order to provide some insight as to the likely errors that can arise when assuming linearity, in Section 8.1 a set of three nonlinear response curves, taken from (Hsu et al., 2008), are applied to a selection of the results. See also the work of Ishida et al. (2009) for further indicative measurements of nonlinear signal responses.The total porosity-weighted concentration,cT, is defined in Eq. (13),(13)cT=ϕfcf+ϕscsand which can be taken to represent directly the MR signal intensity for a linear response curve, without any further post-processing.Even for this simplified model, a key question is how to best draw conclusions from the wealth of spatially and temporally-varying data that these simulations produce. Therefore the following clinically-motivated metrics are used to reduce this information to a manageable form for analysis.A single sample point, located at the centre of the domain, is specified and the three concentration values of porosity-weighted fluid concentration, porosity-weighted tissue concentration extracted and porosity-weighted total concentration. From the resultant time series, the upslope and peak value of concentration are calculated. The upslope is defined as the maximum gradient of the curve betweent=0and the time at which the peak value occurs (Aquaro et al., 2013).The value of concentration in the defect displays a large degree of spatial inhomogeneity, therefore sampling at a single point is less useful in the diseased simulation in comparison to the healthy case. For the diseased simulations the average value of concentration, Eq. (14), is calculated for this region, defined using the same masking function as for the permeability field.(14)c¯defect=∫ΩKmask(ϕfcf+ϕscs)dΩ∫ΩKmaskdΩErrors associated with the mask boundary spanning two elements are assumed to be unimportant. As with the healthy case, similar properties of the time-varying average signal are extracted.The finite element method is used to solve all the models presented in this paper, all of which are implemented within an in-house parallelised, multi-physics code, CHeart (Michler et al., 2012; McCormick et al., 2013; Nordsletten et al., 2010). A brief description for each model component follows.The 2D spatial domain is discretised using linear Lagrange quadrilateral elements, of size 0.02 units, with velocity and pressure represented by quadratic Lagrange basis functions. This system is solved using the primal, or pressure, formulation, which is obtained by the substitution of the Darcy flux equation into the continuity equation. No-flux boundary conditions are imposed on the long edges of the domain, with fixed unit inflow/outflow velocity conditions applied to the short edges, for both the healthy and diseased cases. For full numerical details see (Michler et al., 2012).Similar to the Darcy solution, the spatial domain is discretised using linear Lagrange quadrilateral elements, as are the concentration and source variables. The input velocity fielduis represented on the same quadratic basis on which it was solved. To ameliorate the numerical instability of the associated advection operator, the Streamline-Upwinding Petrov–Galerkin (SUPG) stabilisation scheme (Brooks and Hughes, 1982) is used. The discrete forms of these equations are assembled into a single matrix system, therefore solving forcfandcssimultaneously. The time integration of this global system from a zero initial condition is performed implicitly, using a backward Euler scheme. All four boundaries are set to a zero Neumann value, which enforces a condition of zero diffusive flux.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study of a simplified model of contrast agent transport in the myocardium has shown the model’s capability for producing physically plausible results in both healthy and disease scenarios. A wide-ranging parameter space study of the four relevant parameters – Peclet number, Damköhler number, diffusivity ratio and fluid porosity – revealed non-monotonic behaviour with respect to the Damköhler number. Furthermore, increased sensitivity of the model to other parameters was observed for large values of Da. The high sensitivity of the signal properties to the Damköhler number, particularly around the estimated current value, could present a challenge for formal parameter estimation techniques applied to noisy data. It also suggests that the signal curve properties could change significantly for novel sampling protocols that sample multiple times per heart cycle, which could complicate any future analyses of imaging data that relies on properties such as signal upslope. The results have also shown that, when correlating signal properties to perfusion defect size, the signal upslope is generally a more robust metric than peak concentration value particularly if it were to be used in conjunction with a model-based quantification method under parameter value uncertainty. More specifically, keeping Da below 0.8 for any future contrast agents would further improve these properties.However, the results from Section 8 examining the effect of nonlinear signal response, flow quantification via Fermi deconvolution and the perfusion reserve index, have shown that there is no single best set of contrast agent parameters. The transport properties of the contrast agents interact in different ways with these different aspects of practical imaging. Therefore, these findings should be used to design or select the appropriate contrast agent for a specific imaging protocol and post-processing method. Alternatively for a given contract agent the results reveal which aspects of the imaging process will require the most care in order to achieve the best results.In future studies these findings will be applied to better understand the behaviour of 3D physiologically-realistic simulations in left-ventricle geometries, but with the knowledge that the results will be sensitive to the choice of contrast agent through-wall diffusivity.