@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Using a conceptual Bayesian network to investigate environmental management of vegetable production in the Lake Taihu region of China

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
There is little quantitative data describing N exports from Chinese vegetable farms.Conceptual equations were used to develop a semi-quantitative Bayesian Network.The Conceptual Bayesian Network is used to compare a range of mitigation strategies.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Nitrogen,Exports,Vegetable,China,Bayesian Network,Modelling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Vegetable farms are one of many nitrogen (N) sources adversely affecting Lake Taihu in eastern China. Given the lack of quantitative “cause and effect” relationships and data relating to these systems, we developed a conceptual Bayesian network to investigate and demonstrate causal relationships and the effects of different mitigation strategies on N exports from vegetable farms in the Lake Taihu region. Structurally, the network comprised one primary transport factor, one primary source factor and three post-mobilisation strategies, and three output factors.In general the network suggests that N exports are more sensitive to transport factors (i.e. runoff volumes) than source factors (i.e. fertiliser application rates) although the cumulative effects of excessive fertiliser were not considered. Post-mobilisation mitigations such as wetlands and ecoditches appear to be particularly effective in decreasing N exports however their implementation on a regional scale may be limited by land availability. While optimising N inputs would be prudent, the network suggests that better irrigation practice, including improved irrigation scheduling, using less imported water and optimising rainfall utilisation would be more effective in achieving environmental goals than simply limiting N supply.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Lake Taihu is in the lower Changjiang (Yangtze) river delta in eastern China (Fig. 1). As China's third largest freshwater lake (2334 km2 and depth of approximately 2 m), Lake Taihu is an important source of domestic, industrial and agricultural water, assists water quantity regulation and provides transport, aquaculture and tourism services to one of China's most developed areas (Shen et al., 2000). Rapid industrial development and population growth in the second half of the twentieth century has turned the once oligotrophic Lake Taihu (Chang, 1995) eutrophic (Luo et al., 2007), with seasonal algal blooms limiting public and private amenity (Qin et al., 2007). Nutrients enter the lake through urban, industrial and agricultural wastes and wastewaters discharged into tributaries (Qin et al., 2007) and atmospheric deposition (Luo et al., 2011, 2007). Recent reductions in industrial inputs to Lake Taihu have focussed attention on domestic and agricultural sources of nutrients, particularly nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) (Qin et al., 2007).Intensive vegetable production is one of many agricultural industries aiming to mitigate their contribution to the non-point source pollution, particularly N, entering Lake Taihu. While deterministic models such as SWAT (Gassman et al., 2007), LEACHMN (Sogbedji et al., 2001), EPIC (Gassman et al., 2004) and DRAINMOD (Salazar et al., 2009) have been used to simulate N exported from agricultural systems and minimise nutrient exports, in this instance linking agricultural management to N exports and downstream effects is particularly difficult. There are few empirical relationships on which to base a deterministic model of N exports and there is a general lack of parametric information relating to the site specific characteristics.Bayesian Networks (Pearl, 1988) are an alternative to conventional modelling that has been used extensively in natural resource sciences to examine complex relationships in data poor environments and for investigating multi-factor problems such as those associated with resource management (Aguilera et al., 2011; Alameddine et al., 2011; Ames, 2002; Ames and Neilson, 2001; Kragt et al., 2011; Nash and Hannah, 2011; Nash et al., 2013; Perez-Minana et al., 2012; Ticehurst et al., 2011; Varis, 1993, 1997; Varis and Kuikka, 1999; Young et al., 2011). Bayesian Networks are well reviewed elsewhere (Jensen and Nielsen, 2007; Korb and Nicholson, 2004; Pourret et al., 2008). In summary, Bayesian Networks provide a graphical representation of “cause and effect” relationships with the strength of the interdependencies (causal links) represented as conditional probabilities. The “nodes” represent variables with defined properties called “states” and directed links (also called arcs which pass from the parent node to the child node) are used to represent dependencies between variables. Dependencies are quantified in a Conditional Probability Table (CPT) associated with each node which considers all combinations of parent node states. Note that while variables may be discrete or continuous, in practice continuous variables are divided into discrete ranges for computational reasons.Flexibility in data acquisition is a major benefit of Bayesian Networks. CPT’s can be populated through direct data analyses (e.g. for probability of rainfall), elicitation of expert opinion, Monte Carlo simulations where deterministic relationships are known (i.e. points are drawn from distributions for inputs), and, where sufficient data are available, machine learning techniques. It is noteworthy that the method of data acquisition affects the structure of Bayesian Networks. For example, where expert opinion is used to populate CPT's the requirement that each CPT considers all combinations of the parent nodes and complexity that creates, places a natural limitation on the number of parent nodes and states.The probability distributions defined in the CPT's are referred to as prior probabilities and relate to the general properties of the environment (i.e. region) and system (i.e. type of farm) to which the Bayesian Network applies. As evidence of state values is received for specific nodes (i.e. the attributes of specific farms are identified), they are added into the network by selecting the appropriate state value (i.e. giving that state a probability of 100%). The resulting posterior probability distributions for the remaining nodes in the network, in particular, for a set of query nodes (i.e. N exports), are computed based on basic laws of probability. Consequently, as evidence is added to a network in the form of node values (states), the possible outcomes that the network represents do not change, only the relative probabilities of those outcomes. The changes in the relative probabilities of states (and related mean estimates for nodes with numerical values) before and after evidence of state values is added to the network, reflect projected differences between specific systems and the expected “average” for the system under consideration. These projected differences from “average” can be used to compare and contrast a range of different scenarios for both the prognostic and diagnostic analyses. For example, McDowell et al. (2009) developed a farm scale Bayesian Network that related P exports to site characteristics and management in a data poor region of south-eastern Australia. The network was used to compare current management and best practice to poor management on three case study farms, demonstrating the utility of Bayesian Networks for targeting mitigation measures (McDowell et al., 2009). Nash et al. (2010) developed a field-scale Bayesian Network for N exports from high rainfall cropping in south-eastern Australia. The network was used to investigate the importance of various site factors related to N transport and source factors, especially fertiliser rates, on N exports (Nash et al., 2010).The aim of this study was to develop a Bayesian Network that could be used to investigate and demonstrate causal relationships and the effects of different mitigation strategies on N exports from vegetable farms in the Lake Taihu catchment of eastern China using Xingeng Village farm as a case study. Given the lack of quantitative “cause and effect” relationships and data relating to these systems a relatively simple conceptual model and conceptually based mathematical equations, rather than experiential data, were used to populate the CPT's. This paper outlines; (a) the network development process; (b) the network and its attributes; and (c) the potential implications of the network output for Government initiatives aimed at mitigating N exports from intensive vegetable production systems and improving water quality in nearby Lake Taihu.Xingeng Village is located in Wangting town in the Xiangcheng district, in the northwest corner of Suzhou city (N 31°26′, E 120°28′). Being on the plains east of Lake Taihu, south of the Wangyu River and in a Level 1 protected area (refer Ministry of Environmental Protection, 2002), this farm is well located for demonstrating non-point source pollution mitigation measures.Xingeng Village has a population of 5375 and covers an area of 480 ha, 330 ha of which is used for agriculture (Xingeng Village farm). The village is a modern agriculture demonstration area where the main crops are rice and vegetables. The village also produces mushrooms and grapes, and there are dairy and pig production facilities. This project addressed a 6.7 ha area used for organic vegetable production of which c. 4 ha was covered by poly-film greenhouses, c. 0.7 ha by multi-span greenhouses and c. 1 ha by insect nets, and c. 1 ha was exposed land.The average annual temperature in Xingeng Village is 16 °C (the maximum is 38 °C and the minimum is 5 °C below zero) with 230 frost-free days annually (i.e. minimum temperature >0 °C) and more than 2000 h of non-cloudy weather. The annual rainfall is c. 1200 mm with the period between March and August accounting for about 65% of that total. In addition to rainfall, irrigation water sourced from the Wangyu river (Class 4 refer Ministry of Environmental Protection, 2002) is also used for growing vegetables.Soils at Xingeng Village farm are described locally as “yellow mud” and “gleyed”. Hand texturing suggests that the topsoil is a well-structured light clay/loamy clay c. 200 mm deep which overlies clay subsoils that have a compacted plough layer (Dr J. Shu, 12-10-11, personal communication). During site inspections there was little evidence of slaking or dispersion but there was evidence of mottling in soil brought to the surface through cultivation, suggesting elevated water tables for a substantial portion of the year. The pH value was reported to be between 7 and 7.5. Unfortunately, there is limited information regarding agronomic measures of soil fertility at this site. The use of composted organic materials may be contributing to the reportedly excellent soil structure and reportedly good soil fertility. Intermittent measurements of tail-water runoff on fifteen (15) occasions suggest drainage from the vegetable growing areas of Xingeng Village farm have an average total N (TN) concentration of 19.7 mg N/L (Range 9.6–39.6 mg N/L) and average total P (TP) concentration of 0.92 mg P/L (Range 0.57–1.85 mg P/L).The main fertilizers used for agricultural production in Xingeng village are composted manure, a commercial organic fertilizer, urea and ammonium bicarbonate. In total approximately 1670 tons of fertiliser materials are applied to the farm annually. The vegetable growing area receives c. 650 kg N/ha and c. 220 kg P/ha annually through applications of composted manures and commercial organic fertilizer (2.2% N, 0.7% P) applied at annual rates of c. 50 and 190 tonnes, respectively.The process used to develop the Bayesian Network is presented in Fig. 2. The network development drew heavily on the processes used to develop similar networks for other industries (McDowell et al., 2009; Nash et al., 2010) and is consistent with recent guidelines (Chen and Pollino, 2012). To constrain intra-annual variation the network was conceptualised using an annual time-step. At Xingeng Village farm vegetable production areas are surrounded by drainage channels approximately 1 m deep. Consequently, while the network normalises data to the hectare scale, the network was conceptualised as applying at the “plot” scale, where a plot is defined as a hydrologically isolated production area. Using this definition plots on Xingeng Village farm varied between 0.024 and 0.288 ha in size.Initial knowledge gathering involved two visits to Xingeng Village farm by the project team and extensive reviews of both Chinese and English literature. To address the geographical separation of some team members from the project site and ensure local knowledge was incorporated into project outcomes, a Steering Committee and a Working Committee were established. The Working Committee members dealing directly with farmers from Xingeng Village provided information to the project team at regular (generally bi-weekly) phone conferences. These knowledge gathering activities yielded limited empirical data and deterministic relationships on which the initial “cause and effect” diagram could be based. Consequently, the initial Bayesian Network was conceptualised as having transport and source factors responsible for nutrient generation, similar to P indices (Bechmann et al., 2005; Birr and Mulla, 2001; DeLaune et al., 2004a; DeLaune et al., 2004b; Elliott et al., 2006; Hooda et al., 2000), and post-mobilisation mitigations (i.e. wetlands, drainage re-use, ecoditches). However, unlike index systems, the Bayesian Network facilitated the incorporation of more complex “cause and effect” relationships.The initial “cause and effect” diagram was developed using NETICA, version 4.08 (Norsys Software Corp., Vancouver, Canada) software. Where deterministic equations are used, NETICA uses forward Monte Carlo simulations to generate the probability distribution for the query nodes (i.e. Total N Exports) and was used for the entire model development and interrogation process.The initial “cause and effect” diagram was reviewed at a specially convened workshop in Xingeng Village. The workshop was attended by the Steering Committee and Working Committee members in addition to four (4) farmers from Xingeng Village. At the workshop the assumptions underlying the diagram were discussed and evaluated. The workshop commenced with an introduction to “cause and effect” relationships and progressed to examine vegetable production. The initial diagram was presented and each node and link was examined in sequence and in detail. This examination comprised a two step process: (a) determining the appropriateness or otherwise of the “cause and effect” diagram's structure; and (b) collecting information regarding node values and relationships. All discussions were recorded on an audio tape and by a designated minute secretary.The “cause and effect” diagram was modified to reflect comments from the Steering and Working Committees and farmers. While some of the suggested changes were cosmetic (i.e. name changes) there were some significant changes. For example, atmospheric N inputs to the farm had not been included in the cause and effect diagram. The final “cause and effect” diagram comprised one transport factor, one source factor and three post-mobilisation mitigation strategies (a) ecoditches; (b) wetlands; and (c) reuse of drainage water, and three output factors (a) Nitrogen Concentration (mg/L) (i.e. the N concentration of runoff from the plot); (b) Export Efficiency (%) (i.e. load of N leaving the plot relative to the Potential N Load); and (c) Total N Exports (kg/ha/y) (i.e. effective output from that area allowing for the effects of post-plot mitigations).The first step in quantifying the network was to define the states. A full description of each node, its states and the sources of data used for compiling, calculating or estimating values used in the CPT's are presented in the Supplementary documentation accompanying this paper. For most nodes, states were represented as ranges rather than discrete numbers allowing for the uncertainty contained in a particular estimate to be included in the analyses (Fig. 3).To develop the Bayesian Network, the relationships between parent (independent) and child (dependent) nodes and their states were documented in the CPT's that underpin the Bayesian Network structure (i.e. given each set of conditions in the parent nodes, what are the chances of each condition occurring in the child node?) (Cain, 2001). Where possible, quantitative data (i.e. rainfall records) and deterministic equations (i.e. generally derived from conservation of mass), were used. Deterministic equations were converted by the NETICA software to conditional probability tables and it was assumed that there was no uncertainty due to sampling (i.e. the sampling error was assumed to be part of the overall error of estimates). Runoff was estimated using standard methods (Allen et al., 1998) and the Potential N Load was estimated as the sum of Total N Additions (the sum of fertiliser and irrigation N inputs), Carry Over N and Reapplied N in Reuse Water minus Gaseous Emissions and Crop N Removal (Fig. 3).Three important deterministic equations, not based on the “conservation of mass”, related to Wetland Efficiency, Gaseous Emissions and Nitrogen Concentration. The Wetland Efficiency estimation is based on an equation adapted from Kadlec and Knight (1996) (Kadlec et al., 2000; Kadlec and Knight, 1996) for total Kjeldahl N with modification for local data (Lu et al., 2009). In the absence of sufficient data to develop statistical relationships, both Nitrogen Concentration and Gaseous Emissions estimations were conceptualised by technical specialists based on the “expected” rather than measured interactions between factors (Equation 1). Runoff and Potential N Load were the independent variables in the case of Nitrogen Concentration, and Runoff and nitrogen load (estimated as the sum of Total N Additions, Carry Over N and Reapplied N in Reuse Water, less Crop N Removal) in the case of Gaseous Emissions.(1)y=K1+K2/(1+exp(−η))where y = Gaseous Emissions, Nitrogen Concentration (dependant variable); K1 = Minimum value; K2 = Maximum value; η = K3*(Runoff − K4) + K5* (x − K6), K3 = Estimated parameter; Runoff = Runoff (independent variable); K4 = Estimated parameter; K5 = Estimated parameter; K6 = Estimated parameter; x = Potential N Load or nitrogen additions (independent variable).Potential N Load and Runoff were assumed to be positively and negatively correlated to Nitrogen Concentration with the rate of change adjusted at the margins. As there was considerable uncertainty regarding parameter estimates and in view of the importance of the equation, the network was structured to enable changes in the equation parameters to be varied in order to assess the likely sensitivity of the outcomes to these factors. The upper and lower values were based on literature estimates of N concentration. Gaseous Emissions estimation was based on the “expected” relationship between Runoff (used as a surrogate estimate for soil water content) and nitrogen additions (estimated as the sum of Total N additions, Carry Over N and Reapplied N in Reuse Water, less Crop N Removal). Having a similar form to Eq. (1), Runoff and N additions were assumed to be positively correlated to denitrification and again the maxima and minima were based on literature estimates with input from a technical specialist (Prof. Deli Chen, 9-11-11, pers. comm.).Where deterministic equations were used to derive conditional probability tables, the numerical ranges assigned to states potentially distorted subsequent probability distributions. For example, the NETICA software assumes that all values within a state (defined by upper and lower values) are equally likely to occur when in fact for non-linear equations values closer to the overall mean for that node may have a higher probability of occurrence. To accommodate the use of non-linear deterministic equations in the final network the number of states was often expanded in child nodes and the numerical ranges assigned to states were not uniform. The number of states and numerical ranges assigned to nodes depended on the forms of the equations (i.e. log-normal) and the influence of the range choice on the estimated mean for the node.The final network is presented in Fig. 3. In NETICA, the state descriptor for each node and the probabilities of each state can be represented both numerically and by the horizontal column graph. For continuous distributions, a mean estimate for that node, calculated as the sum of products of the mid points of the ranges and probabilities, is presented below the column graph along with the standard deviation. As noted above, the reliability of these estimates will depend on the form of the relevant distribution. As there was no comprehensive data set that could be used for formal validation, the network was assessed by examining a limited number of case studies, and comparing the network output with the expectations of experts familiar with these systems.“Sensitivity to Findings” function of the NETICA software was used extensively as part of this quasi-validation process to examine specific relationships within the network and compare those with observed data and the assumptions used in their development (Korb and Nicholson, 2004).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
