@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A Bayesian Belief Network to assess rate of changes in coral reef ecosystems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Anthropogenic/climatic disturbances and coral reef data were integrated in a Bayesian Network.Network structure was assessed through a participatory approach.Correctly classified instances and sensitivity analyses were used to validate the model.Data integration improved data quality and model response.Bio-constructor organisms and water quality were decisive for reef budgetary state.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Coral reef,Calcium carbonate budget,Bayesian network,Anthropogenic disturbances,Climate change,Environmental management,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
It is crucial to identify sources of impacts and degradation to maintain functions and services that the physical structure of coral reef provides. Here, a Bayesian Network approach is used to evaluate effects that anthropogenic and climate change disturbances have on coral reef structure. The network was constructed on knowledge derived from the literature and elicited from experts, and parameterised on independent data.Evaluation of the model was conducted through sensitivity analyses and data integration was fundamental to obtain a balanced dataset. Scenario analyses, conducted to assess the effects of stressors on the reef framework state, suggested that calcifying organisms and carbonate production, rather than bioerosion, had the largest influence on the reef carbonate budgetary state. Despite the overall budget remaining positive, anthropogenic pressures, particularly deterioration of water quality, affected reef carbonate production, representing a warning signal for potential changes in the reef state.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Coral reefs are important ecosystems that support biodiversity and provide ecological, social and economic benefits for many communities (Moberg and Folke, 1999; Cesar et al., 2003; Burke et al., 2011).The extent to which services (e.g. shore protection) and functions (e.g. biodiversity) are maintained by coral reef ecosystems is associated with the persistence of their three-dimensional structure (framework; Perry et al., 2008). Unfortunately, coral reefs have suffered, and continue to suffer, significant framework degradation and loss (Alvarez-Filip et al., 2009; Perry et al., 2013). Anthropogenic disturbances and pressures, such as urban and industrial developments, destructive fishing activities, catchment misuse and coastal and inland deforestation (Burke et al., 2002, 2011; Edinger et al., 2000), have increased the vulnerability of these systems to climate variability (Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2007; Anthony et al., 2008; Baker et al., 2008; Eakin et al., 2010), overall threatening reefs' functionality (Kennedy et al., 2013).Rate of changes of the reef framework have been largely investigated through carbonate budget assessments that estimate contribution from reef-building (e.g. hermatypic corals, crustose coralline algae) and bioerosive (e.g. sea urchins, sponges, parrotfish) organisms (Eakin, 1996, 2001; Edinger et al., 2000; Hubbard et al., 1990; Mallela and Perry, 2007; Perry et al., 2013; Stearn and Scoffin, 1977). Coral reef structural integrity is associated with positive budgets that occur when calcium carbonate production exceeds the rate of erosion, whereas negative budgets occur generally as a result of changes in the natural reef processes (Perry et al., 2008; Kennedy et al., 2013).Despite carbonate budgets being valuable in determining the ‘state’ of a reef system, they do not always provide a full picture of disturbances and pressures responsible for changes in the framework state, and are therefore limited in their application for long-term management. In addition, varied and often incomplete datasets, as well as limited knowledge on the relationships between coral reef abiotic and biotic factors, can result in considerable uncertainty in the parameters of resulting models. In coral reef ecosystems uncertainty may be associated with ecological and biological processes (e.g. coral reef framework growth and erosion) and with changes triggered by climatic and anthropogenic disturbances and pressures (e.g. changes in ecosystem state due to extreme sea water temperatures, sedimentation, water pollution). This has the potential to limit the identification of management priorities and the definition of effective management actions (Olsson et al., 2004; Smith et al., 2011).A comprehensive approach that integrates uncertainty, can aid sustainable coral reef management and prevent further decline. Although, it is impossible to predict with certainty the result of management decisions, it is important to provide decision-makers with models that consider the impacts of implementing management interventions or decision options in order to maximize their benefit (Uusitalo et al., 2015). Therefore, to evaluate the effects of anthropogenic and climatic disturbances on the reef framework, we propose a Bayesian Belief Network (BBN) approach, which offers a methodological framework to address uncertainty (Bennett et al., 2013; Kelly et al., 2013).BBNs associate variables via conditional probability distributions and use inference algorithms to calculate posterior probabilities of the outcome states (Jensen and Nielsen, 2007). They consist of two structural components: (1) a direct acyclic graph (DAG), where each vertex represents one of the variables in the model; (2) conditional probability tables (CPTs), indicating the strengths of the links in the graph by denoting the likelihood of the state of a ‘child’ node given the states of its ‘parent’ nodes (those from which edges entering the node originated) (Renken and Mumby, 2009; Landuyt et al., 2013). The DAG consists of a set of variables or nodes that can take on a number of pre-defined discrete “states”, which are mutually exclusive and exhaustive (Borsuk et al., 2004). The presence of an edge linking two variables indicates the existence of statistical dependence between them (Aguilera et al., 2011). Inference can be used to propagate conditional probabilities through the network (Aguilera et al., 2011), whilst accounting for uncertainty.BBNs enable the integration of empirical data and expert knowledge (Uusitalo, 2007; Aguilera et al., 2011; Chen and Pollino, 2012), can operate in a data poor environment (Uusitalo, 2007), and can be readily updated with newly available data, by combining the new information with prior probabilities such that, the network posterior probabilities are updated in response to additional observational information (Marcot et al., 2001). Although BBNs are efficient in integrating variables presented at different scales (Wooldridge et al., 2005), they are constrained in describing explicit spatial and temporal dynamics and interactions, requiring the use of different nodes to represent and incorporate information on different locations or times (Marcot et al., 2001; Kelly et al., 2013). In addition, since they do not allow for feedback loops among variables, time steps to describe such effects are needed (Marcot et al., 2001; Kelly et al., 2013), adding complexity to the model and limiting their application to systems or processes described by feedback interactions (e.g. nutrient cycle; food webs). Due to the explicit handling of uncertainty (as well as their ability to integrate different type of data and knowledge) BBNs provide the opportunity to identify key knowledge gaps in our scientific understanding of complex systems, and hence inform future research priorities (Marcot et al., 2001; Uusitalo, 2007; Renken and Mumby, 2009).The graphical structure of BBNs is particularly relevant in ecosystem management since it facilitates a participatory approach during the development of the model and provides a user-friendly framework to communicate the results (Marcot et al., 2001; Borsuk et al., 2004; Jakeman et al., 2006; Aguilera et al., 2011; Chen and Pollino, 2012; Vilizzi et al., 2013). Extensive reviews of the use of BBN for environmental modelling can be found in Aguilera et al. (2011) and Chen and Pollino (2012).The Carbonate Budget BBN (CARBNET) was developed to evaluate coral reef carbonate balance under changing environmental conditions and across reef bioregions. The aim was to identify those disturbances and pressures that exert the greatest influence in modifying the reef framework CaCO3 (carbonate) budgetary state.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
CARBNET provides a means for capturing the dependencies between climate change and human disturbances and pressures, and their influence on the reef framework state. The benefit of using Bayesian Belief Networks is that they explicitly model ecological causal influences and uncertainty, providing a better level of information that decision makers can use to interpret the ecological and biological changes occurring in a system (Marcot et al., 2001; Bennett et al., 2013).During model construction, literature-based discretisation had the advantage of including information derived from studies conducted under different environmental conditions and in different coral reef bioregions, introducing a large range of possible conditions and reducing the bias that can occur when automatic discretisation is applied to variables with unbalanced data cases (Uusitalo, 2007; Chen and Pollino, 2012). These multiple sources of knowledge aided capturing a richer set of variable states, in order to improve the ability of the model to generalise across coral reef systems. However, the discretisation process is generally regarded as a potential source of bias since “too large categories may not be able to capture subtle dynamics occurring in a system, whilst narrower categories may not be feasible due to the uncertainty and lack of data to define accurately the conditional probabilities for each possible combination of levels” (Renken and Mumby, 2009). For some of the CARBNET variables, a trade-off between uncertainty and accuracy may have been exacerbated by too large categories, which may have overlooked understudied or rare conditions that occur in coral reef systems. In this case, experts can be consulted to elicit rare or less studied conditions in order to improve model applicability. In general, we recognise that further involvement of experts is needed to assess flaws in discretisation and that this participatory process can be further applied to corroborate model outputs.The use of standardised methodology for data collection and analysis (ReefBudget) was a practical approach to reduce the bias that can occur during the standardisation of data collected and analysed with different methodologies. ReefBudget is set up as an excel document, where estimates of carbonate production and erosion are automatically calculated based on benthic cover and density data collected using a consistent field methodology (Perry et al., 2012). This methodology provides information that is beyond the hard coral-macroalgae relationship, hence adding to the knowledge relative to some of the complex relationships occurring on the reef.Overall, sensitivity analyses showed the need to inform the knowledge gaps, which reside in data characterised by little variation and therefore high uncertainty. The biological and environmental components of the network resulted in high entropy values potentially due to a lack of data to encode the CPTs. Integrating the non-informative nodes with more varied data (data with a high mixture of combinations of variable states) can help to determine whether the variation observed is noise or based on some relationship with other variables. However, measures of uncertainty should be treated carfully since sometimes a uniformly distributed variable may be the result of intrinsic qualities of the variables (noise/external factors) or how the data has been discretised. Conversely, data that has non-uniform distributions may not necessarily be certain – for example due to lack of data for some states. Careful use of intervals suring discretisation helps to overcome this to some degree. The sensitivity of the node ‘Calcium carbonate budget’ to the quantity of calcium carbonate deposited by reef-building organisms (e.g. hermatypic corals), rather than from carbonate degradation through bioerosion, may be due to the reduced number of data cases for some of the bioeroder taxon variables (e.g. macroborers density). Therefore, it is likely that knowledge gaps in the bioerosive taxa components (Fig. 1, d1) of the model have caused misclassification of the negative budgets.Despite the overall budget remaining positive, the model predicted a likelihood increase in bioerosion when the system is subjected to extreme climatic and anthropogenic disturbances, indicating that disturbances have the potential for changes in the CaCO3 budgetary state. However, climatic and anthropogenic input nodes were less important in influencing the output node state, being unable to produce a consistent shift to any of the other node states (mpe = ‘positive high’ calcium carbonate production). Declining carbonate production was observed also in relation to poor water quality, supporting the general view that high sedimentation and nutrients levels are important drivers of change in coral reef framework (Hallock and Schlager, 1986; Hallock, 1988; Le Campion-Alsumard et al., 1993; Kennedy et al., 2013). Direct effects of sedimentation are well documented (see Fabricius, 2005); however, its effect on erosion is still poorly understood (Perry and Larcombe, 2003). In this context, depletion of herbivore fish appeared to magnify the response of the system to water quality degradation, suggesting that the effect of overfishing is additive to poor water quality in determining changes in the CaCO3 budgetary state. There have been examples on how exploitation of herbivore fish may reduce the erosive pressure on the reef, overall maintaining a positive budget (Mallela and Perry, 2007; Perry et al., 2014). However, negative budgets may offset positive net production in the case of extensive loss in coral cover and low recruitment of juvenile corals also as a consequence of algal blooms (Perry et al., 2013). This complex interaction seems to not be accounted for, despite dependencies presented in the model. The consequence is that the model is perhaps limited in detecting hidden conditions although additional sources of data cases may improve this drawback. In a management context scenario 3 indicates that managing sources (e.g. catchment degradation) of pressures (e.g. sedimentation) may aid positive balance and reef framework growth (Perry et al., 2008; Kennedy et al., 2013).In this paper we have demonstrated the potential of a BBN approach to model coral reef state, improving our knowledge into the complex interactions occurring between disturbances and reef framework dynamics. In addition, we have shown how such a model can be used to identify knowledge gaps that need to be informed to prompt comprehensive management strategies. Future work will involve the inclusion of information on marginal systems (e.g. reefs flourishing in turbid and sedimentary settings), especially in relation to the interaction between bioerosion and sedimentation, and integration of the model with more varied data to add knowledge.