@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evaluating uncertainties of future marine flooding occurrence as sea-level rises

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Future coastal flooding depends on sea-level rise and other uncertain coastal factors.We use a dynamic global sensitivity analysis to assess these sources of uncertainties.We apply the method at a low-lying urban French Mediterranean coastal site.Here, coastal processes are dominant sources of uncertainties for the coming decades.Uncertainties on sea-level rise and climate change scenarios prevail after 2080.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Marine flooding,Sea-level rise,Low-lying coastal areas,Global sensitivity analysis,Uncertainties,Climate change scenarios,Adaptation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
As sea-level rises, the frequency of coastal marine flooding events is changing. For accurate assessments, several other factors must be considered as well, such as the variability of sea-level rise and storm surge patterns. Here, a global sensitivity analysis is used to provide quantitative insight into the relative importance of contributing uncertainties over the coming decades. The method is applied on an urban low-lying coastal site located in the north-western Mediterranean, where the yearly probability of damaging flooding could grow drastically after 2050 if sea-level rise follows IPCC projections. Storm surge propagation processes, then sea-level variability, and, later, global sea-level rise scenarios become successively important source of uncertainties over the 21st century. This defines research priorities that depend on the target period of interest. On the long term, scenarios RCP 6.0 and 8.0 challenge local capacities of adaptation for the considered site.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Among all adverse consequences of sea-level rise, a most immediate should be more frequent marine flooding of low lying coastal areas (Nicholls and Cazenave, 2010). This major change of coastal environmental conditions is possibly already taking place, as extreme water heights have globally risen as much as mean sea-levels (Menéndez and Woodworth, 2010; Woodworth et al., 2011; Weisse et al., 2012). As many coastal zones are already densely populated and urbanised, several studies have attempted to quantify future flood hazards (Fortunato et al., 2013) or risks (Hanson et al., 2011; Hallegatte et al., 2013). These studies have proven useful for demonstrating that future coastal flooding hazards need to be anticipated.However, sea-level impact studies have uncertainties. Part of these originate from global sea-level rise scenarios, their regional variability, and their interactions with solid earth deformation processes (Church et al., 2013a; Nicholls et al., 2014; Slangen et al., 2014). Other are related to oceanographic processes underpinning extreme events and coastal geomorphic changes (Fig. 1; Stockdon et al., 2006; Wong et al., 2014; Cazenave and Le Cozannet, 2014; Bilskie et al., 2014). In addition, local vertical ground motions may aggravate or moderate sea-level changes at the coast (Santamaria-Gomez et al., 2012). While they are often poorly known, slight changes in their evaluation can lead to large modifications in future flood losses assessments (Woppelmann et al., 2013).Several options are available to reduce these uncertainties. For example, accurate information on storm surges or vertical ground motions can be obtained, but at the cost of complex geophysical investigations and oceanographic studies (e.g. Brooks et al., 2007; Muller et al., 2014; Le Roy et al., 2014; Bulteau et al., 2015). Hence, the desire to maximize the social impact of future applied research raises the following questions: what is the relative importance of each source of uncertainty in the final flooding projections? Which sources of uncertainty need to be considered? Conversely, can we neglect the variability of some input parameters without affecting significantly future coastal risk assessments?A method which is especially suitable to answer these questions is the variance-based global sensitivity analysis (Sobol', 2001; Saltelli et al., 2008; Norton, 2015). Given a model with uncertain input parameters, this approach quantitatively assesses the contribution of each uncertain model input on the variability of their output. Contrary to the “One-factor-At-a-Time” (OAT) technique, variance-based global sensitivity analysis (GSA) consider that all uncertain input parameters can vary together (i.e., in a global manner). Hence, GSA allows to identify which sources of uncertainty contribute the most to the output variability and which input parameters are insignificant and can be eliminated (Saltelli and Annoni, 2010). Unlike OAT, GSA explicitly quantifies how interactions between input factors affect the variability of the final results, and no a-priori assumption needs to be done on the structure of the mathematical model of interest (Saltelli, 2004).While variance-based sensitivity analysis is not new, there are surprisingly few applications, whether in the field of future coastal changes (see Chu-Agor et al. (2011) for an application to wetland ecology) or in the wider domain of climate change impacts uncertainty (Saltelli and D'Hombres, 2010; Anderson et al., 2014). Instead, coastal impact studies have rather evaluated the uncertainties by considering a few possible values of the input parameters independently (OAT technique), and often focused on the climate-driven part of uncertainties only. In such cases, only a part of the model outcome variability is considered, and the actual ranking of the relative importance of uncertainties is difficult (Saltelli, 2004; Norton, 2015). Furthermore, few studies incorporate probabilistic sea-level scenarios in impact assessments, which can lead to underestimations of potential impacts (Purvis et al., 2008). Finally, the temporal evolution of sea-level rise is rarely addressed. This raises difficulties as recommended approaches toward adaptation require input information on the temporal dynamics of future changes (e.g., Lempert and Schlesinger, 2000; Hallegatte, 2009).To summarize, there is a need for probabilistic information on future coastal flooding occurrence, using objective and robust measures of the uncertainties importance, and addressing the temporal dimension of expected changes. This paper sets up a model evaluating how the probability of extreme marine flooding evolves over the time under different sea-level rise scenarios. We use the sea-level rise scenarios provided by IPCC (Church et al., 2013b) for different representative concentration pathways (RCP; see Table 1). The model is designed to be easily applicable for a wide range of coastal sites, including those where little is known regarding local coastal processes. The contribution of each source of uncertainty and its evolution over time is evaluated by means of a global sensitivity analysis (section 2). We apply the approach to a local low-lying coastal urban area exposed to storm surge and waves in the north-western Mediterranean and evaluate the relative importance of each source of uncertainty in order to define priorities for future applied research for this site (section 3). Finally, we discuss the usefulness and limitations of our approach for understanding uncertainties on coastal climate change impacts, and examine the implication of our results for adaptation and mitigation of climate change (section 4).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
