@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Non-invasive pressure difference estimation from PC-MRI using the work-energy equation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel semi-automatic method for the estimation of pressure differences in cardiovascular compartments from dense velocity fields (4D flow MRI data).The approach relies on the work-energy principle, and removes the need for second order spatial derivatives.Pressure differences are evaluated directly from the 4D flow data, without the need of any computational mesh.The method shows good accuracy, robustness to noise and robustness to segmentation compared to existing methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
4D flow,PC-MRI,Pressure differences estimation,Work-energy equation,Aortic flow,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractImage, graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Pressure differences, or pressure drops, measured over vascular segments are widely used clinically as biomarkers for a number of cardiovascular disorders (Baumgartner et al., 2009; Sawaya et al., 2012; Vahanian et al., 2007). A well-known example is aortic coarctation (CoA), where the pressure drop is used as a diagnostic metric to risk stratify patients undergoing surgery (Jenkins and Ward, 1999; Oshinski et al., 1997) and to evaluate patients after stenting (Tan et al., 2005). Other examples of pressure based metrics in the clinic include the transvalvular drop – an accepted metric to classify the severity of aortic valve stenosis (Baumgartner et al., 2009; De Bruyne et al., 2006; Feldman, 2006), the Left-Ventricle Outflow Tract (LVOT) pressure drop – used to define the guidelines for the treatment of Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM) (Gersh et al., 2011), and the transstenotic pressure difference in the coronary artery – used to quantify the Fractional Flow Reserve (FFR) (Deng et al., 2014).The measurement of pressure differences in current clinical guidelines is based on catheter measurements (Feldman, 2006; Konecny et al., 2014) or echocardiographic Doppler recordings (Bach, 2010; Firstenberg et al., 2000a; Fyfe et al., 1984; Labovitz et al., 1986; Zhang and Nitter-Hauge, 1985). Pressure catheterization has seen significant improvement in terms of probe sensitivity (de Vecchi et al., 2014; Garcia and Carrozza, 2007; Iwasaki and Kusachi, 2009) and surgical administration, making it the gold standard in pressure drop measurement. However, despite its advantages, application of pressure catheterization is limited to specific cohorts of patients due to its intrinsic invasiveness and associated risks. To broaden the base of patients who could benefit from these assessments, non-invasive evaluation using Doppler echocardiography was developed. Applying this modality, the pressure difference is estimated from the peak velocity magnitude acquired along the direction of an ultrasound beam through a simplified Bernoulli formulation (Hatle et al., 1978; Oshinski et al., 1997). While useful for patient stratification, the accuracy of this approach is limited by operator dependence and the mathematical assumptions which rely on neglecting transient effects and viscous losses on the flow (Holen and Simonsen, 1979; Laske et al., 1996; Zhang and Nitter-Hauge, 1985).Working with the same Doppler Echocardiography data, pressure differences estimation has been improved by the use of Euler equations, as used in the characterisation of diastolic performance (Bermejo et al., 2001; Greenberg et al., 2001; Yotti et al., 2004). This approach benefits from high temporal resolution of the data, but neglects the effects related to advective acceleration out of the line of insonation as well as to viscous dissipation. Doppler acquisitions are also dependent on the ability of the operator to detect the blood flow direction. All these factors have motivated continued research to improve robustness, accuracy and operator independence.Recent advances in Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) and Echocardiography have allowed the acquisition of velocity data in three-dimensional space and time (Deng et al., 2014; Herment et al., 2008; Markl et al., 2010; Nielsen et al., 2005). Ongoing research efforts have produced a number of different techniques to estimate pressure differences using these images. Particularly, Four Dimensional Phase-Contrast MRI (4D PC-MRI) data enables the solution of the Poisson Pressure Equation (PPE), where pressure is derived explicitly as a function of the acquired velocity field (Bock et al., 2011; Krittian et al., 2012), allowing the estimation of the convective effects in all spatial directions and the contribution of viscous dissipation (Lamata et al., 2014). This approach has been successfully applied for the estimation of the pressure in aortic coarctation (Riesenkampff et al., 2014). Building on these data-driven methods, reconstruction of the velocity field at the vascular walls (Donati et al., 2014) has been proposed to recover the viscous effects, and data-assimilation techniques attempted to overcome the limitations of data acquisition with physically-based simulations (de Hoon et al., 2014).An alternative approach to estimate pressure differences in the vascular anatomy is based on 3D Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) simulations (Kim et al., 2010; LaDisa et al., 2011; Sankaran, 2012; Vignon-Clementel et al., 2010). In this case, patient specific geometric models are reconstructed from images such as computed tomography angiography and velocity boundary conditions are defined from flow measurements. Consequently, pressure and velocity are simulated over the cardiovascular model (Coogan et al., 2013; Xiao et al., 2014), providing detailed metrics of flow, pressure differences, wall shear stress, amongst others. While providing these detailed metrics, forward cardiovascular modeling based on CFD requires robust multi-scale approaches for boundary conditions (Formaggia et al., 2002; Gresho and Sani, 1987; Vignon-Clementel et al., 2006), accurate anatomical definition and the solution of expensive, parallel simulations in a computer cluster.In this work, we present a novel non-invasive semi-automatic method for the estimation of pressure differences based on the work-energy theorem. The formulation introduced benefits from simplicity and computational efficiency, requiring integrations and computations that can be executed directly from the image acquired using 4D PC-MRI or Echocardiography. Introducing the mathematics behind the method, we detail its application for cardiovascular flow data. We test the method on a series of in silico test cases with progressively increasing complexity, evaluating robustness to segmentation variability and noise. Subsequently, the proposed method is thoroughly compared with other available methods on an in silico CFD solution. Finally, the satisfactory performance of the method is demonstrated on 4D PC-MRI acquisitions on a cohort of 9 healthy patients, by comparing estimated aortic pressure differences to previously reported results obtained with a PPE-based approach (Lamata et al., 2014). We conclude by highlighting the benefits of the new approach and proposing possible improvements for translation of this technique into the clinic.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In conclusion, this work demonstrates the potential applicability of the newly proposed approach to accurately estimate relative pressures from 4D PC-MRI data non-invasively, within clinically feasible times. Thorough validation and testing on progressively more complex cases showed increased robustness of the formulation compared to other pressure gradients estimation methods.