@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automatic generation of water distribution systems based on GIS data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A method for automatic generation of water distribution systems is presented.For comparison and validation of the approach a real system is used.Water distribution systems can be created with different degree of meshing.Network characteristics, pipe lengths and costs are comparable to the real system.Hydraulic performance is for 75% of the supply area the same as in the real system.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Algorithmic network generation,GIS-data,Hydraulic simulation,Water distribution system,Modular design system,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In the field of water distribution system (WDS) analysis, case study research is needed for testing or benchmarking optimisation strategies and newly developed software. However, data availability for the investigation of real cases is limited due to time and cost needed for data collection and model setup. We present a new algorithm that addresses this problem by generating WDSs from GIS using population density, housing density and elevation as input data. We show that the resulting WDSs are comparable to actual systems in terms of network properties and hydraulic performance. For example, comparing the pressure heads for an actual and a generated WDS results in pressure head differences of ±4 m or less for 75% of the supply area. Although elements like valves and pumps are not included, the new methodology can provide water distribution systems of varying levels of complexity (e.g., network layouts, connectivity, etc.) to allow testing design/optimisation algorithms on a large number of networks. The new approach can be used to estimate the construction costs of planned WDSs aimed at addressing population growth or at comparisons of different expansion strategies in growth corridors.WDS Designer (Water Distribution System Designer)Robert Sitzenfrei, Unit of Environmental Engineering, University of Innsbruck, Technikerstr. 13, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria. Tel: ++43 (512) 507-6695; Fax: ++43 (512) 507-29112010MCRInstaller.exe, version 7.13 or Matlab (R2010a) Version 7.10.0.499Matlab∼16 MBContact the authors to obtain this software and user manualFree

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the field of water distribution system (WDS) analysis, case study research is a well-known instrument for testing or benchmarking optimisation strategies, evaluating newly developed technologies, proving hypotheses, testing new software and analysing uncertainties in models. With a limited number of case studies for evaluations, investigations are case specific and it is difficult to transfer the obtained results to other boundary conditions. In addition, very differing case studies make it difficult to identify driving factors. However, data availability for real case research is limited due to the time and cost of data collection. In addition, the data on WDSs that are available are often incomplete or of insufficient quality. Fear of terrorist attacks has led to restricted access to sensitive WDS data (Brumbelow et al., 2007). However, such data are crucial for research tasks. Past studies on optimisation problems (di Pierro et al., 2009; Ostfeld and Tubaltzev, 2008; Behzadian et al., 2009; Giustolisi and Savic, 2010; Savić et al., 2011), water quality analyses or assessments (Rodriguez and Serodes, 1999; May et al., 2008; Tamminen et al., 2008; Wu et al., 2009a), performance analysis (Ramos et al., 2009) and demand forecasting (Alvisi et al., 2007; Zhou et al., 2002) had to use one or at most a few WDS case studies as application examples. To make e.g. optimisation studies comparable and also to tackle the limited data availability, benchmark models have been introduced in the literature, including the Two Loop System (Alperovits and Shamir, 1977; Todini, 2000; Kalungi and Tanyimboh, 2003), New York City Tunnels (Schaake and Lai, 1969; Olsson et al., 2009), the Hanoi network (Fujiwara and Khang, 1990; Savic and Walters, 1997; Dandy et al., 1996) and the “Anytown” network (Walski et al., 1987; Walters et al., 1999). For incomplete data sets, Wang (2008) presented a Bayesian method for multi-site stochastic data generation. To tackle the problem of data availability, Brumbelow et al. (2007) presented two single virtual cities, denoted Micropolis and Mesopolis, that are fully described both in GIS and as an Epanet2 model (Rossman, 2000) for further analysis (e.g., Torres et al., 2009). However, the manual process for creating such a virtual case study is tedious, and investigations are very case specific.In Möderl et al. (2011) a set of 2280 virtual water distribution systems (vWDSs) were generated by means of a stochastic approach. The set is based on variations in the layout and size of the vWDS. For this set, a constant elevation for all vWDS junctions is assumed, and the elevation of the reservoirs is kept constant. The demand per junction is determined by a stochastic variation. The layout characteristics of each virtual system are determined by the generation process (variation of size and expansion) and do not meet any boundary conditions or GIS data requirements. Hence, the generated vWDSs are conceptual and not fully comparable with real world WDSs. However, analyses using that set of vWDSs are based on a large set of different case studies thus providing general applicable findings instead of case specific and difficult to generalize results (Möderl et al., 2011).The objective of this work is to generate WDSs benchmark configurations based on given GIS data in order to test different design approaches, such as based on the use of optimisation algorithms. The generation process of the WDSs is carried out using a newly developed graph concatenation approach (GCA) that is introduced in this paper. With the GCA, default blocks representing reoccurring network WDS motifs are selected and combined to form an entire WDS (network layout). The blocks are chosen to meet the requirements of given GIS data (housing and population densities) and follow a layout design strategy. Compared to existing approaches such as that presented in Möderl et al. (2011), more variations in the generation process can be performed. For example, the level of connectivity in the system can be varied from completely looped to branched but with user-defined intermediate levels. In addition, the number of sources, the pipe-sizing procedure, and other factors can easily be varied. Although elements like valves and pumps are neglected, the generated vWDSs can form the basis for further comprehensive investigations (e.g., Möderl et al., 2010; Hellbach et al., 2011). The method is applied to the GIS data from the real-world case study of Wolf-Codera Ranch (WCR), and the generated WDS data are compared with the real WDS data from the WCR.In this section, the GCA methodology developed for WDS generation is described. The approach is implemented in a standalone Matlab tool with a graphical user interface (GUI), denoted WDS Designer. The WDS Designer GUI is presented in Sitzenfrei et al. (2010). The results of the WDS generation process are discussed and compared with data from a real-world WDS (Fig. 1).The key method of generating the layout of WDSs in this paper is the newly developed graph concatenation approach (GCA). Within the GCA, the modular design system (MDS, Möderl et al., 2011) is used for graph theory-based data administration and provides an interface to the hydraulic solver Epanet2 (Rossman, 2000). The choice to use Epanet2 is made for convenience because it is a widely applied software tool. Any other solver (including pressure-driven solvers such as those as used by, e.g., Todini, 2003; Wu et al., 2009b; Giustolisi and Laucelli, 2011) could be applied in the GCA as well without changing either the method or the results (the implemented diameter design and performance assessment are performed under standard conditions). The innovative approach concatenates different blocks from a database while meeting the requirements of the underlying GIS data and following layout and reservoir design processes. For diameter design, an auto design algorithm for large systems that is based on economic flow velocity and the consideration of either future demands (Alvisi et al., 2007) or peak demands (Diao et al., 2010) is used. All of the parameters for these design strategies are determined by input parameters through the GUI of the WDS Designer. The parameters for the cost estimations that enable cost design, performance evaluation (e.g., sufficient supply pressure, water age and overall performance) and graph properties of the WDS can be defined via the GUI, and the results can be visualised. In addition, the GUI allows the import of Epanet2 case study data and the export of generated or redesigned networks to Epanet2.The generated WDSs are described using the graph theory-based MDS (Modular design system) approach presented in Möderl et al. (2011). Following the idea of describing complex networks with “network motifs” (Milo et al., 2002), the MDS can be used to describe and administrate entire network structures (e.g., energy supply networks, district heating networks or water distribution networks) by means of graph theory. For MDS, the demand junctions are points on a grid, and the number of connected pipes to the junctions are binary coded (Möderl et al., 2011). Hence, all of the pipes and junctions are represented by an explicit MDS graph matrix. In the MDS approach, an assumption is made that a maximum of four pipes can be connected to any single junction. For the application for WDSs presented in this work that assumption is appropriate (see Fig. 5, maximum 4 connections to a single junction). The coordinates of the junctions in the MDS can be freely defined (e.g., distances between the junctions or angles between the pipes). In this study, a quadratic arrangement of the grid points is used. Therefore, the four connections to a single junction are oriented in the four cardinal directions. By summing the binary values for the existing connections, the elements in the MDS graph matrix as shown in Fig. 2range from 0 to 15 (no connections: 0 = 0·20 (east) + 0·21 (north) + 0·22 (west) + 0·23 (south); four connections: 15 = 1·20 + 1·21 + 1·22 + 1·23). All system attributes, such as demand per junction, elevation of each junction, pipe diameters, and pipe roughness, are organised within the MDS. The MDS provides an interface with the chosen hydraulic solver by writing text based input files. In this study, the well-known and freely available hydraulic solver Epanet2 is used because the hydraulic evaluations for the WDSs are performed under standard conditions (i.e., no source failures, pipe breakages, etc.). Other conditions might require the use of more advanced solution routines, which would not pose a problem because any other hydraulic solver that is either based on text files as input or available as an open source can be easily used with this method.With the GCA subsets of the water network, designated blocks can be concatenated from a database to form an entire WDS. The blocks in the database as well as the entire WDS are represented by graph matrices using the MDS. The implemented default blocks are based on a 5 × 5 grid raster and therefore a 5 × 5 graph matrix. Hence, a default block consists of a maximum of 25 junctions (see Fig. 2).For the generated WDS, the decision of a 5 × 5 grid raster was made on the one hand to have small, generic network motifs and on the other hand in order to have a manifold database of network motifs. The default blocks have differing connectivities (see Fig. 3), i.e., number of dead end branches, differing layout structures, numbers of junctions in a block or numbers of redundant connections. The GCA presented here uses four sets of default blocks. These sets are denoted as O, L, H and U according to the appearance of their basic structure (see Fig. 3). The O set consists of blocks representing network motifs of looped network structures (high connectivity), while the L, H and U blocks represent blocks of branched network structures (low connectivity) (see Fig. 3). Using the MDS for data administration, the user can also design new blocks and add them to the GCA.Because each element of the raster has its own interdependent coordinates, these blocks can be freely defined; all of the blocks can be scaled, warped and concatenated to bigger blocks through matrix concatenation. In this study, the GCA uses data that are rasterised to a cell size corresponding to the size of the default blocks. Depending on the level of detail of the obtained network, the cell size has to be chosen. For this study, Fig. 7 shows how the cell size of 300 m was determined. If no data is available, a cell size of 300 m is recommended.The required GIS data (raster data) for population density, water demand and housing density are therefore reclassified according to the block raster (i = 1…N raster cells with a housing density above 0). The housing density in this context describes the dwelling unit density, which can be determined based on dwelling sizes and floor space required per capita. Based on that, the number of junctions per block area is determined.In the following section, the GCA flowchart is described and illustrated using an example for one cell (see Fig. 4). The input data for the GCA include both the GIS raster data and other input parameters such as the connectivity parameter FLayout that specifies which block sets of the database can be used in the GCA. Based on the housing density for each raster cell H(i) (for all cells i = 1…N) the GCA then determines which blocks meet the requirements of the GIS data and defined parameters (FLayout = 100% specifies that the branched sets (L, H, U set) be used). For example, a current housing density of H(i) = 11 requires 11 junctions in a block. In the database, there is a set of appropriate blocks {K} that meet these requirements. From among the appropriate blocks {K}, one block k ∈ {K} is randomly selected. A random rotation angle α ∈ {0°, 90°, 180°, 270°} is applied to the block k, which results in block krot. Block krot is placed at position x,y by concatenating the graph matrix of block krot to the graph matrix of the entire WDS. Through the algorithmic application of this procedure to each cell and considering the variation of the selection process, an entire WDS can be composed. The water demand for each junction is distributed according to the population densities P(i) within the cells, and the elevation is determined by projecting the junctions on digital elevation map E. Finally, water sources are needed for the WDS. Reservoirs can be added to the WDS following a reservoir design (see Section 3.2.2).After the network layout is set, the system, and in particular the pipe diameters, must be designed based on the maximum demand. The generated WDS can be extensive, with several thousand nodes and pipes. For the optimisation of the WDS in terms of hydraulic performance, pipe diameters, pumping costs or CO2-emissions, among other factors, various algorithms and approaches are available (Ostfeld and Tubaltzev, 2008; Maier et al., 2003; di Pierro et al., 2009; Gupta et al., 1999; Wu et al., 2010). The aim of the automatic pipe sizing algorithm used in this effort is not to obtain an optimised WDS but to design a WDS following state-of-the-art design rules in minimal computation time. Therefore, a single objective approach is implemented in this study and it is assumed that the diameter design is totally free (no limitations were e.g. large diameters are installed). Nevertheless, the generated WDS can be used to investigate the performance of optimisation algorithms via the evaluation of different generated WDSs with various layout characteristics.For the diameter design used in this work, the available pipe diameters and corresponding economic flow velocities can be user-defined and input via the GUI of the WDS Designer. The by default implemented diameters and economic flow velocities are shown in Table 1. The implemented approach is based on an iterative calculation of flow velocities with Epanet2. Starting with the smallest available pipe diameter for all of the pipes (e.g. 80 mm), the flow velocities are determined using the Epanet2 hydraulic solver (first iteration). If the calculated flow velocity in a pipe exceeds the corresponding economic flow velocity for the current diameter, before the next iteration that diameter is incrementally increased to the next available diameter (see Table 1, e.g. from 80 mm to 100 mm). After incrementally increasing all of the pipe diameters with uneconomic flow velocities, a hydraulic recalculation (next iteration) is performed. This procedure is repeated until either the computed velocity in each pipe is below the economic flow velocity or the highest available pipe diameter is obtained. Therefore, for the 11 available diameters according to Table 1 first line, maximum 11 iterations are performed. By defining customised pipe construction costs for each pipe diameter or using the already implemented default values, a rough estimation of construction costs of the generated WDS is obtained.To estimate the hydraulic performance and water quality of the investigated real and generated WDSs, performance indicators for sufficient hydraulic pressure and water age (i.e., residence time) based on Möderl et al. (2011) are used. The performance indicator for sufficient hydraulic pressure (PI1) is determined byPI1=∑j=1JQdel,j(p)∑j=1JQreq,jQdel(p):p∈(a,b);In this equation, the sum of water Qdel(p) that is delivered with sufficient pressure over all J junctions is divided by the sum of the required amount of water Qreq. The limits a and b for PI1 are the lower and upper hydraulic pressure heads, respectively. Varying values for pressure limits can be obtained from the literature and from national guidelines. Trifunovic (2006) reports minimum pressure limits for several cities ranging between 20 and 40 m per water column. Chung et al. (2009) report that 14 m is a sufficient water pressure. The maximum pressure limits may also vary. For example, for WDSs with high water losses and a high risk of pipe breakages, a low maximum pressure limit may be applied. On the other hand, for an alpine case study with large topographic height differences, maximum pressure limits up to 100 m and more are used (Möderl et al., 2012). Therefore, the pressure limits for evaluation are kept variable and can be defined by the user. By default, a lower pressure limit of a = 40 m and an upper pressure limit of b = 100 m are used. The sufficient water age can be determined by the equation for PI2:PI2=∑j=1JQdel,j(Age)∑j=1JQreq,jQdel(Age):Age∈(c,d)In this equation, the sum of water Qdel(Age) that is delivered with a sufficiently low water age over all J junctions is divided by the sum of the required amount of water Qreq. The lower limit for the PI2 (default c = 0 h) and the upper limit d are variable. The US-EPA investigated more than 800 water supply utilities, resulting in average residence times of 1.3–3 days (US-EPA, 2002). The default value for the upper limit of the water age is thus assumed to be d = 24 h, but it can also be defined differently by the user. PI3 is the product of PI1 and PI2, which represents a combined performance indicator:PI3=∑j=1JQdel,j(p)·Qdel(Age)∑j=1JQreq,jQdel(p):p∈(a,b);Qdel(Age):Age∈(c,d)These performance indicators can be applied to real-world WDSs and generated WDSs, taking into account all nodes and pipes. Therefore, with these performance indicators, very different systems can be compared using these normalised single values PI1, PI2 and PI3.To demonstrate the applicability of the GCA, a real-world case study consisting of an Epanet2 model of a WDS and GIS data is used. The GCA can be applied to any appropriate GIS data. In this paper, one case study data is used as input. The GIS data are derived from the Epanet2 model of the Wolf-Codera Ranch (WCR) (Lippai, 2005). The WCR is a region of expected future developments of the Colorado Springs utilities.The given Epanet2 model provides data regarding the elevation and water demand for each junction in the WDS. From the water demand of the Epanet2 model, GIS data for population density as well as housing density can be estimated by evaluating the number of WDS junctions in a cell. The WCR model contains approximately 2000 pipes and 1800 junctions. The extension of the supply area is approximately 10 km2 with an estimated average demand of 160 l/s. Nearly 90% of the pipes are DN200 (diameter 200 mm or 8 inch) or lower because of the utility's standards that require minimum diameters for distribution lines (DN200) and DN150 (diameters 150 mm or 6 inch) for dead ends (Lippai, 2005). A maximum DN600 (diameter 600 mm or 24 inch) is used in the planned WDS.In Fig. 6, the digital elevation model of the WCR model is shown. The ground elevation of the service area is between 2.100 m and 2230 m. The elevation is only available at the junctions. Between the junctions, the grid is interpolated (Delaunay Triangulation, de Berg et al., 1997), and the grid is extrapolated to defined boundary points. The junctions of the water distribution system are plotted according to their elevation, as shown in Fig. 6.In the WCR model, 36% of the nodes are without demand or connecting tasks (Sitzenfrei, 2010). Over 90% of these dead end pipes have lengths less than 10 m. Following the principles of skeletonisation (Walski et al., 2003), these dead ends without demand are removed for the analysis in this work. Therefore, 1150 junctions and approximately 1350 pipes remain in the system; these are further used to determine the appropriate cell size. In the block database, blocks that contain from 3 to 25 junctions in a cell are available (see Fig. 3 and blue area in Fig. 7). The ways in which different cell sizes for rasterising housing density result in different distributions of required blocks are investigated. Cell sizes ranging from 50 m up to 500 m (in 50 m steps) are investigated. In Fig. 7, each cumulative distribution function (CDF) represents one cell size and specifies the distribution of the required blocks in the demand area for that specific cell size. With a cell size of 300 m (black CDF in Figure 7), 89% of the junction densities can be represented with available blocks (black line within blue area). Larger cell sizes (CDFs to the right of the black line) result in more than 25 junctions in a cell. Smaller cell sizes (CDFs to the left of the black line) mean that some of the available blocks are not used, which also results in short pipe lengths (see Fig. 11). For a cell size of 300 m, the cells that are not within the range of the database are those that require one or two junctions. It is assumed that these cells can be approximated with blocks with 3 or 4 junctions.Therefore, in this work, the housing density is reclassified to a cell size of 300 m to obtain the highest range of junction densities that are covered with the block database and to approximate the pipe length distribution in the WCR model (see also Fig. 11). A detailed description of how the optimal cell size is determined can be obtained in Sitzenfrei (2010).With the presented methodology, WDSs with different characteristics can be generated that, for example, have differing pipe sizing specifications. To ensure that the generated WDS and the WCR have similar layouts, a wolf mode is implemented in the approach. By applying this mode, the positions of the reservoirs, the available pipe diameters and the economic flow velocities for the pipe-sizing process are kept the same as those in the WCR or are set in such a way that similar characteristics can be obtained (see Section 3.3).The presented GCA approach is implemented in WDS Designer. This tool is programmed using the Matlab environment and is operated by a GUI. It uses the open source software Epanet2 (Rossman, 2000) to run the hydraulic simulations for pipe diameter design and performance evaluation. The GUI functions as an operator's panel and allows visualisation of the network structure, parameter selection for the WDS generation process, and graph and pipe diameter distribution evaluation. All of the parameters in the following sections can be set via the GUI. Both the GUI and the kernel are compiled using standalone application for Windows. This standalone application requires either Matlab 2010a or higher or MCRInstaller.exe, version 7.13. The MCRInstaller.exe is freely available on request for users of WDS Designer.The parameters for layout design control the WDS generation process. The generated WDSs are based on the MDS quadratic grid. To vary this constant grid, a stochastic deviation of the position can be applied at each grid point. The maximum deviation can be defined by the random grid amplitude (r) as a percentage of the grid size. The value for the random grid amplitude can be specified via the GUI of the WDS Designer.The connectivity is determined by the factor FLayout, which can be set via the GUI. The probability of selecting a loop or branched block for the generation process is thereby defined. Setting FLayout = 0% results in the use of only O-Set blocks, which generate completely looped water distribution systems (high connectivity). If FLayout = 100%, only L, U or H set blocks are applied, which results in a branched water distribution system. By default, the branched set consists of the L, U and H blocks (low connectivity). A new user-defined block set can also be designed by writing the graph matrix in a text file. These user-defined sets can be added into the GUI and further selected in the generation process. Furthermore, the branched set or the looped set can be modified. For example, a branch system can be specified to use only L blocks.The reservoir parameter determines the number of reservoirs set in the generation process. The reservoirs are placed on either specified or random positions within the area of the WDS. To use random positions may result in poor hydraulic performance (Möderl et al., 2010). Therefore, it is recommended to use specified positions. At least one reservoir must be placed, and at most 10 reservoirs can be set in the generation process (the number 10 results from the implemented numerical routines only). The reservoir height parameter defines the elevation above the surface at the current position.In Fig. 8, on the right side, the positions of the reservoirs denoted as A, B1 and C in the WCR model are marked with red circles. In the WCR, there is no reservoir at B2, but there is connection with B1 via a pipe with a diameter of 600 mm. This connection cannot be included in the GCA. The Epanet2 model for the Wolf-Codera Ranch determines the system inflows at points B1 and B2 under standard conditions. This means that two reservoirs, B1 and B2, are used in the generated WDS instead of the single reservoir, B1, in the WCR. Furthermore, the hydraulic simulation of the WCR model reveals that reservoir C does not contribute to the water supply under standard conditions. Therefore, for the generated WDS, reservoir C is disregarded because hydraulic analyses are only performed under standard conditions in this study. If the wolf mode is activated, the heights and positions of the sources of the real-world data are used, but in the simplified manner described above (Fig. 8).With the diameter design properties, the parameters for the auto pipe-sizing algorithm (available pipe diameters (see Section 3.3.1), demand multiplier and economic flow velocity) are defined. The aim of the auto pipe-sizing process is to maintain the defined economic flow velocities within the WDS.Pipe diameters that are applicable in the auto pipe-sizing process are selected from an input data set denoted as the pipe vector. By default, pipe vector one (PV1, see Table 1) is used. Optionally, the diameters used in the real world data can be selected with pipe vector two (PV2, see Table 1). Additional user-defined pipe vectors with corresponding design velocities can be specified via the GUI.With the demand multiplier (−)prospective future demand (Zhou et al., 2002; Alvisi et al., 2007; Ghiassi et al., 2008) as well as demand peaks (Diao et al., 2010) can be considered in the auto pipe-sizing process. The actual demand is therefore multiplied by a factor, usually in a range from 0.5 to 4(−). By default, the demand multiplier is set to 1.5(−) according to Trifunovic (2006).With the economic flow velocity (m/s), the maximum tolerable velocity for the auto pipe-sizing process is defined. The value range is defined from 0.5 m/s to 3.0 m/s.The upper limit of 3.0 m/s is set to avoid water hammer problems (Walski et al., 2003). The defined constant flow velocity is considered for every pipe diameter. By default, the design velocity is set to 1.0 m/s for all diameters (Trifunovic, 2006). With the dim+ mode provided by the GUI, the values for the velocities for different diameters are set according to Gujer (2002). If the dim+ mode is activated for the auto pipe-sizing process, PV1 is selected with varying velocities for the diameters according to Table 1 (PV1 and dim+ mode). The wolf mode provided by the GUI follows a strategy of generating a WDS with a similar diameter distribution as the WCR model. If the wolf mode in the auto design section is activated, PV2 is selected because only these parameters appear in the real world WDS of the WCR. The economic flow velocities for the diameters are set, as shown in Table 1 (PV2 and wolf mode). The values for the pipe velocities are derived from a calibration of the auto pipe-sizing algorithm to attain a comparable diameter distribution for the real world diameter data and the redesigned diameter data (see Fig. 11 right hand side).The cost design (total construction cost only – no cost of operation) is based on the assumption of costs per metre. The investment costs for pipes are estimated to represent 70% of the total construction costs. Table 1 shows the costs according to Mutschmann and Stimmelmayr (1999) multiplied by the factor 1/0.7. Optionally, a user-defined pipe vector with corresponding economic flow velocities and specific costs can be defined via the GUI. The estimation of costs in connection with the hydraulic performance allows for the economic design of WDSs.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
