@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new approach to design source–receptor relationships for air quality modelling

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel approach to design source–receptor relationships for air quality is proposed.It needs a small number of simulations to be implemented.It also brings flexibility in terms of application in Integrated Assessment Models.A case study on a regional domain is presented.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Air quality modeling,Integrated assessment modeling,Surrogate models,Source–receptor relationships,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Air quality models are often used to simulate how emission scenarios influence the concentration of primary as well as secondary pollutants in the atmosphere. In some cases, it is necessary to replace these air quality models with source–receptor relationships, to mimic in a faster way the link between emissions and concentrations. Source–receptor relationships are therefore also used in Integrated Assessment Models, when scenario responses need to be known in very short time. The objective of this work is to present a novel approach to design a source–receptor relationship for air quality modeling. Overall the proposed approach is shown to significantly reduce the number of simulations required for the training step and to bring flexibility in terms of emission source definition. A regional domain application is also presented, to test the performances of the proposed approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Air quality models are complex tools which include detailed representations of the transport, diffusion and chemical processes taking place in the atmosphere. These models work at various horizontal and vertical resolutions and account for the non-linear interactions in each of the processes previously mentioned.One of the main advantages of AQ models is the possibility to assess the impact of emission changes on concentration levels. The easiest approach is to modify the emissions accordingly, run the model and check the resulting concentrations. This is generally referred to as using a model in “scenario mode”. One of the consequences of the high complexity of AQ models is their associated CPU time implying that AQ models can only be run for a limited set of scenarios due to this important constraint. If the number of required scenarios becomes prohibitive, one way out is to design source–receptor relationships (or models), which is a simplified modeling approach that will mimic the full air quality model behavior. Air quality integrated assessment models use this approach when scenario responses need to be known in very short time within an optimization process. In this case a simplified model is constructed to link the emission changes to the concentration changes. The same type of simplified model is also very useful in scenario mode when a user wishes to assess the impact of several possible emission reductions on concentrations without requiring the long computation times that come with running the full AQ model.Many examples of this approach do exist in literature. Seibert and Frank (2004) developed linear-source receptor relationships to compute the transport of atmospheric traces substances with a Lagrangian particle dispersion model. Simpson et al. (1997) and Tarrason et al. (2004) used the Eulerian EMEP model as basis to compute country-to-country source–receptor relationships over a European domain, considering a multi-annual time-frame. At the national scale, Vedrenne et al. (2014) used a similar approach over Spain with the Atmospheric Evaluation and Research Integrated model for Spain (AERIS). This model allows for assessing the impact of sectorial emission reductions on air quality. All the above mentioned techniques however rely on a large number of computer simulations to identify the source–receptor models.Alternative approaches also exist to assess the impacts of emission scenarios on air quality. The decoupled-direct method (DDM) (Dunker, 1981, Dunker et al., 2002) or its adjoint sensitivity complementary method (Sandhu et al., 2005; Hakami et al., 2006) provide sensitivity coefficients based on an initial set of nonlinear, partial differential equations. These sensitivity coefficients can then be used to describe how emissions impact air pollution concentrations. The source-oriented external mixture (SOEM) method (Ying and Kleeman, 2006) or the Particulate Source Apportionment Technology (PSAT) method (Wagstrom et al., 2008) use a source-oriented Eulerian air quality model and monitor the formation of PM2.5 nitrate, sulfate and ammonium ion from primary particles and precursor gases emitted from different sources. However these techniques usually require an a-priori definition of the sources and receptors to be tracked with a requested computer time quickly increasing with the number of these tracked sources/receptors. In this work we will only focus on the formulation of source–receptor relationships on the basis of an Eulerian air quality model.Given the scope of the source–receptor (SR) model (e.g. focus on yearly averaged model responses), an experiment is designed and assumptions are made to construct the SR model. This experiment consists in the following steps: (1) running several times the full AQ model under selected conditions (training), (2) designing the SR model to mimic at best the source-receptor relations of the full AQ model and (3) validate the SR model on a series of independent simulations. All three steps need to be designed to make sure the SR model becomes a good representation of the full air quality model for the desired scope and that the assumptions made during the derivation are robust.The objective of this work is to present a novel approach to design a source–receptor model for air quality modeling. The main advantages of the proposed approach lie in the reduced number of simulations required for the training step as well as in the flexibility it brings in terms of source definition. In a first section, we will introduce the overall problem of source–receptor relationships. We then detail possible approaches to simplify the problem both in terms of sources and receptors. In a second section an application on a regional domain is presented, where different configurations are tested.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
