@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Measuring and modelling CO2 effects on sugarcane

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Novel glasshouse method separates direct and indirect effects of CO2 on crop growth.Novel modelling technique scales CO2 effects from glasshouse to field environments.Reduced transpiration under elevated CO2 accounts for sugarcane responses.Direct effects of elevated CO2 on sugarcane photosynthesis, if any, are small.Effect of CO2 on transpiration of field crops declines as canopy develops.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sugarcane,CO2,Transpiration,Glasshouse,Adaptation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In order to fully capture the benefits of rising CO2 in adapting agriculture to climate change, we first need to understand how CO2 affects crop growth. Several recent studies reported unexpected increases in sugarcane (C4) yields under elevated CO2, but it is difficult to distinguish direct leaf-level effects of rising CO2 on photosynthesis from indirect water-related responses. A simulation model of CO2 effects, based purely on changes in stomatal conductance (indirect mechanism), showed transpiration was reduced by 30% (initially) to 10% (closed canopy) and yield increased by 3% even in a well-irrigated crop. The model incorporated the results of a field experiment, and a glasshouse experiment designed to disentangle the mechanisms of CO2 response: whole-plant transpiration and stomatal conductance were both 28% lower for plants growing with high-frequency demand-based watering at 720 vs 390 ppm CO2, but there was no increase in biomass, indicating that indirect mechanisms dominate CO2 responses in sugarcane.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Some of the most important sources of human and animal food are derived from a small number of the world's plant species that possess the CO2 concentration mechanism that involve four carbon compounds. These C4 species include maize, sorghum and sugarcane. Photosynthesis occurs in two types of tissue in C4 plants, the mesophyll and the bundle sheath while only the mesophyll is involved in the case of C3 plants (Matsuoka et al., 2001). This allows C4 plants to reach maximum photosynthesis rates at current levels of ambient CO2 (Ghannoum et al., 2000). Reported responses to elevated CO2 concentrations of increased photosynthesis and consequent biomass accumulation in well watered C4 plants (e.g., de Souza et al., 2008), have therefore been difficult to explain. In order to accurately model the impacts of climate change on crops and to fully capture the benefits of rising CO2 in adapting agriculture to climate change, it is first necessary that we properly understand the processes by which CO2 affects crop growth.Even in well watered C4 plants, elevated CO2 and consequently reduced stomatal conductance can lead to enhanced leaf growth and photosynthesis through mitigating the effects of transient water stress (Seneweera et al., 1998). In an open top chamber experiment where sugarcane was exposed to twice normal CO2, stomatal conductance was reduced by 37% and transpiration reduced by 32% while photosynthesis and biomass yield increased by 30% and 40% respectively (de Souza et al., 2008). de Souza et al. (2008) also found difficulty in explaining this result and suggested that even though plants were irrigated when soil water was at a low tension of 20 kPa, plants in normal CO2 must have experienced transient water stress that was alleviated in the treatments under elevated CO2. One would need to provide a different water regime for plants growing in high levels of CO2 for them to experience the same degree of water stress to plants growing in normal CO2 levels. Vu and Allen (2009) reported a similar reduction in conductance (34%) and a smaller reduction in transpiration (25%) when well watered sugarcane plants were provided with ‘twice normal’ CO2 (720 ppm) in glasshouse experiments. Ghannoum et al. (2000) listed reports which indicate that assimilation (A) and biomass accumulation in well watered C4 plants both increase under elevated CO2 and other reports where A responded but not growth and yet others where growth responded but not A. These conflicting results probably reflect the difficulty of inferring growth responses from short-term measurements of A using small segments of young leaves (Ghannoum et al., 2000), as was the case in the studies by de Souza et al. (2008) and Vu and Allen (2009). Ghannoum et al. (2000) argued that indirect effects are dominant in the response of C4 plants to elevated CO2. Ghannoum et al. (2003) provided further evidence that even under water stress, elevated CO2 does not directly enhance A, and any enhancement of A is most likely due to non-stomatal means. To date little work has been conducted on the effects of CO2 on sugarcane and the contrasting reports among the work that has been done (de Souza et al., 2008; Vu and Allen, 2009) suggest that further investigation on the nature and mechanisms of these responses is warranted.Tubiello et al. (2007) reviewed the literature on crop CO2 experiments and concluded there was broad agreement between different techniques (across enclosed, semi-enclosed and unenclosed environments) for estimates of the impact of elevated CO2 on yield, once differences in CO2 treatment levels were taken into account. They also found that the results from most crop model simulations were consistent with the results from field-based CO2 experiments.Two sugarcane modelling platforms are available internationally for sugarcane, Canegro in the DSSAT platform (Inman-Bamber et al., 1993; Kiker et al., 2002; Singels et al., 2008) and the ‘Sugar’ module in the APSIM platform (Keating et al., 1999; Holzworth et al., 2014). In previous applications of these models to climate change, approaches to representing CO2 effects on sugarcane have varied (Park et al., 2007; Webster et al., 2009; Marin et al., 2013; Knox et al., 2010; Biggs et al., 2013; Singels et al., 2014; Marin et al., 2015). Webster et al. (2009) assumed that intrinsic transpiration efficiency (TE) as defined by Sinclair, 2012 and Keating et al. (1999) would increase by 8% for every 100 ppm increase in CO2 when estimating sugarcane yields for future climates in Australia, using the APSIM-Sugar model. This increase in TE is less than was assumed for wheat (10.6%) by Asseng et al. (2004) who used the APSIM module for wheat. However the response for wheat included benefits to TE from increased internal CO2 as external CO2 levels rise (Asseng et al., 2004) which may not be the case for sugarcane and other C4 plants. Webster et al. (2009) also assumed that radiation use efficiency (RUE) would increase by 1.43% for every 100 ppm increase in CO2 concentration. The assumptions about TE and RUE for sugarcane came from an internal report by Park et al. (2007). Biggs et al. (2013) used the same model and assumptions to predict yield and off-site impacts in future climates, for one sugarcane region. TE responses to twice normal CO2 measured in small cuvettes, supported the Webster et al. (2009) assumption about TE in one case (Vu and Allen, 2009) but not in another where TE increased 62% in twice normal CO2 (de Souza et al., 2008). The modest increase in RUE assumed by Webster et al. (2009) would not account for the 40% increase in biomass for well watered plants in twice normal CO2 (de Souza et al., 2008). None of these modelling studies appeared to use experimental evidence for assumptions about the effects of CO2 on sugarcane yield building processes.Controlled environment experiments allow the fine level of manipulative control required to separate proximate leaf-level CO2 responses from those mediated by whole-plant-soil hydrological feedbacks. We describe an experimental approach that is well suited to testing and measuring the mechanisms that should be represented in crop models. We also describe a field experiment used to measure transpiration and provide a baseline for crop simulations under current CO2 levels. We then developed a model (from existing ones) that could make use of the results obtained in the glasshouse to predict what will happen in a field of sugarcane subjected to elevated CO2.This paper makes advancements, firstly in developing experimental techniques to decouple direct and indirect effects of enriched CO2 on plants and secondly in improving ways to simulate the effects of CO2 enrichment on sugarcane growth and water use.For the glasshouse pot experiments we developed a control system that could maintain soil water content within a narrow range to limit CO2 responses mediated by feedbacks on soil moisture while simultaneously measuring the amount of water used. This was accomplished by using a sensor array linked to a control system that could independently control and deliver exact volumes of water to each pot (Fig. 1). Each pot was fitted with a volumetric soil moisture sensor (CS616, Campbell Scientific, Utah) that measured soil moisture every 10 min. If the soil moisture for a particular pot fell below its target treatment level, then a solenoid would open to deliver an aliquot of water from a precisely-machined reservoir (204 ml) above the pot. A data logger was programmed to automatically calibrate each sensor for the most recent three water deliveries (based on the increase in soil moisture in response to each addition of the known volume of water) so that water use could be interpolated between triggered water deliveries. A horizontal tube with lateral perforations, orientated perpendicularly to the moisture sensors, was used to spread the delivered water evenly in the pots, assisted further by a thin (2 cm) layer of sand between the tube and the soil surface. A 5 cm layer of plastic beads was placed on top of this to limit evaporation.For the CO2 treatments we used two large (approximately 6 m × 9 m by 7 m tall) controlled environment chambers, part of a new facility based on the design described in Inman-Bamber et al. (2008). The chambers included control systems for regulating temperature, humidity and CO2 levels, with large air handlers to ensure even mixing. Two precautions were taken to prevent the build-up of plant-active contaminants from the CO2 supply in chambers such as ethylene (Morison and Gifford, 1984a): 1) the system used a continuous flow of air through the chambers, with CO2 injected into the incoming air stream (diluted in two-stage mixing to within 10 ppm of chamber levels before entering the chamber to eliminate CO2 gradients); and 2) the source of gas used was produced by separation of atmospheric air, and therefore low in plant active impurities to begin with.Air temperature and relative humidity (RH) were measured every minute with shielded sensors (HMP45a Vaisala Pty Ltd Melbourne, VIC) placed at the level of the leaves. Solar radiation (350–2500 nm) was measured above the plant canopy at a height of 6 m in each chamber with four 1-m long tube solarimeters (Delta-T Devices Ltd, Cambridge, UK).The experiment was a factorial design of two CO2 treatments by two sugarcane varieties by four harvest dates, replicated four times (with harvest dates and replicates arranged in a 4 × 4 Latin Square), giving a total of 64 pots. For the CO2 treatments, one growth chamber was supplied with ambient air (approximately 390 ppm CO2), while the other was elevated to approximately 720 ppm. The two varieties that were used were KQ228A and Q208A, two of the mostly widely grown commercial varieties in northern Queensland, Australia. The watering control system was set to maintain the soil in each pot at 90% of field capacity (watering trigger threshold). The four harvest dates are explained below.One-eyed setts were germinated and then transplanted, three per pot, into pots (520 mm tall and 380 mm in diameter) containing 25 L of a premium potting mix. Plants were allowed to establish for 2 months at field capacity. During this period, pots were watered to just above field capacity each afternoon, and excess water was allowed to drain through small holes at the bottom of each pot. The water content after drainage was regarded as field capacity and was determined separately for each moisture sensor–pot combination. Watering and CO2 treatments were then initiated and the starting mass of plants was determined from destructive harvesting of 10 extra plants of each variety. In each chamber four control pots were set up that were identical to experimental pots except that they contained no plants. These were used to measure pot evaporation (subtracted from pot water use in calculating transpiration).Plants were harvested in batches at approximately 8-week intervals following the initiation of treatments. Harvested plants were subsampled and separated by plant part into green leaf, dead leaf, sheath and stalk to obtain dry masses following the procedures described in Inman-Bamber et al. (2008). Subsamples of green leaf were processed through a leaf area meter, and the height and number of internodes were measured for stalks. Water use for each pot was calculated for the final seven days before harvest, to calculate the water use per unit green leaf area for each harvest date.Shortly before the final harvest in November 2011, gas exchange measurements were taken on the youngest fully expanded leaf (leaf #1) of 24 plants in each glasshouse, using a portable photosynthesis apparatus (Li-6400, Li-Cor Inc., Lincoln, NE, USA). A 6 cm2 section of the leaf was enclosed in the cuvette and exposed to 2000 μmol/m2/s photosynthetically active radiation and to 375 ppm CO2. Readings were later repeated on the same leaves using the same settings but this time with CO2 set to 720 ppm.Because of teething problems with the first experiment, we briefly note some clarifying results from a later experiment that addressed these issues. This later experiment included eight replicates of each of the same clones (Q208 and KQ228) and CO2 treatment combinations as before. The experiment ran for a shorter period (12 weeks) so the plants were small enough to swap pots and CO2 treatments between chambers half way through the trial. The average water use for each pot was calculated for the four days before the changeover and the four days after the changeover. An analysis of variance was then used to test whether there were any effects of chambers, besides those associated with CO2 treatments, on plant water use. At the end of the 12-week experiment, pots were harvested as before, and results were analysed to test for any biomass differences between treatments.A Bowen ratio energy balance (BREB) system was set up in a 10.3 ha commercial block of sugarcane (cv. Q127, first ratoon) at Kalamia estate (19.6 °S, 147.4 °E), near Ayr in the Burdekin district, north-east Australia. The details and results of the BREB system were provided by Inman-Bamber and McGlinchey (2003) and only brief details are repeated here. The crop was ratooned (allowed to regrow) after harvesting the plant crop on 23 August 2000 and was irrigated and fertilized according to industry recommendations for achieving potential yields. On 22 October 2000, four recently calibrated tube solarimeters (1 m long) were placed on the soil surface in two places near the BREB installation, to span the 1.8 m dual crop row configuration exactly. Two more tube solarimeters were mounted above the canopy so that the fraction of intercepted radiation could be determined.On 17 September 1998, an automatic weather station (AWS) was installed in an open grassed area about 1 km from the BREB system at Kalamia. All components were described by Inman-Bamber and McGlinchey (2003). AWS data were used to determine daily reference evapotranspiration (ET0) from Allen et al. (1998).Total above ground biomass was determined on seven occasions during the development of the crop at Kalamia. All plant material was removed from one 18 m2 quadrat in each of four sampling sites on each occasion. Shoots and stalks were counted and then weighed altogether. A sub sample of stalks was also weighed and then partitioned into green leaf, sheath plus immature stem, mature stem and dead leaf components. A sub sample of each of these components was weighed and then dried to constant mass in a forced draught oven set at 80 °C. Stalk and crop heights were estimated based on a stalk diameter of 23 mm, and leaves extending an additional 2 m above the stalks.We used a customised version of the model from WaterSense (Armour et al., 2012) to simulate the effects of elevated CO2 on the field experiment above. WaterSense was a web-based irrigation scheduling service (now disabled) based on a model that used the most appropriate components of APSIM and Canegro for the purpose of helping sugarcane farmers to manage irrigation (Haines et al., 2008). Canegro and APSIM-Sugar differ considerably in regard to the transpiration process. Potential transpiration (TO) in APSIM is determined by the amount of radiation intercepted (RI), RUE, TE and the vapour pressure deficit (VPD) (Eq. (1)). Actual transpiration (TA) is limited either by TO or the rate of root water supply to the crop (WR) (Eq. (2)). The ratio of TA to TO (0–1) is the measure of water stress affecting biomass gain directly and leaf expansion proportionally (Keating et al., 1999).(1)TO=RUE·RI·VPD/TE(2)TA=min(TO,WR)Older versions of Canegro use the Penman-Monteith (PM) equation in a procedure which includes a daily estimate of the canopy height (zc) and leaf area index (LAI) (Inman-Bamber et al., 1993), but newer versions use the FAO56 approach (Allen et al., 1998) based on crop factors (Singels et al., 2008). The crop factor, also called the crop coefficient (Kc), is the ratio of crop transpiration plus evaporation from the soil (evapotranspiration or ETc), to a reference evapotranspiration of a well-watered, short grass (ET0) and is often regarded as a simple function of crop development alone (Allen et al., 1998).For this study we used WaterSense logic (Armour et al., 2012) but we replaced the crop coefficient approach with the one in which evapotranspiration estimates vary with zcand LAI as reported by Inman-Bamber and McGlinchey (2003) and Inman-Bamber et al. (1993, 2005). In this procedure latent heat flux is derived from the PM equation (Eq. (3)) and functions for canopy resistance, aerodynamic resistance and wind speed (Eqs. (4)–(6)). This was done to allow estimates of leaf conductance obtained from the glasshouse study to be scaled up to an estimate of canopy conductance of a field crop.Latent heat flux from sugarcane transpiration is:(3)λTcane=(Δ(Rn−G)+ρcpVPD/ra)/(Δ+γ(1+rc/ra))Canopy resistance is:(4)rc=rs/(0.5LAI)Aerodynamic resistance is:(5)ra=(ln((z2−0.7zc)/0.026zc))2/(u2κ2)where:Tcane= potential transpiration for sugarcane (mm d−1)cp= specific heat of air at constant pressure (J kg−1 K−1)Δ = slope of the vapour pressure curve (kPa °C−1)G = soil heat flux density (MJ m−2 day−1)γ = psychrometric constant (kPa °C−1).κ = von Karmans's constant = 0.41λ = latent heat of vaporization of water (J kg−1 °C−1)Rn= net radiation (MJ m−2 d−1)ρ = air pressure (kPa)ra= aerodynamic resistance (s m−1)rc= canopy surface resistance (s m−1)rs= leaf resistance (s m−1)zc= sugarcane canopy height (m)The PM equation uses wind speed measured at 2 m and determines aerodynamic resistance to vapour flux as a function of the difference between crop height and the height of the wind speed measurement (Eq. (5)). Sugarcane can grow to heights well above 2 m thus preventing resolving this equation at times. Wind speeds (u2) were therefore adjusted to a height of 10 m using the wind profile equation (Inman-Bamber and McGlinchey, 2003; Monteith and Unsworth, 2007):(6)u2=u1·ln((z2−dr)/zor)/ln((z1−dr)/zor)where:u1and u2= wind speed at 2 and 10 m (m s−1)z1and z2= heights 2 and 10 m above the grounddr= zero plane displacement of reference surface = 0.07 mzor= roughness length of reference surface = 0.013 mThus Tcaneis responsive to changes in LAI, crop canopy height and leaf (mainly stomatal) resistance (1/conductance). Here we are concerned only with the effect of CO2 on stomatal resistance (rs) even though this may influence LAI and canopy height (zc) development indirectly through water supply and demand. Inman-Bamber and McGlinchey (2003) standardized LAI at 3.5 and rsat 100 s m−1 to account for daily evapotranspiration as measured in large weighing lysimeters. For these simulations we used the latter value for rsfor CO2 levels (∼325 ppm) at the time of the lysimeter measurements in the late 1960's (Thompson, 1986). rswas allowed to increase at 12 s m−1 for every 100 ppm increase in CO2 based on the glasshouse experiment results (presented below). LAI and zcwere allowed to vary with crop development but a maximum of 5 m was allowed for zcbecause of the tendency for sugarcane crops to lean or lodge when individual plants are longer than 5 m.Evaporation from the soil (ES) was derived as in WaterSense (Armour et al., 2012); based on the depth of water in the top soil layer in excess of the depth remaining after air drying (term 1 in Eq. (7)); and the fraction of radiation reaching the soil surface (remaining terms) (Eq. (8)). The factor (F) for transpiration at elevated, relative to current, levels of CO2 is (Tubiello et al., 2000):(7)F=(Δ+γ(rc0+ra)/ra)/(Δ+γ(rcf+ra)/ra)where:rc0= rcat current CO2 levels (s m−1)rcf= rcat elevated CO2 levels (s m−1)Evaporation from the soil is (Armour et al., 2012):(8)ES=E0((minθC−θAD/θS−θAD,1.030.05+exp−0.38LAI−c−0.11−exp−0.38LAI+0.1))where EOis reference evapotranspiration (Allen et al., 1998); θC, θAD and θS are water contents for the soil on the day of calculation (θC), for air-dried soil (θAD) and for saturated soil (θS) and c is the fraction of the soil surface covered by cane residue (trash); c = 0 for this simulation (burnt cane).Sugarcane actual evapotranspiration (ETcin mm d−1) is the sum of soil evaporation and potential transpiration or root water supply whichever is the least (Eq. (9)).(9)ETc=Es+min(Tcane,WR)The CO2 level used in our simulations was 375 ppm (rs= 106 m s−1) which was the ‘current’ level at the time of the BREB experiment by Inman-Bamber and McGlinchey (2003). The elevated CO2 concentration was chosen as 720 ppm (rs= 148 m s−1) to correspond with several experiments including ours, where the high CO2 treatment was set at this level.LAI was determined as in the APSIM-Sugar model (Keating et al., 1999) with leaf characteristics for the variety Q172 as in Table 1. APSIM interpolates between inflection points defined as ‘x’ and ‘y’ parameters (Table 1). For example the maximum area is 50 cm2 for leaf #1 and it increases linearly to 500 cm2 for leaf #12 and remaining leaves.Dry above ground biomass accumulation (△B) was also based on the APSIM-Sugar model and the Canegro term for maintenance respiration (M = 0.004) (Eq. (10)).(10)ΔB=max(((WR/Tcane)(RI·SA·RUE)−M.B),0.0)

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
