@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Quantification of ultrasonic texture intra-heterogeneity via volumetric stochastic modeling for tissue characterization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new approach for assessing subtle heterogeneities within a given mass is proposed.Volumetric Nakagami-based shape and scale parameters are estimated from ultrasound RF.A multi-resolution Daubechies wavelet packet transform is performed adaptively.Local multi-scale textural fractal descriptors are extracted from volumetric patches.Results show improved prediction of therapy response and disease characterization.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Texture analysis,Fractal dimension,Tumor characterization,Nakagami modeling,Ultrasound imaging,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Intensity variations in image texture can provide powerful quantitative information about physical properties of biological tissue. However, tissue patterns can vary according to the utilized imaging system and are intrinsically correlated to the scale of analysis. In the case of ultrasound, the Nakagami distribution is a general model of the ultrasonic backscattering envelope under various scattering conditions and densities where it can be employed for characterizing image texture, but the subtle intra-heterogeneities within a given mass are difficult to capture via this model as it works at a single spatial scale. This paper proposes a locally adaptive 3D multi-resolution Nakagami-based fractal feature descriptor that extends Nakagami-based texture analysis to accommodate subtle speckle spatial frequency tissue intensity variability in volumetric scans. Local textural fractal descriptors – which are invariant to affine intensity changes – are extracted from volumetric patches at different spatial resolutions from voxel lattice-based generated shape and scale Nakagami parameters. Using ultrasound radio-frequency datasets we found that after applying an adaptive fractal decomposition label transfer approach on top of the generated Nakagami voxels, tissue characterization results were superior to the state of art. Experimental results on real 3D ultrasonic pre-clinical and clinical datasets suggest that describing tumor intra-heterogeneity via this descriptor may facilitate improved prediction of therapy response and disease characterization.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Analysis of the local characteristic patterns of tissue texture can reveal subtle pathological features deemed important for clinical diagnosis. Spatial variation of textons quantified in terms of image “surface roughness” has been shown to reflect tumor functional heterogeneity, and to lead to a better understanding of disease state (Bae et al., 2013; Chicklore et al., 2013; Davnall et al., 2012; Al-Kadi and Watson, 2008). However, sub-voxel resolution complex and higher order textural features can be difficult to discern by simple observation. These texture signatures may convey significant information about disease progression or regression. However, quantifying these subtle signatures in ultrasound images is challenging.Our motivation stems from a clinical need to improve the diagnosis and therapy of liver cancer. Approximately 100,000 patients are diagnosed each year with primary liver cancers in the United States and Europe (Cancer Research UK, 2014; American Cancer Society, 2014). When this is compared against worldwide statistics, liver cancer is even more common in developing countries (World Health Organization: International Agency for Research on Cancer, 2012). Although it the sixth most common cancer in the world (Ferlay et al., 2013), incidence varies across the world, and it is the most cancer type in some developing countries (Parkin et al., 2014). Surgery is considered the only curative treatment; however, this is not suitable in the majority of cases due to co-morbidity, extent or location of the cancer, with chemotherapy forming the mainstay of treatment in these patients. Chemotherapy can have significant side effects, and may not be effective in all cases. Development of monitoring techniques during the course of chemotherapy may permit dose adjustment in responders to minimize side effects, while alternative treatments could be offered to non-responders. Current monitoring techniques rely on computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging, with frequency limited by the potential damage from ionizing radiation and cost consideration respectively. Despite the difficulties of using ultrasound for monitoring disease (e.g. operator dependent, poorly reproducible and non-standardize), it is a technique that is known to be rapid, relatively inexpensive, readily available, with no exposure to ionizing radiation, making it ideal for frequent monitoring of liver tumors during a course of treatment.Given the advantages of ultrasound, analyzing tissue speckle from a single resolution perspective is limiting, as substantial information that could assist tumor tissue characterization can be hidden at sub-voxel resolution. This is true for the smaller necrotic or functionally low-activity regions that exhibit a hyperechogenic appearance compared to healthy tissue (Ueta et al., 2011). We hypothesize that the difference in echogenicity of the tumor speckle texture can be exploited as an indicator of disease responsiveness to treatment (Czarnota et al., 2013). Nevertheless, the functionally low-activity regions within the tumor texture are relatively small, especially in the early sessions of tumor chemotherapy treatment. They also tend to have low intensity contrast compared to the aggressive or functionally active background of the remaining tumor. Identification of subtle changes in these regions based on visual assessment of the intensity alone can be challenging.Our approach is motivated by four observations:•Tumors are heterogeneous: most previous work has accounted for functionally active malignant regions rather than the peripheral low activity necrotic regions which may additionally provide key information on disease progression or regression. These subtle variations and deviations within the speckle tissue texture were deemed too chaotic to be characterized in Larrue and Noble (2014), but are important for understanding disease state.Heterogeneity suggests using a multi-resolution texture analysis: a carefully designed multi-resolution approach which is visually discriminative and geometrically informative could reveal small speckle changes and is better suited to describe the mixture distribution complexity that underpins a heterogeneity model.Fractal analysis is well-suited to this problem: conventional energy-based wavelet decompositions are susceptible to local intensity distribution variations; the fractal signatures used in our approach, derived from the wavelet representation sub-bands related to physiological properties of texture surface roughness are not; finally.Analysis should be three-dimensional: performing a 3D texture analysis based on a volumetric Nakagami modeling could facilitate a more reliable estimate of the Nakagami parameters, where the 3D location of each voxel provides a better localization of speckle distribution mixtures.In this work, a novel multifractal Nakagami-based volumetric feature descriptor that is invariant to local speckle attenuation changes is proposed. A pipeline summarizing the stages of our approach is illustrated in Fig. 1. It is postulated that fractal tissue characteristics locally derived from 3D textural tumor patterns at several scales and from the RF envelope of the ultrasound backscattered volumes can assist in attaining descriptive features that relate to underlying biological structure. These tissue textural fractal characteristics tend to change in cases of therapeutic response, providing an attractive indicator for disease response to treatment during chemotherapy.This paper is organized as follows. State of the art and challenges associated with characterizing speckle tissue texture heterogeneity are summarized in Sections 2 and 3, followed by a detailed explanation of the proposed 3D multifractal Nakagami-based feature descriptor in Section 4. Sections 5 and 6 present the experimental results and discuss the potential significance of the work. The paper concludes in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
