@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
State of the art in modelling of phosphorus in aquatic systems: Review, criticisms and commentary

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The treatment of phosphorus in aquatic models is systematically reviewed.The complexity of lake, river and marine models is increasing over time.Catchment–river models tend to be simpler than lake and marine models.Performance assessment of lake and marine models is generally inadequate.Processes not included in models are discussed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Systematic review,Modelling,Water quality,Biogeochemical models,Catchment–river models,Oceanographic and limnological models,Complexity,Trends,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Though planktonic population dynamic models date back to the 1930s (Fleming, 1939), the current generation of mechanistic water quality models are in many senses the direct descendents of the NPZ models developed for eutrophic coastal systems during the 1950s, 60s and 70s (Dugdale, 1967; Steele, 1959, 1974) and the variations designed to facilitate management of eutrophic rivers and lakes (O'Brien, 1974; Scavia and Park, 1976). In the intervening decades, these models have been applied to an ever-growing range of aquatic environments: oligotrophic lakes (Buzzelli et al., 2000), rivers (Garnier et al., 2005), weir pools, floodplains and freshwater wetlands (Paudel et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2010), estuaries (Colijn et al., 1987; Wild-Allen et al., 2010), coastal and deep ocean systems (Allen and Clarke, 2007; Blauw et al., 2009), and even salt ponds (Bruce and Imberger, 2009). A brief history of marine plankton models has been presented by Gentleman (2002).Over time, many models have become increasingly detailed, both in resolution and in the number of processes and components represented. It is timely to pause and take stock of these models. Are models that were developed for eutrophic lakes suitable for the other systems to which they are now being applied? Do they accurately reflect our current understanding of the biogeochemistry of aquatic systems? Are they getting more accurate? Are they improving in the range of system properties and behaviours that can be predicted? Where there is variety, can we demonstrate that one approach is better than another and should always be preferred?This review will begin this process, focussing on how phosphorus cycles are represented in models of aquatic systems. Phosphorus is important as the dominant limiting nutrient in many freshwater systems, and has long been considered a key control of harmful algal blooms and the productivity of aquatic ecosystems (Abell et al., 2010; Elser et al., 1990). Nitrogen more commonly limits planktonic production in marine systems, where nitrogen fixation by cyanobacteria is more constrained and inputs from sewage treatment plants are less important (Vitousek and Howarth, 1991).The paper begins by reviewing recent criticisms of and commentary regarding aquatic ecological models. I will then consider the various ways in which the phosphorus cycle is represented, considering water column and benthic processes as well as the physical frameworks in which water quality models are embedded. The variety of formulations that have been used to represent specific processes are not reviewed in detail, but the following section will refer readers to other such reviews and suggest a framework by which to evaluate alternative formulations.The quantitative contribution of this paper is a systematic review of 158 published aquatic modelling papers that include aspects of the phosphorus cycle. The models included in the systematic review are compared in terms of their representation of components and processes in the phosphorus cycle and assessed in terms of how well these representations hold up in the face of current biogeochemical understanding, and how the complexity of phosphorus cycle modelling is changing over time. I will discuss whether increases in model complexity have been justified, how representations vary between sub-disciplines (lotic and lentic limnological versus oceanographic modelling), and how well aquatic ecosystem models are currently being evaluated.I will use the terms “aquatic ecosystem models,” “aquatic biogeochemical models” and “water quality models” somewhat interchangeably. Some of the models included in the review are true ecosystem models, incorporating a range of biota from predatory fish and macroinvertebrates to seagrasses and periphyton. Others are best considered biogeochemical models, concentrating exclusively on phosphorus (and sometimes also nitrogen) processes, but including aspects of plankton ecology. A few simulate only a limited number of nutrient processes, but still aim to simulate variations in water quality. The boundaries between these three groups are fuzzy, as they represent parts of a spectrum rather than discrete model types.Finally, I will discuss some of the processes not included in most current phosphorus models, and the circumstances in which the omission of these processes may be important, and will conclude with some general recommendations for the future direction of aquatic ecological modelling.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
There is a clear separation between marine and lake models on one side (diverse and conceptually sophisticated, but lacking rigour in implementation and assessment) and catchment and river models on the other (tending to neglect important biogeochemical processes, but with more rigorous characterisation of performance). As we move towards integrated catchment-to-ocean modelling, we need to overcome these differences, establishing a consistent approach across the two communities.At present, the predictive performance of most aquatic biogeochemical and ecological models is not really very good, at least if judged by r2 and relative error comparisons with observational data points. If we are to improve our predictive capacity, we need to understand why. To build this understanding, we must:•Assess the physiological basis of alternative functional forms for phosphorus processes, and reject those than cannot produce ecologically realistic results within the range of conditions for which the models are being applied;Interact continually with observational scientists, to ensure that our models reflect the best available systems understanding and to ensure that observational programs are designed that can provide the information needed by our models;Agree on standard metrics and methodologies for performance assessment, so that we can extract knowledge from a range of model applications and conduct meaningful meta-analyses to identify problems and successes; andDevelop techniques and utilities for automatic sensitivity, calibration, uncertainty estimation and performance characterisation that are suited to complex lake and marine models and sufficiently flexible to work with a range of model platforms.As a community, we should be working to build a toolkit of submodels from which we can pick and choose to suit each modelling application – not necessarily within a single modelling framework (though this could be achieved through open-source community modelling of the sort recommended by Trolle et al. (2012) or Pereira et al. (2006)), but across the literature as a whole.This toolkit should include a range of processes relevant to oligotrophic systems. Most current models are derived from models developed to aid management of eutrophication, and may not be suitable for the low-nutrient systems to which they are now also being applied. In applying biogeochemical models to oligotrophic systems, modellers should consider including formulations to represent: transfer limited uptake of phosphorus by benthic plants; direct uptake of bioavailable dissolved organic phosphorus by phytoplankton; rapid cycling of organic phosphorus in the form of nucleotides; and production of phospholipids and subsequent physical removal mechanisms.Other processes, not commonly simulated at present, which might be included in such a toolkit include the effects of sediment drying and rewetting, flow through sediments, and groundwater biogeochemistry.At the same time, we should beware of continuing increases in the complexity of models, as increases in model complexity over the past few decades have not been demonstrated to have substantially improved our predictive capacity. As a rule of thumb, a more complex model should only be used where a simpler model has been demonstrated to be inadequate, and a proposed, more complex formulation should always be thoroughly investigated to ensure that (even in light of the limitations of available data and uncertainties in other parts of the phosphorus cycle) it really does lead to more accurate representation of phosphorus cycling in aquatic ecosystems.