@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Segmentation of pulmonary nodules in computed tomography using a regression neural network approach and its application to the Lung Image Database Consortium and Image Database Resource Initiative dataset

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
First nodule-specific performance benchmark using the new LIDC–IDRI dataset.Hybrid algorithm comprised of a fully automated and a novel semi-automated systems.New class of algorithms and standards of performance.Application of a regression neural network (RNN) with new features.Study of adaptability of presented methods to different styles of consensus truth.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pulmonary nodule,Segmentation,Computed tomography,Lung Image Database Consortium and Image Database Resource Initiative,LIDC–IDRI,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We present new pulmonary nodule segmentation algorithms for computed tomography (CT). These include a fully-automated (FA) system, a semi-automated (SA) system, and a hybrid system. Like most traditional systems, the new FA system requires only a single user-supplied cue point. On the other hand, the SA system represents a new algorithm class requiring 8 user-supplied control points. This does increase the burden on the user, but we show that the resulting system is highly robust and can handle a variety of challenging cases. The proposed hybrid system starts with the FA system. If improved segmentation results are needed, the SA system is then deployed. The FA segmentation engine has 2 free parameters, and the SA system has 3. These parameters are adaptively determined for each nodule in a search process guided by a regression neural network (RNN). The RNN uses a number of features computed for each candidate segmentation. We train and test our systems using the new Lung Image Database Consortium and Image Database Resource Initiative (LIDC–IDRI) data. To the best of our knowledge, this is one of the first nodule-specific performance benchmarks using the new LIDC–IDRI dataset. We also compare the performance of the proposed methods with several previously reported results on the same data used by those other methods. Our results suggest that the proposed FA system improves upon the state-of-the-art, and the SA system offers a considerable boost over the FA system.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Lung cancer remains the leading cause of cancer death in the United States (ACS, 2013). Computed tomography (CT) is currently considered the best imaging modality for early detection and analysis of lung nodules. A wealth of image processing research has been underway in recent years developing methods for the automated detection, segmentation, and analysis of lung nodules in CT imagery (Pham et al., 2000). To facilitate such efforts, a powerful database has recently been created and is maintained by the Lung Image Database Consortium and Image Database Resource Initiative (LIDC–IDRI) (Armato et al., 2011). In this paper, we present new robust segmentation algorithms for lung nodules in CT, and we make use of the latest LIDC–IDRI dataset for training and performance analysis. Note that nodule segmentation is a critical tool in lung cancer diagnosis and for the monitoring of treatment. Multi-temporal CT scans are used to track nodule changes over certain time intervals. To make this process more accurate, consistent, and improve radiologist workflow, effective automated and semi-automated segmentation tools are highly desirable (Wormanns and Diederich, 2004). Given segmentation boundaries, nodule volume and volume doubling time can be readily computed (Ko et al., 2003; Reeves et al., 2009). For more than two decades, a variety of methods and improvements have been proposed for such lung nodule segmentation. A selected chronological listing of nodule segmentation algorithms that we believe are most closely related to our methodology is presented in Table 1. This is provided in order to put the novel contribution of our proposed methods into proper context.While many powerful nodule segmentation methods have been proposed including the works in Table 1 and that of Coleman et al. (1998), Elmoataz et al. (2001), Wiemker and Zwartkruis (2001), Fan et al. (2002), van Ginneken et al. (2002), Xu et al. (2002), Kawata et al. (2003), Ko et al. (2003), Mullally et al. (2004), Tachibana and Kido (2006), Way et al. (2006), van Ginneken et al. (2006), Hardie et al. (2008), Kubota et al. (2008), Dehmeshki et al. (2008), Diciotti et al. (2008), Ye et al. (2009), Bendtsen et al. (2011), Gu et al. (2013), Keshani et al. (2013), Jacobs et al. (2014), none that we are aware of are able to fully and ideally address all of the challenges presented by the LIDC–IDRI dataset. Some of these advanced challenges include juxtapleural nodules that significantly invade the pleura, cases where density/intenity information is ineffectual, and non- or part-solid nodules with irregular regions-of-exclusions/cavities (Armato et al., 2011). In light of this newly expanded dataset, it behooves us to continue to explore new and more robust solutions for nodule segmentation. In this paper, we present a highly robust and novel approach for segmenting the various LIDC–IDRI nodules. Furthermore, we believe our results are among the first comprehensive nodule segmentation results produced for the new LIDC–IDRI database. Thus, it is our hope that this work may serve as a benchmark for many future nodule segmentation studies.Our full nodule segmentation solution is a hybrid, combining a fully-automated (FA) subsystem that requires only a single centralized cue point within the nodule, and a semi-automated (SA) method that requires a set of 8 control points from the expert user. The FA subsystem builds on the unpublished dissertation work of Tuinstra (2008). The improvements to the method presented in Tuinstra (2008) are many fold. Note that the work of Tuinstra (2008) assumes an ideal lung mask, contoured around juxta-pleural nodules, is available a priori. In contrast, here we incorporate a fully automated lung segmentation algorithm. Other important advancements include, a sequence of modified morphological operations that are adapted jointly for each nodule, a shape-model based “limiting” mechanism to treat ill-conditioned segmentation candidates and a regression neural network (RNN) that uses new salient features to evaluate the candidate segmentations. We shall show that the FA subsystem can be used alone and is competitive with other state-of-the-art systems of the same genre.While we believe the FA system has improved robustness, some unusual and complex cases may still be problematic. Hence, if the final segmentation of the FA system is deemed inadequate the hybrid system switches to the SA subsystem. Our SA system is similar to the FA system, but uses 8 control points from the end-user. SA frameworks, that allow user intervention and/or require guiding landmarks from expert end-users for routine use in clinical settings like the ones presented in Aubin et al. (1994), Mitton et al. (2000), van Ginneken (2001), Xu et al. (2002), Pomero et al. (2004), Kuhnigk et al. (2006), Rousson et al. (2006), Dehmeshki et al. (2008), Diciotti et al. (2008), Moura et al. (2009), Moltz et al. (2009), Bendtsen et al. (2011), Vidal et al. (2011), Diepenbrock and Ropinski (2012), Gu et al. (2013) have been found to be effective in resolving advanced challenges. However, our SA system is not interactive like the nodule segmentation algorithms presented in Xu et al. (2002), Kuhnigk et al. (2006), Diciotti et al. (2008), Dehmeshki et al. (2008), Moltz et al. (2009), Bendtsen et al. (2011), Gu et al. (2013). In our proposed SA method, the required control points are entered only once. After that, the process proceeds in an automated fashion to provide the final segmentation. The extra points are used to estimate an adaptive shape limiting boundary that is used to impose constraints on the segmentation candidates. They are also used to modify the automatically determined lung boundary when applicable. To our best knowledge, this particular type of user input has not been used in previously published nodule-specific studies. We think that the idea of setting the 8 points once in advance and then not manipulating the output, has the opportunity to provide more repeatability and make the radiologists workflow more consistent. Note that among other possible scenarios for incorporating extra guidance from the user, we believe that our approach effectively balances the trade-off between taxing the user and segmentation performance enhancement (i.e., a tremendous robustness and generally a large performance boost is attained in return). Also to note is that the FA system alone yields good results in many cases, and the SA system is not used.Another novel contribution of this paper is the study of the capabilities of the FA and SA subsystems to provide segmentation characteristics that match the training truth. Since there is considerable dissent among the different radiologist truth segmentations (Armato et al., 2004, 2007, 2011), we have trained and tested multiple regression systems, each with a different form of consensus truth. This allows us to study how well our segmentation systems can adapt to various styles of truth. Finally, using our FA, SA, and full hybrid systems, we provide a thorough performance analysis and new performance benchmarks using the new LIDC–IDRI dataset.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We begin by describing the LIDC–IDRI database in Section 2. The FA, SA, and hybrid nodule segmentation algorithms are described in Section 3. The RNN approach to segmentation parameter selection is described in Section 4. Experimental results and related discussion are presented in Section 5. The results include performance results on new LIDC–IDRI data, as well as a comparison with several other previously published systems using the previously available data. Finally, in Section 6 we offer conclusions. Where relevant, some of the previously published methods described in this Section are discussed further in the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we have presented new pulmonary nodule segmentation algorithms. These include the FA system that uses our TR segmentation engine, the SA system employing theT∼REsegmentation engine, and a hybrid system that uses both. The TR segmentation engine is a traditional automated system that requires only a single user supplied cue point. TheT∼REengine is semi-automated in the sense that 8 user supplied control points are required. While the burden on the user is certainly greater with theT∼REengine, the resulting system is highly robust and can handle a variety of challenging cases. The hybrid system attempts to balance the ease of use of the TR segmentation engine with the performance boost of theT∼REengine. This hybrid system initially only requires a single cue point. Only if the resulting segmentation is determined to be inadequate is the user prompted to enter the 8 control points for theT∼REengine.To the best of our knowledge, the results summarized in Table 6 represent one of the first performance benchmarks using the new LIDC-IDLI dataset. Note that both testing data subsets used here to evaluate our FA, SA and hybrid systems are publicly available via the links provided in Section 2. It is our hope that this benchmark will spark future research efforts. We also compare the performance of the proposed methods with several previously reported results using the same LIDC data and performance metric. These results, summarized in Table 7, show that the TR system provides the highest overlap scores of those systems considered. In particular, the TR system generates overlap scores that are 5.34% above the next best results (excluding results from one of the current authors). The results also show that theT∼REengine provides a boost of 8.35% over the TR engine on LIDC, and a similar boost on LIDC–IDRI(-). Thus, the 8 user provided cue points are clearly an effective way to boost nodule segmentation system performance. We believe that such semi-automated systems represent a new class of nodule segmentation algorithms capable of performing at new levels, and they should continue to be explored.