@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Models of daily rainfall cross-correlation for the United Kingdom

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Spatial properties of UK daily rainfall are described with simple models.An aseasonal national model estimates lag-0 cross-correlation using only distance.More tailored models specialize by calendar month and for nine climatic regions.Such properties allow spatial rainfall models to be parameterized easily.A simple tool for spatial-temporal rainfall modelling is demonstrated.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Precipitation,Cross-correlation model,United Kingdom,Spatial Temporal Neyman–Scott Rectangular Pulses (STNSRP) model,Weather generator,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Automated easy-to-use tools capable of generating spatial-temporal weather scenarios for the present day or downscaled future climate projections are highly desirable. Such tools would greatly support the analysis of hazard, risk and reliability of systems such as urban infrastructure, river catchments and water resources. However, the automatic parameterization of such models to the properties of a selected scenario requires the characterization of both point and spatial statistics. Whilst point statistics, such as the mean daily rainfall, may be described by a map, spatial properties such as cross-correlation vary according to a pair of sample points, and should ideally be available for every possible pair of locations. For such properties simple automatic representations are needed for any pair of locations.To address this need simple empirical models are developed of the lag-zero cross-correlation-distance (XCD) properties of United Kingdom daily rainfall. Following error and consistency checking, daily rainfall timeseries for the period 1961–1990 from 143 raingauges are used to calculate observed XCD properties. A three parameter double exponential expression is then fitted to appropriate data partitions assuming isotropic and piecewise-homogeneous XCD properties. Three models are developed: 1) a national aseasonal model; 2) a national model partitioned by calendar month; and 3) a regional model partitioned by nine UK climatic regions and by calendar month. These models provide estimates of lag-zero cross-correlation properties of any two locations in the UK.These cross-correlation models can facilitate the development of automated spatial rainfall modelling tools. This is demonstrated through implementation of the regional model into a spatial modelling framework and by application to two simulation domains (both ∼10,000 km2), one in north-west England and one in south-east England. The required point statistics are generally well simulated and a good match is found between simulated and observed XCD properties.The models developed here are straightforward to implement, incorporate correction of data errors, are pre-calculated for computational efficiency, provide smoothing of sample variability arising from sporadic coverage of observations and are repeatable. They may be used to parameterise spatial rainfall models in the UK and the methodology is likely to be easily adaptable to other regions of the world.Crosscorrelation_UK_DailySchool of Civil Engineering and Geosciences, Newcastle University, NE1 7RU, UKAidan Burton, School of Civil Engineering and Geosciences, Newcastle University, NE1 7RU, UK, aidan.burton@ncl.ac.uk2013R, C, Excel spreadsheet or formulaeDownload from authors websitelag-one daily Auto-CorrelationCentral and East EnglandConditional Exceedance ProbabilityDecember–January–February season (winter)Environment Agency Rainfall and Weather Impacts GeneratorEast ScotlandJune–July–August season (summer)March–April–May season (spring)North East EnglandNorthern IrelandNorth-West and North ScotlandNational-Seasonal-ParametersNeyman Scott Rectangular PulsesNorth-West England and north WalesProportion of Dry Days (days with <1 mm of rainfall)Proportion of Dry Hours (hours with <0.1 mm of rainfall)Root of the Mean Square ErrorSouth East EnglandSouth-West and South ScotlandSpatial Temporal Neyman Scott Rectangular PulsesSeptember–October–November season (autumn)South West England and south WalesUnited Kingdom Climate Projections 2009United Kingdom Meteorological OfficeWeather Generatorcross-Correlation-Distance

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Stochastic weather models provide a useful basis for the analysis of hazard, risk and reliability of systems related to urban infrastructure, catchments and water resource systems. They may provide synthetic weather records where none are available, stochastic extrapolation of short observed records, temporal downscaling of observed records or the downscaling of climate change scenarios in both space and time (e.g. Burton et al., 2008). Applications predominantly involve spatially distributed hydrological, water resource and environmental modelling which ideally require simple-to-use tools and modelling frameworks able to provide spatial-temporal simulations of weather fields rather than single- or multi-site timeseries.Stochastic downscaling of climate model projections using a weather generator (WG) is computationally inexpensive compared with climate models, can provide multiple realizations for the same climate projection and may exhibit weather variability and extremes as good as or better than climate models (e.g. Burton et al., 2010a). Scenarios of both present day and future climates allow the evaluation of impact model sensitivity to the climate change signal whilst keeping the source of the input timeseries consistent (e.g. Burton et al., 2010c; Goderniaux et al., 2011). Wilby and Wigley (1997), Prudhomme et al. (2002) and Fowler et al. (2007) provide more general reviews of future climate downscaling for impact studies. A range of easy-to-use tools have been developed to simplify the process of using a weather generator to produce scenarios for either present day or future climate projections at a single location, e.g. the Lars-WG (Semenov and Barrow, 1997), SDSM (Wilby et al., 2002), Environment Agency Rainfall and Weather Impacts Generator (EARWIG; Kilsby et al., 2007) and the UK Climate Projections 2009 (UKCP09) WG (Jones et al., 2009). In contrast, few authors have even demonstrated multi-site statistical downscaling using the weather generator approach, examples include Palutikof et al. (2002), Charles et al. (2004); Fowler et al. (2005), Cannon (2008) and van Vliet et al. (2012). Clearly easy-to-use tools providing spatial-temporal weather scenarios are required, ideally producing simulations of weather on a regular grid (rather than multi-site), as demonstrated for rainfall by Burton et al. (2010c) and Blanc et al. (2012).A challenging aspect of developing highly automated easy-to-use spatial weather generator tools is to automate the calibration of model parameters for observed or climate-change-projected scenarios. In the EARWIG (Kilsby et al., 2007) and UKCP09 (Jones et al., 2009) schemes modelling using the single-site Neyman Scott Rectangular Pulses (NSRP) model is facilitated through the availability of the UKMO 5 km gridded climatology dataset (Perry and Hollis, 2005a,b) which enables the pre-calculation of a map of gridded observed point values of weather statistics. However, for the Spatial Temporal NSRP (STNSRP) model (e.g. Burton et al., 2008), the spatial properties of the rainfall are characterized by XCD properties, i.e. the cross-correlation between pairs of timeseries from locations a specific distance apart. Whereas a point statistic (e.g. the daily mean rainfall) may be mapped with some confidence, XCD varies dependant on two locations and so is not so straightforward to map.Here simple pragmatic empirical models of the XCD properties of observed United Kingdom daily rainfall are developed, which are justifiable with the available data but are responsive to seasonality, regional climatology and local geographic variation. This approach has the benefits of incorporating error checking, regionalization of irregularly sampled observations and standardization. These models will be particularly useful during the development of automated spatial-temporal weather generators, for example, to extend on the single-site weather-generator used in UKCP09.Rainfall timeseries were originally obtained from a number of sources including the BADC MIDAS database (Meteorological Office, 2012) and subjected to error correction and validation such as ensuring sequential order of records, removal of duplicate records and identification of missing data or multiple day accumulations (see Jones et al., 2010, 2013). A subset of 143 raingauges were selected with an average completeness of 97% covering the UK at daily resolution for the period 1961–1990 (Fig. 1). Considering the high sensitivity of spatial cross-correlation calculations to temporal offset errors (typically arising from inconsistent archival of accumulation dates, e.g. end date instead of start date) and their likelihood, given the multiple sources of the data, the potential for whole-series daily offset errors was investigated to ensure the temporal self-consistency of the dataset. The timeseries were verified: i) by correlation with nearby raingauges; ii) against extreme events recorded in 1978 and 1969 (Meteorological Office, 1983, 1979; respectively); and iii) against the MIDAS daily archive. Researchers working with cross-correlation properties of rainfall are strongly recommended to carry out such checking.Summary XCD statistics were then estimated for the time-series dataset. For each of the 10153 possible raingauge pairings, the daily cross-correlation of the calendar month partitioned timeseries and the separation distance between the raingauges were evaluated.A characterization of XCD properties was assumed whereby monthly partitioned spatial cross-correlation properties are considered to be homogeneous, isotropic and aseasonal. Therefore cross-correlation, y, is considered to depend only on the distance, d (km), between a pair of raingauges. Considering monthly-partitions of the XCD properties focuses this analysis upon the spatial similarity of within-month daily anomalies (from monthly means) and away from seasonal mean behaviour. These latter properties may be estimated separately and more straight-forwardly as point rainfall statistics (see Section 5). Preliminary qualitative investigations suggested that the cross-correlation decays rapidly for short distances (<∼200 km) and more slowly at greater distances. Accordingly a double exponential relationship (Equation (1)) was selected as it is both parsimonious and flexible enough to model the qualitative behaviour. As used here, this model has three parameters: B, the short range decay rate (km−1); C, the long range decay rate (km−1); and A, the relative influence of the short range term.(1)y(d)=Ae−Bd+(1−A)e−Cdwhere B > C > 0.First, a national scale model capable of representing cross-correlation at the scale of the whole UK was considered. This National-Aseasonal model was fitted simultaneously to all monthly partitions of the XCD properties of all possible pairings using non-linear minimization of the square error. The fitted model's parameters are shown in Table 1a and exhibited an RMSE of 0.095.The second national scale model then extended the first by considering the seasonal cycle of the rainfall properties. Thus Equation (1) was fitted separately for each calendar month to the XCD properties of all possible raingauge-pairings. The parameters of these National-Seasonal model fits are provided in Table 1b, all of which are statistically significant (at the 95% level).22All significance tests reported in this paper are at the t-statistic >3 or ∼95% confidence level. Repetition of this level for subsequent tests is avoided for brevity.Fig. 2shows example plots of the fitted curves (elaborating the contributions of the short and long range terms) and their residuals for the months of January and July, and the RMSE is summarized by season in Table 2.Clearly the National-Seasonal model has an improved predictive capability compared with the National-Aseasonal model however the National-Aseasonal model is shown to be particularly effective. Summer exhibits the best model fit, Winter the worst, and Spring and Autumn lie in-between with similar skill.This section describes the development of regional scale homogeneous isotropic specializations of the daily XCD model. The available data provided insufficient coverage to support a grid based scheme (with resolution 100 km), however two alternative climatic region based modelling schemes were considered, Regional-Simplify and Regional-National-Seasonal-Parameters (Regional-NSP), both of which begin with Equation (1) then iteratively reduce the number of free parameters towards a default model until a statistically significant model is found.For the purposes of developing the two regional schemes, the UK was considered to be partitioned into the nine Gregory et al. (1991) climatic regions shown in Fig. 1 (adapted from Alexander and Jones, 2001). The climatic regions are abbreviated here as east Scotland (ES), north-west and north Scotland (NS), south-west and south Scotland (SS), north east England (NEE), north-west England and north Wales (NWE), Northern Ireland (NI), central and east England (CEE), south east England (SEE) and south west England and south Wales (SWE). However, the regional boundaries are illustrative rather than formal and so provide a rough indication of the influence of each regional model rather than precisely defining whether a specific location lies within a given region or not. A set of 108 data classes (comprising 12 months × 9 regions) were defined and populated from the observed XCD properties of the raingauge-pairs, including only same-region raingauge-pairs.The Regional-Simplify scheme considered a hierarchy of three models for each class with reducing complexity and number of fitted parameters: a full double exponential model; an exponential decay to a constant; an exponential decay to zero. Each model was fitted using non-linear minimization of the square error to the XCD properties of the raingauge-pairs in each class. A successfully fitted model was only accepted provided all parameters were significantly different from zero and, where appropriate, A was significantly different from one. The first model fitted to each class was Equation (1), which has three free parameters. Where the first model was rejected, the most appropriate two-parameter model, with C set to zero, was considered. Finally where the second model was rejected, A was set to one and the parameter B alone was fitted.The methodology of the Regional-NSP scheme followed a more complex hierarchy with different fixed parameter values than the Regional-Simplify scheme, so that a double-exponential model was always identified for each data class. Fixed parameters were set to the National-Seasonal values given in Table 1b. Each model was fitted using non-linear minimization of the square error to the XCD properties of the raingauge-pairs in each class. A successfully fitted model was only considered acceptable if all parameters were significantly different from zero and from their National-Seasonal values. First the three parameter model, Equation (1), was fitted for each class. If this was rejected, three alternative two parameter models were considered, by fixing each of the three parameters in turn then attempting a fit of the remaining two parameters. Where multiple models were acceptable for a particular class the one with the smallest RMSE was chosen. Where all two-parameter models were rejected, a single parameter fit was attempted for each parameter in turn, with the other two parameters fixed. RMSE was again used to choose between multiple acceptable models. For any remaining classes, the parameters were all fixed to the National-Seasonal values.Application of the two regional schemes to the observed XCD data classes resulted in models with a range of fitted and fixed parameters (see Table 3). The RMSEs for all of the region-month classes were then compared for the two regional schemes. The maximum difference was found to be less than 0.003, a negligible value compared with the magnitude and variability of the observed data (e.g. Fig. 2). Therefore the less complex Regional-Simplify scheme was selected as the preferred regional model. The full set of the fitted model parameters partitioned by month and climatic region is provided in Table A1 in Appendix A.Table 4summarizes the RMSE values for the National-Seasonal and the Regional-Simplify models partitioned by both climatic region and season. RMSE results for the National-Seasonal model are only calculated for pairings used in the regional models so that the values are directly comparable. The number of raingauge-pairs considered for each climatic region is also shown. From this table it can be seen that•The National-Seasonal model exhibits different RMSE skill in different climatic regions. CEE, NEE and NI are better, and SEE and SS are similar to the skill reported in Table 2.As might be expected the Regional-Simplify model is better than the National-Seasonal model for all partitions. The greatest improvement is noted typically in the winter season or in NI, CEE and SEE. The least improvement is noted for NEE, NWE and SS.The average skill of the Regional-Simplify model remains fairly constant throughout the year whereas the National-Seasonal model is better in summer and worse in winter.The climatic regions best modelled by the Regional-Simplify model are NI, SEE and CEE and the least well modelled are NWE, SS and NS.Whilst Equation (1) is a function of distance only, its three parameters are partitioned by both climatic region and calendar month. The fitted Regional-Simplify models therefore provide an interpolation between the various raingauge separations in the observed dataset and also smooth sample variability, and so provide the basis for a regional intercomparison. Fig. 3shows the annual cycle of estimated cross-correlation as fitted for each climatic region at three selected distances: 50 km, 100 km and 200 km. The National-Seasonal model is also plotted for comparison. Since ES, NI and SS had no pairings greater than 150 km their curves were excluded from Fig. 3c. NWE and SEE are shown in Fig. 3c but are considered subject to high sample variability since their pairings were not greater than 200 km.The typical annual cycle for the entire UK goes from a minimum value during the period May–July to a maximum during September–April (for short range) but only December–March for longer range. This corresponds to the increased proportion of convective events in summer which exhibit more localized behaviour. The extended transition period in the autumn, August–November at longer range may indicate a relative increase in the number of events with a size ∼200 km during this period. Climatic regions with low cross-correlation values appear to correspond to mountainous areas (of say NS and NWE) with increased cross-correlation corresponding to more uniform terrain of the southern parts of the UK. A slight shift in the seasonal timing of the cycles is noted with latitude, whereby the Scottish cycles may be a month in advance of SWE and SEE.Here the utility of the Regional-Simplify methodology is evaluated through its implementation into a new automatic spatial weather modelling system and its application to two case studies.A software framework was developed based on that used to model rainfall for the EARWIG (Kilsby et al., 2007) and UKCP09 (Jones et al., 2009) systems. The user selects a number of contiguous 5-km squares from a grid covering the UK to identify the simulation domain for a spatial rainfall model. The length of the simulation and the number of ensemble realizations are also specified.The characterisation of the rainfall properties and the rainfall model parameterization and simulation then proceeds automatically. The rainfall characteristics for each grid square are read from a database which contains pre-calculated calendar month partitioned estimates of daily and hourly rainfall statistics, originally determined from the UKMO 5 km dataset (Perry and Hollis, 2005a,b), see Kilsby et al. (2007) and Jones et al. (2009) for details. This provides a spatial grid of point rainfall statistics covering the simulation domain, including: daily mean, proportion dry33Defined here as a day with strictly less than 1 mm of rainfall (see discussion in Burton et al., 2008).(PDD), variance, skewness, lag-1 autocorrelation (AC); hourly variance, skewness and proportion dry44Defined here as an hour with strictly less than 0.1 mm of rainfall.(PDH). For computational efficiency, the point rainfall statistics are combined into a single set of target statistics by evaluating the mean across the domain of each of the eight statistics for each calendar month. The spatial properties of the rainfall model need to be specified by a set of cross-correlation-distance properties. Here, the appropriate annual cycle of Regional-Simplify parameters is selected from Table A1 according to the location of the selected simulation domain. Cross-correlation is then estimated using Equation (1) at three distances for each calendar month and appended to the target statistics.The STNSRP model is parameterized separately for each calendar month according to the eleven target statistics following the procedure detailed in Burton et al. (2008). This involves numerically minimizing the least square difference between the target statistics and estimated simulated statistics, known as the fitted statistics.A continuous spatial temporal simulation is then produced using an efficient implementation of the STNSRP simulator (Burton et al., 2010b). The simulated space-time rainfall process is sampled at the locations of the grid square centres, aggregated to daily time steps and stored as simulated timeseries files. Sample estimates of the statistical properties of these timeseries are referred to here as simulated statistics.Two case study applications were selected, one from each of the SEE and NWE climatic regions which have a relatively high and low RMSE score in Table 4 respectively. For SEE, the Thames catchment (above Tedington Weir at Kingston) was selected (∼11,000 km2). For the NWE application a set of contiguous grid squares (∼10,000 km2) was selected as there is no appropriate catchment of similar size to the Thames. The two domains are shown in Fig. 4. Using the automatic spatial-temporal rainfall modelling framework, target statistics were evaluated for each case study, the rainfall model was fitted and a single realization of a 1000-year rainfall simulation was generated producing daily rainfields on a regular 5 km grid. Simulated statistics were calculated for the entire 1000-year dataset.The domain-mean target, fitted and simulated daily point statistics (i.e. the mean, variance, PDD, AC and skewness) were then compared (e.g. Fig. 5). For the Thames, the simulated properties were found to be an excellent match to the target statistics. For the NWE domain the simulated mean, PDD and AC were found to be an excellent match to the target statistics (e.g. Fig. 5c) whereas the variance (Fig. 5d) and skewness showed some minor differences but were still very good matches to the target data.The XCD properties were then compared for the Regional-Simplify target, the STNSRP fitted, a representative sample of the simulated rainfields and ten nearby raingauges. For the NWE domain the nearby raingauges all lay within the domain, whereas for the Thames only four were available within the domain and six were located within 17 km. Fig. 6shows these properties for five calendar months, selected to illustrate a range of seasons and model skill.An overall evaluation of the spatial properties of the rainfall modelling process is gained by comparing results for the simulated and the nearby-raingauges. For the Thames the results generally indicated a very good match. Exceptions were noted for a couple of summer months, e.g. August, where the simulations were slightly below the observed range for distances greater than 100 km. Similarly for the more challenging NWE-domain there was generally a good match between the simulated and observed properties. Exceptions were April, June55Not shown.and July when the simulated properties were slightly below the observed range for distances greater than ∼50 km.A comparison of the three target estimates with the nearby raingauge properties provides an assessment of the Regional-Simplify model for the domains. For the Thames domain the match was found to be generally excellent, with exceptions in November5and December5at mid and longer range where estimated target values are towards the lower end of the observed range. For the NWE domain the mid to long range target values were generally towards the lower end of the range of observations (e.g. January, April and July in Fig. 6). However, excellent results were found in four months, e.g. August and October.Finally it is useful to investigate how well the rainfall modelling framework matches the target XCD statistics. For the Thames the model fits are noted to be slightly too high at short range and too low at longer range for the summer months, see July and August. This gives rise to the under simulation of long range XCD properties noted in August. Otherwise the rainfall model produces an excellent fit to the target statistics. For the NWE-domain the model fits are typically excellent with a few months exhibiting small fitting biases (e.g. April, the largest). In all cases the simulated rainfall properties match the fitted values almost exactly.Whilst the spatial properties of high rainfall events are not explicitly modelled using this framework, they may be of concern for applications of such simulated rainfields. To assess this property the Conditional Exceedance Probability (CEP) metric is defined for a pair of locations (i.e. raingauges or grid centres) and a given calendar month as the estimated probability of the first location exceeding its threshold conditional on the second location exceeding its threshold when both locations are wet. To investigate high rainfall events the threshold is set to the 90th-percentile of the wet day66Defining a wet day as one with at least 0.2 mm of rainfall.rainfall amount at each location. The CEP was evaluated for the same pairs of nearby raingauges and grid-squares as used in Fig. 6 and plotted against each pair's separation distance, as shown in Fig. 7for January and July. This analysis found the spatial properties of high rainfall events well matched overall and similar in skill to the results found for cross-correlation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Three national and regional three-parameter double-exponential homogeneous and isotropic models of the spatial XCD properties of daily rainfall have been developed for the UK. First, a national three-parameter aseasonal model was identified and found to provide a fair representation for monthly partitioned data. Second, a monthly partitioned national model additionally considered monthly variation and considerably improved on the first model, particularly in Summer. The third additionally considered regional variation with a piecewise homogeneous model, Regional-Simplify, which was partitioned by both climatic region and calendar month. These three models are straightforward to implement and have a small number of parameters which are tabulated here, thus the daily rainfall cross-correlation between any two points in the UK may be easily estimated from these tables.The XCD models developed here are of general relevance to spatial rainfall modelling in the UK since they estimate rainfall statistics rather than model parameters. Here the utility of the Regional-Simplify model was demonstrated through implementation into a simple-to-use modelling framework. This extended the automated single-site present-day rainfall modelling capabilities of the EARWIG (Kilsby et al., 2007) and UKCP09 (Jones et al., 2009) systems by simulating rainfall spatially, on a regular grid. The framework used the Regional-Simplify model to facilitate the characterisation of the spatial rainfall properties for the climatic region in which the simulation was carried out. Comparison of the simulated outputs against observations for two case study applications in the NWE and SEE climatic regions found good matches between simulated and observed rainfall properties. This rainfall modelling framework thus provides an important resource in support of the current trend towards distributed hydrological, water resource and environmental modelling. Ultimately such models may lead to automated spatial weather generators suitable for downscaling climate model projections.A possible alternative to the XCD modelling methodology developed here could involve an algorithm to select, evaluate and summarize analysis from a number of observed rainfall timeseries. In contrast the scheme presented has the advantages of being independent of raingauge selection, incorporating error correction, addressing sporadic coverage both spatially and temporally, pre-calculated summary XCD properties and having repeatability.Four strands of research arising from these XCD relationships are considered likely:1)Application of the methodology in other locations worldwide.Development of similar relationships for hourly rainfall, which may be of particular importance for applications considering extreme rainfall events.Developing representations of anisotropic behaviour. Some evidence of anisotropic behaviour was noted in the observed XCD data, but modelling this was considered beyond the scope of the current work. Such a development will inevitably involve an increased number of parameters with reduced fitting confidence.The development of XCD relationships for projected climate scenarios. Climate model projections of change in the spatial properties of rainfall at local hydrological scales (say up to 100 km) is not yet credible due to the resolution of the current generation of climate models. However, the results of a new generation of very-high resolution climate models (e.g. the CONVEX project77See http://research.ncl.ac.uk/convex/ (verified 17/9/12).) are eagerly awaited in order to inform such model developments.