@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An expandable web-based platform for visually analyzing basin-scale hydro-climate time series data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Solution fulfills documented need in hydrological and resource management communities.Employed visualization paradigm permits easy visual analysis of Great Lakes Data.Data are downloadable for further analysis; Information about data is in application.Novel development model permits significant data and application feature expansion.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data visualization,Great lakes,Data access,Analytics,Software,Object oriented,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Growing demand from the general public for centralized points of data access and analytics tools coincides with similar, well-documented needs of regional and international hydrology research and resource management communities. To address this need within the Laurentian Great Lakes region, we introduce the Great Lakes Dashboard (GLD), a dynamic web data visualization platform that brings multiple time series data sets together for visual analysis and download. The platform's adaptable, robust, and expandable Time Series Core Object Model (GLD-TSCOM) separates the growing complexity and size of Great Lakes data sets from the web application interface. Although the GLD-TSCOM is currently applied exclusively to Great Lakes data sets, the concepts and methods discussed here can be applied in other geographical and topical areas of interest.The Great Lakes Dashboard, The Great Lakes Water Level Dashboard, and The Great Lakes Hydro-Climate DashboardNational Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Great Lakes Environmental Research Laboratory, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA and Cooperative Institute for Limnology and Ecosystems Research, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USAAdobe Flash capable computer with modern system specificationsInternet browser (Mozilla Firefox, Google Chrome, Microsoft Internet Explorer, etc.), Adobe Flash PluginMXML and ActionScript under the Apache Flex Framework, compiled under the Adobe Flash Builder and JetBrains IntelliJ IDEA, HTML, JavaScript with jQuery and Dygraphs packagesAll Adobe Flash based products are freely available at the following sites: http://www.glerl.noaa.gov/data/gldb, http://www.glerl.noaa.gov/data/wldb, and http://www.glerl.noaa.gov/data/hcdbhttp://www.glerl.noaa.gov/data/dashboard/GLD_HTML5.htmlhttp://www.glerl.noaa.gov/data/dbportal

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The North American Laurentian Great Lakes comprise the largest system of freshwater lakes in the world. In response to changes in the Great Lakes ecosystem, natural resource availability, and hydrology (Morris and Gill, 1994; Ricciardi and Rasmussen, 1998; Wilcox et al., 2002; Gronewold and Stow, 2014), and amidst growing regional and international awareness of global climate change (Stocker et al., 2013) and urban development (Martine et al., 2008), research and monitoring on the Great Lakes system has intensified over the past couple of decades. Consequently, large amounts of data have been and continue to be produced for this region (Bulatewicz et al., 2014). For instance, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the Canadian Hydrographic Service (CHS), and the Detroit District of the United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) are three, among many other, agencies that develop or maintain large amounts of Great Lakes regional data. Developed or maintained data include water level and water budget model simulations, observations, and forecasts, as described in Gronewold et al. (2011) and Deacu et al. (2012). Given the recent acceleration of regional research on the Great Lakes system (e.g. projects funded by the Great Lakes Restoration Initiative), we have observed a coincident rise in demand for these agencies to make their data and model output readily available to the public.In and outside of the Great Lakes research community, these needs have been documented and attempts have been made to fulfill them – providing access to, and visual analysis of, multi-dimensional data (Jeong et al., 2006). Two notable efforts include the Consortium of Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic Science, Inc. Hydrologic Information System (CUAHSI-HIS, Horsburgh et al. (2009)) and the Great Lakes Observing System (GLOS, Read et al. (2010)). Both projects focus on providing access to and documentation for point observation data, as opposed to aggregate (e.g. averages – over temporal, spatial domains, or both) data. Access is realized through web services, with CUAHSI HIS implementing a propietary Observations Data Model (ODM, Horsburgh et al. (2008)) via a Relational Database Management System (RDBMS), and GLOS utilizing tools compliant with Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC, see Web References section) standards.Beyond the need for basic hydrological data management and dissemination, there is a strong demand for simple, inexpensive or free, and accessible tools facilitating exploratory analysis of regional environmental and aggregate data. Such applications could be used to assess initial quality, identify candidate supporting information, and provide decision support (Jakeman et al., 2008). Demand for these tools is enhanced by the existence of rapidly advancing and increasingly sophisticated software packages, such as those employed by the user accessible WeatherSpark.com, as well as Aquatic Informatics' AQUARIUS and KISTERS’ WISKI (see Web References section). These web and commercial software applications, respectively, streamline the data discovery, fetching, visualization, and analysis process, making a wide variety of tools and data easily available to users. While CUAHSI HIS, GLOS, and other existing distribution platforms (for example, see Hendler et al., 2012) serve data, they often do not demonstrate that data are readily available and easy to access and analyze. For instance, while web services may provide data in standard formats to users, data insights are not realized without expertise in web scraping, programming, or other technical skill.In this paper, we introduce the Great Lakes Dashboard (GLD, Fig. 1), a free web application that provides user-friendly tools to explore aggregated time series data, model output, and forecasts for multiple variables potentially affecting the Great Lakes along with background information. Produced by NOAA's Great Lakes Environmental Research Laboratory (NOAA-GLERL) and the Cooperative Institute for Limnology and Ecosystems Research (CILER), the GLD is one of very few, if any, available tools that aggregate multiple time series data sets on the Great Lakes in a basin-wide spatial domain and present them in an accessible interface.The GLD is driven by a robust, expandable Time-Series Core Object Model (GLD-TSCOM). As a generic framework and programming model similar to MapReduce (Dean and Ghemawat, 2008), programmers can develop applications similar to the dashboard using the GLD-TSCOM. In that sense, it can also be adapted to new requests from users, applied to regions other than the Great Lakes or other topical areas of interest, and be framed around advances in available technology. As an example, instead of focusing on sub-basins within the Great Lakes (see top of Fig. 2), the GLD-TSCOM could work with hydrological inputs, outputs, and storage within subregions of California, defined by the United States Geological Survey (USGS), currently experiencing extreme drought conditions (Swain et al., 2014).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Amidst growth in collected data, establishment of large, central data discovery and distribution services, and demand for simple access and visualization of aggregate data, we have developed applications based on a single model that fulfill needs within the Laurentian Great Lakes data user communities. The GLD and its predecessors are flexible, powerful, expandable applications for easy visual analysis of aggregated time series data. We have considered and incorporated the demands of many stakeholders, researchers, and managers in the Great Lakes community. These applications represent the leading edge of big data efforts (Vitolo et al., 2015) – aggregating and visualizing measurements and model outputs delivered from data catalogs and services. Instead of accessing data through scripts or data services of variable accessibility, users of the GLD can visualize and download data through a few clicks and drags of a computer mouse.Adopting an Agile development approach (Ahalt et al., 2014), the GLD-TSCOM can grow in its scope of data and in its capabilities to serve users. This web framework's expandability and its resulting graphical front-end functionalities are useful in light of recent implementations of adaptive management practices (Linkov et al., 2006), such as NOAA's Next Generation Strategic Plan. The flexibility built into the platform leaves open the possibility of utilizing large data services such as CUAHSI-HIS and GLOS – displaying aggregate versions of their data on the dashboards. Additionally, these tools are helpful in the participatory modeling process between stakeholders and modellers as discussed by Voinov and Bousquet (2010), especially when it comes to model analysis, discussion, and planning improvements to models. This platform provides a means by which users can gain perspective and insights that could not be achieved without the juxtaposition of potentially related data.During the time that the dashboard was developed, available server capabilities and resources were limited both in terms of installed software and support staff. Consequentially, text-based data and inventories were the best option, as updating and maintaining them does not require a specific skillset beyond spreadsheet manipulation. Recent developments, including the instantiation of a PostgreSQL service, may present opportunities to migrate the inventories and data to a more structured, more scalable, and robust system. Such developments would make options, such as the ability to download only the actively displayed data, simple to implement. However, adopting server-entrenched technologies may render the dashboard less transferable. Thus, as of this publication, we have a more lightweight, portable, and easily deployable data system than data infrastructures such as the CUAHSI-HIS.While the dashboards are built under the Flash platform due to 1.) the availability of powerful, easy to use Integrated Developement Environments for the platform and 2.) initial developer experience with application programming, there is a trend towards doing web development under the relatively new HTML5 platform. This is driven by growth in mobile platform adoption, Flash's general incompatibility with mobile devices, and recent exposure of critical and severe security issues in the platform (see the Symantec link in the Web References section). Early in the research and development process, we considered the JavaScript package Flot. While we previously drafted version of the GLWLD using jQuery and Dan Vanderkam's Dygraphs, the resulting performance was insufficient and unable to match what is achieved with the Flex framework. However, using the GLD-TSCOM as a guide, we have developed a draft HTML5 version of the GLD using some of the pseudo object-oriented features of the HTML5 platform (see the Software Availability section). The draft dashboard has a limited feature set since the platform composed of JavaScript and HTML5 is not as innately rich as Flash. Additionally, as there are limitations to the Dygraphs package, we employ a different visualization paradigm - users can view multiple variables' data for a single Great Lakes basin with one chart per variable, or view a single variable type for all the Great Lakes basins with one chart per basin. The variable types available are the same as the axis types employed in the Flash GLD. Despite the limitations, the HTML5 dashboard is capable of performing the similar analyses that its Flash counterparts can, and do them on mobile platforms such as Apple Inc.’s iOS (Cupertino, California, USA).