@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Understanding the DayCent model: Calibration, sensitivity, and identifiability through inverse modeling

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Several DayCent submodels were calibrated simultaneously using inverse modeling.Parameter estimation reduced DayCent total sum of weighted squared residuals by 56%.Soil temperature and water content are highly informative in DayCent calibration.Parameter estimation is an efficient way to calibrate soil biogeochemical models.Post-estimation analyses provide unique insights into model structure and function.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
DayCent model,Inverse modeling,PEST,Sensitivity analysis,Parameter identifiability,Parameter correlations,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The ability of biogeochemical ecosystem models to represent agro-ecosystems depends on their correct integration with field observations. We report simultaneous calibration of 67 DayCent model parameters using multiple observation types through inverse modeling using the PEST parameter estimation software. Parameter estimation reduced the total sum of weighted squared residuals by 56% and improved model fit to crop productivity, soil carbon, volumetric soil water content, soil temperature, N2O, and soilNO3−compared to the default simulation. Inverse modeling substantially reduced predictive model error relative to the default model for all model predictions, except for soilNO3−andNH4+. Post-processing analyses provided insights into parameter–observation relationships based on parameter correlations, sensitivity and identifiability. Inverse modeling tools are shown to be a powerful way to systematize and accelerate the process of biogeochemical model interrogation, improving our understanding of model function and the underlying ecosystem biogeochemical processes that they represent.DayCent modelW. J. Parton, S. J. Del Grosso, S. Ogle, K. Paustian,Natural Resource Ecology Laboratory, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA(970) 491-2195century@colostate.edu1998PC with at least 512 K of RAM. A graphics adapter (CGA, EGA, VGA, or Hercules monographic) and 2 Mb of disk space are recommended.WindowsAvailable on request; FreePEST version 13.0John DohertyWatermark Numerical Computing, 336 Cliveden Avenue, Corinda 4075, Australia07 3379 1664johndoherty@ozemail.com.au1994Desktop or LaptopWindows or Linuxdown load from: http://www.pesthomepage.org/Downloads.php; Free.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Greenhouse gases (GHG) released from the soils of terrestrial ecosystems are highly variable in space and time due to the interaction of climatic drivers and ecosystem processes involved in carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) transformation associated with production and consumption of GHGs (Müllera et al., 2002; Rahn et al., 2012; Wrage et al., 2001). Field measurements that capture the high temporal and spatial variability of N2O fluxes (Bouwman et al., 2002; Parkin, 2008; Snyder et al., 2009) or the high spatial variability of soil organic carbon (SOC; Conant and Paustian, 2002; Kravchenko and Robertson, 2011) are expensive, time intensive, and unable to capture the full range of ecological and environmental conditions. When properly informed by field observations, ecosystem process-based models are a powerful way to investigate the effects of management practices on GHG emissions or SOC from different ecosystems, soils, and climates.A number of biogeochemical models have been developed and used to quantify GHG emissions and SOC at both plot and landscape scales, e.g., Century (Parton et al., 1994; Parton, 1996), DayCent (Del Grosso et al., 2005; Parton et al., 1998), denitrification–decomposition (DNDC) (Li et al., 2000), ecosys (Grant et al., 1993) and EPIC (Wang, 2005). These models are mathematical representations of our understanding of the complicated, coupled biogeochemical soil processes that allow us to test our understanding through comparison of model results with observations, and predict responses to conditions that have not yet been observed, such as ecosystem responses to changing climate. Thus these models have become important tools in the study of biogeochemical cycles. Model development is based on a quantitative understanding of the interactions among physical, chemical and biological processes that is critical for predicting the ecosystem response to land use or climate change. The individual underlying processes are represented by sets of equations in component models that are coupled together to describe a full system (Wallach et al., 2014). Models usually have a mechanistic structure that reflects our understanding of the processes governing the system behavior. Many ecosystem models utilize several hundred parameters representing individual physical quantities or combinations of physical quantities that may not be observable through direct measurement. It is thus impossible to measure the sensitivity of system behavior to each of these parameters and information on their identifiability through field observations is often not available. Yet for model users and particularly model developers, an understanding of how model parameters influence the simulation of target ecosystem processes and which field observations are most useful in defining parameter values is essential.The DayCent model is a widely used terrestrial biogeochemical process-based model of intermediate complexity (Del Grosso et al., 2001, 2002; Parton et al., 1998). It has been used to simulate ecosystem responses to changes in climate and agricultural management practices in crop, grassland, forest and savanna ecosystems (Brilli et al., 2013; Cheng et al., 2014; Del Grosso et al., 2008a, 2009; Hartman et al., 2009; Parton et al., 2007; Parton and Rasmussen, 1994). In the USA, it has been used to quantify N2O emissions from agricultural soils for the US National Greenhouse Gas Inventory compiled by the EPA (Olander and Haugen-Kozyra, 2011) and reported annually to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (US EPA, 2014). DayCent consists of sub-models for soil water content and temperature by layer, plant production and allocation of net primary production (NPP), decomposition of litter and soil organic matter (SOM), mineralization of nutrients, N gas emissions from nitrification and denitrification, and CH4 oxidation in unsaturated soils.The accuracy with which a model represents the natural system observed in the field depends on how completely the underlying biophysical processes are represented in the model and how well the model parameters are calibrated to field observations. Like other biogeochemical process-based models, DayCent is typically calibrated manually by adjusting one parameter at a time, thus the calibrated parameters are adjusted in an iterative fashion in multiple stages (Wallach et al., 2014). At each stage, specific processes are targeted (e.g., plant growth and yield, SOC), and the most influential parameters are adjusted to match simulated to observed values (Del Grosso et al., 2011). This approach, however, does not guarantee full extraction of information from the field observations and it is difficult to know when calibration correctly balances the performance of all model components (Nolan et al., 2011). It is generally accepted that manual calibration of complex ecosystem models does not necessarily yield optimal parameter estimates, is somewhat arbitrary, and results in high uncertainty in model parameters and simulated variables (Schwarz et al., 2006). Inverse modeling, based on an objective statistical method and mathematical techniques for stable parameter estimation, has become a widely accepted way to enhance the transfer of information contained in field observations to model parameters (Doherty, 2003; Doherty and Hunt, 2010a; Hunt et al., 2007). Despite mathematical objectivity, some subjectivity is unavoidable: through defining the conceptualization of the inverse problem and making a set of decisions related to regularization, parameter bounds, observation weighting strategy, etc. (Fienen, 2013). The inverse modeling tool PEST (Doherty, 2010) uses an iterative, nonlinear regression approach that involves simultaneous adjustment of multiple model parameters and evaluation of model fit by the sum of weighted squared residuals between field observations and simulated values. In addition to providing sophisticated estimates of the parameter values that provide the best possible fit for a given calibration problem, inverse modeling provides a method for comprehensive model analysis through statistical measures such as the variance/covariance matrix, parameter correlations, confidence intervals, sensitivities, identifiability, and predictive uncertainty analysis (Moore and Doherty, 2005, 2006).These tools can help users recognize model problems that are difficult to identify with manual calibration methods (Hill and Tiedeman, 2007; Poeter and Hill, 1997). For example, it has been repeatedly observed that only a small number of the many parameters used in most environmental models are uniquely estimable with most datasets (Beck and Halfon, 1991; Beven and Freer, 2001; Doherty and Hunt, 2009). The inability to uniquely identify certain model parameters can be the result of their high correlation with other parameters, or lack of sensitivity of the model outputs to these parameters. This sort of problem is extremely difficult to recognize without specialized tools and can lead to misidentification of parameter values, model over-fitting, and inaccurate model projections for conditions outside the range of the calibration dataset. Applying inverse modeling tools provides valuable insight about parameter dependencies, which parameters are exerting the most influence on the simulated values, whether the field observations contain enough information to estimate the model parameters, and the uncertainty associated with the predictions based on the estimated parameter values.Inverse modeling has been applied to soil physics and groundwater studies where inverse simulations are commonly used to parameterize hydraulic functions (e.g., Bitterlich et al., 2005; Kosugi et al., 2001; Lin and Anderson, 2003; Spohrer et al., 2006; Tonkin and Doherty, 2009). It has been also applied to three biogeochemical models, i.e. RZWQM (Malone et al., 2010, 2014; Nolan et al., 2010) to calibrate soil hydraulic, N leaching, N transformation and crop yield parameters; Forest DNDC (Lamers et al., 2007) and DayCent (Rafique et al., 2013) to calibrate parameters associated with C and N trace gas production. These studies performed calibration with a reduced number of degrees of freedom to increase efficiency. To our knowledge, no previous study has demonstrated the full use of inverse modeling by calibrating multiple components of an ecosystem biogeochemical model and explicating model function through the use of associated sensitivity and identifiability methods.The objectives of this study were to demonstrate calibrating the major components of the DayCent model with several types of field observations simultaneously through inverse modeling as implemented in the PEST parameter estimation software (Doherty, 2010), and to provide insights into the function of the model. Outputs simulated using the estimated parameter values were validated against an independent dataset. Using parameter correlations, sensitivity and identifiability we provide insights into the complex DayCent model structure and explore the relationships between model parameters and observations.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The inverse modeling approach can be used to calibrate several components of complex ecosystem biogeochemical models simultaneously. Its application here improved DayCent model performance in simulating crop productivity, SOC, VSWC, soil temperature, and N2O emissions relative to the default DayCent simulation during both the calibration and validation period. Underestimation of the magnitude of pulses in soilNO3−,NH4+and N2O emissions after fertilization events suggests a need to improve the model representation of highly fertilized conditions.Insights gained through inverse modeling improved our understanding of the relationships between DayCent model parameters and observations frequently collected during agronomic trials, which is important for model calibration using manual or inverse modeling techniques. Relative composite sensitivities compared the effects of 67 parameters on the simulated values of individual observation types identifying the key influential parameters that should be included in the model calibration process. Analysis of the parameter correlation structure identified sets of parameters that have a similar effect on the simulated values, indicating that their values cannot be uniquely estimated. Identifiability analysis compared the capabilities of five types of field observations to constrain the parameter values. Soil temperature and VSWC were identified as highly informative observations that should be collected and included in calibration of the DayCent model.The use of inverse modeling has provided insights into the function of the DayCent biogeochemical model that cannot be obtained through normal use of the model for simulation or through manual model calibration procedures.Models like DayCent are formal, quantitative representations of our understanding of how the physical world works. As such, models codify hypotheses that can be tested through experimentation and comparison with observations. The inverse modeling process comprises a set of important tools for testing our understanding of system function as embodied in a model. The inverse modeling process systematically interrogates the model, explicating relationships that are not otherwise obvious to model users and developers. When the inverse model processes brings to light relationships that seem counter-intuitive, this is an opportunity to increase our understanding; reflecting either an error in how physical processes are represented in the model, errors in measurements of observation values, or the existence of relationships in the physical system that were unanticipated and the exploration of which may expand our understanding of the governing processes. Today, the iterative process of formulating our understanding of the world as a quantitative model and testing that model against physical observations is an essential part of how we improve our understanding of complex natural systems. Inverse modeling tools are a powerful way to systematize and accelerate that process, thus improving our understanding of ecosystem biogeochemical processes.