@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A simulation system for biomarker evolution in neurodegenerative disease

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Develop a framework for simulating neurodegenerative disease biomarker data sets.Evaluate the Event Based Model of disease progression for recovering biomarker abnormality orderings from synthetic cross-sectional datasets.Evaluate a differential equation model of disease progression for recovering biomarker trajectories from synthetic longitudinal datasets.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Event-based model,Differential equation model,Alzheimer's disease,Biomarker evolution,Simulation system,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractImage, graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), Huntington's disease (HD), Parkinson's disease (PD), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), present increasing social and economic costs. Determining the sequence and evolution of the symptoms and pathologies of neurodegenerative diseases will enable pre-symptomatic and differential diagnosis, and treatment monitoring for drug trials. Biomarkers have been developed that allow the presence and progression of these pathologies to be measured in vivo. Such biomarkers include cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) measures of proteins implicated in disease pathogenesis, structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) measures of regional volume changes, positron emission tomography (PET) measures of hypometabolism or abnormal protein deposition, and cognitive test scores. Recent multi-centre collaborations, such as the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) for AD, the Parkinson Progression Marker Initiative (PPMI) for PD, and the Track-HD study for HD, collect a diverse set of biomarker data from large cohorts. However, analysing longitudinal biomarker trends in such datasets is difficult due to inherent disease heterogeneity and the long disease time course (thought to be over a decade in some cases), which means that even so-called longitudinal data is almost cross-sectional with respect to the full disease duration. As a result, understanding of the longitudinal evolution of biomarkers in neurodegenerative diseases remains largely hypothetical (Aisen et al., 2010; Frisoni et al., 2010; Jack et al., 2010).In AD for example, the most well validated biomarkers are amyloid PET imaging (Clark et al., 2011; Klunk et al., 2004) and CSF Aβ1-42 (Blennow and Hampel, 2003) to measure brain amyloid pathology; CSF total tau (t-tau) and phosphorylated tau (p-tau) (Blennow and Hampel, 2003) to measure neurofibrillary tangle (NFT) deposition and neuroaxonal damage; FDG-PET imaging (Herholz, 2012) to measure brain hypometabolism; volumetric measures from MRI (Fox and Schott, 2004) to measure neurodegeneration; and a range of cognitive tests to measure memory loss and other cognitive deficits. Hypothetical models of AD describe a distinct sequence in which these biomarkers become abnormal (Jack et al., 2010). Jack et al. (Jack et al., 2010) propose a model in which biomarkers evolve sigmoidally over time with amyloid plaque biomarkers such as CSF Aβ1-42 and amyloid PET preceding NFT deposition and neuroaxonal damage markers such as CSF p-tau, CSF t-tau. These in turn become abnormal prior to FDG-PET hypometabolism and grey-matter atrophy measured on MRI, before finally memory and cognition are affected, as measured using cognitive test scores. More recently, Jack et al. (Jack and Holtzman, 2013; Jack et al., 2013a) have revised this model to account for the possibilities that (1) NFT build up and neurodegeneration precede amyloid plaque development in some cases, and (2) subjects have mixed pathology. However, these models await empirical validation from measured datasets.Data-driven models of disease progression allow longitudinal trends to be reconstructed from cross-sectional or short-term longitudinal datasets. Basic techniques to analyse biomarker trajectories involve staging subjects and then comparing biomarker levels across different disease stages (Bateman et al., 2012; Caroli and Frisoni, 2010; Förster et al., 2012; Jack et al., 2011, 2012; Landau et al., 2012; Lo et al., 2011; Sabuncu et al., 2011; Schuff et al., 2012). This limits the temporal resolution of the model to the accuracy of the patient staging. Patient staging techniques include clinical diagnoses (Förster et al., 2012; Jack et al., 2011; Landau et al., 2012; Lo et al., 2011), which typically comprise just three stages: cognitively normal (CN), mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and clinical AD; cognitive test scores (Caroli and Frisoni, 2010; Jack et al., 2012; Sabuncu et al., 2011), which suffer from floor and ceiling effects; age (Schuff et al., 2012), for which disease stage varies widely amongst subjects; and predicted age of onset based on parents age of onset (Bateman et al., 2012), which can only be established for genetic disease subtypes and is a crude estimate of actual onset. Data-driven models do not require prior knowledge of the stage of a patient along the disease, allowing the reconstruction of a much more fine-grained picture of disease progression. Differential equation models (DEM) (Jack et al., 2013b; Oxtoby et al., 2014; Sabuncu et al., 2011; Villemagne et al., 2013) model short-term longitudinal patient data as a differential cross-section of a common longitudinal biomarker trajectory; the overall biomarker trajectory is obtained by integrating all of the subject's differential cross-sections. Jedynak et al. (Jedynak et al., 2012) and Donohue et al. (Donohue et al., 2014) make a similar set of assumptions to formulate their disease progression models, again modelling each subject's biomarker data as a snapshot of a common progression curve, but further allowing for variation in individual progression rates. Another data-driven model, the Event Based Model (EBM) (Fonteijn et al., 2012; Young et al., 2014) considers disease progression as a sequence of events at which biomarkers become abnormal, thereby allowing direct determination of biomarker ordering from entirely cross-sectional data.However, such data-driven models typically depend on idealised assumptions about the data that they are modelling. First, that all subjects follow the same progression pattern. This is not true in general as large cross-sectional datasets will contain subjects who have different disease subtypes, mixed pathology, have been misdiagnosed, are yet to develop other diseases, or who are aging healthily. Such outliers are particularly prevalent in pre-symptomatic populations where the diagnostic outcome is unknown. Second, a set of parameters that define normal and abnormal biomarker levels. This is difficult to determine due to the high proportions of pre-symptomatic subjects in typical control populations (for example, a significant proportion of cognitively normal elderly subjects have been found to have biomarker changes consistent with AD (Rowe et al., 2010; Schott et al., 2010)), and misdiagnosis in diseased populations. Third, that the underlying disease time course is well sampled. In reality, pre-symptomatic subjects may not go on to develop the neurodegenerative disease being investigated and therefore the early disease stages might be under sampled or misrepresented, and diseased subjects may not be representative of the very late disease stages where the population thins and severe illness can make data hard to collect.Here we present a simulation system to generate synthetic biomarker datasets that represent the heterogeneity of sporadic neurodegenerative diseases. Although still based on a model of disease progression, it encapsulates many more variables than the simpler models that are parsimonious enough to fit to current data sets. Thus it provides a platform to evaluate the effect of more brutal simplifications necessary to obtain robust fitting results from working models. Here, we demonstrate this simulation system by evaluating the performance of the EBM and a DEM in determining the sequence of biomarker abnormality from simulated data.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
