@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Applying Occam's razor to global agricultural land use change

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The complexity of global agricultural LUC can be represented with simple processes.The approach allows efficient exploration of the parameter uncertainty range.Changes in cereal yields in developing countries are an essential driver of LUC.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Global agricultural land-use,Parsimonious models,Parameter uncertainty,Sensitivity analysis,Cereal yields,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We present a parsimonious agricultural land-use model that is designed to replicate global land-use change while allowing the exploration of uncertainties in input parameters. At the global scale, the modelled uncertainty range of agricultural land-use change covers observed land-use change. Spatial patterns of cropland change at the country level are simulated less satisfactorily, but temporal trends of cropland change in large agricultural nations were replicated by the model. A variance-based global sensitivity analysis showed that uncertainties in the input parameters representing to consumption preferences are important for changes in global agricultural areas. However, uncertainties in technological change had the largest effect on cereal yields and changes in global agricultural area. Uncertainties related to technological change in developing countries were most important for modelling the extent of cropland. The performance of the model suggests that highly generalised representations of socio-economic processes can be used to replicate global land-use change.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Land-use is a crucial link between human activities and the natural environment (Foley et al., 2005). It is central to the sustainable development debate (Turner et al., 2007), especially concerning food security (Brown and Funk, 2008; Fresco, 2009; Lobell et al., 2008), but also climate change (Brovkin et al., 2006), soil quality (Guo and Gifford, 2002; Lal, 2008), water resources (Rockström et al., 2009; Scanlon et al., 2005), biogeochemical cycles (Barth et al., 2005; Ramankutty et al., 2007), biodiversity (de Chazal and Rounsevell, 2009; Scharlemann and Laurance, 2008), human health (Xu et al., 2008) and fire activity (Cochrane and Barber, 2009). More than a third of the global land area is used for agriculture as cropland or pasture (FAOSTAT, 2012), with the remaining land consisting mainly of deserts, mountains, tundra, cities, and ecological reserves (Foley et al., 2011), that include forests and unmanaged grasslands. Between 1961 and 2009, the global population doubled, but agricultural area only increased by 10% (FAOSTAT, 2012). Increasing food demand was met by the intensification of agricultural production arising from the increased use of fertilizers and irrigation (Foley et al., 2011). Land-use intensification has caused detrimental environmental impacts such as salinization, biodiversity loss, and groundwater pollution and depletion (Foley et al., 2011). Expanding agricultural areas also encroach on natural ecosystems resulting in deforestation, conversion of natural grasslands and wetland drainage. These changes are predicted to have far-reaching consequences, impacting on many aspects of the Earth system (Foley et al., 2011). Knowledge about land-use change (LUC) is important, therefore, in understanding how to feed a growing global population whilst simultaneously avoiding environmental damage.Land-use models are designed to systematically analyse these complex structures, interactions and feedbacks (Deffuant et al., 2012; Heistermann et al., 2006; Rounsevell et al., 2012) and have proven to be useful in both conceptualizing and testing our understanding of the role of different drivers and processes in LUC (Alcamo et al., 2011; Verburg et al., 2009). Because land systems are complex, a variety of land-use models have been developed that apply different methodological approaches (Schaldach and Priess, 2008) across global, continental, or regional scales (Heistermann et al., 2006; Letourneau et al., 2012). These include Markov Chains, empirical–statistical functions, optimization strategies, cellular automata, micro simulation and system dynamics models (Lambin et al., 2000; Parker et al., 2008), with a focus on biophysical or economic processes or both (Lotze-Campen et al., 2008; van Tongeren et al., 2001).Integrated assessment models (IAMs) include interactions between society, the biosphere and the climate system (Heistermann et al., 2006; Hurtt et al., 2011). Land-use change and land management are one of the components of the broader IAM approach and has been the focus of considerable attention in recent years. For instance, in the IAM IMAGE (Integrated Model to Assess the Global Environment) the land-use module was refined by replacing a set of decision rules to allocate land cover change with an approach to represent land-use as land-use systems. Land-use systems are combinations of land cover, land-use (including livestock), population and accessibility, and represent the heterogeneity of landscape patterns and the interactions of humans with the environment (Letourneau et al., 2012). A similar approach is applied in other types of models, e.g. in the CLUMondo (Conversion of Land Use change Mondo) land-use allocation model. In CLUMondo changes in the land system are allocated to fulfil various demands at the same time and with multiple combinations of land systems (van Asselen and Verburg, 2013).Other developments include the integration of the use of water for food production in global food security modelling, which is, for example, an integrated component of the Model of Agricultural Production and its Impact on the Environment (MAgPIE; Lotze-Campen et al., 2008). Another example of the integration of water for food production in global land use modelling is IMPACT (International Model for Policy Analysis of Agricultural Commodities and Trade), where cropland changes are modelled for food production units, accounting for interactions between land-use and the hydrology of the food producing watershed (Rosegrant et al., 2013). Furthermore, bioenergy is increasingly considered as a driver of global LUC, for instance in 7 out of 10 global agro-economic models that participated in a recent comparison of LUC trajectories up to 2050 (Schmitz et al., 2014). The GLOBIOM (Global Biosphere Management Model), for example, has been used to study the impact of first and second generation biofuel on direct and indirect land-use and its effects on greenhouse gas balances, but the model can also assess the impact of food production on land and water resources (Havlík et al., 2011; Kraxner et al., 2013; Schneider et al., 2011). While the above models are spatially explicit, the SIMPLE (Simplified International Model of agricultural Prices Land-use and the Environment) model is, by contrast, neither spatially explicit nor dynamic, but calculates cropland change at the global scale with a set of equations based on the supply and demand elasticity of agricultural products and land from one point in time (e.g., 1961) to another (e.g., 2006; Baldos and Hertel, 2013).Hence, land-use models aspire to represent the effects and interactions of multiple global drivers, differing spatial extents and turnover times of key ecological and social processes, and connections between individual actions, institutional responses, and ecological changes across these multiple dimensions of scale. In practice, it is very challenging to develop global land-use models that simulate all of the key processes in the land system for both human activity and the biophysical environment (Schaldach and Priess, 2008; Schaldach et al., 2011). All models are imperfect representations, or simplifications, of a real world observation. The nature and extent of these simplifications usually reflects the judgement of individual model developers and the research question addressed by the model. While more complex models arguably have a better representation of system processes, they are less transparent than simpler models and there is a greater potential for error propagation between coupled sub-models. Transparency is important in communicating results, especially where the purpose of a model is to inform policy making (Giupponi et al., 2013; Rounsevell et al., 2012). Additionally, the associated computational overhead of complex models is such that applications are limited by the number of possible model runs within a reasonable amount of time. Simpler models are easier to formulate, reducing the probability of human-induced errors, and are computationally inexpensive which makes them amenable to sensitivity experiments using probabilistic estimates of uncertain parameters (Tao et al., 2009; Tebaldi and Lobell, 2008).Sensitivity analysis (SA) increases the credibility and utility of models and assists in identifying areas of model improvement (Norton, 2015). SA should be applied more commonly as part of modelling exercises, but is rarely undertaken especially for global scale land-use modelling studies (Letourneau et al., 2012). SA has emerged as part of “post-normal science” when dealing with highly uncertain systems, such that: “uncertainty is not banished, but is managed, and values are not presupposed, but are made explicit” (Funtowicz and Ravetz, 1993, 1990, p. 740). However, model simplification risks neglecting important system processes or scales that contribute to real-world phenomena. A model that is unable to replicate these phenomena, at least in part, with appropriate levels of realism is of limited value. Moreover, simplification of a modelled system increases the number and arguably the complexity of assumptions (Wainwright and Mulligan, 2004). Conversely, identifying simple models that perform well, i.e., in comparison with observations and for which parameter sensitivities are known, can support understanding of the key processes that control system behaviour. In this paper we address the question: can the temporal trends and large-scale spatial patterns in global agricultural land-use be understood from simplified socio-economic processes at the country level? We do this by:1.Developing a simple conceptual model of the socio-economic processes that determine global agricultural land-use change (represented here by cropland and grassland areas);Representing this simple conceptual model within the formulation of a parsimonious land-use model (PLUM);-Testing the concept by evaluating the model against observational data for the period 1991–2010; andExploring the uncertainty and sensitivity of global cropland to the variability in global input parameters using a variance-based global sensitivity analysis.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
