@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Estimation of Purkinje trees from electro-anatomical mapping of the left ventricle using minimal cost geodesics

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Estimation of the Purkinje system of the left ventricle from patient specific data.Estimation of the Purkinje Myocardial Junctions using critical points.Successful recovery of the Local Activation times from estimated trees.Validation of the estimation methods on simplistic and realistic simulations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Purkinje system,Minimal cost geodesic paths,Fast marching,Singular points,Electro-anatomical mapping,Cardiac arrhythmias,Fascicular ventricular tachycardia,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The electrical activation of the heart is a complex physiological process that is essential for the understanding of several cardiac dysfunctions, such as ventricular tachycardia (VT). Nowadays, patient-specific activation times on ventricular chambers can be estimated from electro-anatomical maps, providing crucial information to clinicians for guiding cardiac radio-frequency ablation treatment. However, some relevant electrical pathways such as those of the Purkinje system are very difficult to interpret from these maps due to sparsity of data and the limited spatial resolution of the system. We present here a novel method to estimate these fast electrical pathways from the local activations maps (LATs) obtained from electro-anatomical maps. The location of Purkinje-myocardial junctions (PMJs) is estimated considering them as critical points of a distance map defined by the activation maps, and then minimal cost geodesic paths are computed on the ventricular surface between the detected junctions. Experiments to validate the proposed method have been carried out in simplified and realistic simulated data, showing good performance on recovering the main characteristics of simulated Purkinje networks (e.g. PMJs). A feasibility study with real cases of fascicular VT was also performed, showing promising results.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Computational models of the heart and biophysical simulations are increasingly helping to understand clinical data and dissect the wide range of pathological mechanisms in the diseased heart (Boyle et al., 2013; Vigmond et al., 2009). An ongoing concern is to recognize which are the anatomical components required to realistically model ventricular arrhythmias (Bishop et al., 2010; Plank et al., 2009), identifying which ones can be tailored to a given patient using imaging information, and which ones rely on ex-vivo population experiments and observations. In cardiac electrophysiology, the cardiac conduction system (CCS) is a key component that meets both requirements. On the one side its presence is mandatory in several modeling applications since it is known to be involved in arrhythmia initiation and maintenance as well as in other diseases such as left bundle block or bundle branch re-entry VT and fascicular (PK-related) VT and their associated therapies (Li et al., 2002; Nogami, 2011). On the other side, its structure cannot be visualized in-vivo which have led to the construction of population-based computational models of the distal section of the CCS in the ventricles (Behradfar et al., 2014; Deo et al., 2010; Sebastian et al., 2013; Walton et al., 2014). Among the techniques that have been used to model the geometry of the CCS there are fractal models (Abboud et al., 1991), manually delineated models (Romero et al., 2010), models guided by ex-vivo electrical recordings (Pollard and Barr, 1990), models guided by histological information (Sebastian et al., 2013), and models guided by high-resolution images in animals (Vadakkumpadan et al., 2009). The reader is referred to Sebastian et al. (2013) for a review on different techniques commonly used to build computer models of the CCS. The personalization of such models with in vivo patient specific data has been discussed in the past. We presented recently one of the first computational methods to personalize the CCS from in-vivo EAM data (Cárdenes et al., 2014), which is extended and validated here. Very recently, Vergara et al. (2014) and Palamara et al. (2014) published an enhanced approach based on personalizing a generic model built with L-systems (Sebastian et al., 2011; 2013). In their method the initial location of Purkinje-myocardial junctions (PMJs) is subsequently altered by pruning and modifying a generic CCS to minimize differences with an electro-anatomical mapping (EAM) previously acquired.One potential application where such PK models are crucial is the treatment of ventricular tachycardias (e.g. fascicular or substrate-related VTs) with radio-frequency ablation (RFA) where very limited patient-specific information on the CCS is used. The analysis of the CCS contribution is very complex since the only available information for electrophysiologists are a set of few scattered low-amplitude electrograms obtained from EAMs. Although these interventions have been notably improved in the last years by integrating patient-specific imaging data with EAM (Fernández-Armenta et al., 2013; Piers et al., 2013) to better targeting ablation sites, information on the CCS has never been included. This is particularly important in severe fascicular VTs where catheter ablation of the PMJs is recommended (Aliot et al., 2009; Stevenson and Soejima, 2007), although not always the key target (Boyle et al., 2013), and in substrate-related VTs to avoid partial ablation of the CCS. Besides RFA, biophysical models including PK could also help on testing hypothesis about the role of the CCS to optimize cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT) in heart failure patients.In this paper we present a methodology based on differential geometry to partially estimate the anatomy of the functional segments of the CCS for a specific patient. The method estimates first the PMJs locations from local activation time (LAT) maps and then, weighted geodesic paths are computed to link the detected PMJs with the bundle of His, following the underlying LATs measured from the EAMs.This method was verified on simulated simplified CCS and validated using detailed multi-scale biophysical electrophysiological models, in a realistic ventricular anatomy that includes different Purkinje networks. Finally, the proposed methodology was applied to three clinical datasets to evaluate the feasibility of the method with real data.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we have proposed a methodology that automatically detects the PMJs of the CCS from LAT maps on a LV surface, assuming that there are critical points on a Riemannian surface defined by the LV and its LAT map and making use of their non-differentiability characteristics. From these PMJs we have proposed a method that generates a simplified estimation of the PK network that is modeled as a tree by computing weighted minimal cost geodesics on the LV surface to join the detected PMJs. To our knowledge, this is one of the first computational attempts to reconstruct the PK network from in vivo electrical human measurements, together with our preliminary work (Cárdenes et al., 2014) and recent developments of Vergara et al. (2014) and Palamara et al. (2014). We have shown in simplified and realistic simulation scenarios that detection of PMJs is feasible and that estimation of PKTs provides solutions that are functionally similar to realistic simulations. The discrepancies between the LAT maps derived from our estimated tress and the reference realistic LATs were lower than 10 ms in 80% of the points. We also showed that the methods were stable in the presence of noise.The proposed methodology has also been applied to a limited set of clinical data, providing reasonable results. However, the PKTs generated in those cases have to be carefully interpreted since LAT maps were reconstructed using a low number of initial points to generate the interpolated activation maps. The application of differential geometry concepts on EAM data presented in this paper opens up the possibility for better visualization and interpretation of this type of data in other clinical scenarios where abnormal electrical pathways are important such as in substrate-related VTs. Furthermore we also plan as future work to combine the proposed methodology with advanced signal processing methods, similar to the ones we recently published (Alcaine et al., 2014), applied directly to 1D electrograms from EAM data to automatically detect PMJs, thus complementing information obtained from LAT maps. Finally, to extend the current validation, a full 3D torso model could be used to obtain the virtual electrogram by solving the forward problem of electrophysiology and then compare it to a measured ECG. However, additional uncertainties will have to be taken into account to fully validate the method.