@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Modelling PM2.5 impact indicators in Europe: Health effects and legal compliance

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present PM2.5 forecasts for 1875 individual air quality monitoring stations in Europe.Calculations bridge the gap between regional background and street canyons.Compliance with the EU limit value is achieved easily, but not with the WHO guideline.We quantify EU wide health benefits of future emission control legislation scenarios.We analyse the relationship between compliance and population exposure.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Integrated assessment,GAINS,Particulate matter,Premature mortality,Air quality,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Long-term exposure to fine particulate matter (PM2.5) has been shown to have significant negative impacts on human health. It is estimated that current levels of air pollution shorten the statistical life expectancy of European citizens by several months. The GAINS integrated assessment model calculates shortening of life expectancy from population exposure to PM2.5 using epidemiologically-derived health impact functions. In addition, GAINS estimates PM2.5 concentrations at 1875 air quality monitoring stations located in diverse environments ranging from remote background locations to busy street canyons. In this article, different approaches to dealing with the PM2.5 pollution problem are compared. We assess for the present and future the attainment of EU and WHO air quality standards for PM2.5 and estimate the loss of life expectancy under different policy scenarios developed for the ongoing revision of the EU Air Quality Legislation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
During recent years, several long-term cohort studies have demonstrated a strong association between human exposure to fine particulate matter below 2.5 μm aerodynamic diameter (PM2.5) and premature death (Dockery et al., 1993; Pope et al., 2002; Henschel and Chan, 2013; Beelen et al., 2014). Long-term exposure to elevated levels of PM2.5 leads to increased risk for a variety of diseases, such as cardiovascular disease, ischemic heart disease, and respiratory diseases (Lim et al., 2012). Effects of short-term exposure to ambient PM2.5 have also been demonstrated; however, these are not the topic of this study.Consequently, PM2.5 has received increased attention in air quality legislation in recent years, prompting the establishment of guideline and legally binding limit values in many countries as well as the European Union (EU). The World Health Organisation (WHO) states a guideline value of 10 μg/m3 annual mean concentration that should not be exceeded in order to ensure healthy conditions. The United States Environmental Protection Agency has recently revised its standard to be 12 μg/m3, while the EU set forth a target value of 25 μg/m3 that is to become a limit value in 2015 (EU, 2008). Compliance with this limit has to be established at a fixed set of individual air quality monitoring stations, largely congruent with the stations reported to AirBase, the European Air Quality Database.The existence of a threshold value of PM2.5 exposure that can be considered safe for human health is still under debate, partly because few observations are available at clean environments. For the cohorts analysed in recent assessments, no levelling off of effects could be observed (Crouse et al., 2012; WHO, 2013). For most of the populated places in Europe and worldwide however, this question is of less relevance as their PM concentrations are considerably above such levels. Despite successful efforts to reduce ambient PM2.5 concentrations in Europe, concentration levels are well above the WHO guideline value (EEA, 2013). Hot spot areas are found in the Po valley in Northern Italy, parts of Poland, and many of the large cities in both old and new member states of the EU, where the WHO guideline is exceeded by factors of up to five.PM is both a local and a regional issue, as contributions stem both from long-range transboundary transport of pollution, urban increments in cities, and local traffic increments within street canyons. Important sources of PM emissions include domestic heating, particularly coal and wood burning, road transport with contributions from both exhaust (mostly diesel) as well as non-exhaust emissions from brake and tyre wear, and industrial combustion. However, as PM consists not only of primary particles but also secondary particles formed in the atmosphere from precursor gases, a range of other pollutants and anthropogenic activities from which they are emitted, such as agriculture, contribute strongly to the problem. Secondary inorganic aerosol consists of sulphate formed from sulphur dioxide (SO2) emissions, nitrate formed from reactive nitrogen oxides (NOx) emissions, and ammonium formed from ammonia (NH3) emissions. Emissions of non-methane volatile organic compounds (VOCs) are responsible for the formation of secondary organic aerosol (SOA). For an integrated approach to tackle the PM problem, all sources need to be taken into account to design a control strategy.Several research groups have established integrated assessment modelling tools that have been used to quantify the effects of different policy options on anthropogenic emissions and their impacts on environmental parameters, on a national (Oxley and ApSimon, 2007; Oxley et al., 2013), regional (Amann et al., 2011) or global scale (Van Dingenen et al., 2014). The GAINS integrated assessment model (Amann et al., 2011) provides for the whole of Europe a consistent framework that combines bottom-up emission calculations from projections of anthropogenic activity in all economic sectors and data on control technologies and their emission factors for various pollutants with an impact calculation scheme, providing as output variables (among others) projections on premature mortality from exposure to ambient air pollution, as well as projections of ambient PM2.5 concentrations at 1875 air quality monitoring stations reporting to the AirBase European Air Quality Database. Hence, GAINS provides estimates of two quantities relevant to policy: The actual target of air quality legislation is the reduction of health and environmental damage,11Note, e.g., the formulation of the EU Thematic Strategy on Air Pollution, which states the objective to attain “levels of air quality that do not give rise to significant negative impacts on, and risks to human health and the environment”.which cannot be measured directly, while limit values pertain to measured concentrations at individual stations which are supposed to be representative of their surroundings.Presently, the EU is undertaking a revision of the existing air quality legislation, with the aim to establish new national emission reduction commitments for the year 2030. The GAINS model has been extensively employed in this policy process to provide an analysis of the expected evolution of emissions and their reduction potentials, and to quantify the projected impacts of different policy options.This paper explains the methodology used in GAINS and provides for the first time projections of station-based PM2.5 concentrations as well as projections of calculated health benefits for different scenarios in the year 2030. We analyse a baseline scenario assuming only implementation of currently agreed legislation, a mitigation scenario investigating the potential for reductions if all available control technologies are employed to their maximum feasible extent, and a policy scenario corresponding to the EU Commission proposal for a new Emission Ceilings Directive for 2030 as published December 2013 (European Commission, 2013). We investigate the two different indicators and quantify their relationship, which may become relevant if the currently rather high limit value is to be revised in the future.This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 reiterates the GAINS methodology for calculating premature mortality, as well as PM2.5 concentrations for individual stations. Section 3 provides a validation of the modelled station-by-station concentrations. Section 4 presents results in terms of station concentrations and premature mortality for 2009 and projections for the year 2030 following the different scenarios. A simple relation between the two indicators is introduced and discussed. Conclusions are presented in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper has discussed the PM2.5 related air quality indicators calculated in the GAINS integrated assessment model. Premature mortality is calculated from anthropogenic PM2.5 concentrations on a 7 × 7 km grid, and compliance with limit values is calculated from PM2.5 concentrations at monitoring stations, based on a combination of bottom-up modelled fields and past observations.As an application of the modelling scheme, we explored potential impacts of the emission control scenarios in 2030 that are used as a basis for the revision of the EU air quality legislation. Ultimately, the driver for limit values on ambient concentrations of PM2.5 has been concern for human health. The EU aims in its 7th Environment Action Program at attaining “levels of air quality that do not give rise to significant negative impacts on, and risks to human health and environment”. While emission ceilings are set for each Member State individually, the legal indicator for air quality is compliance with a fixed limit value on annual mean concentrations at individual monitoring stations.As shown in Section 4, current EU emission control legislation will lead to a significant decrease of ambient PM2.5 concentrations in comparison with past/present levels. By the year 2030, more than 98% of all stations can be assumed to meet the current EU limit value on PM2.5 of 25 μg/m3 annual mean concentration without any further political action. However, at the same time the life expectancy of European citizens will remain shortened by several months, and acceptable levels of ambient PM2.5 as indicated by the WHO guideline cannot be reached without further measures.From the above discussion, it is obvious that the current limit value on PM2.5 is hardly suited to motivate further emission controls in Europe's most polluted areas. The question arises how a limit value might be set which would achieve this but would still be attainable with reasonable efforts. From the analysis presented in Section 4.3, attainment of the WHO guideline seems infeasible at around 25% of the analysed monitoring stations. However, a large majority of stations (80–90%) is projected to have anthropogenic PM2.5 concentrations below 12 μg/m3 in 2030 under the MTFR as well as CLAPP scenarios, hence attaining the US EPA standard with Europe-wide emission control measures. For the remaining stations, local measures such as traffic regulations, and fuel switches in domestic heating would be needed on top of the purely technical measures analysed here. Using the linear relation derived in Sect. 4.4., this concentration level would translate into an average population exposure of 7.9–10 μg/m3 depending on the linear fit used. Applying EU average life table factors, this corresponds to 4.9–6.3 months of life expectancy lost; hence a limit value in the order of the US standard would limit loss of life expectancy to roughly half a year everywhere.