@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Methods and workflow for spatial conservation prioritization using Zonation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We summarize spatial conservation prioritization analysis workflow using Zonation.We focus on common pre- and post-processing stages of analysis.The utility of several Zonation analysis types are discussed.We summarize operational best-case and worst-case scenarios for analysis stages.This study helps conservation practitioners implement prioritization analyses.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Conservation planning,Decision analysis,Decision support tool,Spatial conservation prioritization,Systematic conservation planning,Zonation software,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Spatial conservation prioritization concerns the effective allocation of conservation action. Its stages include development of an ecologically based model of conservation value, data pre-processing, spatial prioritization analysis, and interpretation of results for conservation action. Here we investigate the details of each stage for analyses done using the Zonation prioritization framework. While there is much literature about analytical methods implemented in Zonation, there is only scattered information available about what happens before and after the computational analysis. Here we fill this information gap by summarizing the pre-analysis and post-analysis stages of the Zonation framework. Concerning the entire process, we summarize the full workflow and list examples of operational best-case, worst-case, and typical scenarios for each analysis stage. We discuss resources needed in different analysis stages. We also discuss benefits, disadvantages, and risks involved in the application of spatial prioritization from the perspective of different stakeholders. Concerning pre-analysis stages, we explain the development of the ecological model and discuss the setting of priority weights and connectivity responses. We also explain practical aspects of data pre-processing and the post-processing interpretation of results for different conservation objectives. This work facilitates well-informed design and application of Zonation analyses for the purpose of spatial conservation planning. It should be useful for both scientists working on conservation related research as well as for practitioners looking for useful tools for conservation resource allocation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Conservation prioritization is about decision support for conservation planning (Ferrier and Wintle, 2009). It aims to answer questions about when, where, and how we can efficiently achieve conservation goals (Pressey et al., 2007; Wilson et al., 2007). Spatial conservation prioritization utilizes computational tools and analyses that are relevant for ecologically informed spatial allocation of conservation actions or placement of other land uses (Kukkala and Moilanen, 2012). Methods of spatial prioritization evolved starting from simple complementarity-based minimum set reserve selection algorithms that operated on relatively small data sets and presence-absence data (reviewed by Sarkar et al. (2006)). More recently, methods have become able to accommodate various cost factors and much increased ecological realism by implementing, for example, methods to deal with species-specific connectivity and uncertainty, and software implementations have become able to deal with much larger landscapes and a variety of data types (Kukkala and Moilanen, 2012).Spatial conservation prioritisation is a form of conservation assessment (sensuKnight et al., 2006) which can be utilized as a technical phase inside the broader operational model of systematic conservation planning (SCP) that focuses on planning, implementing, and monitoring conservation (Margules and Pressey, 2000; Margules and Sarkar, 2007; Pressey and Bottrill, 2008; Kukkala and Moilanen, 2012). In this study, we concentrate on the interface between spatial conservation prioritization and implementation-oriented conservation planning, specifically in the context of the Zonation spatial planning software22Zonation version 3 is freely available from http://cbig.it.helsinki.fi/software/zonation/ for MS Windows.(Moilanen et al., 2005, 2009b).There are several categories of factors that can introduce their own nuances into prioritization problems (Moilanen et al., 2009c). Details of the planning problem depend on the type of conservation action considered, including protection, management, maintenance, and restoration of habitats (Pressey et al., 2007; Wilson et al., 2009). A reserve network could be planned for immediate implementation or for recurrent yearly operations (Costello and Polasky, 2004; Pressey et al., 2007). Biodiversity could be considered from the perspective of representation in a reserve network or from the perspective of landscape-wide retention, which involves potential threats and opportunities both within reserves and the surrounding landscape (Pressey et al., 2004). The level of detail included in the ecological model that explicitly or implicitly underlies the decision-making influences the difficulty of implementing a decision analysis (Possingham et al., 2000; Wilson et al., 2009).Spatial conservation prioritization is usually done within a wider decision-making context in which the needs of many land users and stakeholders are acknowledged (Ferrier and Wintle, 2009). At the outset of any planning process, it is crucial that objectives (aims, goals) are explicitly set for all of the processes and criteria involved (Ferrier and Wintle, 2009; Runge et al., 2011). This also includes the explicit consideration of which decision-support tool is most suitable for the task at hand which can involve integrating large biological and socio-economic datasets as well as several software tools (Segan et al., 2011). Furthermore, setting of objectives (Opdam et al., 2002; Wilson et al., 2009), stakeholder involvement (Knight et al., 2006), policy recommendations (Sutherland et al., 2006), quality verification (Langford et al., 2011), and monitoring (Lindenmayer and Likens, 2009) are all stages that may be repeated over periods of many years.Here we describe a workflow for running a conservation prioritization analysis with the Zonation software (see Moilanen et al., 2005, 2009b, 2011a, 2012; Moilanen and Arponen, 2011 for references). Zonation has been applied across terrestrial, riverine, marine, and urban environments (Leathwick et al., 2008; Moilanen et al., 2008; Gordon et al., 2009). It includes a set of useful analysis features, including uncertainty analysis and seven ways of dealing with connectivity (Section 2.4). In can operate on species, ecosystems (Kremen et al., 2008; Lehtomäki et al., 2009), ecosystem services (Moilanen et al., 2011a; Thomas et al., 2012), or any such biodiversity feature, and can be applied to landscapes up to tens of millions of elements (grid cells) of biodiversity feature data (Arponen et al., 2012). In addition to target-based planning (Carwardine et al., 2009), Zonation includes multiple alternative ways of aggregating conservation value across species and space (Moilanen, 2007).As with any sophisticated tool, using Zonation requires both conceptual understanding about analysis options as well as experience and knowledge on how to establish a sensible workflow, which can be a major obstacle in the use of Zonation, due to the many analysis options available. While the analytical features available in Zonation are well documented, there is a scarcity of accessible information about what should happen before and after the computational analysis itself. Here we summarize previously scattered information about the process of implementing spatial conservation prioritization with Zonation. We explain all parts of the typical workflow, concentrating on what happens before and after the computational analysis itself. While the present work is most relevant for Zonation, much of the workflow should be relevant for any method and software that is applied for spatial prioritization.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
