@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Learning-based prediction of gestational age from ultrasound images of the fetal brain

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a model to predict gestational age from 3D fetal brain ultrasound images.A feature-based model characterizes spatial and temporal brain development.We capitalize on sonographic image patterns and clinical measures to predict age.Use of clinical measurements and neuroimage information improves age predictions.We identify the most age-discriminating brain anatomies in early brain development.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fetal brain ultrasound,Gestational age,Regression forest,Surface parametrization,Brain development,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We propose an automated framework for predicting gestational age (GA) and neurodevelopmental maturation of a fetus based on 3D ultrasound (US) brain image appearance. Our method capitalizes on age-related sonographic image patterns in conjunction with clinical measurements to develop, for the first time, a predictive age model which improves on the GA-prediction potential of US images. The framework benefits from a manifold surface representation of the fetal head which delineates the inner skull boundary and serves as a common coordinate system based on cranial position. This allows for fast and efficient sampling of anatomically-corresponding brain regions to achieve like-for-like structural comparison of different developmental stages. We develop bespoke features which capture neurosonographic patterns in 3D images, and using a regression forest classifier, we characterize structural brain development both spatially and temporally to capture the natural variation existing in a healthy population(N=447)over an age range of active brain maturation (18–34weeks).On a routine clinical dataset(N=187)our age prediction results strongly correlate with true GA(r=0.98,accurate within±6.10days), confirming the link between maturational progression and neurosonographic activity observable across gestation. Our model also outperforms current clinical methods by ±4.57 days in the third trimester—a period complicated by biological variations in the fetal population. Through feature selection, the model successfully identified the most age-discriminating anatomies over this age range as being the Sylvian fissure, cingulate, and callosal sulci.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Accurate gestational age (GA) estimation forms an integral part of obstetric prenatal care. It defines the estimated date of delivery (EDD), and can influence the success or safety of a clinical intervention. Moreover, it is essential for the screening of fetal abnormalities. The anomaly scan, which is routinely offered in the early second trimester, forms the legal basis for time-critical care decisions as it enables expectant parents to make informed reproductive decisions about their unborn child (e.g. termination of pregnancy, intrauterine therapy or intervention) (National Collaborating Centre for Women’s and Children’s Health, 2008).Traditional approaches to GA estimation include (a) menstrual dating, which makes use of the first day of the last menstrual period (LMP) as a reference point for the EDD and (b) extraction of diameter and circumference measurements from 2D ultrasound (US) images of the fetal cranium, abdomen, and femur (ISUOG, 2007). These measurements are regressed to population-based dating charts to estimate age and assess normality of fetal growth (Loughna et al., 2009). However, beyond 24 post-menstrual weeks, measurement accuracy is dependent on operator expertise and compromised by increasing biological variation, inconsistencies in skull size approximation, and subjectivity in 2D diagnostic plane finding, all contributing to age approximation errors (Bottomley and Bourne, 2009). As pregnancy advances and biological variation amongst normal fetuses increases, the range of values of each biometric measurement associated with a specific GA also increases and so equations based upon size become less accurate. In practice, this means that whilst the predictive error at 22weeks’ GA (±10days, Altman and Chitty (1997)) is considered acceptable in the majority of clinical settings, the predictive error at 28–42weeks (±18days) is considered to offer little clinical value (Hadlock et al., 1983).Pregnancy dating becomes particularly important in low-income settings where pregnant women typically attend for obstetric care late in pregnancy, when menstrual history is unavailable or unreliable. In the absence of clinically-useful LMP information, US measurements provide the most accurate estimation of GA (Geirsson, 1991). However, in the third trimester of pregnancy, even US-based dating may produce estimation errors up to ±3weeks (Hadlock et al., 1984; Altman and Chitty, 1997). Thus, in a setting where screening occurs in the second and third trimesters, the error margins yielded by current methods render them as not clinically useful, potentiating the need for alternative techniques for estimating GA.Post-mortem neuroanatomical studies have observed that during early development the fetal brain undergoes dramatic structural changes and have established a spatiotemporal timetable which characterises normal brain development (Chi et al., 1977; Dorovini-Zis and Dolman, 1977). Specifically, the fetal brain surface, or cortex, rapidly transitions from a relatively smooth agyric surface in the early second trimester to progressively bearing more indentations or folds (gyrification) over the course of pregnancy until it resembles the adult brain at birth. Deviations from this pattern have been indicative of cortical malformations as a result of defective neuronal migration, as is the case of lissencephaly which occurs when gyrification is reduced or stunted. Depending on severity, cortical malformation may result in adverse outcomes ranging from developmental delays and retardation to infant mortality (Ghai et al., 2006). This, in turn, is suggestive of a direct link between healthy gyrification and chronological age. These findings raise the question whether changes in brain morphology could be used as a robust indicator of GA and developmental normality in clinical practice.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
