@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A backcasting approach for matching regional ecosystem services supply and demand

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a novel backcasting approach for ecosystem services (ES) assessments.The approach links normative visions with explorative land-use and ES modeling.Modeling ES transition pathways identifies desirable land-use policy strategies.Type, combination and timing of policy interventions influence ES benefits.Effectiveness of policy strategies depends on global boundary conditions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Backcasting,Ecosystem services,Normative vision,Social-ecological modeling,Policy strategies,Transition pathways,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Ecosystem services (ES) modeling studies typically use a forecasting approach to predict scenarios of future ES provision. Usually, these forecasts do not inform on how specific policy alternatives will influence future ES supply and whether this supply can match ES demand – important information for policy-makers in practice. Addressing these gaps, we present a multi-method backcasting approach that links normative visions with explorative land-use and ES modeling to infer land-use policy strategies for matching regional ES supply and demand. Applied to a case study, the approach develops and evaluates a variety of ES transition pathways and identifies types, combinations and timings of policy interventions that increase ES benefits. By making explicit ES sensitivity towards regional policy strategies and global boundary conditions over time, the approach allows to address key uncertainties involved in ES modeling studies.Integrated backcasting modeling system BackESSibyl H. Brunner, Adrienne Grêt-Regamey, Simon Peter, Simon Briner, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology; Robert Huber, Swiss Federal Institute for Forest, Snow and Landscape Research. The model version presented in this paper and example input data are offered free of charge from the corresponding author (sbrunner@ethz.ch)Linear Programing Language (LPL), Virtual Optima; ILOG CPLEX Optimization Studio, IBMLPL academic license available on purchase, http://www.virtual-optima.com/en/index.html; CPLEX academic license available at no charge, http://www-01.ibm.com/software/commerce/optimization/cplex-optimizer/index.htmlNLOGIT 5, Econometric Software Inc. (Education license available on purchase, http://www.limdep.com/products/nlogit/); R x64 3.1.0: A language and environment for statistical computing, R Core Team, Foundation for Statistical Computing (Available at no charge, http://www.r-project.org/)

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The future provision of ecosystem services (ES) will depend on forthcoming land-use changes which, in turn, are strongly influenced by environmental, socio-economic and political developments (Foley et al., 2005; Turner et al., 2007; Rounsevell et al., 2012; Verburg et al., 2013). In order to project future ES provision, modeling studies typically use a forecasting approach or explorative storylines. They thus organize complex information into coherent scenarios to help people conceptualize the future (Polasky et al., 2011a) and provide insight into the range and uncertainty of future ES changes (Rounsevell et al., 2012; Grêt-Regamey et al., 2013a). This information can provide guidance for policy development, land-use planning and land management (Metzger et al., 2010). Foresight scenario analyses are particularly helpful to illustrate emerging synergies and trade-offs among ES (e.g. Nelson et al., 2009; Schirpke et al., 2012; Reed et al., 2013) and between economic development and ES (e.g. Metzger et al., 2006; Goldstein et al., 2012). They, however, have two constraints: Firstly, the most plausible futures may not be the most feasible ones and exploring the desirability of alternative futures may be more important than their coherence (Robinson, 2003). Secondly, scenarios tend to be static representations and are of limited value for scrutinizing the dynamic response of a system to alternative policy options (Rounsevell and Metzger, 2010). In particular, the time horizon of scenarios seldom matches the short-term nature of policy cycles that affect actions of decision-makers (Bryson et al., 2010). Thus, forecasting scenarios often fail to provide clear information on how specific policy alternatives will influence future ES supply and how this supply relates to social preferences.Backcasting has been proposed as a complementary approach to forecasting. Backcasting first creates a future normative vision, then looks back to identify how this desirable future could be achieved and proceeds to define follow-up activities, strategies and pathways leading to the desired future state (Robinson, 1982). Hence, the focus is shifted away from predicting the most plausible future developments to exploring possible solutions to current and future problems based on socio-economic, political and environmental desirability criteria and goals (Robinson, 1982; Robèrt, 2005; Höjer et al., 2011). Backcasting focuses on determining the freedom of policy action with respect to desirable futures rather than on evaluating policy implications along a certain path or trend (Wilson et al., 2006). The concept was originally developed in the energy field as a new kind of normative future studies in the late 1970s (e.g. Lovins, 1977; Robinson, 1982). Since then, backcasting methods have expanded to strategic planning for sustainability (e.g. Dreborg, 1996; Holmberg and Robert, 2000), to participative backcasting tools involving stakeholders in local sustainability (e.g. Carlsson-Kanyama et al., 2008; Höjer et al., 2011; Kok et al., 2011; Quist et al., 2011; Berkel and Verburg, 2012), as well as to transportation (e.g. Robèrt, 2005; Mattila and Antikainen, 2011), conservation (Gordon, 2015) or spatial planning (Haslauer, 2015). Recently, methodological frameworks have been suggested for participatory backcasting (Quist and Vergragt, 2006) and for backcasting to support sustainable and adaptive spatial planning (Grêt-Regamey and Brunner, 2011; Haslauer et al., 2012). Furthermore, qualitative roadmaps to a post Kyoto protocol have been described in several climate change mitigation studies (e.g. Kok et al., 2003; Strachan et al., 2008). However, integrated backcasting approaches linking normative visions with explorative modeling have not yet been developed for ES studies (Rounsevell et al., 2012; Brown et al., 2013).Applying backcasting in an ES context for inferring optimal policy and management strategies requires an integration of the supply of and demand for these services (Grêt-Regamey et al., 2012; Cavender-Bares et al., 2015; Wolff et al., 2015). Studies analyzing both, the supply and demand side of ES, are rare (e.g. Bryan et al., 2010; Huber et al., 2011; Burkhard et al., 2012; Grêt-Regamey et al., 2013b; Bagstad et al., 2014; Castro et al., 2014; Schulp et al., 2014; Stürck et al., 2014; Bagstad et al., 2015). Usually, these studies do not approach the problem in a conceptually or methodologically consistent manner (Bagstad et al., 2014) and provide a snapshot of current or past average conditions (Geijzendorffer et al., 2015). A systematic integration of society's demand into ES modeling studies with regard to future ES provision is still lacking (Seppelt et al., 2011; Hauck et al., 2015).As ES assessments become more widely used, various methods to measure ES demand and to model ES supply have been developed. Non-market valuation methodologies, such as economic valuation and participatory valuation techniques (Farber et al., 2002; de Groot et al., 2010; Voinov et al., 2014), or mixed approaches (Vollmer et al., 2015), are applied to asses ES demand. These approaches allow the value of all types of ES to be captured, including non-marketable services (Farber et al., 2002). Still, cultural ES are often neglected in ES assessments (Daniel et al., 2012; van Berkel and Verburg, 2014). On the supply side, many studies have used land-use change models to assess the impact of climatic, socio-economic and political scenarios on ES at the global, European and regional level (e.g. Schröter et al., 2005; Metzger et al., 2006; Nelson et al., 2009; Haines-Young et al., 2012; Huber et al., 2014; Kirchner et al., 2015). These studies acknowledge that the functionality of the land and its capacity to provide ES is inherently linked to land use (Verburg et al., 2009). Some authors derive information on ES supply directly from land use or land-use based proxies, which is appropriate in areas where the dominant services strongly relate to land use (Maes et al., 2012). More sophisticated approaches integrate dynamic process-based ecosystem modules in order to take into account the intricate mechanisms which underlie ES delivery (Nelson et al., 2009). Among the variety of land-use modeling techniques that have been developed to serve different research questions (Verburg et al., 2004; Koomen and Stillwell, 2007; van Schrojenstein Lantman, 2011), agent-based models are increasingly used for policy analysis, since they allow simulating the dynamic interactions between local agent behavior and their regional and global settings (Filatova et al., 2013).The abundance of these methods obviates the need for designing a new integral model for a backcasting application and enables coupling of existing methods and models in a way that they exchange information (Voinov and Shugart, 2013). Thus, the emphasis has to come to integrate methods from different disciplines in a consistent manner and to adapt these integrated approaches to particular case study regions and data (Hewitt et al., 2014). Such an embedment of several methods in a broader approach requires a proper conceptual and technical harmonization of the interface between different components (Hamilton et al., 2015). In addition, a wide range of uncertainties are inherent to integrated approaches which need to be evaluated, especially when they are used as tools to support policy decisions (Refsgaard et al., 2007; Scholes et al., 2013; Uusitalo et al., 2015). While specific models have been suggested for different objectives in integrated environmental assessments (Kelly et al., 2013; Laniak et al., 2013), we provide a novel linking of methods and models which is necessary to address the requirements of backcasting. To ensure a consistent integration we build our approach from a welfare economic foundation. Welfare economic theory investigates the interaction between supply of and demand for goods and services to achieve an optimal allocation of resources that maximizes human well-being (Freeman III et al., 2014). It is increasingly used as an analytical frame for a systematic and concise assessment of ES supply and demand (Cavender-Bares et al., 2015).In this paper, we propose an interdisciplinary multi-method backcasting approach to infer land-use policy strategies for matching the regional supply of and demand for ES, including cultural ES, over a given time horizon. It is a first contribution towards a coherent integration of normative and explorative approaches in land-use and ES modeling. We apply the approach to a mountain case study, where we observe an increasing mismatch between ES supply and demand (Koellner, 2009; Bryan et al., 2010; Huber et al., 2013) and where cultural ES are of great importance (Daniel et al., 2012). We first assess future demand for ES with a discrete choice experiment involving local residents to obtain their stated preferences for changes in four ES (cultural heritage, protection from natural hazards, habitat protection and landscape aesthetics). Secondly, we use formative scenario analysis to define socio-economic and political boundary conditions. An economic agent-based land-use model is then applied to simulate land-use changes and the corresponding changes in the supply of the four target ES under various land-use policy strategies. Finally, we evaluate for each model run, how well ES demand is satisfied at the planning horizon. The combination of a choice experiment and an economic land-use model allows the integration of production functions and utility functions from a welfare economics perspective (Fisher et al., 2008; Cavender-Bares et al., 2015).The development of the backcasting approach was led by three objectives: (1) demonstrating its advantages compared to traditional forecasting methods for use in a policy context, (2) understanding modeling sensitivities in the multi-method approach that are relevant to the results, and (3) simulating plausible policy strategies to provide guidance for policy development in a case study region.The remainder of the article is organized as follows: In the next paragraph, we describe the case study area with a focus on land-use change and related challenges that motivated the development of the backcasting approach. Section 2 starts with an overview on the backcasting approach, followed by a detailed description of the methods used. The study results are presented in Section 3. Finally, we discuss the potential and limits of our approach in Section 4.The case study region is located in the Central Valais, a continental mountain area in the Swiss Alps (Fig. 1). It includes the economically growing urban center Visp, the touristic Saas valley and the remote Baltschieder valley, and has a total of 11 municipalities. It covers an area of 443.3 km2 and is home to 15,346 residents. Unproductive land accounts for 62% of the area, while 20% is covered by forest and 16% is cultivated by agriculture. The mountain forests and grasslands provide a variety of ES: provisioning services, e.g., food and timber production, regulation and maintenance services, e.g., protection from natural hazards or biodiversity, and cultural services, e.g., cultural heritage and scenic beauty. The provision of ES is strongly influenced by climate change and human activities framed by socio-economic and political developments (Briner et al., 2012). In particular, land-use change is an important issue in the region. While the importance of agriculture is declining, touristic activities and settlement development are increasing steadily. In fact, about 14% of the agricultural land was abandoned between 1981 and 2005, while settlement expanded by over 30% and forest grew by 7% (SFSO, 2009). Between 2000 and 2012, the number of farms fell annually by 2.8%. In 2012, there were 161 active farms in the region which, on average, cultivated 8 ha of agricultural land and housed around seven livestock units. Only 7% of the farms cultivated more than 0.5 ha of arable crops (FOAG, 2008). Agriculture is highly subsidized, farmers in the region receive annual direct payments of around 3200 CHF/ha (SFSO, 2015). Less than 10% of the farmers work full-time. Their main farming activity is the grassland-based production of livestock, predominantly larger dairy and beef/suckling cattle. By contrast, almost 50% of the part-time farmers keep sheep only (Brändle et al., 2015). Their farming practices substantially contribute to maintaining regional traditions, the typical character of the landscape and the provision of ES.If observed land-use change trends continue, they will significantly affect the sustainability of ES provision in the region. The narrow socio-economic, political and ecological boundary conditions as reflected, for example, by the marginalization of agriculture, the high dependence on direct payments or steep altitudinal gradients, make the region especially susceptible to regional and global changes, e.g. in agricultural markets and policies, consumption patterns or migration and tourism (Briner et al., 2012). Actual policy programs often struggle with the formulation and implementation of effective mid- and long-term strategies to attenuate or mitigate the negative impacts of global change for several reasons: Long-term oriented strategies contain high uncertainties complicating the design and timing of policy interventions and they exceed typical election cycles and budgetary planning horizons of public institutions. Furthermore land use in the case study region is regulated, facilitated and constrained by a multi-level and multi-sectoral policy system. Policies of involved sectors, such as agriculture, forestry or spatial planning operate at different governmental levels and are discussed in different political arenas. Securing the long-term provision of ES in the case study requires policy-makers to better understand how their actions might change the ES supply from the short to the longer term, to consider trade-offs among policy options and to choose those actions that sustain the appropriate mix of services (Ash et al., 2010).Backcasting, as suggested by Robinson (1990), implies first creating a normative vision followed by looking back at how this desirable future can be achieved. Fig. 2illustrates the approach in four linked generic steps and shows how the approach is operationalized for application in ES assessments. The four generic steps are: (1) envisioning a normative desirable future, (2) describing boundary conditions relevant to the system, (3) designing and generating alternative transition pathways, and (4) assessing how well the pursued targets are achieved under different pathways.To operationalize this general approach in a theoretical consistent manner, we base our backcasting approach on welfare economic theory. Welfare economic theory links combinations of goods or services that can be produced out of limited resources, with utility that expresses people's priorities for these goods or services (Cavender-Bares et al., 2015). In our approach, we use ES demand for evaluating which pathways of ES supply are preferred and for quantifying the ES benefits they generate. We define ES demand as the preferences people express for different ES under a budget constraint (Geijzendorffer et al., 2015). We model ES supply based on production functions that describe land use and related ES supply under optimal allocation of available resources. The availability of these resources depends on ecological, socio-economic and political conditions. ES supply is thus defined as the type and quantity of services that are provided by an ecosystem as a combination of its natural functioning and its management (Geijzendorffer et al., 2015). ES benefits describe how the supplied ES affect people's well-being according to their stated preferences (Tallis et al., 2012).To implement the four steps of backcasting within this conceptual frame, we linked different methods and models: We used (1) a choice experiment for eliciting future ES demand, (2) a formative scenario analysis to sketch global socio-economic and political settings that govern future land use and the provision of ES, (3) an economic agent-based land-use model to (a) derive a set of land-use policy strategies that impact future ES supply based on an assessment of ES-relevant parameters in a sensitivity analysis and to (b) simulate alternative pathways of ES supply driven by these policy strategies, and (4) a utility function to assess ES benefits along each pathway. The different methods and models are linked in a way that one module delivers its output to another in the form of data files (step 1 to 4, step 2 to 3, and step 3 to 4) or qualitative information (step 1 to 2).In the next paragraphs, we specify the rationale behind our choice of methods in the backcasting approach and provide detailed descriptions of data sources, methods and their linkages.To elicit future ES demand, we conducted a discrete choice experiment with local residents (Fig. 2, step 1). Choice experiments have been applied in numerous studies to derive public preferences for alternative states of a set of ES (e.g. Adamowicz et al., 1994; Hasund et al., 2010; Huber et al., 2011; Shoyama et al., 2013; Ryffel et al., 2014). They offer several advantages relative to other ES valuation methods (e.g. Champ et al., 2012) in the context of our study. Firstly, participants are offered a set of feasible alternatives, each including a cost attribute. Thus, choice experiments link to the economic concept of demand based on utility maximization under a budget constraint (Louviere et al., 2010). Secondly, the responses allow an estimation of the value of marginal changes in ES (Hanley et al., 1998). This is important because policy and management decisions normally act at the margin, that is, they deal with changing levels of ES, rather than with a complete loss or gain of services (Fisher et al., 2008). Finally, they are also applicable to non-marketable ES, such as cultural ES (Bateman et al., 2011).The discrete choice experiment was designed to elicit how residents envision ES provision in the year 2035 and conducted between February and September 2013. Four regionally relevant ES and corresponding indicators were specified in an iterative stakeholder process (first column, Table 1). The focus on cultural ES reflects the perceived importance of agriculture to sense of place and an aesthetically attractive landscape. Two to four potential future states of each indicator (attribute levels) were defined based on discussions with 15 experts, among them forest managers, farmers, regional planners and local politicians, to guarantee that the scale of the experiment was meaningful and appropriate for the marginal analysis of ES changes (Table A1, Appendix A). These attribute levels were combined into a total of 32 future visions using an orthogonal main effects design (Hensher et al., 2005). That is, the impractically large set of all possible combinations of attribute levels was reduced into an empirically feasible choice design. In the survey, participants had to perform six choice tasks in which they could choose between the current provision of ES and two alternative future sets of ES which were randomly selected out of the 32 visions. Each vision was described by four verbal attributes, the number of farms, the number of natural hazard incidents and the area of dry meadows as indicators for the ES cultural heritage, mass flow regulation, and habitat protection, respectively, plus a cost attribute. Four additional aesthetic attributes, the area of settlement, intensive grassland and forest areas as well as forest die-off, were merged into visualizations as a representation of landscape aesthetics (see Fig. A1, Appendix A for an example of a choice task). After a pre-test (n = 117), the survey was distributed to a sample of randomly selected 600 households in the case study region. In total, 260 questionnaires were returned (response rate 43%) of which 8 were omitted from further analysis, as respondents skipped the choice tasks. Based on the remaining 252 responses, we used the NLOGIT 5 software package and nested logit models to describe the choice behavior of people and statistically relate the discrete alternatives available to the participants (Louviere et al., 2000). Marginal utility coefficients were estimated for each ES indicator assuming a linear utility function with respect to the ES levels (Table 1). The utility of each attribute refers to its weight in decision-making inferred from stated choices on ES (Farber et al., 2002). Positive utility coefficients indicate a gain in utility with increasing amount of the ES indicator as, for instance, related to the area of dry meadows. Negative coefficients represent a loss in utility, for example due to an expansion of settlement area. The coefficients for all ES indicators were significant with the exception of “tree die-off”. Coefficients of the visual attributes were related to qualitative, i.e., dimensionless levels in the choice experiment (e.g., “one level more”). To convert the qualitative into quantitative levels in the visualizations we performed a picture analysis. We analyzed the share of different land uses among the visualizations by pixel counting and assumed the vistas to be representative for the whole region. This procedure proved to be a good proxy for depicting the visual magnitude of land-use types in mountain regions (Grêt-Regamey et al., 2007). The utility coefficients were used in the last step of the analysis to evaluate ES benefits along different ES transition pathways (Fig. 2).As a frame for the backcasting analysis, trends of global exogenous processes relevant to the target ES must be made explicit (Fig. 2, step 2). In our case study, we defined global socio-economic and political boundary conditions on the basis of two regionally downscaled global IPCC SRES scenarios that reflect potential developments of important drivers of land-use change and ES provision. Qualitative scenarios were developed using formative scenario analysis, a technique that combines expert judgments with a mathematical evaluation and optimization of these judgments (Walz et al., 2014). As compared to alternative concepts for downscaling scenarios (Zurek and Henrichs, 2007) this analysis ensures high consistency between the deduced scenarios and the parent scenarios and is less susceptible to personal biases.The main scenario used in this paper conforms to the A2 scenario of the IPCC SRES and foresees an increasing importance of regional centers for preserving local identity and economic activity. Domestic support for the agricultural sector is maintained at current levels and market access remains restricted, guaranteeing higher producer prices in Switzerland as compared to the EU. The increasing accessibility of mountain regions coupled with a somewhat loose spatial planning policy promotes further settlement development (Walz et al., 2014). This scenario conforms best to a “business as usual” (BAU) development in the case study region.To investigate the effect of alternative boundary conditions on the backcasting results we included a “liberalization” scenario consistent with the A1 IPCC SRES scenario. This setting implies rapid economic growth and global production processes that lead to a decline in the prices of agricultural commodities in Switzerland. Increased accessibility of remote regions, loose spatial planning policy and population growth leads to exploitive settlement development (Walz et al., 2014).Considerable temperature and precipitation shifts are expected in the longer term. However, no climatic effects, e.g., on yields or forest growth, were assumed within the time frame of this study. The two regionally downscaled scenarios thus reflect only socio-economic and political developments sketched in the IPCC SRES scenarios. The qualitative scenarios were translated into quantitative parameters to feed the land-use and ES model (Table B1, Appendix B) based on national development scenarios (SFSO, 2011) and previous quantitative predictions of socio-economic development in the case study region (Briner et al., 2012; Huber et al., 2014) and in Europe (Abildtrup et al., 2006). If the model is thus run under the two baseline settings, it simulates ES supply under respective global changes, but with no additional policy actions taken in future.In our case study, we simulated the supply of target ES (i.e., the same ES as considered in the choice experiment) with the economic agent-based land-use model ALUAM-AB (Alpine Land Use Allocation Model – Agent Based) using Linear Programming Language and a CPLEX solver (Briner et al., 2012; Brändle et al., 2015). Similar to other agent-based models (Filatova et al., 2013), the purpose of ALUAM-AB is to simulate future changes in land-use and ES supply triggered by the combined effects of climate, market and policy changes while considering individual behavior of agents. ALUAM-AB is useful in a backcasting context for several reasons: The recursive-dynamic modeling simulates intermediate yearly time steps, hence, allows system dynamics to be tracked over time. Furthermore, the effect of larger scale socio-economic and political drivers and individual farmers' behavior which lead to a spatially explicit land-use pattern can likewise be explored. The model has been developed over years and is specifically tailored to the case study (Briner et al., 2012, 2013; Huber et al., 2014; Brändle et al., 2015). As inherent characteristics of the region, such as land management types and physical resource constraints are accounted for, causal structures are well represented. On the one hand, this empirical grounding increases the credibility of the model and its value for operational decision support and decreases the risk of misleading information on alternative policy actions (Kelly et al., 2013). On the other hand, it improves the validity of the model. ALUAB-AB was validated against observed livestock and land-use data. Overall and unequal variation errors of model performance were small (on average 6.5%), thus, ALUAM-AB captures the mean and trends of the observed data satisfactorily (Brändle et al., 2015). Finally, the concept of income maximization under various socio-economic constraints captures farmers' situation in the case study region. At the same time, it roots the model in economic theory and allows the conceptual link with the choice experiment.ALUAM-AB simulates land-use decisions in yearly time steps assuming that agents are profit maximizers who make the best out of limited resources. Decisions on different level – parcel level, farm level and regional level – are optimized in a way that aggregated land rent is maximized. Different constraints assure that restrictions on different levels are met: On the parcel level, locational factors influence the choice of the land-use activity, on the farm level nutrient and fodder balances constrain livestock activities, and hirable workforce and number of animals available for grazing on summer pastures restrict decision-making on regional level. Agents in the model represent types of farms in the case study region. They have been derived from interviews with 15 local farmers and a farm survey (n = 111) combined with an analysis of agricultural census data. Agents differ in their household composition, their available resources (land, capital, labor) and their specific type of decision-making reflected by differing opportunity costs of labor, minimal income levels or household composition. Interaction between agents is represented by an exchange of land units. The model identifies land units that are no longer cultivated and either assigns a corresponding parcel to another agent, who can generate profit from the parcel and is willing to expand, or defines the parcel as abandoned in which case it is subject to forest growth.To simulate these processes ALUAM-AB relies on four input data sets: (1) maps of potential yields of all agricultural activities generated by a crop yield model (Briner et al., 2012), and of forest activities generated by the forest-simulation model LandClim (Schumacher et al., 2004), (2) spatially explicit data assembled for each parcel (100 m × 100 m), e.g., slope, elevation, distance to the next farm or the soil suitability (Swisstopo, 2005; FOAG, 2008; SFSO, 2009), (3) specific farmer agent characteristics obtained from stakeholder surveys as described above (Brändle et al., 2015), and, (4) yearly data of parameters reflecting the global scenario, such as market prices for agricultural commodities or population development.We extended ALUAM-AB with an additional selection algorithm that defines the most suitable parcels for settlement development to account for changes in the settlement area (for details see Appendix C). Prior to the optimization process each parcel is characterized by five location factors: elevation, slope, distance to road, distance to centers and view on mountains (Swisstopo, 2004, 2005). A suitability score for settlement development is then assessed for each parcel based on normalized scores for each location factor, an equal weighing of all factors and a neighborhood effect (Garcia et al., 2009; Abdullah, 2014). If population development, as defined in two baseline settings, demands additional settlement parcels, the land units with the highest suitability score are assigned to the settlement area in each simulation year.Results in ALUAM-AB can be represented by land-use and ES maps and by aggregated regional values of ES for each simulation year. Indicators for ES supply in ALUAM-AB were defined as equal as possible to those in the choice experiment (right column, Table 1). The number of farms served as a proxy for the cultural heritage service. The area of extensive meadows was used to approximate the habitat protection service. Aesthetics were assessed based on the share of different land-use types. Mass flow regulation was assessed with a general forest protection index that describes the ability of a parcel to provide protection from all gravitational hazards (Briner et al., 2013). The index was calculated in LandClim for each parcel in the case study region and transferred to ALUAM-AB, where, in the optimization process, the index was allocated only to those parcels used as forest or fallow land.We derived a set of effective policy interventions for the backcasting analysis based on a sensitivity analysis of ALUAM-AB (Fig. 2, step 3a). We identified the most important exogenous factors affecting model outcome using elementary effects (Morris, 1991). Elementary effects show the degree and nature of a change in a specific output variable induced by a relative change in a single input parameter, e.g. how much the number of animals increases or decreases if the milk price drops. We calculated the impact of changes in 13 input parameters related to prices and costs, to direct payments and to agent characteristics, on land rent and the number of animals, since this output is highly correlated to ES provision in our case study (Briner et al., 2013). Furthermore, we analyzed how combinations of these parameters affect model outcomes to account for non-linearities and interactions between exogenous factors driving ALUAM-AB (Uusitalo et al., 2015). Opportunity costs, i.e., benefits foregone due to alternative uses of labor, and production and input prices, especially milk and lamb prices, emerged as the main single exogenous drivers of the model. In addition, an interaction of changes in several parameters had an essential impact on livestock and thus ES changes (Brändle et al., 2015).Based on these findings, we designed an initial set of three agricultural policy interventions for subsequent modeling of ES supply. Each intervention was described by a combination of modifications in several exogenous ES-relevant parameters (Table 2): We assessed the effect of a continuous opening of protected Swiss agricultural markets by a decline in prices of all agricultural commodities. A change in the system of national direct payments was represented by an increase in green direct payments (payments for extensive grassland and for grassland-based milk and meat production), monetary incentives for animal husbandry on summer pastures and an abolition of general area-based payments. Structural interventions were implemented as financial aid for farmers. We included general monetary support to lower their opportunity costs for labor as well as the minimum income level below which they would exit the sector, and to increase their household labor availability. These payments were combined with special monetary support for young farmers to increase their willingness to succeed retiring farmers. A more restrictive spatial planning policy, i.e., a reduction of the settlement area for new residents, to prevent further urban sprawl, was added as a fourth intervention to include another policy sector relevant to the target ES. A detailed overview on the modification of the parameters related to each intervention is provided in Table B2 (Appendix B).Based on the elaborated set of policy interventions (Table 2), we modeled various pathways of ES supply (Fig. 2, step 3b). The interventions were implemented in the model in different combinations and sequences at four different points in time to describe a wide range of alternative policy strategies. We started implementing policy strategies in 2018, since the current agricultural policy program was set up for the policy cycle until 2017 and any changes of the agricultural sector within this period are unlikely (Hirschi et al., 2013). Furthermore, the policy strategies were designed to be economically and politically plausible to increase the credibility of the backcasting analysis (Mahmoud et al., 2009).Given the BAU scenario, we first analyzed the effect of policy strategies that were composed of single interventions, i.e., each of the four interventions was introduced in 2018, 2022, 2026 or 2030, corresponding to the policy cycle in which agricultural programs are updated in Switzerland (16 model runs). We then tested selected combinations of two or three interventions in different sequencing (40 model runs). Finally, we assessed the effect of structural interventions at four additional levels (16 model runs). To investigate how a change in boundary conditions impacts ES supply and the effectiveness of policy strategies, we repeated all model runs under the liberalization scenario (72 model runs). Table B3 (Appendix B) provides an overview on the sequencing of interventions in all performed model runs.In the final step of the backcasting analysis, each modeled pathway must be evaluated with respect to the desirable future elaborated in the choice experiment. We used the marginal utility coefficients from the choice experiment (i.e., ES demand) to assess changes in the benefit people would obtain from ES changes under different policy strategies (i.e., ES supply; Fig. 2, step 4). Similar to other studies modeling the impact of different land-use change scenarios on the quality of life (Labiosa et al., 2013; Murray-Rust et al., 2013), we derived an additive utility function to quantify the ES benefit change (McFadden, 1973).The change in the utility ΔUtotwas computed as the sum of the product of modeled changes in the Indicator I of each ES i between the reference year (2013) and the planning horizon (2035) and the corresponding marginal utility coefficients βiusing the software R x64 3.1.0:(1)ΔUtot=∑βi·ΔIiThe status quo alternative specific constant of 0.181 was subtracted from the utility to correct the systematic preference for the status quo in the choice experiment. Positive changes of ΔUtotindicate a gain in the benefits resulting from changes in ES, while negative changes denote a loss in the benefits as compared to 2013. In this function, the utility change is driven by quantitative changes in the ES while people's preferences are kept constant over time (Boyd and Banzhaf, 2007).We evaluated the effect of policy strategies on the utility in three steps: (1) We analyzed utility changes induced by alternative policy strategies over time comparing single interventions, combined interventions and different levels of structural interventions given two different boundary conditions as described above. (2) To unravel ES trade-offs caused by policy interventions, we analyzed separately the effect of interventions on the supply of individual ES and on the related contribution of the single ES to the total utility change. (3) To address the impact of the timing of interventions, we analyzed the average response of the utility to each intervention compared to the baseline run, regardless of the implementation year.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
