@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Pieces-of-parts for supervoxel segmentation with global context: Application to DCE-MRI tumour delineation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An automatic segmentation method is proposed for dynamic contrast enhanced MRIWe introduce perfusion-supervoxels to over-segment DCE-MRI volumes, and pieces-ofparts to add anatomical constraints to supervoxel segmentationsThis method achieves promising results for the underexplored area of automatic rectal tumour segmentation from DCE-MRI scans.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Parts-based graphical models,Supervoxel,Classification,Segmentation,DCE-MRI,Rectal tumour,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Rectal tumour segmentation in dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI (DCE-MRI) is a challenging task, and an automated and consistent method would be highly desirable to improve the modelling and prediction of patient outcomes from tissue contrast enhancement characteristics – particularly in routine clinical practice. A framework is developed to automate DCE-MRI tumour segmentation, by introducing: perfusion-supervoxels to over-segment and classify DCE-MRI volumes using the dynamic contrast enhancement characteristics; and the pieces-of-parts graphical model, which adds global (anatomic) constraints that further refine the supervoxel components that comprise the tumour. The framework was evaluated on 23 DCE-MRI scans of patients with rectal adenocarcinomas, and achieved a voxelwise area-under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) of 0.97 compared to expert delineations. Creating a binary tumour segmentation, 21 of the 23 cases were segmented correctly with a median Dice similarity coefficient (DSC) of 0.63, which is close to the inter-rater variability of this challenging task. A second study is also included to demonstrate the method’s generalisability and achieved a DSC of 0.71. The framework achieves promising results for the underexplored area of rectal tumour segmentation in DCE-MRI, and the methods have potential to be applied to other DCE-MRI and supervoxel segmentation problems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (DCE-MRI) shows promise for tumour characterisation and measuring response to therapy from tissue perfusion characteristics (Karahaliou et al., 2014; Gollub et al., 2012; Goh et al., 2007). In DCE-MRI, a series of volumes are acquired during and after the injection of a Gadolinium chelate based paramagnetic contrast agent (CA), such as Multihance™, Omniscan™, Prohance™, or Dotarem™. A bolus of intravenous CA circulates through the vascular system and perfuses into the extravascular–extracellular space (EES) of the tissue, resulting in tissue enhancement, which depends on the tissue type and vascularisation.Neovascularisation, the formation of new vessels, is a key process of tumour growth, with angiogenesis being a common mechanism in colorectal tumours. This results in highly vascularised tumours with vessels that are thin, fragile and tortuous (Goh et al., 2007). The vasculature is also chaotic and leaky with regions of the tumour exhibiting hypoxia and necrosis, which leads to complex contrast enhancement patterns in DCE-MRI imaging of rectal tumours; Fig. 1shows an example of contrast enhancement in a rectal DCE-MRI scan. Quantitative and semi-quantitative measures such as pharmacokinetic modelling can be used to analyse these perfusion characteristics in DCE-MRI (Tofts et al., 1999) and have shown the ability to assess the tumour (Goh et al., 2007). Heterogeneity in tumours can be further exploited to quantify tumour progression and response to therapy (Karahaliou et al., 2014; Gollub et al., 2012). Fig. 2shows example enhancement curves for a rectal tumour and illustrates the heterogeneity of the tumour and surrounding region, while also demonstrating some consistency in tumour subregions.To derive tumour-specific perfusion parameters, accurate delineation of the rectal tumour is required. It is difficult to visually distinguish tumour from surrounding structures on T1w sequences used for DCE-MRI; in clinical practice T2w imaging is preferred (Brown et al., 2005), and can be registered to the DCE-MRI scan. DCE-MRI tumour delineation is further complicated due to the contrast-varying nature of the dynamic scan. However, even on T2w scans, manual segmentation of colorectal tumours is a difficult task, with substantial inter- and intra-rater variability (Franklin et al., 2014; Goh et al., 2008), due to: partial volume effects in the axial plane; complex anatomy in the lower rectum, making it difficult to delineate normal anatomical structures; wall thickening due to venous congestion; and mucinous tumours. There is also often local motion between the T2w and DCE-MRI scans, which can lead to poor registration of the volumes, and therefore a poor delineation of the tumour in DCE-MRI. An additional challenge in this study, and medical imaging in general, is the limited number of cases available. Therefore, a requirement of any automated DCE-MRI segmentation method is that it must be able to learn complex relationships efficiently from small datasets. This study is motivated by the rectal imaging trial (Churchill Hospital, Oxford, UK), which is an ongoing trial that aims to use pre-therapy DCE-MRI to assess patient outcomes after therapy.In this work, we propose an automated DCE-MRI segmentation approach that exploits features of the dynamic sequences to segment tumours, and provides a robust and consistent delineation for perfusion analysis. The key contributions of this method are: the introduction of perfusion-supervoxels (supervoxels for dynamic contrast enhanced images, which are used to learn local characteristics of the tumour); and pieces-of-parts, a novel formulation of parts-based graphical models (PGM) (Felzenszwalb and Huttenlocher, 2005; Felzenszwalb et al., 2010) to directly improve supervoxel-based segmentations by including global anatomical constraints.Fig. 3shows a flowchart of the framework, where: a 4D contrast-enhanced DCE-MRI volume is acquired, the region is over-segmented using perfusion-supervoxels and each supervoxel is classified using learnt neighbourhood features. Pieces-of-parts then provides global constraints to the tumour segmentation using belief propagation on likely organ locations. Finally, the tumour segmentation is evaluated against an expert ground truth. This framework is applied to the novel and challenging task of automatic rectal tumour segmentation in DCE-MRI; the authors are not aware of any other method to automatically segment rectal tumours from DCE-MRI.The initial steps in the development of this method were introduced in Irving et al. (2014), which includes the formulation of supervoxels for perfusion images and development of a supervoxel classifier. This is extended to include the novel pieces-of-parts graphical model. The validation is also improved using a more robust ground truth from expert delineations on multiple modalities and, while, previously, a number of cases required manual intervention, this method is evaluated in a fully automated fashion.In the following section we place this work in the context of the state-of-the-art. Section 3 outlines the method which is divided into perfusion-supervoxels (Section 3.1), extraction of features (Section 3.2) and pieces-of-parts (Section 3.3) which relate to Steps 1–3 in Fig. 3. The dataset, experimental set-up and results are described in Section 4. Finally, the discussion is found in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
