@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Development of an open-source road traffic noise model for exposure assessment

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Adaptation of the Calculation of Road Traffic Noise method for exposure assessment.Freely available open-source software (R with PostgreSQL and GRASS GIS).Model estimates compared well to noise measurements (r: ∼0.85–0.95).Noise level exposures modelled for 8.61 million London residents (2003–2010).Over 1 million residents exposed to high daytime and night-time noise levels.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Road traffic,Noise pollution,GIS,PostgreSQL,LAeq,Exposure assessment,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractThe noise model (TRANEX) was implemented in R to call functions from PostgreSQL and GRASS GIS packages and can be obtained from the corresponding author or the following website: http://www.sahsu.org/content/data-download; first available in July 2014; TRANEX requires at least one standard desktop PC.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
There is growing concern on the effects of noise pollution on health (WHO, 2009). Environmental noise exposure is associated with annoyance (Babisch et al., 2013; Clark et al., 2012), sleep disturbance (WHO, 2011), cognitive ability in schoolchildren (Evans and Hygge, 2007; Clark et al., 2013), and health impacts, especially cardiovascular conditions and risk factors (Babisch et al., 2009; Hansell et al., 2013; Sorensen et al., 2012; Stansfeld et al., 2003). Exposure to environmental noise is ubiquitous and increasing in terms of road traffic noise and the reduction of the night-time quiet period (Hammer et al., 2014). Traffic-related noise is said to account for over 1 million healthy years of life lost annually to ill health and may lead to a disease burden that is second only in magnitude to that from air pollution (WHO-JRC, 2011).Estimates of environmental noise exposures were required for a series of epidemiological analyses forming part of the ‘Traffic and Health in London (TRAFFIC)’ study (2011–2014) (http://www.kcl.ac.uk/lsm/research/divisions/aes/research/ERG/research-projects/traffic/index.aspx), funded by the Natural Environment Research Council (NERC) Environmental Exposure and Health Initiative (EEHI). The epidemiological analyses were designed to look at relationships of a range of air pollution metrics (e.g. particulate matter, nitrogen oxides, nitrogen dioxide, ozone) and noise levels with health outcomes in children and adults, including cardiovascular and respiratory mortality and hospital admissions, adverse birth outcomes (low birth weight and pre-term delivery), primary care data on diseases and consultations, and risk factors and vascular markers of diseases in children, over different periods between 2003 and 2010. In addition to confounders (e.g. smoking, deprivation) the epidemiological analyses of air pollution may control for noise levels and vice versa.This paper describes the development of a TRAffic Noise EXposure model (TRANEX) and its implementation for exposure assessment in the TRAFFIC study. Instead of using proprietary software (e.g. CadnaA, SoundPLAN) we developed our own model for two main reasons: 1) so that the treatment of source geometry, traffic information (flows/speeds/spatially varying diurnal traffic profiles) and receptors matched as closely as possible to that of the air pollution modelling being undertaken in the TRAFFIC project, and 2) to optimize model performance for practical reasons of needing to implement a noise model with detailed source geometry, over a large geographical area, to produce noise estimates at up to several million address locations, with limited computing resources. We present an evaluation of the model using comparisons of estimated noise levels with noise level measurements from the UK. We also describe the modelled noise exposures at postcode locations and for the resident population of London for an example year (2008) and changes in modelled noise exposures over the study period (2003–2010).As the model was developed primarily for application to London we adopted the Calculation of Road Traffic Noise method (CoRTN) (Department of Transport, 1988). The CoRTN method is used in the UK for strategic noise mapping (DEFRA, 2008; HMSO, 2006) and has been implemented as an optional noise calculation method in leading proprietary software such as SoundPLAN (http://www.soundplan-uk.com) and CadnaA (http://www.datakustik.com/en/products/cadnaa). The CoRTN method is also used as the UK primary noise calculation methodology for new road schemes (http://www.dft.gov.uk/ha/standards/dmrb/vol11/section3/hd21311.pdf). The study area (Fig. 1) is the area inside the M25 motorway that includes Greater London and the surrounding area, henceforth referred to as London.Traffic noise estimates are calculated in CoRTN as one-hour, A-weighted L10 (dB) (i.e. the noise level that is exceeded 10% of the time), denoted as LA10,1hr, and L10,18hr for the period 06:00 until 0:00.The CoRTN method includes the following terms:(1)LA10,1hr=L0+Δf+Δg+Δp+Δd+Δs+Δc+Δa+Δrwhere L0is the basic noise level calculated at 3.5 m from the kerbside, at 0.5 m above ground level; Δƒis the correction for traffic speed and the percentage of heavy vehicles; Δgis the adjustment for the gradient of a road section; Δpis the road surface correction; Δdis the slant distance between the road (source) and receptor; Δsis the correction for shielding (i.e. barriers) between a road (source) and receptor; Δcis ground cover attenuation; Δais the correction for the angle of view of the road; Δris the correction for reflections from buildings on the opposite side of the façade.(2)L0=42.2+10Log10qⅆB(A)where q is the hourly traffic flow;(3)Δf=33Log10(v+40+500/v)+10Log10(1+5p/v)−68.8ⅆB(A)v is the average hourly traffic speed and p is the percentage of heavy vehicles on each road section;(4)p=100f/qƒ is the hourly flow of heavy vehicles;(5)Δg=0.3Gwhere G is the gradient of the road – only applicable to uphill flow on single carriageways;Δp: a value of −1 dB and is applicable to bituminous impervious road surfaces for roads with vehicle speed less than 75 km/h; pervious road surfaces have a value of −3.5 dB;(6)Δd=−10Log10(d′/13.5)ⅆB(A)d′ is the shortest slant distance between a source and receptor;(7)d′=[(d+3.5)2+h2]0.5where d is the shortest distance between source and receptor; h is the difference in height above ground between the source and receptor (i.e. effective source position); the distance correction (Δd) is only applicable where d ≥ 4m (i.e. beyond the distance from the kerbside where the basic noise level is calculated); d is given a value of 4 m where it is measured to be < 4 m;Δsis the correction for barriers between the source and receptor; effectively this is a lengthening of the shortest slant distance; where the path between the source and receptor is obstructed, the distance between the source and receptor is, for example, the sum of 1) the distance from the source to the top of a building (i.e. the diffracting edge) and 2) the distance from the top of a building to the receptor [further details are available from: http://resource.npl.co.uk/acoustics/techguides/crtn/];Δcis the correction for ground cover correction:(8)For0.75≤H<(d+5)/6;Δc=5.2ILog10[(6H−1.5)/(d+3.5)](9)ForH<0.75;Δc=5.2ILog10[3/(d+3.5)](10)ForH≥(d+5)/6;Δc=0where H is the average height of propagation (m), d is the distance from the edge of the roadside to the receptor, and I is based on the different percentage s of absorbent ground between the source and the receptor;(11)Δa=10Log10(θ/180)ⅆB(A)θ is the angle of the view of the road in degrees;(12)Δr=1.5(θs/θ)180°ⅆB(A)θs is the sum of angles by all the reflecting facades (i.e. individual buildings) on the opposite side of the road to the receptor.The CoRTN method also includes further corrections for roads with low hourly flow (50 ≤ q < 200), and corrections for mixed ground cover.Finally, the noise level from all sources (L1, L2,…Ln) can be combined using the following procedure:(13)L=10Log10[∑1n10Ln/10]ⅆB(A)where L is the predicted noise level from n noise sources.Further information can be found in the CoRTN manual (Department of Transport, 1988) and other implementations of the method (e.g. Pamanikabud and Tansatcha, 2003).For implementation of the noise model in London we used the most detailed data sets available for traffic information (i.e. composition, speed, diurnal varying traffic profiles for different parts of London), land cover, road geography, building heights, and receptors (i.e. postcodes and addresses). Table 1provides a list of data types, data sources, and their spatial resolution (i.e. accuracy).Pre-processing of spatial data was undertaken in a geographic information system (GIS) (ArcGIS v 10.0, ESRI, Inc., Redlands, California). Information on buildings and land cover (Topographic Layer) and the Integrated Transport Network (ITN) form part of Ordnance Survey's 2009 version of MasterMap™ (MM) (see Table 1). We downloaded these data from Digimap® under the agreement for use in teaching and research in higher education. Although more recent updates are available we assumed this version to best reflect our study period.The ITN provides detailed road network information including road type and information on one-way streets. Traffic source data (i.e. 10 m points along roads) are from the London Atmospheric Emissions Inventory (LAEI) (LAEI, 2010). Information on one-way streets and road tunnels in the ITN were linked to traffic source points. We used information from the ITN to exclude road tunnels from TRANEX.Road traffic flows in the LAEI are represented using annual averaged daily traffic (AADT) data. The AADT data for each link has been calculated in accordance with that used in the LAEI 2008, and is described in Beevers et al. (2009). There are a total of 2028 manual classified count (MCC) sites within the LAEI area used to allocate traffic to the network – a total of ∼63000 road links. Not all sites are counted each year, and of the 2028, 690 were counted in 2010. The MCC data are based upon only one day of observations, so to minimise the effect of specific local events introducing outliers into the dataset, the 2010 data has been added to a series of MCC data (extending back to 1999) and smoothed using a LOcal regrESSion (LOESS) smoothing function. Furthermore, as the MCC data only cover a 12-h weekday period (07:00 to 19:00), these data were then expanded to provide counts for each hour of each day in 2010 (including weekends and overnight hours), using hourly average automatic traffic count and automatic number plate recognition data. The resulting annual hourly dataset was then averaged by link to provide AADT estimates for cars, motorcycles, buses, light goods vehicles, taxis, and 6 types of rigid and articulated heavy goods vehicles. MCC sites with data from all years were used to calibrate the 2010 AADT to produce flows and speed estimates for other years (2003–2009).Vehicle speeds for the major road network in the LAEI 2010 are based upon a combination of TrafficMaster GPS derived and Moving Car Observer (MCO) speeds. MCO speed is observed using a vehicle travelling at the average speed of the traffic, whereas the ‘TrafficMaster’ speed has been derived from a GPS-based vehicle tracking system using 2009/2010 observations, and averaged into overnight (22:00–06:00), AM (07:00–09:00), inter (10:00–15:00), PM (16:00–18:00) and evening (19:00–21:00) periods of the day. GPS speed was available for approximately 62% of the LAEI 2010 major road links with MCO data covering the remaining roads.In order to obtain hourly traffic flows for 10 m traffic source points we combined information on traffic composition from the LAEI into two vehicle categories: light duty vehicles (LDV) and heavy vehicles (HV). From this we calculated hourly information on percentage of HV for the calculation of p in the CoRTN method (equation (4)). Average vehicle speed for each traffic source point also came from the LAEI.Building height data (i.e. LiDAR) for all built-up areas within the M25 were downloaded from the Landmap website (http://www.landmap.ac.uk; accessed on 6th August, 2013). For some outlying areas close to the M25, building height data is not available because this data only covers urban areas. MM buildings were considered to better represent the buildings within our study period and to be of better spatial resolution than buildings from Landmap. We therefore assigned building heights to the nearest MM building within a 20 m radius of each building height location. MM buildings that could not be assigned a building height (e.g., no MM building within 20 m of building height data, missing building heights in Landmap) were assigned a default building height of 10 m if the footprint of a MM building was ≥15 m2. Small buildings such as bus shelters, porches, garages etc. potentially cause problems in the definition of building facades and noise calculations (see Fig. 2). All buildings <15 m2 were therefore deleted (see Fig. 2). Building heights were converted into a 0.5 m × 0.5 m grid of buildings attributed with heights for viewshed analysis (i.e. for the reflections calculation).For generation of receptors (i.e. address or postcode locations) a geometric centroid was created for each MM building. Each receptor was then moved to 1 m from the facade on the side of the building closest to the nearest road section with traffic information. Fig. 2 shows how this was achieved and also shows situations where this automated method of moving receptors to facades does not work.Postcodes and address points were intersected with buildings and subsequently linked to receptors using a unique building identifier. Typically there are ∼15 addresses associated with each postcode. Point locations for postcodes are the geometric centroids of the address locations associated with each postcode. Each postcode is attributed with a headcount using data from the 2011 census. There are 189531 postcodes, ∼3 million address locations, and a population of 8613526 in the study area. In this study we only present results related to postcode locations. Address locations are used for forthcoming individual-level health analyses.TRANEX broadly follows the CoRTN method with some modifications for the treatment of source geometry, the calculation of path distance, traffic on minor roads, road surfaces, tunnels, and gradients along roads. We also add in standard noise metrics (LAeq,1hr, LAeq,16hr, Lnight) as specified in the European Noise Directive (END; European Directive 2002/49/EC).LAeq,1hr is calculated from the following empirical relationship described in Abbott and Nelson (2002):(14)LAeq,1hr=0.94L10,1hr+0.77ⅆb(A)TRANEX then produces LAeq,16hr and Lnight by averaging LAeq,1hr from the hours 07:00 – 22:00 and 23:00 – 06:00, respectively.For minor roads we used a fixed value of 600 vehicles day−1 based on the magnitude of manual counts undertaken during noise measurements, and MCC data made available by Norwich City Council and available in the LAEI. Counts were proportionally assigned to minor roads for each hour of the day using the diurnal traffic profile associated with the nearest main road in the LAEI.The CoRTN method calculates the shortest path distance between each source and receptor along the line that bisects the angle subtended by each road section. In other words, the shortest path is taken as a line from the mid-point of each road section to each receptor. In TRANEX we use traffic information assigned to traffic source points. The shortest path is created from each of these points to receptors.Fig. 3shows the pre-processing steps to select traffic source points related to each receptor and the subsequent creation of ray-paths as the basis for calculating the propagation terms.A circular buffer of 500 m is created around each receptor and intersected with the traffic source points (Step 1; Fig. 3). If no traffic source points fall within the 500 m buffer, a second buffer with a radius of 1000 m is created and the operation is repeated. This is to ensure that the nearest main road is included in the noise calculation, which is especially important over open, flat terrain as noise from heavily trafficked roads at distances of ∼1 km can sometimes be heard depending on meteorology. A ray-path using straight-line geometry is created between the receptor and each traffic source point (Step 2; Fig. 3). Each ray-path is subsequently intersected with buildings and land cover for the corrections due to screening and ground cover (Step 3; Fig. 3).In this study all receptors were given a height of 4 m above ground. For each receptor, the noise level is the combination (Equation (13)) of noise levels predicted for each pair of source-receptor points with the basic noise level adjusted for the propagation terms listed in Section 2.1. We were unable to characterise road surfaces in London so we treated all roads as bituminous impervious. We also were unable to determine the direction of flow on single carriageways so we did not include the CoRTN term for the gradient correction. Traffic in tunnels is excluded from TRANEX.TRANEX was developed for exposure assessment (i.e. postcode/address locations), thus it is not directly usable for noise mapping (i.e. predicting over a regular grid of receptors). Fig. 4shows the workflow of the CoRTN method applied in TRANEX including LAeq metrics and a fixed ‘low flow’ calculation for minor roads.The modified CoRTN method has been implemented using open-source software. Calculations are carried out in a PostgreSQL11http://www.postgresql.org/.database with GIS functions provided by the PostGIS22http://postgis.net/.extension. In terms of processing speed for spatial operations, PostGIS has greater performance than other common desktop GIS applications due to its use of efficient spatial indexing. This is of particular importance for this application of TRANEX which uses detailed land cover polygons on a city-wide scale precise to ∼1 m as an input. As such, PostGIS provides an effective environment in which to handle large vector data sets. The CoRTN method also includes a correction based on the proximity of sound reflective surfaces (building façades). This is achieved via viewshed analysis of buildings within a 50 m radius of a receptor point. As viewsheds cannot be calculated by PostGIS, GRASS GIS33http://grass.osgeo.org/.is used and the derived representation of visible building facades was imported into the PostgreSQL database. TRANEX is controlled by a script in the R software44http://www.r-project.org/.using the PostgreSQL55http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/RPostgreSQL/RPostgreSQL.pdf.and spgrass666http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/spgrass6/spgrass6.pdf.packages to call the database and viewshed functions, respectively.TRANEX is implemented using two R scripts: 1) a pre-processor to generate receptors 1 m from the façade of each residential building using a set of rules for best placement of receptors, and 2) a script that contains the noise model which calls PostGIS and GRASS functions. On running the R script, TRANEX proceeds on a receptor point-by-point basis. The estimated noise metrics are stored both as an ArcGIS shapefile and within the PostgreSQL database.While air pollution is routinely monitored in national networks, there is no routine monitoring for noise and data are generally not publicly available. To evaluate the performance of TRANEX, we utilised data on noise measurements collected as part of previous studies undertaken by the authors in the EU funded 5th Framework Program HEAVEN (Healthier Environment through the Abatement of Vehicle Emissions and Noise, in 2002) and HEARTS (Health Effects and Risks to Transport Systems, in 2005) projects in Leicester, UK, and data collected in 2014 to coincide with on-going air pollution monitoring being undertaken by the authors in Norwich, UK. Fig. 5shows maps of the areas covering noise measurements used in this study.The focus of this exercise was assessing the model performance in terms of spatial contrast in noise levels. In Leicester a total of 38, 30-minute noise measurements were taken using Casella sound level meters (2xCEL480 and 2xCEL593.100a instruments). Measurements were taken at both facade and non-facade locations, with heights 3.5–4 m above ground level. All instruments were calibrated before and after each survey day using a Casella CEL calibrator (reference pressure: 94 dB) to ensure that the instrument had not drifted by more than 1 dB(A) over that day. Noise measurements were made in HEAVEN between the hours of 10:00 and 15:00 during August 2002 and in HEARTS between the hours of 09:00 and 16:30 during February 2005 (Goodman, 2005; WHO, 2005).In Norwich 35, 30-min noise level measurements were made using an Optimus CR:171B sound level meter, at 1.5 m above ground level, between the hours of 09:00 and 16:00, June 2014, next to residential properties. The microphone was placed at a height of 1.5 m to match the height of co-located air pollution monitoring. The noise sensor was calibrated at least three times per day using a CR:515 acoustic calibrator (reference pressure: 93.7 dB). All noise sensors had appropriate microphone shielding from the wind.In Leicester we received traffic information from the Council's Airviro model (SMHI, 2014), used for local air quality management, which in turn received data from the cities' SCOOT (Split, Cycle, Offset, Optimisation Technique) (Imtech, 2013) system used for traffic control. In Norwich a version of the SATURN traffic model implemented by Norwich City Council was used to define composition, flows and speeds on main roads. Information from the traffic models and manual counts were used to produce time-varying information on flows, and in turn used to estimate noise levels for the different hours when noise measurements were made (e.g., 09:00 – 16:00). We used equivalent data to London on road geography, land cover and building heights in Leicester and Norwich to run TRANEX for model evaluation. Noise model estimates were made with respect to the height above ground levels of each instrument's microphone in Leicester (3.5–4 m) and Norwich (1.5 m). Noise level estimates from TRANEX were then compared with short-term noise measurements made in the cities of Leicester and Norwich.A series of performance statistics were used to evaluate models including: Spearman's rank correlation coefficient (r), the coefficient of determination (r2) (i.e. the sum of the squares of the errors divided by the sum of the squared differences between measurements and the mean of all measurements), root mean square error (RMSE), the variance of measured and modelled noise levels, and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for the regression fit between modelled and measured noise levels. We used Spearman's correlation to reflect the skewed nature of noise measurements and also because for exposure assessment we are interested in relative ranking of exposures as well as model error. These statistical tests were chosen to cover the key elements of characterising and assessing performance of environmental models as described in Bennett et al. (2013).For each noise metric (e.g. LAeq,1hr), we assumed exposures to be equal to modelled noise levels. Road traffic noise exposures were calculated for all 189531 postcodes in London for each year between 2003 and 2010. Exposure assessment of the population of London was undertaken by assigning population headcounts to noise exposures calculated for each postcode location.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
