@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Systematically linking qualitative elements of scenarios across levels, scales, and sectors

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Elements of multi-level qualitative scenarios have asymmetric interrelationships.Structures of interrelationships can be documented and partitioned into subsets.Analyses of subsets can systematically reconstitute a multi-level parent scenario.Internal consistency of multi-scale scenarios may be preserved with partitioning.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cross-impact balance,Multi-scale scenarios,Socioeconomic scenarios,Shared socioeconomic pathways,Climate change,Global change,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
New scenarios for climate change research connect climate model results based on Representative Concentration Pathways to nested interpretations of Shared Socioeconomic Pathways. Socioeconomic drivers of emissions and determinants of impacts are now decoupled from climate model outputs. To retain scenario credibility, more internally consistent linking across scales must be achieved. This paper addresses this need, demonstrating a modification to cross impact balances (CIB), a method for systematically deriving qualitative socioeconomic scenarios. Traditionally CIB is performed with one cross-impact matrix. This poses limitations, as more than a few dozen scenario elements with sufficiently varied outcomes can become computationally infeasible to comprehensively explore. Through this paper, we introduce the concept of ‘linked CIB’, which takes the structure of judgements for how scenario elements interact to partition a single cross-impact matrix into multiple smaller matrices. Potentially, this enables analysis of large CIB matrices and ensures internally consistent linking of scenario elements across scales.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Scenarios are tools for analyzing plausible alternative future trajectories in a complex system in which there is considerable uncertainty of outcomes when determining future developments. Scenarios can provide scientifically defensible narratives that describe future developments based on major driving forces and their impacts. Scenarios are useful in creating a bridge between science and policy by exploring deeper implications for different decision paths (Zurek and Henrichs, 2007). The value of scenarios for this purpose has been recognized for decades if not longer (Aligica, 2004; Linstone and Turoff, 2011). In environmental change research, scenarios have informed a variety of assessments of the potential consequences of human activities on the environment (European Environment Agency, 2009). In these contexts, the demands for scenario detail, flexibility and consistency are high. Under traditional analytical approaches, the labour of validating socioeconomic scenarios is divided between qualitative narratives (stories) and quantitative models (simulation). This approach, which is known as “Story and Simulation”, or SAS (Alcamo, 2008), presumes that stories and simulations can mutually validate each other. A plausible story acts as a guide for assumptions that would be interesting to model, while a finished simulation is considered a demonstration of the internal consistency of a story. However, recent research has called into question this assumed relationship (Kok, 2009; Schweizer and Kriegler, 2012). Because quantitative models may be simplifications of stories (and vice versa), stories may also benefit from internal validation before they are handed off to modelling teams. Failing to do this can result in scenarios that overlook policy relevant risks (Schweizer and Kriegler, 2012) or become vulnerable to political manipulation (Girod and Flüeler, 2009). A tool that can validate the internal consistency of stories (or qualitative scenarios) is cross-impact balance analysis, or CIB (Weimer-Jehle, 2006). However, validating the internal consistency of a highly detailed story, such as one that is multi-scale (describing outcomes for a country within a region within a global context), would be intractable with traditional CIB. To address this problem, this paper presents a new method (so-called “linked CIB”) for assessing scenarios that are multi-scale so that localized versions of scenarios can be produced that are demonstrably internally consistent with the global version. This study presents an example of this new method in the context of the new Shared Socioeconomic Pathways framework for climate change research (O'Neill et al., 2014), which is discussed further in Section 2. To demonstrate the linked approach for CIB, in Section 3, the paper provides a step-by-step example for systematically partitioning the relationships among a multi-scale list of socioeconomic factors. In Section 4, a conceptual framework for interpreting bottom-up results of a linked CIB analysis is presented. Finally, in Section 5, the general promise of this analytical approach for multi-scale scenario analysis is discussed as well as potential limitations.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
