@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Robust whole-brain segmentation: Application to traumatic brain injury

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A robust and fully-automatic segmentation framework for MR brain scans is proposed.A heterogeneous cohort of 125 scans of patients who had sustained TBI is segmented.The approach compares favourably to the state-of-the-art on benchmark and TBI data.MRI based biomarkers correlate with outcome-relevant clinical variables in TBI.Evidence that subcortical structures are particularly affected in TBI is presented.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Traumatic brain injury,Magnetic resonance imaging,Multi-atlas segmentation,Brain image segmentation,Expectation–maximisation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We propose a framework for the robust and fully-automatic segmentation of magnetic resonance (MR) brain images called “Multi-Atlas Label Propagation with Expectation–Maximisation based refinement” (MALP-EM). The presented approach is based on a robust registration approach (MAPER), highly performant label fusion (joint label fusion) and intensity-based label refinement using EM. We further adapt this framework to be applicable for the segmentation of brain images with gross changes in anatomy. We propose to account for consistent registration errors by relaxing anatomical priors obtained by multi-atlas propagation and a weighting scheme to locally combine anatomical atlas priors and intensity-refined posterior probabilities. The method is evaluated on a benchmark dataset used in a recent MICCAI segmentation challenge. In this context we show that MALP-EM is competitive for the segmentation of MR brain scans of healthy adults when compared to state-of-the-art automatic labelling techniques. To demonstrate the versatility of the proposed approach, we employed MALP-EM to segment 125 MR brain images into 134 regions from subjects who had sustained traumatic brain injury (TBI). We employ a protocol to assess segmentation quality if no manual reference labels are available. Based on this protocol, three independent, blinded raters confirmed on 13 MR brain scans with pathology that MALP-EM is superior to established label fusion techniques. We visually confirm the robustness of our segmentation approach on the full cohort and investigate the potential of derived symmetry-based imaging biomarkers that correlate with and predict clinically relevant variables in TBI such as the Marshall Classification (MC) or Glasgow Outcome Score (GOS). Specifically, we show that we are able to stratify TBI patients with favourable outcomes from non-favourable outcomes with 64.7% accuracy using acute-phase MR images and 66.8% accuracy using follow-up MR images. Furthermore, we are able to differentiate subjects with the presence of a mass lesion or midline shift from those with diffuse brain injury with 76.0% accuracy. The thalamus, putamen, pallidum and hippocampus are particularly affected. Their involvement predicts TBI disease progression.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With an estimated annual global incidence of 6.8million cases, traumatic brain injury (TBI) imposes a significant burden on patients, their families, and health services (Irimia et al., 2012). Usually caused by sudden acceleration/deceleration or focal impacts, the lesions caused can be focal as in the case of contusions or more diffuse (diffuse axonal injury (DAI)) (Meythaler et al., 2001; Warner et al., 2010b). It is common for patients to have a combination of these. After the acute injury secondary processes including complex metabolic cascades, alterations in cerebral blood flow and raised intracranial pressure may occur contributing to the burden of injury. It is well recognised that complex pathophysiological processes including secondary Wallerian-type degeneration continue to occur months to years after the initial insult (Meythaler et al., 2001; Ding et al., 2008; Warner et al., 2010a). In order to improve treatment stratification and patient outcomes, as well as more accurately predict outcome, we need to better understand the complexity and heterogeneity of TBI both in the acute and chronic stages.Although patterns of abnormalities have been shown to be predictors of outcome, such use of imaging data is mainly based on expert interpretation of visually inspected X-ray computed tomography (CT) images. Standard models to predict the outcome of TBI patients remain unavailable (Irimia et al., 2012). To assist the understanding of TBI disease progression, accurate quantitative assessment of the structural changes occurring during and after TBI is crucial. Segmentation of structural magnetic resonance (MR) images offers a potential way to gain more insight. For example, in Bendlin et al. (2008) brain volume loss following TBI has been identified using tissue segmentation techniques on structural MR images (MRIs) and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI). In Irimia et al. (2011) an intra-patient time point comparison has been performed on three representative TBI patients using semi-automatic methods for tissue and lesion classification and 3D model generation. Ramlackhansingh et al. (2011) used structural MRI and positron emission tomography (PET) to demonstrate inflammatory processes that remain active for months or years following brain trauma. An overview of existing structural MRI findings in mild TBI is provided in Shenton et al. (2012). Most of the few existing studies (Strangman et al., 2010; Warner et al., 2010a,b) that analyse structural morphometric measures are based on the segmentation techniques available in FreeSurfer (Fischl et al., 2002) and investigate small patient cohorts (Warner et al., 2010a,b). In Warner et al. (2010b) the authors investigate the correlation between structural brain atrophy of 25 patients with DAI and functional outcome. Several brain structures showed significantly increased structural atrophy when compared to a control group 8months post injury (Warner et al., 2010b). In Strangman et al. (2010), fifty patients that sustained TBI were enrolled in a memory rehabilitation program and their individual progress recorded. The study investigated the predictive value of structural brain volumes with respect to the outcome of the rehabilitation (Strangman et al., 2010). Both studies (Strangman et al., 2010; Warner et al., 2010b) identified several structures, including the thalamus and hippocampus that are particularly affected by TBI and are of significant value when predicting clinical outcome.The automatic structural segmentation of MR brain scans of TBI patients remains, however, a difficult endeavour as most existing methods lack robustness towards TBI-related changes in anatomy (Irimia et al., 2011, 2012). In the acute phase contusions, the presence of blood, hydrocephalus and/or oedema can greatly affect the ability to accurately segment a brain. In more chronic scans gliosis and atrophy are also often poorly dealt with using currently available segmentation methods. It is this high variability and extent of brain change following a moderate or severe TBI that makes the segmentation task so demanding. An exemplar subject with highly abnormal brain configuration is shown with overlaid automatic segmentations in Fig. 1to illustrate the difficulty of the segmentation task.A popular class of automatic segmentation algorithms is multi-atlas label propagation with origins in Rohlfing et al. (2004b) and Heckemann et al. (2006). In multi-atlas label propagation, each of the semi-automatically or completely manually annotated atlases is individually aligned with the unsegmented target image. The propagated segmentations are then merged into a consensus label at each voxel in the target image. Voxelwise label conflicts can be resolved using either simple, unweighted approaches (Rohlfing et al., 2004a; Heckemann et al., 2006; Aljabar et al., 2009) or by weighting individual contributions locally based on the intensity information from the atlas and target images (Artaechevarria et al., 2009; Sabuncu et al., 2010). Alternative fusion strategies based on statistical optimisation have been proposed, with the most popular representative being STAPLE (Warfield et al., 2004) and its modifications (Asman and Landman, 2011, 2013; Landman et al., 2012; Cardoso et al., 2013a). A more detailed overview of atlas-based methods is provided by Cabezas et al. (2011). A particular successful strategy called joint label fusion was recently proposed by Wang et al. (2013). In this state-of-the-art approach, as evaluated in (Landman and Warfield, 2012), segmentation bias is reduced by estimating joint segmentation errors of different atlas pairs (Wang et al., 2013).Atlas propagation techniques rely on the accurate registration of the atlas and unsegmented MR image to determine the spatial transformation of the atlas labels into the target space. This can be difficult if the target image differs from the available atlases due to the presence of pathology.Recently, Liu et al. (2014) presented a promising approach based on low-rank matrix decomposition to register multiple images of TBI patients simultaneously to a reference image. In Niethammer et al. (2011), the authors formulated a geometric metamorphosis model to address the challenges arising in the registration of images from TBI, tumour or stroke patients. Other approaches iteratively register and segment the images simultaneously to identify missing correspondences (Periaswamy and Farid, 2006; Chitphakdithai and Duncan, 2010). Based on a seed, Zacharaki et al. (2009) simulated tumour growth in an atlas image before registering it to a tumour patient. Next to this, more standard approaches often rely on a mask to ignore abnormal regions during the registration process (Brett et al., 2001; Stefanescu et al., 2004; Andersen et al., 2010). However, methods that rely on strong prior knowledge such as masks or tumour growth models are in general not applicable for the segmentation of subjects with heterogeneous pathologies as they are often present in TBI patients. Bauer et al. (2013) provide a comprehensive overview on image analysis in the context of brain tumours.In addition, there have been several methods proposed to address the challenge of registering abnormal adult brain images of Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) patients. In Wolz et al. (2010a) a manifold of atlases and unsegmented MR images is learned to robustly propagate the atlas label sets to all unsegmented images within the manifold. Another approach, “Multi-Atlas Propagation with Enhanced Registration” (MAPER) (Heckemann et al., 2010, 2011), employs automatically calculated tissue classification into the registration process to enable robust image alignment, even if the target image shows severe brain atrophy. Recently, methods based on nonlocal patch-based label fusion have been proposed (Coupé et al., 2011; Rousseau et al., 2011) that rely on affine alignment with a template library and thus relax the requirement for accurate nonrigid registrations. Patch-based methods have been developed further, often with focus on a particular application. For example Tong et al. (2013) used dictionary learning and sparse coding for hippocampal segmentation in patients with AD, while Wang et al. (2014) applied patch-driven level sets to tissue segmentation in neonates. However, while in AD brain changes are consistent with disease progression, MR brain images of patients with TBI can show inconsistent and gross pathological change as demonstrated in Fig. 1. Fig. 1 further shows that established registration techniques such as MAPER (Heckemann et al., 2010) or SyN (Avants et al., 2008) struggle to establish a plausible mapping between the available atlas images and an image of an abnormal brain. Both the presence of gross deformation and the potential absence of brain tissue prevent an accurate anatomical correspondence estimation. Even the application of a state-of-the-art label fusion technique (Wang et al., 2013) is not able to correct the substantial and consistent errors of alignment.Atlas-based segmentation can be further improved by incorporating intensity information from the unseen image through a Gaussian mixture model (GMM) (Van Leemput et al., 1999; Fischl et al., 2002). The resulting optimisation problem is often solved using expectation–maximisation (EM) (Van Leemput et al., 1999; Lötjönen et al., 2010; Cardoso et al., 2011; Cardoso et al., 2013b; Ledig et al., 2012) or graph cuts (van der Lijn et al., 2008; Wolz et al., 2010b). While the EM approach enables simultaneous probabilistic segmentation of multiple brain structures, graph-cut based methods yield binary labels for individual structures. Also approaches that propagate atlas labels over a graph (Wolz et al., 2010a; Cardoso et al., 2013c) or within clusters (Ribbens et al., 2014) enjoy increasing attention in the community. In the context of brain tissue segmentation it has been further shown that the relaxation of anatomical atlas priors can improve segmentation quality (Cardoso et al., 2011, 2013b).As an alternative or complement to either approach, Wang et al. (2011) proposed to use machine learning techniques to learn systematic segmentation errors that are then corrected in a post-processing step.Atlas-based approaches require a number of brain atlases that, in the ideal case, have been generated by expert manual delineation. In this work we use an atlas set that was the basis of a recent whole-brain segmentation challenge (MICCAI 2012 Grand Challenge and Workshop on Multi-Atlas Labeling, Landman and Warfield (2012)). We can thus provide a direct comparison to the methods that were evaluated in this competition. In general, other whole-brain atlases are equally suitable for the proposed approach.The main motivation for our work was to devise a fully automatic and robust segmentation method that allows accurate measurement of various brain structures in MR images in the presence of severe pathologies, as exemplified in Fig. 1. Specifically, we are interested in the analysis of MR brain scans acquired of patients that had sustained traumatic brain injury.The method described in this work addresses a key need in the management of TBI, that was identified by Irimia et al. (2012): “[…] the key methodological hurdle that must be overcome in order to make structural neuroimaging a powerful tool for predicting TBI outcome is the current paucity of automated image processing methods that can allow researchers to analyse large numbers of TBI CT/MRI volumes without the need for excessive user input or intervention.”We pursue this objective on three levels. First, we combine the best features of state-of-the-art atlas-based segmentation tools into a new framework, MALP-EM, by building on MAPER and adding the benefits of joint label fusion and an intensity-based refinement using EM. Second, we adapt this method for the challenges posed by highly abnormal brain configurations. To achieve this, we use a prior relaxation scheme that corrects anatomical atlas priors in regions where accurate alignment of the images is impossible due to missing brain tissue or severe deformation. We further employ a data-driven and locally adaptive weighting scheme to combine anatomical atlas prior probabilities and intensity-refined posterior probabilities for maximum benefit. Third, we use the modified MALP-EM algorithm to segment 125 MR brain scans of a heterogeneous population of 101 subjects who had sustained TBI. To assess segmentation accuracy on this TBI cohort, we devised a specific protocol that was independently followed by three blinded raters. This protocol enables an expert to rate hippocampus, thalamus, putamen and occipital pole segmentation quality in the absence of manual reference segmentations.We then derive volumetric biomarkers based on an index that quantifies asymmetry between structures appearing both in the left and right brain hemisphere (absolute asymmetry index, AAI). We show the potential of single time-point MR imaging based variables to correlate with and predict outcome-relevant clinical variables.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We presented a fully automatic, highly robust and accurate segmentation framework called MALP-EM. This includes a new paradigm: We suggest the spatially weighted combination of probabilistic segmentation results obtained through different techniques into a common segmentation exploiting individual benefits. Extensive quantitative evaluation on a manually annotated atlas cohort of healthy subjects confirmed that MALP-EM significantly improves on existing label fusion techniques. Based on the ratings of three independent experts, MALP-EM is superior to joint label fusion for hippocampus, thalamus, putamen and occipital pole segmentation on TBI brain scans. We have demonstrated the benefits regarding robustness through intensity based refinement on 125 MR brain images of TBI subjects. Using MALP-EM we were able to segment 122 out of 125 available TBI brain images into 134 different anatomical regions. We observed correlations between asymmetry indices of paired structures and clinical variables, using acute-phase or follow-up MR images. We also observed and confirmed evidence that subcortical brain structures such as the thalamus, putamen and hippocampus have strong potential to predict the clinical outcome of individual TBI patients.