@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Comparison and validation of three versions of a forest wind risk model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Comprehensive description and validation of three versions of a mechanistic wind risk model for even-aged forests.Analysis of the performance of mechanistic and logistic regression models against measured damage in a conifer forest.All models provided acceptable discrimination between damaged and undamaged forest stands.The two version of the mechanistic model with the lowest bias gave very comparable overall results at the forest scale.Statistical analysis showed that increasing tree height and local wind speed were the main factors associated with damage.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Risk modelling,Decision support system,Wind damage,Forest disturbance,Mechanistic modelling,Validation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Predicting the probability of wind damage in both natural and managed forests is important for understanding forest ecosystem functioning, the environmental impact of storms and for forest risk management. We undertook a thorough validation of three versions of the hybrid-mechanistic wind risk model, ForestGALES, and a statistical logistic regression model, against observed damage in a Scottish upland conifer forest following a major storm. Statistical analysis demonstrated that increasing tree height and local wind speed during the storm were the main factors associated with increased damage levels. All models provided acceptable discrimination between damaged and undamaged forest stands but there were trade-offs between the accuracy of the mechanistic models and model bias. The two versions of the mechanistic model with the lowest bias gave very comparable overall results at the forest scale and could form part of a decision support system for managing forest wind damage risk.Maximum width of canopy (m)Length of the live crown (m)Drag coefficient scale parameterDrag coefficient (percentage reduction in canopy area due to streamlining)Regression between stem weight (SW) and resistance to overturning (Nm kg−1)Critical wind speed for damage (m s−1)Zero-plane displacement (m)Stem diameter at base of tree (m)Stem diameter at breast height (1.3 m) (m)Average spacing between trees (m)Windiness score from Quine and White (1993)Dimensionless factor to account for additional turning moment due to crown and stem weightDimensionless factor to account for reduction in clear wood MOR due to knotsDimensionless factor to account for gustiness of windTree height (m)von Karman constant = 0.4Maximum turning moment due to wind loading only and not including additional moment due to overhanging crown and stem (Nm)Modulus of rupture on wood for species of interest (Pa)Parameter controlling reduction in drag coefficient with wind speedDensity of air (kg m−3)Forestry Commission sub-compartment databaseRatio of average tree spacing after and before a thinningStem (bole) weight (kg)Turning moment coefficient from Hale et al. (2012) (kg)Ratio of turning moment coefficient after and before thinningWind speed at 10 m above the zero plane displacement height (m s−1)Wind speed at tree height (m s−1)Friction velocity (m s−1)Weibull scale parameter (m s−1)Weibull shape parameter (dimensionless)Wind speed calculated from DAMS score (m s−1)Wind speed calculated from WAsP airflow model (m s−1)Wind speed at meteorological station (m s−1)Distance from forest edge (m)Yield class (m3 ha−1 yr−1)Aerodynamic roughness (m)Name of software: ForestGALES Developers: Forest Research and INRA Contact address: Forest Research, Northern Research Station, Roslin, Midlothian EH25 9SY, United Kingdom Email: forestgales.support@forestry.gsi.gov.uk Availability and Online Documentation: The software along with supporting material is freely available. Go to http://www.forestresearch.gov.uk/forestgales to find out how to obtain the software or email forestgales.support@forestry.gsi.gov.uk Year first available: 2000 Hardware required: IBM compatible PC Software required: MS Windows Programming language: Borland Delphi 5.0®. Versions have also been written in Python, Fortran, R and Java. Contact the corresponding author (barry.gardiner@bordeaux.inra.fr) for further details. Program size: 10 MB. With all additional support files and manuals = 25 MB.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Wind is a major disturbance agent in forests and a key part of the dynamics of many forest ecosystems, particularly temperate forests (Johnson and Miyanishi, 2007). Therefore to understand how forest ecosystems function, and to gain insight into the structure of forests, we need to understand the mechanisms and occurrence of wind damage. In addition, the high levels of damage that can occur in storms have important economic, environmental and social consequences, particularly for managed forests (Gardiner et al., 2010). Understanding the process of wind interactions with forests, the impact of forest damage, the potential for preventive responses, and the prospects for the future are therefore important for people engaged in the forest-based economy, for forest ecologists, for regional planners, and for anyone concerned with the continued sustainability of forests and the forestry sector.Wind is the major disturbance agent for European forests and is responsible for more than 50% of all damage by volume (Schelhaas et al., 2003; Gardiner et al., 2010). The cost of such damage can be very high in economic terms (e.g. € 6 billion in France from storms Lothar and Martin in 1999, and € 2.4 billion in Sweden after storm Gudrun in 2005), as well as having a huge impact on local societies and forest ecosystems (see Blennow et al., 2014; Gardiner et al., 2013). Worryingly, there is evidence that damage levels have been increasing over the past century (Schelhaas et al., 2003), and are likely to continue to increase in the future (Gardiner et al., 2010; Schelhaas et al., 2010). Part of this increase appears to be due to a changing climate, with wetter and warmer winters leading to longer periods of saturated soils, and to longer periods with unfrozen soils in Fennoscandia (Usbeck et al., 2010). However, the increase also appears to be influenced by forest management practice (Seidl et al., 2011), such as the increase in growing stock of European forests because of longer rotations, and the increase in delayed thinning due to the lack of profitable markets for small roundwood. Forest management is known to have a significant influence on forest vulnerability to wind damage (e.g. Albrecht et al., 2012; Gardiner et al., 2005; Hale et al., 2004; Mason, 2002; Mason and Quine, 1995; Valinger and Fridman, 2011). Understanding the impact of forest management is therefore important for planning damage mitigation strategies. A key component of any risk management and risk mitigation strategy is to have a method for predicting the level of risk, so that the implications of different options can properly be assessed (Gardiner and Quine, 2000; Gardiner and Welton, 2013).A number of methods of assessing wind risk have been developed. These began with the Windthrow Hazard Classification (WHC) (Miller, 1985), which is a scoring system developed in Great Britain that uses measures of local topographic shelter and rooting depth to predict the height at which wind damage would be expected to begin in thinned and unthinned stands. The relative weighting of the shelter and rooting factors was based on expert judgement and observations of damage. However, the WHC is essentially a site scoring system and does not allow for differences in silviculture or species choice. It has never been fully validated, but is thought to be pessimistic, predicting damage to start on average at too low a tree height (Quine, 1995).Another approach is to develop empirical models based on inventories of past damage. These require large amounts of high quality data across a range of site conditions, and may only be usable in the area from which the inventory data were obtained, and for the types of storm on which the analyses were based. An example of such a model is “Lothar”, which is based on a detailed inventory of around 1300 plots following storm damage in the Black Forest in 1990 and 1999 (Schmidt et al., 2010). Previous statistical analysis of storm damage (e.g. Albrecht et al., 2012; Colin et al., 2009; Schmidt et al., 2010; Valinger and Fridman, 2011) has identified a number of factors that appear to be associated with storm damage to stands, although they are not always the same from analysis to analysis. Of all the factors that appear to have an influence on wind risk, tree height is the most important and consistent factor from all analyses. In addition recent thinning, the creation of new edges, the presence of waterlogging, and soils with restricted rooting or acidic soils have been shown to be factors predisposing stands to damage. The relative stability of different species has been the subject of much debate and contradictory evidence, but overall it appears that spruces are amongst the most vulnerable of conifers (Colin et al., 2009; Hanewinkel et al., 2008, 2013). Within stands, the trees with the highest taper appear to be the most wind-firm, through being at least risk from stem breakage (Gardiner et al., 1997; Hanewinkel et al., 2013). Slopes and valleys exposed to the prevailing wind are particularly susceptible to wind damage (Schmidt et al., 2010), which is in accordance with the analysis of the importance of funnelling in the DAMS scoring system of Quine and White (1993). Interestingly, increasing elevation has been shown to have a correlation with decreasing levels of risk (Albrecht et al., 2013; Lanquaye-Opoku and Mitchell, 2005) suggesting an acclimation to the wind at higher elevations and wind exposure.The third approach is the use of hybrid mechanistic-empirical models such as HWIND (Peltola et al., 1999), FOREOLE (Ancelin et al., 2004) and GALES (Gardiner et al., 2000), which as much as possible use mechanical engineering calculations to determine the wind loading on trees and the speeds causing uprooting or breakage (Gardiner et al., 2008). They are called hybrid models because some elements of the calculation cannot currently be calculated using purely mechanistic approaches and require empirical relationships. For example, resistance to uprooting uses empirical correlations with tree size, soil type and rooting depth based on tree winching studies (Nicoll et al., 2006). These hybrid mechanistic-empirical models use characteristics of the forest stand and site to calculate the critical wind speed (CWS) that will cause damage to the trees, combined with knowledge of the local wind climate (using wind climate data or airflow models) to estimate the likelihood of the CWS being exceeded. ForestGALES (Dunham et al., 2000; Gardiner et al., 2004) is an example of such a combination, using GALES to calculate CWS and the DAMS windiness scoring system (Quine and White, 1993) to predict the probability of damage through the life of a forest stand, based on tree dimensions and stand and site characteristics. It uses the idea of momentum stress partitioning (Raupach, 1994) between trees to calculate the wind loading on individual trees in the forest, and a gust factor to convert from mean to extreme wind loading. We refer to this method as the “roughness” method. ForestGALES is in use in Great Britain, where it has replaced the WHC as the recommended decision support system for managing wind risk in commercial forestry (Forestry Commission, 2010). It has also been adapted for use in Brazil, Canada, Denmark, France, Japan and New Zealand (Byrne, 2005; Cucchi et al., 2005; Kamimura et al., 2008; Mikklesen, 2007; Moore and Somerville, 1998; Ruel et al., 2000).However, a model is only as good as the data against which it has been validated, and validation of forest wind risk models is inherently difficult because of the relative infrequency of storms that cause severe damage. Furthermore in the event of a damaging storm, a model cannot be validated without having a comprehensive survey of the damage, and knowing the characteristics of the forest at the time of the storm, together with the wind speeds over the forest during the storm; these are seldom all available. To date there have been only a few attempts to conduct systematic validation exercises on hybrid mechanistic-empirical wind risk models. Byrne and Mitchell (2013) tested a modified version of ForestGALES adapted for conditions in British Columbia, Canada; the comparisons at a single experimental location indicated that the model gave reasonable predictions against observed damage, although there were some differences between species. Seidl et al. (2014) developed a wind risk model from the experimental measurements of Hale et al. (2012), which is very similar to the third version of ForestGALES discussed below, and obtained good comparison with observed patterns and levels of damage in Southern Sweden. However, an initial partial validation of ForestGALES in Great Britain (Gardiner et al., 2008; Suárez et al., 2002), together with the experience of wind damage of British foresters, has indicated that the model is over-pessimistic in its predictions of damage (i.e. predicts more damage than is observed) at least under British conditions. This is thought to be due to exaggerated values for the gust factor in the model (Gardiner et al., 2008). This has implications for forest managers, as they may fell a crop on the basis of its predicted wind risk, when in fact it could have grown for longer with a greater economic return. At the same time, Hale et al. (2012) have provided a new approach to predicting CWS from a direct prediction of the maximum turning moment on a tree based on the tree characteristics, without the need for a gust factor. We hereafter refer to this approach as the “turning moment coefficient” or TMC method. This paper presents a comparison of the two approaches to calculating wind risk to forests (“roughness” and “turning moment coefficient” methods) within the hybrid mechanistic-empirical wind risk model ForestGALES, and is the first comprehensive assessment of these models for forests in the Great Britain.On 3rd January 2012 a deep Atlantic depression caused strong winds across much of the UK. Central Scotland was the worst affected area with recorded gusts well over 36 m s−1, causing substantial wind damage in several forest districts. Cowal and Trossachs Forest District, in the west of central Scotland, reported over 150 ha of wind damage resulting from the storm, with the loss of approximately 180,000 tonnes of timber (over 150,000 m3). The damage was monitored by aerial helicopter flights across the whole district just after the storm, and together with the fact that there was information on the forest prior to the storm within the Great Britain Forestry Commission database, we decided that this storm would be an excellent opportunity for assessing the performance of different versions of the ForestGALES model. The information was also sufficiently detailed to allow statistical analysis of which factors were associated with wind damage, and therefore to compare purely empirical and hybrid mechanistic-empirical approaches.The specific aims of this study were:i.to conduct an initial assessment of the performance of three versions of ForestGALES: the original methodology using the “roughness” method requiring a gust factor, a version with a reduced gust factor, and the new “turning moment coefficient” method that avoids the use of a gust factor,to assess what factors were most important in determining wind damage in a typical managed coniferous forest in Great Britain by developing a logistic regression model,to compare the performance of ForestGALES and the logistic regression model against observed damage,to assess the implications of using different modelling options and approaches for the management of wind risk in British forests.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper reports a comprehensive validation of the predictions of damage in a storm from three versions of ForestGALES (a hybrid mechanistic-empirical model of wind risk to forests). It also compared the ForestGALES models with a statistical logistic regression model developed from the observations of damage. The version of ForestGALES (FG2.3) currently in operational use within British forestry was found to be pessimistic in its predictions of overall levels of damage (i.e. predicted more damage than was observed). A revised version using the same methodology, and a completely new method based on individual tree characteristics, agreed well with observed damage at the forest scale and suggests that ForestGALES can be used as part of a reliable decision support system for plantation forests. However, comparison of predicted versus observed damage at the stand scale showed discrepancies with respect to both species and age class. This has highlighted a number of deficiencies in ForestGALES which need to be addressed in order to better represent the damage variation between species and with age, and if use of the model is required for other forest types (e.g. broadleaf and mixed-species forests). These requirements can be summarised as follows:•Better representation of acclimation of trees to their local wind environment and the acclimation of stands with age due to the loss of less wind-firm individual trees.Improvements in modelling the crown characteristics of a number of species as a function of age and growing conditions.More comprehensive measurements of the streamlining properties of a number of species, including broadleaves.Further validation of the TMC method for other species in addition to Sitka spruce and European larch.Tree-pulling on broadleaved species, for which data are currently almost non-existent with the exception of birch (Peltola et al., 1999).Improvements in modelling the wind speeds over forests during storm events in order to better predict the probability of damage.