@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Selecting regional climate scenarios for impact modelling studies

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a method to reduce ensembles of climate models.We use hierarchical clustering, SVD, Silhouettes and mean distances.To minimise the information loss the selection is fitted to the data application.The method shows strong sensitivity to the choice of variables/information provided.Strong need for a careful and thoughtful selection process is shown.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Climate models,Optimised subset,Ensembles,Selection,Impact studies,Climate change impact,Simulation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In climate change research one uses simulations of past and future climate to explore the possible changes in future climate. Different global climate models (GCMs) have been developed by a number of research groups. To stimulate development of these models and reap maximum benefits of these efforts the World Climate Research Programme (WCRP) has established the framework Coupled Modelling Intercomparison Programme which now is in its fifth phase, CMIP5 (Taylor et al., 2012). Regional climate models (RCMs) are then used to downscale the global information onto regional scales which helps in assessing climate change information on the scale relevant to the impact of a changing climate. The modelling and downscaling is coordinated in frameworks such as ENSEMBLES (van der Linden and Mitchell, 2009) and CORDEX (Giorgi et al., 2009; Jones et al., 2011) which produce ensembles of GCM and RCM combinations. The motivation behind the use of multiple models in climate change research is to cover different sources of uncertainties, for more details see e.g. Hawkins and Sutton (2009, 2012), and Deser et al. (2012). Due to limited computing resources those matrices with GCM-RCM combinations are not complete, thus only part of the known uncertainty is covered.To further explore how a changing climate is affecting us and the environment, impact models use climate model output data for the simulation of future climate change impacts, such as crop yields, or in hydrological models simulating the run-off in local areas. Even though it is advised to take all available climate model data into account (e.g. Knutti et al., 2010; Tebaldi and Knutti, 2007; Palmer et al., 2004), often it is not feasible in research projects. The problem which projects face is that the ensembles of GCM-RCM simulations are too big to be handled by many impact modellers.Until now the GCM-RCM ensembles have often been reduced by hand-picking climate simulations depending on the partners involved in the project. Recently, more thoughtful choices were backed up by considering the different climate change signals of temperature, and sometimes of precipitation too (e.g., Fig. 2.1 in Wilcke et al., 2012; Mendlik et al., 2015; Gobiet et al., 2012). Also Murdock and Spittlehouse (2011) use the spread in the change of temperature and precipitation in a study for British Columbia. In few studies in the field of climate research, e.g. Logan et al. (2011), cluster analysis has been applied to select a subset from an ensemble of climate simulations. Only recently Cannon (2015) presented a sophisticated method applying the Katsavounidis-Kuo-Zang (Katsavounidis et al., 1994) algorithm on a large ensemble of global climate simulations.By reducing the model ensemble one also reduces the information about the uncertainty in the projections and the ensembles. Note, by reducing the ensemble one does not reduce the uncertainty as such, only the information available about the uncertainty. Thus the task is to maintain maximum information within the limitations dictated by climate impact studies. In projects like CLIP-C and IMPACT2C (Vautard et al., 2014) a clear demand is expressed for a more systematic approach to select subsets of ensembles of climate simulations tailored to the needs within climate change impact studies.In this paper we present a selection procedure founded on the same basic clustering method as introduced by Mendlik and Gobiet (2015) and explore how it performs for various combinations of variables and climate indices. Specifically, our approach differs in the details of selecting how many principal components to retain, method for choosing the number of clusters and finally how to select one member from each cluster. Based on experiences from current projects, we designed an experiment matrix which focus the evaluation on varying combinations of study regions, climate variables, climate indices, and seasons to test different impact study situations. The study regions included here are examples from Northern Europe. However, the method is to generally select members out of an ensemble, independent of the region.The paper is structured as follows. Starting with the data description in Section 2, which is followed by the explanation of the ensemble reduction method in Section 3. The experimental set-up is described in Section 4 and the results presented in Section 5. In the summary we draw some conclusions in Section 6.The ensemble of climate simulations used in this study consists of 11 GCM-RCM combinations from the EURO-CORDEX initiative (Jacob et al., 2013) with a grid spacing of 0.44 × 0.44° (approx. 50 km × 50 km). The simulations have been produced assuming concentration pathway RCP8.5 (van Vuuren et al., 2011; Stocker et al., 2013) and are listed in Table 1. For this study 30 years of data from historical (1971–2000) simulation runs were used as reference. The future climate is represented with three 30 year periods from the scenario simulation runs: 2021–2050, 2051–2080, 2069–2089.These are the simulations available on the Earth System Grid Federation data network11http://esg-dn1.nsc.liu.se/esgf-web-fe/.in November 2014. Thus, it is a real world situation with an imperfect and imbalanced RCM-GCM matrix resulting in a limited ensemble of opportunity. This fact does not influence the integrity of this study, moreover it can be taken as motivation for selecting simulations different from each other.The data used here are daily values of six model outputs over Northern Europe: 2 m mean temperature (tas), minimum temperature (tasmin), maximum temperature (tasmax), surface precipitation amount (pr), mean relative humidity at 2 m (hurs), and mean wind speed at 10 m (wss). From these model output variables we calculated seasonal averages (Table 2) for each grid cell.Additionally, for each grid-cell we calculate five annual climate indices that are derived from the climate model output. For temperatures, these are the beetle-degree-days index (BDD) and exceeding threshold index (ET) which are related to climate impact research on spruce bark beetles accompanying this study (Jönsson and Bärring, 2011). The BDD are the degree days marking spruce bark beetle maturity and ET is a threshold for the beginning of the second life cycle of those beetles (c.f. Jönsson and Bärring, 2011, for technical definitions).The change in cold days can be described, e.g. by the frost days (FD) index which counts the number of days with tasmin below 0° C (Frich et al., 2002). From precipitation the wet day frequency (RR1, days with pr >1 mm/d) was derived, and Beaufort days (FG6Bft) are the number of days with wind speeds above 6 Bft (10.8 m/s) (see also ECA&D indices of extremes22http://eca.knmi.nl/indicesextremes/indicesdictionary.php.).This study focuses on the future climate, therefore the climate change signals (ccs) of the model output and indices are calculated and used as information for the clustering (subsection 2.1).Covering regional and seasonal differences in climate change and in model performance, the climate change signals were integrated over 6 sub-regions in Northern Europe (Fig. 1) and four seasons. Table 2 shows the quantities used here, which gives n = 174 variables (6 climate variables × 4 seasons × 6 regions + 5 climate indices × 1 season × 6 regions = 144 + 30 = 174). This results in a matrix A spanned by m simulations and n variables(1)A={aij}where a variable aijis defined (Equationfootnote:footnote 2) as the ccs of a seasonal averaged climate model output or climate index averaged (ϕj) over a region (x).(2)aij=ccs(〈simi(ϕj)〉),i∈[1,m],j∈[1,n],with simiis a GCM-RCM combination from Table 1 and(3)〈sim(ϕj)〉=1N∑x∈regiont∈seasonsim(ϕj(x,t))describing the averaging of the ccs over a season t and a region x, with(4)N=∑x∈regiont∈seasonI(x,t)with I being an index function for x and t. One example for an aijwould be the ccs of tas (ϕj) from EC-RCA4 (simi) averaged over DJF (seasont) and over the R1 (regionx) (compare Table 2, Fig. 1). Details of the different combinations and the experiment design are described in Section 4.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The study presented here evaluates and extends an approach to reduce ensembles of climate simulations. The reduction contains five steps: 1) identify user requirements (variables); 2) transform variables into orthogonal and therewith uncorrelated variables; 3) calculate the optimum number of clusters (average silhouette widths); 4) use hierarchical clustering to group the simulations; and finally 5) select the simulation closest to the group's mean as representative.The variables are combinations of climate change signals of climate model output (ϕj), season, and region (Table 2). Climate model output were chosen: temperatures (mean, min, max), precipitation, relative humidity, and wind speed. n Variables and m simulations (climate simulations from the EURO-CORDEX project, Table 1) span the matrix A = {aij} which was de-correlated via singular vector decomposition (SVD).This selection process was tested for sensitivity against different combinations of ϕjand three different climate change periods. The focus here was on the use of climate change signals of climate indices as additional information, as the threshold based quantities can be differently represented in the simulations than their parental variable.The results show a strong sensitivity to the choice of variables and ccs periods. In our experiments for regions in northern Europe, the structure of the clusters was dominated by temperature, when included. Overall, the clusters remained largely unchanged, when climate indices were in- or excluded. However, the simulations selected were different for the different experiments. The selection within the experiments stayed the same (for E*.1 and E*.2), when temperature was involved. This means the influence of the related indices is limited only to the number of selected simulations.For the experiments excluding temperature, the indices strongly affect the final selection. Thus, for studies without temperature it is important for the selection to know if some kind of derived indices will be part of the study.The highest impact of climate indices on the selection shows wind speed and its extreme index FG6Bft, when applied without temperature. Here, the resulting clusters differ in size and structure when the index was in- or excluded. Also there was no overlap in the final selection of the simulations. Based on that one cannot draw any conclusion regarding the amplitude of the climate change signal of wind speed and FG6Bft. However, it clearly shows that different members share the same characteristics in ccs of FG6Bft than when the selection focusses on the characteristics in ccs of wind speed alone.The dependence of the results on the variables can be related to what is known about the performance of RCMs. In, e.g., Christensen et al. (2010) it is shown that RCMs show differences in performance depending on variable, region and season. Thus, the differing resulting clusters reflect this behaviour.Comparing the results for the three different climate change periods no pattern could be found in the selection of representative model simulations. Two simulations might be favoured (Fig. 13), but not clearly enough to automatically choose them. Regarding the number of simulations, for half of the experiments for the mid ccs (2051–2080) two clusters were suggested. However, only rarely more than 5 simulations were suggested, which does relate to the ensemble size of 11 simulations.The results regarding dominance of single variables, like temperature, are related to the regions included for the selection. They could be confirmed in examples not shown here, when regions from Southern Europe are included as well (Pulatov, 2015). Nevertheless, this is not a general statement as only a subset of possible variables and combinations were tested. Furthermore, one has to keep in mind that we were using an ensemble of opportunity only having 11 members. However, this paper intends to present and analyse a method on basis of examples. Thus, the dominance of temperature variables should not be generalised without further studies.In the study of Cannon (2015) it is stated that clustering methods have the disadvantage that the selection changes if one changes the preferred number of simulations and explaining that it leads to inconsistencies for users with different needs. We can confirm, that if one changes the size of the requested subset from, e.g., 4 to 5, one cluster will be split up into two. The representatives of those two “new” clusters will differ from the representative of the one “old” cluster. However, as we select the representatives of each group and by that covering all existing groups, we consider the splitting as a positive and wanted result.Following the concerns of Knutti et al. (2010) about redundant information in large model ensembles, Evans et al. (2014) considers the performance of the simulations as well as their independence from each other regarding the ccs, aiming for maximising independence between simulations and minimising redundancy. However, their final selection is based on a subjective decision about the independence and future performance of the simulations.From this, it is also clear that there exist different motivations for reducing an ensemble, and therefore different methods (even though not many are applied in climate research), which serve different aims.The influence of the provided input information on the selection procedure does not make a statement about the robustness of the method. It rather emphasises that researchers, working in climate change impact studies, need to be aware of this influence. It points out that climate data should not be used or selected blindly and too generally, but should be evaluated for fitness of purpose before.Overall, this study shows the importance of a selection process depending on the variables relevant for the impact model and information about the impact study. It is worth spending some time on the communication of which are the relevant climate variables, but also indices for the impact modellers, as well as the study region, season, and ccs period. This information will help to find a representative subset of simulations and could thus improve the representativeness of the impact model output.The last point will be investigated in a separate study together with the application of bias adjusted climate model output.