@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Wastewater treatment modelling with smoothed particle hydrodynamics

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Novel wastewater treatment model based on smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPH).CFD method coupled to biokinetic model which is applicable to unsteady flows.Simultaneous simulation of wastewater hydraulics and biokinetics.First-ever application of SPH in wastewater treatment.Release of self-developed software SPHASE.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Activated sludge model,CFD in wastewater treatment,Physically-based simulation modelling,Smoothed particle hydrodynamics,Wastewater treatment simulation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper a novel hydrodynamic wastewater treatment (WWT) model based on smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPH) is presented. The hydraulics of the wastewater treatment plant is modelled in detail with SPH. The SPH solver is coupled to the activated sludge model such that the influence on biokinetic processes is described. The key innovation of the present WWT model is that both the biokinetics and the wastewater hydraulics are simultaneously solved for non-steady flows. After validating the present method against the software ASIM 5, the capabilities are demonstrated for a full-scale treatment plant simulation. We investigate the stirrer and aeration induced mixing within the reactor compartments as well as the resulting concentrations of the biokinetic compounds. Following the establishment of a local coupling between the hydraulics and the biokinetics, the biokinetic concentrations within a treatment plant can be spatially resolved with a high resolution.SPHASE – Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics Activated Sludge EngineGregor Burger, Michael Meister, Daniel WinklerMichael Meister, Unit of Environmental Engineering, University of Innsbruck, Technikerstrasse 13, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria, Michael.Meister@uibk.ac.aton application to the author2015PC with multi-core processor, optional: CUDA compatible GPULinux, Mac OS X, WindowsC++command line, graphical user interface(constant) reference particle indexneighbouring particle indexreactor indexbiokinetic compound index

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A key step in modern wastewater treatment (WWT) is to biologically treat contaminated water by a sequence of biokinetic processes. Depending on the pollutant concentration the hydraulics of the treatment plant, which includes the supply of oxygen and the retention of activated sludge, has to be controlled. Whilst the biokinetics are described in detail by the well-established activated sludge models (ASM) summarized by Henze et al. (2000), the reactor hydraulics is coarsely approximated by a series of fully mixed reactors (Levenspiel, 1972). In some instances the complexity of the hydraulic model is increased by including effects of axial dispersion. A breakthrough in WWT hydraulics, however, is achieved by the application of computational fluid dynamics (CFD) methods, which allow for the detailed modelling of processes like the settling and transport of solids (Larsen, 1977). Since effects of multiphase flow (Gresch et al., 2011) and biokinetic models (Le Moullec et al., 2010a,b; Wang et al., 2010; Sobremisana et al., 2011) can be incorporated, CFD is a promising tool for wastewater treatment simulations. Particularly if conventional models fail e.g. in case of dynamic inflows and significant variations in the contamination, the strength of CFD methods is evident (Laurent et al., 2014).Existing research on CFD in WWT is restricted to mesh-based methods. To account for the biokinetics an advection-dispersion equation is solved on the existing grid (cf. Fig. 1a). Due to the restriction of the hydrodynamics to steady flows the computational demand and complexity of the model are low, but in return the application area for steady flows in WWT is limited. The application of the meshless Lagrangian SPH method gives rise to the following advantages: Firstly, SPH intrinsically supports free surface (Monaghan, 2005) and multiphase flows (Colagrossi and Landrini, 2003). Secondly, since particles move along with the fluid advection is treated exactly. Hence if SPH particles are assigned biokinetic concentrations, these compounds are transported with the flow which is a prerequisite for locally coupling the hydraulics to biokinetic models. Thirdly, since each particle's physical variables are accessible at all times, the computation of the hydraulics and the biokinetics can be carried out simultaneously for unsteady flows as outlined in Fig. 1b.In this paper a novel WWT software, where the hydraulics are modelled with SPH and directly coupled to the ASM1 model by Henze et al. (1987, 2000), is proposed. The wastewater hydraulics are computed with a multi-fluid SPH algorithm, whose accuracy is demonstrated by an analysis of the mixing in WWT-plant basins. Following the description of the method we briefly summarize the biokinetic ASM1 model to specify the coupling to SPH. Following the validation of the model against the software ASIM 5, the capabilities of the present method are demonstrated for a full-scale treatment plant simulation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The proposed coupling between SPH and the biokinetic ASM1 model represents a breakthrough in hydrodynamic wastewater treatment (WWT) modelling. The key step of the present approach is to couple the hydraulics to the biokinetic conversion processes. The present WWT model is validated against the software ASIM 5 and found to be in good agreement. The capabilities of the method are demonstrated for a full-scale treatment plant simulation with a dynamic wastewater influent and pollutant concentration. The full potential of the model is revealed if the effects of the local hydraulics on the biokinetic concentrations are included. Numerical experiments on the accumulation of oxygen and sludge have been made, but an efficient local two-way coupling between SPH and ASM1 needs to be found in the future.