@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Discriminative dictionary learning for abdominal multi-organ segmentation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Discriminative dictionary learning is applied to multi-organ segmentation.A local voxel-wise atlas selection is proposed.A multi-resolution strategy is developed for gaining computational efficiency.Validation is carried out on 150 abdominal CT images.A comparison between different atlas selection strategies.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Abdominal multi-organ segmentation,Discriminative dictionary learning,Local atlas selection,Patch based,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
An automated segmentation method is presented for multi-organ segmentation in abdominal CT images. Dictionary learning and sparse coding techniques are used in the proposed method to generate target specific priors for segmentation. The method simultaneously learns dictionaries which have reconstructive power and classifiers which have discriminative ability from a set of selected atlases. Based on the learnt dictionaries and classifiers, probabilistic atlases are then generated to provide priors for the segmentation of unseen target images. The final segmentation is obtained by applying a post-processing step based on a graph-cuts method. In addition, this paper proposes a voxel-wise local atlas selection strategy to deal with high inter-subject variation in abdominal CT images. The segmentation performance of the proposed method with different atlas selection strategies are also compared. Our proposed method has been evaluated on a database of 150 abdominal CT images and achieves a promising segmentation performance with Dice overlap values of 94.9%, 93.6%, 71.1%, and 92.5% for liver, kidneys, pancreas, and spleen, respectively.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
CT-based clinical assessment of abdominal organs relies on quantitative measures and comprehensive analysis of multiple organs in order to identify disorders (Linguraru et al., 2012). The segmentation of multiple abdominal organs enables quantitative analysis of different organs, providing invaluable input for computer aided diagnosis (CAD) systems. For instance, liver segmentation is helpful in the automatic detection and definition of focal lesions (Liu et al., 2004). The segmentation of the pancreas facilitates the diagnosis of dilated pancreatic ducts or inflamed pancreatic tissues (Shimizu et al., 2010). The measurement of the size of the kidney is useful in evaluating its conditions. Other applications like radiotherapy planning as well as cancer detection and staging also require the accurate segmentation of abdominal organs. An automated segmentation approach can eliminate the need for manual labeling by trained observers, i.e. radiologists. Many segmentation approaches have been developed for abdominal computed tomography (CT) scans in recent years. Most of these approaches are based on statistical shape models (Cerrolaza et al., 2014; Heimann et al., 2006; Okada et al., 2008b; Spiegel et al., 2009; Wimmer et al., 2009) or multi-atlas segmentation (Okada et al., 2008b; Park et al., 2003; Shimizu et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2014; Wolz et al., 2013). In these methods, a- shape model or a probability atlas is calculated by averaging shape or location priors of multiple spatially aligned atlases. Such statistical shape models or probabilistic atlases can then provide prior knowledge for the segmentation of organs in the target image. A combination of statistical shape models and probabilistic atlases has also been proposed (Okada et al., 2013; 2008a; Wang et al., 2012) to incorporate both shape and location priors for segmentation tasks.Since the introduction of statistical shape models in the early 1990s (Cootes et al., 1995), these models have been proven very effective in various image segmentation applications. Gao et al. (1998) presented early work using statistical shape models for segmentation of abdominal organs. Later, Heimann et al. (2006) showed a successful application of an active shape model in the segmentation of the liver in CT scans. An automated segmentation method using statistical shape models was proposed by Shimizu et al. (2010) to successfully segment the pancreas. An enhanced shape model approach that integrates a hierarchical framework was also proposed in Bagci et al. (2012) for improving the segmentation accuracy. Another interesting study was presented in Cerrolaza et al. (2014) which introduces a generalized multiresolution hierarchical shape model to efficiently describe the shape variability of different organs to improve the segmentation performance of statistical shape models.Early work using probabilistic atlases was described in Park et al. (2003), where a statistical atlas of the liver and the kidneys was shown to be helpful for the segmentation of these organs. Recent work have incorporated spatial priori knowledge for different abdominal organs (Linguraru et al., 2012; 2010; Oda et al., 2012; Okada et al., 2008a; Shimizu et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2014; Wolz et al., 2013). Notably, Okada et al. (2008a) constructed a hierarchical multi-organ statistical atlas for improving segmentation performance. In order to generate more specific atlases, Oda et al. (2012) separated an atlas database into several clusters and multiple probabilistic atlases were generated. Also recently, inter-organ spatial relations have been incorporated into the probabilistic atlases to perform multi-organ segmentation (Cerrolaza et al., 2014; Okada et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2014).The aim in building models from a population in the form of statistical shape models or probabilistic atlases is that the constructed models can match to the shape or appearance of the anatomical structure of interest of new images. However, the average models calculated from a given population describe the full variability in this specific dataset, potentially leading to a low specificity with respect to individual appearance. The generality of such average models may hamper the segmentation of a specific target image due to large inter-subject variability. For example, difficulties may arise in the segmentation of the target images whose anatomical shapes or locations differ significantly from the average model. To address these shortcomings, more recent approaches are based on subject-specific shape models (Wang et al., 2010) or subject-specific probabilistic atlases (Chu et al., 2013; Shimizu et al., 2010; Wolz et al., 2013), generating subject-specific priors for unlabeled images instead of sharing the same average shape or location priors. The subject-specific models are generated by identifying a number of suitable atlases and then fusing their priors. In order to generate good subject-specific priors for segmentation, two steps are crucial in these methods: selecting similar atlases to the target images and performing accurate pairwise registrations.Previous studies (Aljabar et al., 2009) show that the segmentation performance of multi-atlas based methods is highly dependant on the selected atlases for the target image. Most atlas selection methods define a global mask region to include multiple organs of interest. Then, global similarity measures are calculated in this predefined mask between the target and atlas images to select suitable atlases. More advanced methods (Cao et al., 2011; Wolz et al., 2010) transfer the global similarities into a manifold and perform the atlas selection in the learnt manifold. However, the global similarities represent the overall differences in the mask, which are dominated by the large organs. For example, in our application of abdominal segmentation, the atlas selection is likely to be dominated by the liver since the liver is much larger than other organs. This means that the selected “similar” atlases may not be similar in some local regions such as in the pancreas. A region-wise local atlas selection strategy (van Rikxoort et al., 2010; Shi et al., 2010; Wolz et al., 2013) has been utilized to overcome this shortcoming by selecting suitable atlases at each local region. However, these approaches require the separation of the whole image into different local regions and non-rigid registrations are performed over these local regions for accurate label fusion. Since different anatomical patterns exist at different locations, a voxel-wise local comparison strategy may provide a better way to select similar atlases at each location.The other drawback of traditional multi-atlas based methods is that accurate pairwise registrations are needed to acquire good segmentation results. This can be problematic in the case of high inter-subject variability. Another challenge that arises from using non-rigid registration is the highly computational burden. Previous studies (Chu et al., 2013; Wolz et al., 2013) have demonstrated that the computational complexity is largely defined by the computational time required for the non-rigid registration step. Recently, nonlocal patch based segmentation (PBS) method (Coupé et al., 2011; Rousseau et al., 2011) has been proposed to avoid the need of accurate non-rigid registration and demonstrated the successful applications on the segmentation of brain MR images. However, the patch-based segmentation method cannot be directly applied to the segmentation of abdominal organs, because (i) unlike the human brain, the anatomy in abdominal region shows great variability. There is significant variation in the shapes, sizes and locations of the abdominal organs especially the pancreas, making the overall image alignment particularly challenging (Wang et al., 2014; Wolz et al., 2013). This will pose difficulties for the segmentation methods that rely on image registrations. Although only affine registration is required for the patch based segmentation method, Rousseau et al. (2011) argued that more accurate registration is beneficial to improve the segmentation accuracy of patch-based segmentation methods; (ii) the computational complexity becomes a significant problem for large abdominal organs.To address the above problems, a novel patch-based segmentation framework is presented for the abdominal multi-organ segmentation. In our previous work (Tong et al., 2013), a dictionary learning technique was introduced to improve the segmentation performance of the patch-based methods. However, this approach was limited to binary segmentation and only evaluated on the hippocampus labeling. In this paper, we extend our previous method (Tong et al., 2013) for the simultaneous segmentation of multiple structures. Furthermore, we evaluate the approach on abdominal multi-organ segmentation from CT images. Specifically, dictionaries and classifiers are learnt from the selected training atlases, which will then be utilized to generate a subject-specific probabilistic atlas for each unlabeled target image. The final segmentation is obtained by applying a post-processing step based on graph-cuts in combination with the generated subject-specific probabilistic atlases (Chu et al., 2013; Wolz et al., 2013). The main contributions of this work can be summarized as follows: (1) The extension of discriminative dictionary learning for segmentation (DDLS) algorithm for the segmentation of multiple organs in CT images; (2) A local voxel-wise atlas selection in order to capture local information for segmentation and to tackle the high inter-subject variability; (3) A comparison between different atlas selection strategies; (4) A multi-resolution strategy for gaining computational efficiency. In the remainder of the paper, we will first introduce the datasets used in our work in Section 2.1. The methodology of DDLS for multi-organ segmentation is introduced in Section 2.4 and different atlas selection strategies are also presented. The performance of the proposed method is analyzed in Section 3. Finally, we discuss the strengths and weaknesses of the proposed method and conclude this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
