@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A Matlab toolbox for Global Sensitivity Analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
SAFE implements several GSA methods and can easily integrate new ones.SAFE facilitates assessment of robustness/convergence and effective visualization.SAFE embeds good practice guidelines through workflow scripts.SAFE is intended for both non-specialists users and SA developers.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Global Sensitivity Analysis,Matlab,Octave,Open-source software,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Global Sensitivity Analysis (GSA) is increasingly used in the development and assessment of environmental models. Here we present a Matlab/Octave toolbox for the application of GSA, called SAFE (Sensitivity Analysis For Everybody). It implements several established GSA methods and allows for easily integrating others. All methods implemented in SAFE support the assessment of the robustness and convergence of sensitivity indices. Furthermore, SAFE includes numerous visualisation tools for the effective investigation and communication of GSA results. The toolbox is designed to make GSA accessible to non-specialist users, and to provide a fully commented code for more experienced users to complement their own tools. The documentation includes a set of workflow scripts with practical guidelines on how to apply GSA and how to use the toolbox. SAFE is open source and freely available for academic and non-commercial purpose. Ultimately, SAFE aims at contributing towards improving the diffusion and quality of GSA practice in the environmental modelling community.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Global Sensitivity Analysis (GSA) is a term describing a set of mathematical techniques to investigate how the variation in the output of a numerical model can be attributed to variations of its inputs. GSA can be applied for multiple purposes, including: to apportion output uncertainty to the different sources of uncertainty of the model, e.g. unknown parameters, measurement errors in input forcing data, etc. and thus prioritise the efforts for uncertainty reduction; to investigate the relative influence of model parameters over the predictive accuracy and thus support model calibration, verification and simplification; to understand the dominant controls of a system (model) and to support model-based decision-making.Many GSA methods have been proposed in the literature and their application and comparison in the environmental modelling domain has steadily increased in recent years (e.g. Tang et al. (2007); Pappenberger et al. (2008); Yang (2011)). GSA has been recognised as an essential tool for the development and assessment of environmental models (Saltelli et al., 2008). However, the use of formal GSA techniques is still rather limited in some domains. Moreover, reported applications often fail to adequately tackle some critical issues like, in the first place, a rigorous assessment of the robustness of GSA results to the multiple and sometimes non-univocal choices that the user has to make throughout its application. Tools are needed to facilitate uptake of the most advanced GSA techniques also by non-specialist users, as well as to provide guidelines on GSA application and to promote good practice.Freely available GSA tools include the repository of Matlab and Fortran functions maintained by the Joint Research Centre (JRC, 2014), the Sensitivity Analysis package for the R environment (Pujol et al., 2014), the GUI-HDMR Matlab package (Ziehn and Tomlin, 2009), the C++ based PSUADE software (Gan et al., 2014), and the Python Sensitivity Analysis Library SALib (Herman, 2014). In this paper we present a Matlab toolbox for the application of GSA, called SAFE (Sensitivity Analysis For Everybody), specifically designed to conform with several principles that reflect the authors' view on “good practice” in GSA, namely: (i) the application of multiple GSA methods as a means to complement and validate individual results; (ii) the assessment and revision of the user choices made when applying each GSA method, especially in relation to the robustness of the estimated sensitivity indices; and (iii) the use of effective visualisation tools (see Table 1for more discussion).The SAFE Toolbox has primarily been conceived to make GSA accessible to non-specialist users, that is, people with only a basic background in GSA and/or Matlab. At the same time, it is designed to enable more experienced users to easily understand, customise, and possibly further develop the code. The toolbox documentation is also organised to meet these dual goals. It comprises a technical documentation, which is embedded in the code, and a user documentation that is given in the form of workflow scripts (see Table 2). This paper complements that documentation by providing an overview of the Toolbox structure/architecture.The first release of the SAFE Toolbox includes the Elementary Effects Test (EET, or Morris method (Morris, 1991)), Regional Sensitivity Analysis (RSA, Spear and Hornberger (1980); Wagener and Kollat (2007)), Variance-Based Sensitivity Analysis (VBSA, or Sobol' method, e.g. Saltelli et al. (2008)), the Fourier Amplitude Sensitivity Test (FAST by Cukier et al. (1973)), Dynamic identifiability analysis (DYNIA by Wagener et al. (2003)) and a novel density-based sensitivity method (PAWN by Pianosi and Wagener (2015)). The Toolbox also offers a number of visual tools including scatter (dotty) plots, parallel coordinate plot and the visual test for validation of screening proposed by Andres (1997). The Toolbox has been designed to facilitate the integration of new methods and therefore this first release is meant to be the starting point of an ongoing code development project by the authors.The SAFE Toolbox is implemented in Matlab but is also compatible with the freely available GNU Octave environment (www.gnu.org/software/octave/) and it runs under any operating system (Windows, Linux and Mac OS X). A R-version of the Toolbox is also available. Moreover, as it will be further described in the next section, the Toolbox can be easily linked to simulation models that run outside the Matlab/Octave environment. The Toolbox is freely available from the authors for noncommercial research and educational uses.Fig. 1shows how the SAFE Toolbox is organised into folders. To better understand the file structure used in these folders, it must be highlighted that all GSA approaches can be described through three basic steps (see Fig. 2):(1)Sampling the inputs within their variability space.Evaluating the model against the sampled input combinations.Post-processing the input/output samples to compute sensitivity indices.Assuming that the simulation model of interest has already been implemented in a numerical programme, the application of a specific GSA method requires a set of functions to perform the first step (sampling) and the third step (post-processing). However, while the post-processing functions are tailored to each specific GSA approach, the same generic sampling function (for instance Latin Hypercube Sampling) can often be applied across different methods. Similarly, some visualisation tools can be used to visualise sensitivity indices estimated according to different methods (for instance the convergence plot shown in Fig. 3c can be used independently of the definition of the sensitivity index) or to provide additional insights to complement the GSA (an example is the widely used Parallel Coordinate Plot shown in Fig. 3d). Therefore, two types of folders in the SAFE Toolbox can be distinguished:•shared folders (sampling, util and visualisation) that contain functions for sampling, visualisation, and other utilities, which might be used across different GSA methods;tailored folders (e.g. EET, RSA and VBSA) that contain the functions to compute sensitivity indices according to a specific method (e.g. the Elementary Effects Test, Regional Sensitivity Analysis, Variance-Based Sensitivity Analysis) and to visualise them in a method-specific fashion (for instance the elementary effects plot shown in Fig. 3a).This modular structure provides a number of advantages.•It makes it easy to plug-in new code. For instance, new sampling methods can be included in the code by simply adding new functions to the sampling folder. The only requirement is that they produce an input sample matrix X in the format required by the post-processing functions (see Fig. 2). New GSA methods can also be easily integrated in the Toolbox. The implemented functions will be grouped into a new folder, respecting the naming convention adopted in the Toolbox (i.e. [methodname]_indices.m for the function that computes the sensitivity indices, [methodname]_plot.m for the one that plots the indices, etc., see again Fig. 2 for an example). Again the only requirement for the integration is that all the post-processing functions have the sample matrices X and Y as input arguments.It makes it easy to use portions of the code only. For instance, if a dataset of input/output samples generated for a given model is already available (maybe not even from Monte Carlo simulations) one can directly load it into Matlab/Octave and apply the post-processing functions. Similarly, an easy way to link the SAFE Toolbox to an external simulation model is to perform the sampling in Matlab, save the input sample X into a text file, run the model against the sampled inputs outside Matlab, load the output samples from the model output file into Matlab, and move on to the post-processing step (see also asterisk in Fig. 2). Advice on how to do this, with a practical example, is given in the user documentation through a specific workflow script.SAFE is a modular, flexible, open-source Matlab toolbox for GSA. Its main features are that it facilitates the application of multiple GSA methods, that it includes functions to analyse the convergence and robustness of sensitivity indices for all methods (including some like EET and RSA where this has not yet become an established practice), and that it provides several visualisation tools for both the investigation of sensitivities and their effective communication. It provides both tools and practical guidelines (through workflow scripts) to assist non-specialist users in performing GSA. At the same time, it is a fully commented code that more experienced users can customise, share and further develop.The SAFE Toolbox is freely available from the authors for noncommercial research and educational purposes. A website has been set-up to facilitate the Toolbox distribution (bristol.ac.uk/cabot/resources/safe-toolbox/). New releases will be progressively uploaded on this website as new methods for sampling, post-processing and visualisation will be implemented, and registered users will be notified about new releases. By “releasing early, releasing often” (Raymond, 1999), we aim at establishing a tight feedback loop with users of the SAFE Toolbox. Users are welcome to send their feedbacks about the Toolbox, though we do not plan to establish a collaborative software development project at this stage. Hopefully, the SAFE Toolbox and website will contribute towards improving the diffusion and quality of GSA practice in the environmental modelling community.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
