@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Calibrating hourly rainfall-runoff models with daily forcings for streamflow forecasting applications in meso-scale catchments

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Daily rainfall is disaggregated to hourly to calibrate hourly hydrological models.Models perform almost as well as models calibrated with observed hourly rainfall.Disaggregation performed at least as well as parameter scaling.A way to develop hourly river forecast systems with daily rainfall.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Rainfall-runoff calibration,Hourly data,Rainfall disaggregation,Streamflow forecasting,AWBM,GR4J,PDM,Sacramento,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The absence of long sub-daily rainfall records can hamper development of continuous streamflow forecasting systems run at sub-daily time steps. We test the hypothesis that simple disaggregation of daily rainfall data to hourly data, combined with hourly streamflow data, can be used to establish efficient hourly rainfall-runoff models. The approach is tested on four rainfall-runoff models and a range of meso-scale catchments (150–3500 km2). We also compare our disaggregation approach to a method of parameter scaling that attains an hourly parameter-set from daily data.Simple disaggregation of daily rainfall produces hourly streamflow models that perform almost as well as those developed from hourly rainfall data. Rainfall disaggregation performs at least as well as parameter scaling, and often better. For the catchments and models we test, simple disaggregation is a very straightforward and effective way to establish hydrological models for continuous sub-daily streamflow forecasting systems when sub-daily rainfall data are unavailable.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Many streamflow forecasting systems operate at sub-daily time steps to give adequate detail of streamflows, for example about the timing and magnitude of floods (e.g. Thielen et al., 2009; Demargne et al., 2014). Operating a sub-daily streamflow forecasting system requires the availability of both sub-daily forcing data (rainfall, potential evaporation) and response data (streamflows) in real-time. In addition, long records of historical data are required for forecasting systems that rely on continuous hydrological modelling, as the hydrological models have to be calibrated to reasonably long historical periods to capture variability in streamflow (e.g., Merz et al., 2009, recommended using a minimum of 5 years' data).Catchments where sub-daily streamflow records are available without accompanying sub-daily rainfall records are common in Australia and in many other regions, particularly in developing countries. Sub-daily rainfall records require expensive monitoring (e.g. tipping bucket rain gauges), data logging and telemetry systems to adequately cover rainfall variability over a catchment. Conversely, a single streamflow gauge is often sufficient to establish a forecasting system. A sub-daily hydrological forecasting service cannot be easily extended to a catchment that has long streamflow records if there are no existing sub-daily rainfall records, even if there is a strong need for such a service. However, daily rainfall records are available over much wider geographical areas and/or for much longer periods for two reasons: i) daily rainfall can be recorded manually with simple rain gauges, and are accordingly more common than sub-daily records (see, e.g., Nalbantis, 1995); and ii) the increasing availability of daily precipitation data products (e.g. the European Climate Assessment & Dataset project, http://www.ecad.eu/).A number of studies have shown that calibrating conceptual hydrological models to different time steps can produce markedly different parameter values (e.g., Schaake et al., 1996; Holman-Dodds et al., 1999; Littlewood and Croke, 2008; Wang et al., 2009). This makes it difficult to transfer daily parameters directly to hourly models without a substantial drop in performance. Accordingly, few attempts have been made to use daily rainfall to inform the calibration of streamflow models run at an hourly time step in a forecasting context. The most notable of these is the study by Nalbantis (1995), who considered the case where a few hourly rainfall observations for flood events are available to supplement a more comprehensive set of daily rainfall observations. He amalgamated two sets of hydrological model parameters: 1) a parameter set calibrated at a daily time step using all daily rainfall records available and 2) a parameter set calibrated to an hourly time step for events where hourly rainfall records were available. In order to amalgamate the two parameter sets, parameters that changed with time step were standardised with theoretically derived scaling factors so they could be applied at either the daily or hourly time step. The amalgamated model markedly improved event-based and continuous forecasts generated by the hydrological model calibrated only to daily calibration data.In this study, we consider a slightly different scenario: a catchment with an hourly streamflow record is targeted for the development of a continuous streamflow forecasting system, and rainfall gauges that monitor hourly rainfall are to be installed in the catchment. Before these hourly rain gauges are installed, only daily rainfall data are available. The scenario is not simply an academic exercise: the Bureau of Meteorology in Australia is facing similar cases as it seeks to extend its System for Continuous Hydrological Ensemble Forecasting (SCHEF - Bennett et al., 2014) to a wider range of catchments, a number of which have short sub-daily rainfall records.We attempt to answer the question: can a simple disaggregation of daily rainfall data be used to establish hydrological models suitable for a continuous sub-daily streamflow forecasting system? To answer this question, we disaggregate daily rainfalls to hourly rainfalls. To offer the sternest test of this hypothesis, we use the simplest method of disaggregation available (simple division), though we note that more complex disaggregation methods exist (e.g., Koutsoyiannis and Onof, 2001; Segond et al., 2006). We test the disaggregation for a variety of catchments (Section 2), and use these with hourly streamflow data to calibrate and validate hydrological models in a series of experiments (Section 3). We assess the disaggregated rainfall on a range of conceptual rainfall-runoff models, and compare the results to alternative methods of deriving parameter sets for models run at an hourly time step (Section 4). We discuss our findings in the context of streamflow forecasting in Section 5, and summarise and conclude our study in Section 6.Our experiments consider hydrological simulations forced by observed rainfall (i.e. not with forecast rainfall) Forecast rainfall may be biased (Shrestha et al., 2013), and contains errors with respect to observations (Shrestha et al., 2015), meaning rainfall-runoff models are likely to perform worse when forced with forecast rainfall than with observations. However, it is common practise in forecasting to calibrate rainfall-runoff models to observations, meaning our study is directly relevant to forecasting applications.We select seven catchments on the following bases: i) the availability of high-quality hourly rainfall and streamflow data of at least 5 years' duration, and ii) that catchments cover a diverse range of climatic and hydrological conditions. Catchment locations are shown in Fig. 1, and catchment characteristics are listed in Table 1. We define the catchments in this study as meso-scale (between 100 km2 and 3500 km2 in area). Three of the catchments had more than one streamflow record available, and we analyse a total of 17 streamflow records.We divide each catchment into subareas in order to run semi-distributed hydrological models. Except for the Forth River catchment, the catchment delineations employed in this study are to be used in a deterministic forecasting service provided by the Bureau. Catchment delineations follow recommendations by the Bureau of Meteorology to i) ensure all subareas within a catchment are of a similar size and ii) to simulate flow at significant points-of-interest (e.g. gauge sites, reservoirs, etc.).Rainfall and streamflow data for all catchments except the Forth River were quality controlled by the Bureau of Meteorology (http://www.bom.gov.au/waterdata/). Hydro Tasmania supplied quality-controlled streamflow data for the Forth River. Hydro Tasmania also supplied rainfall data for the Forth River catchment that were not quality controlled. We quality control rainfall data for the Forth River catchment by comparing rainfall records to nearby gauges and gridded precipitation data from the Australian Water Availability Project (AWAP, http://www.bom.gov.au/jsp/awap), then marking suspect values as null (Robertson et al., 2015).Area-average hourly rainfalls are compiled for each subarea by applying a simple inverse-distance-squared weighting to gauged rainfalls, where distance is calculated from the gauge to the centroid of the subarea. Rainfall gauges occasionally have missing/null data, and in these cases the inverse-distance squared weighting is re-calculated and applied only to gauges without missing data. In no cases are rainfall data missing from all gauges, and the subarea rainfalls for all catchments are serially complete for the periods listed in Table 1.Evaporation data are taken from the AWAP dataset, which uses the Priestley and Taylor (1972) method to calculate potential evaporation from observed solar radiation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
