@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
MRI to X-ray mammography intensity-based registration with simultaneous optimisation of pose and biomechanical transformation parameters

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Presents a patient-specific, intensity-based framework for MRI to X-ray mammography registration.Performs simultaneous optimisation of both pose and biomechanical transformation parameters.The method is validated on clinical cases including both CC and MLO view mammograms.Comparison with previously-proposed affine transformation model.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Breast imaging,Multimodal registration,FEM-based transformation model,Mammography,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Determining corresponding regions between an MRI and an X-ray mammogram is a clinically useful task that is challenging for radiologists due to the large deformation that the breast undergoes between the two image acquisitions. In this work we propose an intensity-based image registration framework, where the biomechanical transformation model parameters and the rigid-body transformation parameters are optimised simultaneously. Patient-specific biomechanical modelling of the breast derived from diagnostic, prone MRI has been previously used for this task. However, the high computational time associated with breast compression simulation using commercial packages, did not allow the optimisation of both pose and FEM parameters in the same framework. We use a fast explicit Finite Element (FE) solver that runs on a graphics card, enabling the FEM-based transformation model to be fully integrated into the optimisation scheme. The transformation model has seven degrees of freedom, which include parameters for both the initial rigid-body pose of the breast prior to mammographic compression, and those of the biomechanical model. The framework was tested on ten clinical cases and the results were compared against an affine transformation model, previously proposed for the same task. The mean registration error was11.6±3.8mm for the CC and11±5.4mm for the MLO view registrations, indicating that this could be a useful clinical tool.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
X-ray mammography (MG) is routinely used both as a screening and a diagnostic tool. DCE-MRI is often used as a complementary modality to MG, for instance in the following cases (Mann et al., 2008):•Problem solving when findings from conventional imaging (MG or ultrasound) are inconclusive – for example lesions that are only visible on a single mammographic view, or multiple MR enhancing lesions – as DCE-MRI has been shown to have high sensitivity but poor specificity (Morrow et al., 2011). In the case of multiple enhancing lesions, MRI to MG registration could help disambiguate between them, by identifying their corresponding MG position.Screening in patients with dense breasts who are at increased risk and more frequent screening in patients at high genetic risk of cancer, in particular those known to be more radiosensitive (Leach et al., 2005).Monitoring and assessing the tumour response of patients treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy.Staging of women with breast cancer; in particular for women with dense breasts and patients with histologic evidence of invasive lobular carcinoma.Determining the primary lesion, when this is not visible in mammography, for example axillary metastases with an occult primary tumour (de Bresser et al., 2010). In this instance the sensitivity of MRI is high (90%) but specificity is relatively low (30%) and could potentially be improved with correlation to MG.Imaging after breast conservative therapy, for example to evaluate possible residual disease or further evaluate suspected recurrence.Many studies have compared the performance of MG and MRI to determine which modality is most appropriate at each step of the patient’s care pathway. In short the relative merits of these and other breast cancer imaging modalities are wide ranging and complex (Hooley et al., 2011). Despite this, there have been no comprehensive studies, to our knowledge, that have assessed the clinical benefits of combining MG and MR imaging, to affect a clinical decision with respect to breast cancer care. This can be attributed to the lack of tools currently available to enable simultaneous, multi-modal image assessment. In their prospective view of breast cancer imaging for detection and diagnosis, however, Karellas and Vedantham (2008) suggest that: “From the technological perspective, in addition to improvements with each modality, we are likely to observe an increasing trend towards multi-modality systems that combine the relative strengths of each modality”. This paper addresses this issue by describing a method to spatially correlate breast MG and MRI. Finally, another potential application of MRI to MG registration is its use to facilitate X-ray stereotactic biopsy for patients that have a second-look mammography following an MRI, for lesions that were initially considered mammographically-occult. In this case, identifying correspondences between MRI and MG could be a valuable tool to enable mammographically guided, rather than MRI-guided biopsies to be performed; the latter generally being more expensive, time consuming and not widely available (Heywang-Köbrunner et al., 2009).Identifying corresponding regions between X-ray mammograms and MR images can be problematic, due to the differences in dimensionality and image appearance, and the large breast deformation between the two modalities. Women are lying prone in the MR scanner with their breasts pendulous, while during X-ray mammography acquisitions women are standing with their breast compressed between two plates. In addition, for MG, typically two images are acquired, one Cranio-Caudal (CC) and one Medio-Lateral Oblique (MLO) view. An automated MRI to X-ray registration algorithm would be a valuable tool that could help radiologists in the diagnosis and management of breast cancer.Previously, authors have used feature-based techniques for this task (Behrenbruch et al., 2003;Marti et al., 2004). However the selection of corresponding, distinctive features from MR and X-ray images is particularly problematic for breast images, due to the lack of anatomically distinctive, internal landmarks.A patient-specific FE modelling approach that simulates mammographic compression was initially proposed by Ruiter et al. (2006). This implementation used the breast outline for alignment rather than the intensities in the two images. The registration was performed in two stages: In the first step a plate compression was applied and in the second a breast outline alignment was achieved by applying additional displacements on the surface nodes of the breast model. Hopp et al. (2013) recently extended this approach by introducing one additional final step, where the rotation of the breast about the anterior-posterior axis was estimated using an intensity-based optimisation. Similarly, another FEM-based approach with a contact model was proposed (Lee et al., 2013), which also employed an iterative intensity-based registration framework. However, this was limited to a 2D rigid-body registration of the simulated projection to the X-ray mammogram.Biomechanical models have also been used previously to simulate large mammographic compressions but were not applied to the calculation of MRI to X-ray correspondences (Samani et al., 2001; Pathmanathan et al., 2004; Chung et al., 2008). In all these approaches the material parameters of the breast tissue were taken from the literature, from studies on ex-vivo tissue samples. Han et al. (2012) proposed a method for in vivo parameter estimation, using a framework that incorporates an implementation of the FEM modelling on the Graphics Processing Unit (GPU). This approach can be further extended to FEM-based registration tasks, which are computationally expensive and hence prohibitively time consuming to perform with current commercial FE solver packages.We have previously investigated the performance of an intensity-based framework using simpler transformation models, such as an affine transformation (Mertzanidou et al., 2012a) and a statistical deformation model learnt from biomechanical simulations (Mertzanidou et al., 2011). In this work, we are using the same iterative optimisation framework with a new patient-specific FEM-based transformation model and we further validate its performance on a larger dataset than our preliminary study (Mertzanidou et al., 2012b).The original contribution of our technique, compared to other approaches that used biomechanical modelling for the same application, is the use of an intensity-based registration framework with an iterative update of both the model (non-rigid, biomechanical) parameters and the rigid transformation parameters; in total seven degrees of freedom. This is achieved using a transformation module that runs on the GPU (Taylor et al., 2009), providing shorter execution times than commercial packages and enabling several hundred simulations to be performed during each registration. In summary, previously proposed methods (Hopp et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2013) perform a registration via discrete, sequential steps, whereas our approach optimises all parameters simultaneously. Therefore it can be extended or modified to include more or different parameters without altering the registration framework. Also, the parameter space is better explored, as more parameters are used and a considerably larger number of their combinations is tested during optimisation. We apply and validate our method using both CC and MLO mammograms, and we perform a direct comparison to registration using an affine transformation (Mertzanidou et al., 2012a).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
