@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Performance and security enhanced authentication and key agreement protocol for SAE/LTE network

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We exhaustively discuss the security threats of LTE access network.The scheme boosts the security level and improves performance of the network.We contribute to the methods of security protocols verification.The bandwidth consumption of exchange of authentication vectors is reduced by 79%.The computational, communication and storage overheads are significantly reduced.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
EPS AKA,LTE authentication,LTE key agreement,User Equipment(UE) authentication,3GPP,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In recent years, Long Term Evolution has been one of the promising technologies of current wireless communication systems. Quality of service and data rate contribute for the robustness of the field. These two factors are the sum up of transmission rate, security delay, delay variation and some other communication factors. Despite its high data rate and quality of service, Long Term Evolution has some drawbacks as far as the security of this technology is concerned. Particularly, there are some security holes in authenticating users for access in the domain of Access Network. For instance, when User Equipment requests for attachment, the International Mobile Subscriber Identity (IMSI) is sent over network without security protection, hence privacy does not hold. In addition, many parameters are generated by invoking a function with only one input key by which compromising this key results in the whole failure of the system security. So as to mitigate these and some other huge security problems, the researchers, propose an improved approach without adding extra cost so that it can be implemented within the same environment as the existing security system (Evolved Packet System Authentication and Key agreement). As one of the performance enhancements, fetching authentication vectors from foreign network is enabled instead of fetching from home network, which significantly reduces the authentication delay and message overhead. Generally, the purpose is to boost the security level and performance of the protocol keeping the architecture of the system as similar as the conventional security system. These has been exhaustively analyzed and verified under network as well as security verification and simulation tools.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Evolved Packet System (EPS) has brought two new major elements in to 3GPP environment with defined quality of service [1,2]: the radio network Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access Network (E-UTRAN) with new radio interface, and the Internet Protocol based core network Evolved Packet Core (EPC) [6,10,31]. The security mechanism and functions that are deployed in GSM and 3G mobile communication are mostly based on principles that are generic enough and usable in many environments as this security mechanisms are tightly related to functions and mechanisms (e.g. UE attachment procedure, location area update, bearer establishment, handover) in the system. The design of EPS security architecture follows the same principle with GSM and 3G security. GSM and 3G security mechanisms put a good basis for EPS security architecture for which most of them are directly adapted to the EPS architecture. The EPS is also designed in a way it can inter-work with legacy systems; hence, it is done in a backward-compatibility manner. In addition to adapting existing security, functionality from legacy systems, many new extensions and enhancements have been introduced in to the EPS security architecture [10]. A high level EPS security architecture is shown in Fig. 1for which the detail is briefly discussed in [3,10].The conventional security architecture of Evolved Packet System (EPS) consists of Network Entities and security protocols that protect communication among these entities or sub-networks. Universal Integrated Circuit Card (UICC) with in Mobile Equipment(ME), mutually authenticates with the serving network for which authentication data is fetched from home network. A Communication among serving network nodes such as Evolved NodeB (eNB), Serving Gate-Way (S-GW) and Mobility Management Entity (MME) is protected under Internet Protocol Security (IPsec) where as the confidentiality as well as Integrity of data exchange between the serving network and ME is guaranteed by Non-Access Stratum (NAS), Access Stratum (AS), and User Plane (UP) security Protections.During the execution of EPS security, once the User Equipment (UE) is identified (the UE sends its identity to MME), the MME in the serving network or visited network fetches authentication vectors (AVs) from the home network if there is no AVs available or if it is exhausted. Consequently, the MME initiates Authentication and Key Agreement (AKA) protocol which is termed as Evolved Packet System Authentication and Key Agreement (EPS AKA).The EPS AKA comprises of three authentication procedures. Receiving a request from UE for authentication through MME, HSS generates EPS authentication vectors (RAND, AUTN, XRES, KASME) and delivers them to an MME as initial step. Secondly, the MME(on the behalf of serving network) selects one of the authentication vectors for mutual authentication with a UE and both generate same authentication key (KASME) as a master key using EPS AKA algorithm. Thirdly, new-shared keys are generated between the serving networks (SN) and the UE for signaling and user plane data protection. In the LTE access networks, in order to justify the legitimacy of the serving network, authentication of the network by the user is performed in addition to authentication of the user by the network. EPS AKA can be run depending on the network operators interest and policy to establish or renew a security context. A full EPS AKA procedure needs to be executed (apart from the case of emergency calls) whenever the UE and the network want to communicate but do not share a security context [10]. Particularly, authentication procedure can be run in different situations such as during the UE attachment, location area update, call originating, call terminating, handovers and during detachment [29].EPS AKA achieves most of the security requirements of wireless network and successfully protects the communication interfaces against threats that were found in the preceding authentication and key agreement protocols of the access network. Nevertheless, it is still vulnerable to some security breaches such as user privacy violation, redirection attack, man-in-the-middle attack,denial of service attack, and lack of forward secrecy during handover key exchange. These security gaps, for which we discuss in detail in following problem statement section of this paper, are the deriving forces for the authors to come up with solution. Specifically, our contributions are:1.Despite most of threats are discussed in [1,10], we identify some unknown security threats or Scenarios of the LTE access network such as accessibility of the network for multiple device and exhaustively discuss with respect to security requirements of the network, which helps us to find solutions and obviously contributes to other researchers of the field as well.As a security enhanced and performance optimized solution, we propose a scheme that mitigates the identified security breaches of the authentication and key agreement protocol and reduces the latency of execution. The scheme boosts the security level and improves performance of the protocol, keeping the architecture of the system as similar as the conventional security system.We simulated the proposed scheme under OPNET modeler in order to evaluate the network performance of the protocol, which implies the applicability of the solution to the access network. It would also be an input for the literature of EPS AKA and helps other researchers to approach this simulation environment in similar fashion to model LTE access network. we formally analyze the proposed protocol under AVISPA to verify the security of the protocol, which proves the validity of the scheme and would also contribute to the methods of security protocols verification.The security of the protocol is analytically illustrated and a bandwidth consumption during authentication fetching is mathematically shown using fluid flaw mobility model. Accordingly, the proposed scheme is found to be security enhanced and the bandwidth consumption of exchange of authentication vectors is reduced by 79% as compare to the conventional system.Exploiting the application of cryptographic algorithms is also one of the objectives of the research.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: We discuss the security holes of EPS (SAE/LTE) authentication and key agreement protocol in Section 2. Section 3 provides the related works for which an additional discussion is detailed under comparison section of the paper. We introduce our proposed scheme in Section 4 with multiple subsections. Section 5 comes up with protocol analysis. Subsequently, depending on the simulation and analysis results, we briefly illustrate the improvements of the protocol as compare to the conventional system in Section 6 and finally conclude the work in Section 7.Although, numerous researchers have been working to address unanswered vulnerabilities of the SAE/LTE wireless access network, still, there are huge number of threats. Under this section, the authors illustrate these security gaps for which we will come up with solutions later.1.Having an assumption that an adversary is operating a device that has a capability of functioning as base station (in this case eNB) and can emulate a mobile station, the adversary can impersonate as genuine base station and entices a legitimate user equipment (UE) to camp on the radio channel of the false base station. The attacker can also impersonate as a legitimate UE and establishes connection with a genuine base station. The capability of the false base station or mobile stations to act as genuine false base station or mobile stations allows the adversary to relay messages in between a legitimate mobile station and a genuine base station. Once the attacker entices the UE to camp on the radio channel of the false base station he can redirect it to Unintended access network. This scenario can happen when the false base station redirects connection request to foreign network while the intention of the UE is to connect to Home network. Due to this, a foreign network charges the user based on a rate higher than that offered by the home network. As another scenario, “To intercept user traffic, the adversary may redirect user traffic to a network in which data encryption is either not provided or provided but very weak” [35].Forward security is another vulnerability that needs consideration in EPS-AKA. When UE handovers with in MME (intra-MME) and to new MME,Next−Hop−KeNBparameter is transferred from MME to the target eNB with path switch acknowledgement message. Because the acknowledgment message of path switch is transmitted after the radio link handover, it can only be used to generate keys for the next handover procedure and target eNB comes after the current target eNB. Thus, forward security happens only after two hops because the source eNB knows the current target eNBs keys. In other words, the forward security is achieved after two hops, as the source eNB does not have a way to know the keys that the current target eNB uses to prepare handover to the next target eNBs (the fresh key derivation parameter,Next−Hop−KeNB,comes from the MME to the target eNB in the path switch acknowledgement message) [3].The EPS AKA lacks a privacy protection due to unsecured transmission of International Mobile Subscriber Identity (IMSI) over networks. One can illustrate many instances that results in disclosure of the IMSI, which helps attackers to track the mobility of the users. For instance, when a UE registers to a network for the first time, or IMSI cannot be retrieved due to a possible synchronization failure when it roams to a new MME, the current MME or the new MME requests the IMSI of the UE, and thus, the UE must transmit the IMSI insecurely. Once the IMSI is obtained, the adversary can acquire subscriber information, location information, and even conversation information, and then disguise the real UE and launch the other attacks such as DOS attacks to destroy the network [8]. To minimize the risk of transmitting IMSI frequently on unsecured channel, TMSI (Temporary Mobile Subscriber Identity) was proposed to replace IMSI [16]. However, this could not fully resolve the problem due to the above possibilities of sending IMSI through a network. Moreover, allocating TMSI dynamically incurs computational load and updating the TMSI each time it is allocated consumes bandwidth.Several denial-of-service attacks have been found on EPS-AKA. For instance, a denial-of-service attacks by modifying the unprotected messages in the EPS AKA during first authentication of UE to cause authentication failure [30]. On the other hand, by sending a large number of valid IMSIs, which are collected in advance, to cause massive attachment request to exhaust/congest the bandwidth between the serving network and the home network or to exhaust the computational capacity of the networks. This finally leads to denial of service.In addition to SAE/LTE, user identity module (UIM) authentication and key agreement in relation with 3GPP access networks is considered in this work. Today, service providers are supposed to provide services on number of different devices in order to attract customers to their services. As the number of devices that a subscriber may use to connect to a network increases, a service provider may want to issue a UIM for each of the subscriber’s devices, where each UIM has the same shared secret key. It should be noted that the 3GPP standards allow for multiple UIMs with the same shared secret key. Security vulnerability, however, arises when known key exchange protocols are used in an environment where a subscriber has multiple devices, and where each device has its own UIM with the same shared secret. Attack scenarios can happen due to the following.Let denote two devices of a customer as D1 and D2. D1 and D2 both want to connect to the access network where D1 initiates the connection first. As defined in AKA procedure, a server sends random number (RAND), authentication token (AUTH) to D1, which an adversary (A) overhears. Again, D2 initiates connection request, but A intercepts the request and then replays the RAND, AUTH parameters to D2. Thus, the both D1 and D2 generate the same ciphering key (CK), integrity key (IK). This may lead to unintended transaction on the customers account. For instance, the adversary may redirect an account transaction intended for D1’s UIM to D2’s UIM.Man in the middle attack is also still a security problem of EPS AKA. This simply illustrated as in the figure below (Fig. 2).Bandwidth consumption and authentication signaling overhead between the serving network (foreign network) and the home network (HN) is one of the problems. This is because the serving network (SN) must go back to the HN for a request of another set of authentication vectors (AVs) when the UE stays in the SN for a long period and exhausts its set of AVs for the authentication.EPS-AKA is fully dependent on the secrecy of a single key, pre-shared secret key between authentication center and mobile station (UE). Once, this key is compromised, every key can be retrieved and possibly an adversary can be authenticated by the network.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
