@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A multi-timescale cross-layer approach for wireless ad hoc networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model a cross-layer problem of congestion control, link delay, and power control.Subproblems are successively solved by the Lagrange duality techniques.The design can be implemented distributedly and adheres to the timescale difference.We conduct simulations on MTSRENUM and compare it to the current frameworks.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi-timescale,Rate control,Packet delay,Power allocation,Lossy links,Fast-fading channels,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Conventionally, cross-layer designs with same timescale updates can work well; however, there is a difference in layers’ timescales and each layer normally operates at its corresponding timescale when implemented in real systems. To respect this issue, in this article, we introduce a multi-timescale cross-layer design along with three sets of constraints: congestion control, link delay, and power control and with the objective of maximizing the overall utility and minimizing the total link delay and power consumption. The proposed procedure can be implemented in a distributed fashion, which not only guarantees truly optimal solutions to the underlying problem, but also adheres to the natural timescale difference among layers. Finally, the numerical results further solidify the efficacies of our proposal compared to the current frameworks.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Flow control in wired networks was firstly modeled as a network utility maximization (NUM) paradigm [1,2], as follows:(1)maxx≥0∑sUs(xs)s.t.Rx≤c,where x is the source rate vector, R is the routing matrix, and c is the fixed link capacity vector. In wireless networks, however, the link capacities c might be changed due to characteristics of wireless channel [3,4]. Accordingly the problem (1) should be solved using Cross-Layer Designs (CLDs) by decomposing into subproblems, each of which corresponds to a layer. In fact, CLDs are essentially needed for wireless networks since CLDs can improve the network performance and reliability, for example, increasing throughput and reducing latency and bit error rate [5].There exist lots of works mainly focusing on CLDs for wireless networks [3,5–11]. In [8], they not only considered a congestion control problem but also examined the effects of the lossy feature on the power control and link delay, namely Rate-Effective NUM (RENUM), with constraints on rate outage probability, data rate reduction, and delay-constrained traffics by taking them into consideration of the objective function. The rate outage probability is, however, based on the approximated form; therefore, RENUM may just produce suboptimal solutions to the problem [9]. In [12], we studied a cross-layer design which can guarantee the globally optimal solutions to the RENUM. However, a common limitation of these works is that optimization variables at different layers are all updated simultaneously.Each one of the five-layers in the TCP/IP network model takes its own networking functionalities and adheres to the distinct timescale. For an extreme example, the PHYsical layer (PHY) roles are to perform functions of power control and rate adaptation, while admission control, multi-flow control, and congestion control are performed at the transport layer. Practically, the TRANsport (TRAN) layer is executed on the second timescale, while the data link control/MAC (DLC/MAC) layer and the PHY layer are executed on the scale of, respectively, milliseconds and microseconds. The precise timescales offer significant benefits of convergence speed and network performance [11]. Multi-timescale CLDs can be found in [11,13–21]. The authors in [11,16] developed joint CLDs of congestion control and power allocation, which adheres to the natural timescale separation between rapid power control updates and slower end-to-end rate adjustments. In [13], the authors reported that using the standard subgradient method in tackling the joint problem of MAC scheduling and congestion control might be not suitable for some circumstances [19–21], for example, if the utility function is not concave at all primal variables such as time-share proportions of the allowed schedules in the case [13], the primal variables may be oscillated, which can be avoided by proposing a two-timescale adaptive method. Nevertheless, no mentioned literature [11,13–21] has concurrently addressed the following issues (1) fast-fading, (2) lossy features of wireless networks, and (3) link delay requirement.In this paper, we study the problem of rate control, link delay, and power allocation for Wireless Ad Hoc NETworks (WANETs). Our objective is to find a cross-layer design that maximizes the overall utility and minimizes the total link delay and power consumption subject to constraints on outage probability, delay requirement and flow rate conservation, which not only guarantees globally optimal solutions to the underlying problem, but also adheres to the difference in layers’ timescales. In a nutshell, the summary of features and contributions offered by our proposal are listed, as follows:•In Section 3, we present the network model and then formulate a joint optimization problem. Since the original optimization problem is non-convex, we first cast the underlying one into a convex one by auxiliary variables and log-transformations and then prove the convexity and strong duality properties of the transformed problem.We explore our proposed procedure, namely, Multi-TimeScale RENUM (MTSRENUM) in Section 4 and make use of the primal vertical decomposition in order to derive three timescale-based subproblems: the Short-TimeScale (STS) subproblem (power control), the Mid-TimeScale (MTS) subproblem (link delay control), and the Long-TimeScale (LTS) subproblem (congestion control). Because the convexity and strong duality hold for the new optimization subproblems, each subproblem can be successively and optimally solved by the conventional duality technique and updated at its adhered timescale.The convergence of the proposed algorithm MTSRENUM is guaranteed, which is proven in Section 4.4.Simulation results in Section 5 confirm that our cross-layer design can provide large gains over the current frameworks. More specifically, by comparing the multi-timescale CLDs with their same-timescale counterparts, CLDs with multi-timescale controls illustrate the improvement in the convergence speed. In addition, it is observed that the MTSRENUM algorithm is better than the others in terms of suffered delay, consumed power, transmission rate as well as the trade-off between the aggregated effective rate and suffered delay and consumed power.In the next section, we provide an overview of the state of the art related to CLDs and multi-timescale controls.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
