@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Factors influencing acceptance of technology for aging in place: A systematic review

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Overview of factors influencing acceptance of electronic technology for aging in place.Comparison between pre- and post-implementation factors.Comparison between results from qualitative and quantitative research.Recommendations for research in this field.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Independent living,Aged,Technology,Review,Behavior,Assistive technology,eHealth,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
PurposeTo provide an overview of factors influencing the acceptance of electronic technologies that support aging in place by community-dwelling older adults. Since technology acceptance factors fluctuate over time, a distinction was made between factors in the pre-implementation stage and factors in the post-implementation stage.MethodsA systematic review of mixed studies. Seven major scientific databases (including MEDLINE, Scopus and CINAHL) were searched. Inclusion criteria were as follows: (1) original and peer-reviewed research, (2) qualitative, quantitative or mixed methods research, (3) research in which participants are community-dwelling older adults aged 60 years or older, and (4) research aimed at investigating factors that influence the intention to use or the actual use of electronic technology for aging in place. Three researchers each read the articles and extracted factors.ResultsSixteen out of 2841 articles were included. Most articles investigated acceptance of technology that enhances safety or provides social interaction. The majority of data was based on qualitative research investigating factors in the pre-implementation stage. Acceptance in this stage is influenced by 27 factors, divided into six themes: concerns regarding technology (e.g., high cost, privacy implications and usability factors); expected benefits of technology (e.g., increased safety and perceived usefulness); need for technology (e.g., perceived need and subjective health status); alternatives to technology (e.g., help by family or spouse), social influence (e.g., influence of family, friends and professional caregivers); and characteristics of older adults (e.g., desire to age in place). When comparing these results to qualitative results on post-implementation acceptance, our analysis showed that some factors are persistent while new factors also emerge. Quantitative results showed that a small number of variables have a significant influence in the pre-implementation stage. Fourteen out of the sixteen included articles did not use an existing technology acceptance framework or model.ConclusionsAcceptance of technology in the pre-implementation stage is influenced by multiple factors. However, post-implementation research on technology acceptance by community-dwelling older adults is scarce and most of the factors in this review have not been tested by using quantitative methods. Further research is needed to determine if and how the factors in this review are interrelated, and how they relate to existing models of technology acceptance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The majority of older adults prefer to live independently for as long as they possibly can [1–4]. Supporting older adults to remain in their own homes and communities is also favored by policy makers and health providers to avoid the costly option of institutional care [5]. Research shows that several interrelated factors can challenge the independence of older adults: primarily functional and cognitive impairment, chronic diseases, a diminishing social network, and a low level of physical activity [6–9]. Technology might provide a solution for some of these challenges, and particularly in the last decade, much effort has been invested in the development of technology to support aging in place, such as sensor-based networks for activity monitoring, fall and wandering detection, and various e-health applications. However, older adults explicitly reserve the right to decide for themselves what they allow into their own homes [10], and questions have been raised on the readiness of community-dwelling older adults to accept and use these technologies [11–13]. Acceptance of technologies that are electronic or digital may be more difficult for the current generation of seniors which did not grow up with these types of technologies [14–16]. In an effort to understand older adults’ usage and non-usage of modern technology, researchers often turn to two technology acceptance models, stemming from the field of information systems.Technology acceptance research is dominated by the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) [17] and the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT) [18]. The key variables in TAM are Perceived Usefulness (PU) and Perceived Ease of Use (PEOU). Systematic reviews have shown that these two variables typically explain 40 percent of an individual's intention to use a technology in a variety of contexts including healthcare [19–21], and that intention to use may [22] or may not [23] predict actual use of technology. UTAUT is capable of explaining up to 70 percent of intention to use at the expense of parsimony by adding two additional variables (Social Influence and Facilitating Conditions) and four moderating factors (Gender, Age, Experience and Voluntariness of Use) [18].While being powerful and robust, TAM and UTAUT have also received criticism for disregarding the fact that technology acceptance may fluctuate over time [24–27]. Furthermore, several studies demonstrate that the influence of PU, PEOU, and other relevant factors is different between the pre-implementation stage (when a technology has not been used yet) and the post-implementation stage (when users have used and experienced a technology) [28,29]. Acceptance research is also criticized for being too reliant on TAM and UTAUT, overlooking essential determinants [30,31,26]. In a recent literature review, Chen and Chan discussed 19 studies that used TAM or related models and constructs to explain technology acceptance by older adults [32]. They found that specific biophysical (e.g., cognitive and physical decline) and psychosocial (e.g., social isolation, fear of illness) factors related to aging are overlooked in the current literature.Chen and Chan also note that the factor cost (price) of technology is neglected in many studies, although it seems to be a critical factor in determining an older adult's acceptance of technology [32]. Furthermore, most research has focused on communication- and assistive technology in the home domain, neglecting other types of technology [32]. These concerns indicate that more research is needed to develop a better understanding of acceptance of various types of technology by older adults.This systematic review of qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods studies examines the following research questions: which factors influence the acceptance of different types of technology for aging in place by community-dwelling older adults, and how do these factors differ between the pre-implementation stage and the post-implementation stage?The aim of this study is to provide an overview of factors that can facilitate the implementation of technology for community-dwelling older adults, and to provide directions for further technology acceptance research within this specific group.Technology acceptance in this study is defined as the intention to use a technology or the actual use of a technology [17]. Technology for aging in place is defined as electronic technology that is developed to support the independence of community-dwelling older adults by alleviating or preventing functional or cognitive impairment, by limiting the impact of chronic diseases, or by enabling social or physical activity. Community-dwelling older adults are defined as older adults who are not living in a long-term care institution.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
