@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Patient and public attitudes towards informed consent models and levels of awareness of Electronic Health Records in the UK

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Most participants would prefer to opt-in before their identifiable records are used.Half of participants would share their de-identified records under implicit consent.A low awareness of EHRs persists among participants.Participants who were aware of EHRs were more willing to share de-identified data.Awareness and consent expectations vary by socio-demographic characteristics.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Electronic health records,Informed consent,Patient attitudes,Information governance,Policy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundThe development of Electronic Health Records (EHRs) forms an integral part of the information strategy for the National Health Service (NHS) in the UK, with the aim of facilitating health information exchange for patient care and secondary use, including research and healthcare planning. Implementing EHR systems requires an understanding of patient expectations for consent mechanisms and consideration of public awareness towards information sharing as might be made possible through integrated EHRs across primary and secondary health providers.ObjectivesTo explore levels of public awareness about EHRs and to examine attitudes towards different consent models with respect to sharing identifiable and de-identified records for healthcare provision, research and planning.MethodsA cross-sectional questionnaire survey was administered to adult patients and members of the public in primary and secondary care clinics in West London, UK in 2011. In total, 5331 individuals participated in the survey, and 3157 were included in the final analysis.ResultsThe majority (91%) of respondents expected to be explicitly asked for consent for their identifiable records to be accessed for health provision, research or planning. Half the respondents (49%) did not expect to be asked for consent before their de-identified records were accessed. Compared with White British respondents, those from all other ethnic groups were more likely to anticipate their permission would be obtained before their de-identified records were used. Of the study population, 59% reported already being aware of EHRs before the survey. Older respondents and individuals with complex patterns of interaction with healthcare services were more likely to report prior awareness of EHRs. Individuals self-identifying as belonging to ethnic groups other than White British, and those with lower educational qualifications were less likely to report being aware of EHRs than White British respondents and respondents with degree-level education, respectively. Those who reported being aware of EHRs were less likely to say they expected explicit consent to be sought before use of their de-identified record.ConclusionsA large number of patients remain unaware of EHRs, while preference for implicit consent is stronger among those who report previous awareness. Differences in awareness levels and consent expectations between groups with different socio-demographic characteristics suggest that public education and information campaigns should target specific groups to increase public awareness and ensure meaningful informed consent mechanisms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The potential to reuse health information collected in clinical settings for planning and research purposes has been a major driver for the diffusion and integration of Electronic Health Records (EHRs) in the English National Health Service (NHS) [1–3]. UK government initiatives, such as the data extraction service from primary care (‘care.data’) [4] and the Clinical Practice Research Datalink (CPRD) [5] are underway to maximise the usefulness of health information within existing EHRs. A number of benefits can potentially be realised through the use of integrated records, including improved health outcomes, enhanced quality of clinical research and effectiveness of medical care services [6,7]. However, the effort to increase and systematise health information sharing for secondary purposes has raised a debate among health professionals, patient groups and privacy advocates. In particular, reactions have focused on whether patients and the public are aware of the proposed changes and whether appropriate consent mechanisms are in place [8–12].Informed consent is important in navigating the balance between the potential benefit and harm from information sharing for secondary purposes, while offering patients control over their personal data [13–16]. Yet, there is little agreement about what constitutes meaningful and informed consent in the case of networked, integrated EHRs, and what options should be available to individuals who wish to revoke any permission to use this data [17–19]. The recent UK Information Governance review led by Dame Fiona Caldicott recommended that de-identified data ‘with a low residual risk of re-identification’ should be shared under an implied consent model, where patient permission to use these data is regarded as implicit or assumed [20]. The same report concluded that identifiable data should be treated as more complex and only shared on a ‘need to know’ basis under explicit consent-seeking mechanisms, where data sharing is not assumed to be automatically permitted [20].Previous research on patient views about consent mechanisms has identified three important factors that influence individuals’ decisions to allow their data to be used: (1) the perceived sensitivity of the data; (2) the nature of patient interaction with, and trust, in the data recipient; and (3) the extent to which individuals feel informed about how their data will be used [21–26]. Despite the range of secondary purposes for which health data may be shared, work carried out to date has generally focused on public attitudes to data sharing for research purposes only [15,16,21,25–35], with a smaller number of studies examining the use of data for research along with healthcare planning and policy [22–24,36], or for any purpose other than direct patient care [37,38]. As such, research on public attitudes about integrated EHRs used simultaneously for multiple purposes, has been relatively limited, and has not incorporated the potential for wider sharing afforded by EHRs, and the public response in terms of their preferences. Furthermore, most studies which have examined consent preferences in terms of patient characteristics, have been conducted outside the UK [33,35,39–41], or have been limited to one or two sampling sites [23,33,42]. The relationship between consent and socio-demographic factors has also been variable across studies in terms of the magnitude and direction of effect [43,44].To achieve meaningful and informed consent processes, it is imperative that individuals understand what health information sharing entails [13,14,17,19,45]. However, the published research suggests that people are poorly informed about the uses of their health records and the reasons records may be accessed [25,26]. The UK is no exception: patient awareness of the details of health information sharing in the NHS is low, with a number of studies reporting a lack of meaningful patient engagement, despite information campaigns about the Summary Care Records programme and other initiatives [15,21,22,32,43,46,47].Despite general lack of awareness, individuals who do report familiarity with EHRs and those who understand how their data would be used are more likely to support EHR use in general and be willing to share their data for research [15,39,43,48]. However, previous work has not made explicit the link between awareness of EHRs and support for the different consent models intended to govern health data sharing. More work is required to identify levels of patient and public awareness about the use of longitudinal, fully comprehensive EHRs and to examine how these relate to expectations of implicit and explicit consent models.In this paper we examine levels of support for implied and explicit consent models with respect to sharing identifiable and de-identified health information for multiple purposes, including healthcare provision, research and planning. Furthermore, we explore public awareness about detailed EHRs used simultaneously for these purposes. Specifically, we address the following questions:1.What is the level of patient and public support for explicit (where patient permission is actively sought) and implicit (where permission is assumed) consent models before the use of identifiable and de-identified EHRs?What is the level of public awareness towards EHRs?How are socio-demographic variables, healthcare interaction patterns and computer expertise associated with support for different consent models, and with awareness of EHRs?What is the relationship between awareness of EHRs and support for different consent models for wider sharing of health information?

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study indicates that most members of the public expect to be asked for explicit consent before their identifiable data stored within integrated EHRs is shared for health provision, research and policy. Even for de-identified health records, however, half of the respondents expect their explicit consent to be sought. Because those aware of EHRs were more willing to share de-identified data without their express consent, public education may be a way to increase support for implicit consent to share information for care, research and policy. Awareness of EHRs varies between different groups, and NHS information campaigns must ensure all members of the public are adequately informed about the uses of their personal health data.Summary pointsWhat was already known on the topic?•There are many benefits and risks to integrated EHRs allowing wider sharing of medical information for health provision, research and policy.Implementing EHR systems in the UK requires an understanding of patient expectations for consent mechanisms and consideration of public awareness.What this study added to our knowledge?•The vast majority of participants expected to be asked for explicit consent (opt-in) before their identifiable records were shared for health provision, research and policy.Half of the respondents expected that their de-identified health records may be used under their implicit consent for health provision, research and policy.There is relatively low awareness of EHRs among participants, while those aware of EHRs were more willing to share de-identified data without their express consent.There are differences in awareness levels and consent expectations between groups with different socio-demographic characteristics.All authors of this study meet the requirements for authorship and have approved the final version of the paper to be published. FR planned and conducted the data analysis, and drafted and revised the paper. CP contributed to the planning and data analysis, drafted and revised the paper. JR conceived of the study, provided oversight to its design and coordination, contributed to the interpretation of the data, and drafted and revised the paper. CM contributed to the design of the study, data collection tools, the interpretation of the data, and revised the paper. AM contributed to the design and coordination of the study and reviewed the paper. DB conceived of the study, contributed to its design and coordination, and revised the paper. DB is guarantor of the study.None declared.