@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Does single-source create an added value? Evaluating the impact of introducing x4T into the clinical routine on workflow modifications, data quality and cost–benefit

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Improving routine and research documentation by changing workflow and integrating x4T.Integrating clinical research documentation into routine care.Automatic transfer of pre-fillable EHR data into EDC system.Calculate the costs of single-source and weight them against likely benefits.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Evaluation,Secondary use,Electronic health records,Data quality,Cost–benefit analysis,Process optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectivesThe first objective of this study is to evaluate the impact of integrating a single-source system into the routine patient care documentation workflow with respect to process modifications, data quality and execution times in patient care as well as research documentation. The second one is to evaluate whether it is cost-efficient using a single-source system in terms of achieved savings in documentation expenditures.MethodsWe analyzed the documentation workflow of routine patient care and research documentation in the medical field of pruritus to identify redundant and error-prone process steps. Based on this, we established a novel documentation workflow including the x4T (exchange for Trials) system to connect hospital information systems with electronic data capture systems for the exchange of study data. To evaluate the workflow modifications, we performed a before/after analysis as well as a time–motion study. Data quality was assessed by measuring completeness, correctness and concordance of previously and newly collected data. A cost–benefit analysis was conducted to estimate the savings using x4T per collected data element and the additional costs for introducing x4T.ResultsThe documentation workflow of patient care as well as clinical research was modified due to the introduction of the x4T system. After x4T implementation and workflow modifications, half of the redundant and error-prone process steps were eliminated. The generic x4T system allows direct transfer of routinely collected health care data into the x4T research database and avoids manual transcription steps. Since x4T has been introduced in March 2012, the number of included patients has increased by about 1000 per year. The average entire documentation time per patient visit has been significantly decreased by 70.1% (from 1116±185 to 334±83s). After the introduction of the x4T system and associated workflow changes, the completeness of mandatory data elements raised from 82.2% to 100%. In case of the pruritus research study, the additional costs for introducing the x4T system are €434.01 and the savings are 0.48ct per collected data element. So, with the assumption of a 5-year runtime and 82 collected data elements per patient, the amount of documented patients has to be higher than 1102 to create a benefit.ConclusionIntroduction of the x4T system into the clinical and research documentation workflow can optimize the data collection workflow in both areas. Redundant and cumbersome process steps can be eliminated in the research documentation, with the result of reduced documentation times as well as increased data quality. The usage of the x4T system is especially worthwhile in a study with a large amount of collected data or a high number of included patients.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Routine patient care as well as clinical research often requires documentation of large amounts of data for each patient. The medical documentation usually occurs in electronic health record (EHR) systems, whereas research documentation is entered in electronic data capture (EDC) systems. EHR systems contain a comprehensive data basis and the number of patients having a basic electronic medical record is consistently increasing [1]. However, the fact that physicians already spend 25–30% of their daily working time on electronic documentation [2,3] creates the demand of less, especially redundant documentation work. In this regard, the so-called single-source approach attempts to capture data once and reuses it again for different purposes. Theoretical frameworks [4,5] have been developed for the secondary use as well as concrete implementations within EHR systems [6–10] and data warehouses [11–13]. However, the secondary use is not unrestrictedly possible, because EHR data is not always available in a structured manner as needed to facilitate the research process [14]. Furthermore, the fact that data is present does not mean that it is necessarily trustworthy [15]. Therefore, a key challenge for the secondary use is the quality of data to attain research objectives.In the context of adapting new Health IT systems, such as EHR or computerized provider order entry systems, changes are often introduced in the common workflow [16]. Apart from time-savings through the implementation of a single-source system, reported by Köpcke et al. [9], workflow processes might be changed, which often remains unconsidered.A faster documentation workflow and increased data quality thanks to a revised process can be obtained through a careful introduction of a single-source system. Nevertheless, costs should be taken into account for operating a single-source system. A comparison between time and associated cost savings and the efforts for setting up and running such a system is essential for its profitability.With the aim of supporting the secondary use of EHR data, a generic single-source architecture was jointly developed by the authors at the Institute of Medical Informatics and the Department of Information Systems at the University of Münster. Based on this architecture, the x4T (exchange for Trials) system was developed to enable efficient study documentation with routinely collected patient care data from EHR systems [5].The technical feasibility of the x4T system has already been demonstrated in three different use cases: an observational study in the department of dermatology since March 2012, a biobank in the department of angiology since September 2012, and an investigator initiated trial in the department of psychosomatic medicine since March 2013. However, to what extent the usage of the single-source system implies modifications on the routine patient care and clinical research documentation workflow remains unknown. Implementing healthcare IT often results in a change of work execution and to the authors’ knowledge an integration of a secondary use system into the routine patient care documentation process has not been evaluated before. Apart from this, the effort for setting up such a system in comparison to likely benefits has also not yet been evaluated.The objective of this study is to assess the impact of the x4T system for the secondary use of EHR data. Particularly, this paper aims to address the following research questions:•What workflow effects are associated with integrating a single-source system into the routine patient care documentation process?How is the data quality, in particular completeness, correctness and concordance affected by the integration of x4T?Are the savings that are achievable with x4T greater than the expenditures of its introduction in a clinical study documentation workflow?The subject of this evaluation was the data collection workflow in the Competence Centre Chronic Pruritus (KCP), a part of the department of dermatology at the University Hospital Münster, Germany, employing three physicians and 10 healthcare professionals in total. With approximately 2,500 patients per year (as of 2012), it is specialized in the treatment of all kinds of pruritic dermatoses such as atopic dermatitis. The pruritus research study in the KCP was chosen as they have a large patient collective of retrospectively and prospectively collected data.In the former process, physician-based documentation was performed on paper forms, whereas a part of patient questionnaires were completed on paper and another part on electronic devices [17]. Data from these electronic questionnaires was automatically imported into the EHR system ORBIS (Agfa Healthcare) [18]. Clinicians as well as patients are highly satisfied using this digital method [19]. Physicians collected data regarding diagnoses, localization, trigger and quality of pruritus on the initial as well as follow-up medical history paper form. The local paper-based itch questionnaire (NeuroDerm) collects data about pruritus like quality, score of the intensity, trigger factors, etc. and is completed by the patient at home before the appointment.For archive and research purposes, a documentation assistant transcribed data from the medical history and the patient questionnaires onto a paper-based database preparation form (DPF). From there the data is again transferred manually into the Excel research database by a documentation assistant. This database consisted of a large Microsoft Excel spreadsheet comprising 2,075 study subjects with 139 data elements per patient, which have been collected since 2009. Simple functions for descriptive analyses were also included. To give physicians a brief overview of the entire data in the patient record, a summary sheet was prepared for each patient encounter. This sheet was created out of the Excel database and contained relevant data elements from the medical history and patient questionnaires.To facilitate secondary use of routinely collected EHR data, the x4T system was used. In contrast to typical commercial or open-source EDC systems (e.g. OpenClinica [20], REDCap [21] or DADOS [22]), x4T-EDC – as part of the x4T architecture – provides the opportunity to communicate with EHR systems. The architecture is based on the “Extraction and Investigator Verification”-scenario of the Clinical Data Interchange Standards Consortium (CDISC) Electronic Source Data Interchange (eSDI) [23] group. This group has identified five possible scenarios for the clinical trial documentation between sites and sponsors using eSource (electronic source data) collection instruments. Three of them propose a strategy in which data is entered once in the EHR or separate system and used for multiple purposes. For all scenarios the CDISC eSDI group has analyzed and assessed the regulatory requirements found in ICH-GCP [24] and FDA 21 CRF Part 11 [25] predicate rules. The Extraction and Investigator Verification-scenario comprises a validation step at the local site before the eSource data is transferred to the sponsors system. The x4T architecture was developed according to the requirements stated from the eSDI group; e.g. that data should be captured as specified within the protocol or the location of source documents and data shall be clearly identified.As shown in Fig. 1, x4T consists of two major components: The x4T-EDC [26] research database and the Clinical Interface that serves as mediator between EHR and EDC.x4T-EDC is based on a native XML database (eXist-db [27]) with XQuery and XForms capabilities. The XML-based Operational Data Model [28] from CDISC is used for communicating and processing eCRFs (electronic Case Report Forms) on which research documentation occurs. The research database contains the functionality of requesting, receiving, and integrating EHR data as well as audit logging for entered data. Furthermore, the x4T architecture offers the ability to directly register eligible patients for the study within the EHR system. Currently, it is used for observational studies and patient registries.EHR communication is established by the second component: the Clinical Interface, which is located at each hospital. This interface is connected to the EHR database and provides secured web services for the x4T-EDC interaction. Research databases usually contain de-identified data, thus to allow re-identification a mapping table at each site links patient IDs and subject IDs for each study. The Clinical Interface includes a semantic component. For the identification of eligible EHR data, research and clinical data are annotated with concept codes of common terminologies such as NCI Thesaurus, SNOMED-CT, etc. A request is sent from x4T-EDC to the Clinical Interface containing these semantic annotations. To query the corresponding EHR values, a local mapping is defined that links concept codes to local hospital codes including database query templates. In case of matching codes the real patient is re-identified in the Clinical Interface, data values are extracted from the EHR and transferred to x4T-EDC. In addition to clinical values, meta-information concerning the EHR source is provided such as timestamps of the record and user IDs to facilitate traceability. Plausibility and completeness of data is validated by the clinical user.The observational study of pruritus was approved by the local ethics committee and the x4T architecture was approved by the local data protection officer. In the pruritus study an informed consent is obtained from each patient.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
