@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Motivating participation and improving quality of contribution in ubiquitous crowdsourcing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We report 4 case studies on motivation to participate in ubiquitous crowdsourcing.We demonstrate that motivation can affect levels of participation and performance.We provide recommendations on designing ubiquitous crowdsourcing applications.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Ubiquitous Crowdsourcing,Motivation,Participation,Performance,Engagement,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Ubiquitous crowdsourcing, or the crowdsourcing of tasks in settings beyond the desktop, is attracting interest due to the increasing maturity of mobile and ubiquitous technology, such as smartphones and public displays. In this paper we attempt to address a fundamental challenge in ubiquitous crowdsourcing: if people can contribute to crowdsourcing anytime and anyplace, why would they choose to do so? We highlight the role of motivation in ubiquitous crowdsourcing, and its effect on participation and performance. Through a series of field studies we empirically validate various motivational approaches in the context of ubiquitous crowdsourcing, and assess the comparable advantages of ubiquitous technologies' affordances. We show that through motivation ubiquitous crowdsourcing becomes comparable to online crowdsourcing in terms of participation and task performance, and that through motivation we can elicit better quality contributions and increased participation from workers. We also show that ubiquitous technologies' contextual capabilities can increase participation through increasing workers' intrinsic motivation, and that the in-situ nature of ubiquitous technologies can increase both participation and engagement of workers. Combined, our findings provide empirically validated recommendations on the design and implementation of ubiquitous crowdsourcing.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Crowdsourcing work and the associated distribution of micro-tasks across large numbers of individuals are becoming increasingly popular in settings beyond the desktop, thus enabling a wide range of applications. Ubiquitous technologies, such as smartphones and public displays, are now mature enough to allow users to contribute to crowdsourcing tasks wherever and whenever. While the increased ease with which it is now possible to participate in crowdsourcing work raises new possibilities, it also raises an important question of motivation: if people can contribute to crowdsourcing anytime and anyplace, why would they choose to do so?While the issue of motivation has been a long-standing concern in the design of computer systems and online services, new technologies require that new motivational approaches are developed, adapted, and validated. In terms of crowdsourcing, research in psychology, sociology, management and marketing provide a solid theoretical basis on human motivation [36]. However, these theoretical approaches typically have to be adapted and fine-tuned for a crowdsourcing setting. At the same, by motivating workers to contribute more, task requesters can unwillingly make them more susceptible to quality control issues [36] so careful motivational considerations have to be taken into account.In addition to accounting for human behaviour, a motivational approach also needs to account for the technologies and context of use. Ubiquitous technologies are particularly challenging as they are typically in the hands of users, away from the controls of a lab setting, and normally lack any identification mechanisms. Therefore, crowdsourcing using these technologies may produce “noisy” results due to unpredictable behaviour or misappropriation from users [28,59]. Thus, prior work further emphasizes the importance of appropriate motivational approaches to address these challenges.In this paper we adapt, present and validate motivational approaches for ubiquitous crowdsourcing by drawing on extensive literature and leveraging our own results from four case studies. These approaches draw on prior literature in human behaviour, account for ubiquitous technologies, and are validated in field trials to establish their effect on participation and quality of contribution. We answer four important questions on the motivational aspects of ubiquitous crowdsourcing regarding the possibility of eliciting altruistic contributions, the effectiveness of various motivational approaches, the potential advantage that ubiquitous technologies can offer for crowdsourcing, and finally on the situated nature of ubiquitous crowdsourcing:1.Can ubiquitous crowdsourcing work altruistically? We answer this through a case study where we experimentally compare results obtained between ubiquitous and online crowdsourcing. Specifically, we establish a baseline assessment showing that performance in ubiquitous settings without payment is comparable to online settings with payment, and worthy of further investigation.Can psychological empowerment motivate ubiquitous crowdsourcing? We answer this by validating psychological empowerment approaches as motivators for participation in ubiquitous crowdsourcing. Specifically, we validate how 3 types of psychological empowerment affect participation and contribution in crowdsourcing on mobile phones.Can contextual cues motivate ubiquitous crowdsourcing? To answer this we test the effect of presenting contextual information on engagement. Specifically, we evaluate how the presentation of location cues affects participation in a “crowd-mapping” setting.Can situatedness motivate ubiquitous crowdsourcing? Specifically, we investigate how the situatedness of ubiquitous technology can motivate people to participate in in-situ feedback collection.We conclude the paper with the lessons learned throughout our case studies, discussion of other potential motivational approaches in ubiquitous crowdsourcing and empirically validated recommendations on the design and implementation of ubiquitous crowdsourcing.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
