@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The value of telemonitoring and ICT-guided disease management in heart failure: Results from the IN TOUCH study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A multicenter randomized controlled trial to test the effects of an ICT- guided-DMS combined with telemonitoring in HF-patients (IN TOUCH trial).The intervention did not affect the primary endpoint of mortality, HF- readmissions and quality of life.Use of telemonitoring is safe and can reduce HF-related visits to the HF outpatient clinic keeping HF-care accessible.The adherence of patients using telemonitoring was very high indicating that the devices used in combination with daily measurements were well accepted by patients.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Heart failure,Disease management,Telemonitoring,ICT-guided disease-management,Computer decision support,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
AimIt is still unclear whether telemonitoring reduces hospitalization and mortality in heart failure (HF) patients and whether adding an Information and Computing Technology-guided-disease-management-system (ICT-guided-DMS) improves clinical and patient reported outcomes or reduces healthcare costs.MethodsA multicenter randomized controlled trial was performed testing the effects of INnovative ICT-guided-DMS combined with Telemonitoring in OUtpatient clinics for Chronic HF patients (IN TOUCH) with in total 179 patients (mean age 69 years; 72% male; 77% in New York Heart Association Classification (NYHA) III–IV; mean left ventricular ejection fraction was 28%). Patients were randomized to ICT-guided-DMS or to ICT-guided-DMS+telemonitoring with a follow-up of nine months. The composite endpoint included mortality, HF-readmission and change in health-related quality of life (HR-QoL).ResultsIn total 177 patients were eligible for analyses. The mean score of the primary composite endpoint was −0.63 in ICT-guided-DMS vs. −0.73 in ICT-guided-DMS+telemonitoring (mean difference 0.1, 95% CI: −0.67 +0.82, p=0.39). All-cause mortality in ICT-guided-DMS was 12% versus 15% in ICT-guided-DMS+telemonitoring (p=0.27); HF-readmission 28% vs. 27% p=0.87; all-cause readmission was 49% vs. 51% (p=0.78). HR-QoL improved in most patients and was equal in both groups. Incremental costs were €1360 in favor of ICT-guided-DMS. ICT-guided-DMS+telemonitoring had significantly fewer HF-outpatient-clinic visits (p<0.01).ConclusionICT-guided-DMS+telemonitoring for the management of HF patients did not affect the primary and secondary endpoints. However, we did find a reduction in visits to the HF-outpatient clinic in this group suggesting that telemonitoring might be safe to use in reorganizing HF-care with relatively low costs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Increasing shortage of resources, growing costs, increase in expensive treatments and downwards pressure on healthcare budgets, necessitates a thorough review of management of patients with heart failure (HF). Heart failure is a chronic debilitating condition with a poor prognosis and can be defined as an abnormality of the cardiac structure or function leading to failure of the heart to deliver oxygen and causes a cascade of syndromes, symptoms and complaints [1]. A first step in efficiently organizing HF-care was taken by implementing specialized HF-outpatient clinics, with a strong collaboration between HF-nurses and cardiologists [2,3]. In these HF-outpatient clinics, Disease Management Programs (DMP) were introduced [4,5] and over the last decade, these clinics became ‘care as usual’ in several European countries [6]. The effect on quality of care and clinical outcomes in HF-clinics in the Netherlands was investigated by two randomized studies [7,8]. Although both studies have contributed to the quality of DMP in HF-outpatient clinics led by specialized HF-nurses, the key characteristics of patients who benefits most from a DMP remained unclear [9].Although tele cardiology seems to be a large success for the management of pace-makers and defibrillators, the use of tele cardiology in the follow-up of technological functioning of pace-makers and defibrillators is quite different from the use in the monitoring of symptoms of deterioration in patients. Guidelines suggest to include careful monitoring of HF patients in addition to regular outpatient clinic visits by means of telephonic assessments or telemonitoring [1]. On a caregiver level, cardiologists and HF-nurses have high expectations of telemonitoring by expecting it to improve quality of care, reduce costs and improves patients' Health-Related Quality of Life (HR-QoL) by increasing feelings of control and empowerment of the patient [10]. On the other side, the misalignment between patients expectations regarding the continuously monitoring of the data and the actually non-continuously monitoring activities from the professionals providing the service is a cause of concern. On a patient level, patients experience by using telemonitoring an increase in their self-care activities [11], an increase in their understanding of HF symptoms and an improvement in their feeling of safety [12]. Furthermore, patients experience a high level of satisfaction with telemonitoring and have the feeling that care-givers continuously monitor the transmitted parameters (despite the knowledge that monitoring by care-givers is non-continuously) [13]. On a population level, results regarding reduction in hospitalization and mortality rates by the use of telemonitoring in HF patients compared to usual care are ambiguous [14–19]. It is suggested that the development of tools to automatically analyze the data and provide advice to patients and caregivers regarding the treatment of the patient would be a revolution [18]. However, until now it is not clear whether telemonitoring, when delivered as an integrated approach added to an information and communication technology guided disease management system (ICT-guided-DMS), improves clinical and patient reported outcomes or reduces healthcare costs. The value of a Computer Decision Support System (CDSS) incorporated into an ICT-guided-DMS to facilitate healthcare professionals into optimizing treatment and care is also not known. Therefore, the aim of this study is to assess the effect of telemonitoring on top of an ICT-guided-DMS with an CDSS in patients with worsening HF on the combined endpoint of death, readmission and HR-QoL, compared to patients treated with ICT-guided-DMS and CDSS alone.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
ICT-guided disease management in combination with telemonitoring, used in the follow-up of HF-patients, did not affect the primary (composite) endpoint of mortality, HF-readmission and HR-QoL, nor the separated individual outcomes of this composite endpoint. However, we demonstrated that telemonitoring is safe and can reduce HF-related visits to the HF-outpatient clinic, keeping HF-care accessible. Costs however were €1360,- higher with telemonitoring. The adherence of patients in using telemonitoring was very high, indicating that the devices used for this study, in combination with daily measurements, were well accepted by patients and therefore acceptable when implementing regular care.Imke Kraai, Arjen de Vries, Hans Hillege, and Ivonne Lesman: designing, conducting, analyzing and interpreting data and drafting the article. Vincent van Deursen: conducting survival analyses. Karin Vermeulen: analyzing and conducting cost analyses. All other authors made substantial contributions to the design of the study, interpreting data, drafting the article to revising it critically for important intellectual content.This project was funded by the Dutch Ministry of Health, Department of Pharmaceutical Affairs and Medical Technology (GMT).René van Dijk: Medical advisor CURIT. All other authors: none declared.Summary pointsWhat was already known on the topic of the study:-On a caregiver level, cardiologists and HF-nurses have high expectations of telemonitoring by expecting it to improve quality of care, reduce costs and to improve patients' Health-Related Quality of Life (HR-QoL) by increasing feelings of control and empowerment of the patient.On a population level, results regarding reduction in hospitalization and mortality rates by using telemonitoring in HF patients compared to usual care, are ambiguous.What this study added to our knowledge:-It is safe to use telemonitoring and it can reduce HF-related visits to the HF-outpatient clinic, keeping HF-care accessible. However the costs were &z.euro;1360,- higher with telemonitoring.The adherence of patients using telemonitoring was very high indicating that the devices used in combination with daily measurements were well accepted by patients.We found no additional benefit from adding telemonitoring to an ICT-guided-DMS with CDSS with regard to the composite endpoint score; all-cause mortality, HF-readmission and change in HR-QoL.