@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The EHR-ARCHE project: Satisfying clinical information needs in a Shared Electronic Health Record System based on IHE XDS and Archetypes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Content-based search avoids information overload in IHE XDS Shared EHR systems.Content-based search enables retrieval of fine-grained information items.Content-based search implemented by integrating Archetypes in IHE XDS.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Electronic health records,Medical records systems, computerized,Reference standards,Models, theoretical,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
PurposeWhile contributing to an improved continuity of care, Shared Electronic Health Record (EHR) systems may also lead to information overload of healthcare providers. Document-oriented architectures, such as the commonly employed IHE XDS profile, which only support information retrieval at the level of documents, are particularly susceptible for this problem. The objective of the EHR-ARCHE project was to develop a methodology and a prototype to efficiently satisfy healthcare providers’ information needs when accessing a patient's Shared EHR during a treatment situation. We especially aimed to investigate whether this objective can be reached by integrating EHR Archetypes into an IHE XDS environment.MethodsUsing methodical triangulation, we first analysed the information needs of healthcare providers, focusing on the treatment of diabetes patients as an exemplary application domain. We then designed ISO/EN 13606 Archetypes covering the identified information needs. To support a content-based search for fine-grained information items within EHR documents, we extended the IHE XDS environment with two additional actors. Finally, we conducted a formative and summative evaluation of our approach within a controlled study.ResultsWe identified 446 frequently needed diabetes-specific information items, representing typical information needs of healthcare providers. We then created 128 Archetypes and 120 EHR documents for two fictive patients. All seven diabetes experts, who evaluated our approach, preferred the content-based search to a conventional XDS search. Success rates of finding relevant information was higher for the content-based search (100% versus 80%) and the latter was also more time-efficient (8–14min versus 20min or more).ConclusionsOur results show that for an efficient satisfaction of health care providers’ information needs, a content-based search that rests upon the integration of Archetypes into an IHE XDS-based Shared EHR system is superior to a conventional metadata-based XDS search.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
One of the key benefits of Shared Electronic Health Record (EHR) systems [1] is their ability to integrate a patient's health data across the borders of different healthcare institutions. They can thus essentially improve continuity of care [2]. As Shared EHRs can be expected to contain much more documents than conventional intra-institutional EHRs, there are, however, also concerns that Shared EHR systems may promote information overload [3,4]. Information overload occurs when “information received becomes a hindrance rather than a help, even though the information is potentially useful” [5]. This may particularly be the case for patients with chronic diseases or multimorbid conditions, which will commonly lead to voluminous EHRs containing a plethora of documents.One obvious way to avoid information overload is to reduce the number of documents that have to be searched for satisfying a particular information need. The problem-oriented medical record suggested by Weed [6] follows this strategy. However, even if a Shared EHR system organizes a patient's documents based on medical problems (the nationwide Austrian ELGA system [7] for example is not problem-oriented), the set of documents may again become large for chronic diseases.Information overload is further fostered by document-oriented Shared EHR systems, if they do not support information retrieval mechanisms at finer granularities than the document level. The Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise (IHE) Cross-Enterprise Document Sharing (XDS) profile [8] is an open standards-based architecture specification for document-oriented Shared EHR systems. It is commonly employed for the implementation of regional Shared EHR systems, e.g. [9–13]. It is also a fundamental component of several upcoming national Shared EHR systems, such as the French DMP system [14] and the Austrian ELGA system [7]. A geographic overview of current IHE XDS implementations around the world can be found at [15].The standard way of retrieving information in IHE XDS relies on queries that exclusively refer to document metadata (for example, patient ID, provider ID, document type, date of document creation) and always return complete documents as the smallest unit of information. More specific queries that refer to fine-grained information items (e.g., insulin therapy of the last 12 month, or course of HbA1c values) are not supported – i.e. the user has to know which documents to search for when looking for a particular information item. Further, in current implementations of the IHE XDS search component, the user typically has to manually browse the returned documents to find the relevant data for the information items.11Note that IHE XDS does not forbid Shared EHR systems to implement (semi)automated local search and browse functions. In this case, however, to avoid missing relevant information all available documents of a patient have to be downloaded before they can be locally searched. This results in noteworthy exchange of irrelevant documents on the network and may lead to concerns of patients about the massive and partially unnecessary access of their documents when studying their access logs. Further, without a computer-processable specification of the documents’ contents, a local solution could still only rely on a rather coarse search heuristic.This may become seriously laborious, e.g. if data for a time series has to be located or if the desired information items are optional and only sparsely recorded on the returned documents. Searching Shared EHRs purely based on document metadata may thus lead to information overload by forcing users to (a) access a potentially large number of EHR documents (where due to the manual selection relevant documents may be missing and irrelevant ones may be present), and (b) find and filter the relevant data within the documents to satisfy their particular information need.Our basic assumption is that users of Shared EHR systems need extended search options to satisfy their information needs and to avoid information overload. Instead of relying on document metadata only, these extended search options should allow to search for specific content within structured EHR documents. The ISO/EN 13606 [16], Health Level Seven (HL7) Clinical Document Architecture (CDA) [17,18], and openEHR [19] are the currently most important open specifications for modelling structured EHRs’ contents.All three before-mentioned specifications support the so-called “dual-model approach”, which uses separate information and knowledge layers to model EHR contents. The information layer is based on a Reference Model. It defines a set of generic classes from which any EHR content may be constructed. The knowledge layer is based on a set of models, which specify how each individual EHR content is composed from the generic classes of the Reference Model. These knowledge models can be represented in free text, such as in CDA implementation guides (e.g., the CDA Continuity of Care Document [20]), or in computer-processable form, such as in Archetypes [21] or HL7 Templates [22]. In the following we focus on Archetypes as the modelling technique of the knowledge layer.According to an analysis of Archetype-related literature, Archetypes represent a suitable solution for EHR storage and interoperability [23]. For example, within two investigations by the National Health Service (NHS) in England, nearly 400 different Archetypes were developed in an in depth evaluation of this concept. As a result, Archetypes were found well suited for defining detailed clinical models for reuse across NHS IT projects [24]. However, it is unclear whether Archetype-based EHR architectures can actually help to satisfy the information needs of Shared EHR systems’ users via extended, content-based search options. Previous work on optimizing information retrieval in IHE XDS based Shared EHR systems has focused on semantic EHR document indexing techniques [25–27]. The semantics of EHR document contents were derived from coded data, from classes of the Reference Model, or via natural language processing – Archetypes have not yet been employed for this purpose.It is further unclear what information needs the users of Shared EHR systems in fact have. Prior work in this context primarily focused on what kind of information is frequently accessed. As an example, fourteen physicians were observed and it was found that most often medications and prescriptions are accessed, followed by vital signs and requests to lab orders [28]. In another observation, Zeng and Cimino found that physicians primarily accessed results of specific tests, past diagnoses and past hospitalizations and tests [29]. Hripcsak et al. found that in an emergency department most frequently clinical lab tests, radiology reports and clinician notes of earlier contacts were reviewed [30]. However, all these studies do not assess information needs, but information access. Hereby they overlook unavailable, but needed information.To address the before-mentioned problems, we defined the following objectives for our EHR-ARCHE project [31]:1.Identify healthcare providers’ information needs when accessing Shared EHRs.Develop a concept to satisfy these information needs within IHE XDS- and Archetype-based, standardized Shared EHR systems.Implement a prototype and evaluate the concept.In this paper we will present an overview of the EHR-ARCHE project and describe how we realized these three objectives.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
