@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Text mining of cancer-related information: Review of current status and future directions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Narrative reports can be used for predictive modelling of cancer.Natural language processing can be used to structure information from free text reports.Synoptic reporting formats indicate which types of information should be extracted from narrative reports.Comprehensive cancer ontology is needed to support semantic interpretation of clinical narratives.Machine learning approaches are yet to be fully explored in text mining of cancer information.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cancer,Natural language processing,Data mining,Electronic medical records,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
PurposeThis paper reviews the research literature on text mining (TM) with the aim to find out (1) which cancer domains have been the subject of TM efforts, (2) which knowledge resources can support TM of cancer-related information and (3) to what extent systems that rely on knowledge and computational methods can convert text data into useful clinical information. These questions were used to determine the current state of the art in this particular strand of TM and suggest future directions in TM development to support cancer research.MethodsA review of the research on TM of cancer-related information was carried out. A literature search was conducted on the Medline database as well as IEEE Xplore and ACM digital libraries to address the interdisciplinary nature of such research. The search results were supplemented with the literature identified through Google Scholar.ResultsA range of studies have proven the feasibility of TM for extracting structured information from clinical narratives such as those found in pathology or radiology reports. In this article, we provide a critical overview of the current state of the art for TM related to cancer. The review highlighted a strong bias towards symbolic methods, e.g. named entity recognition (NER) based on dictionary lookup and information extraction (IE) relying on pattern matching. The F-measure of NER ranges between 80% and 90%, while that of IE for simple tasks is in the high 90s. To further improve the performance, TM approaches need to deal effectively with idiosyncrasies of the clinical sublanguage such as non-standard abbreviations as well as a high degree of spelling and grammatical errors. This requires a shift from rule-based methods to machine learning following the success of similar trends in biological applications of TM. Machine learning approaches require large training datasets, but clinical narratives are not readily available for TM research due to privacy and confidentiality concerns. This issue remains the main bottleneck for progress in this area. In addition, there is a need for a comprehensive cancer ontology that would enable semantic representation of textual information found in narrative reports.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Around 325,000 people were diagnosed with cancer in 2010 in the UK (approximately 890 people per day) [1]. More than 1 in 3 people in the UK will develop some form of cancer during their lifetime. Worldwide, around 12.7 million new cases of cancer were estimated in 2008. Currently, half of people diagnosed with cancer will survive for at least five years. With constant advancements in cancer research and healthcare provision, cancer survival rates in the UK have doubled in the last 40 years. Still, cancer remains the most common cause of death (29%) followed by circulatory diseases (28%) such as heart disease and strokes [2]. Further advances depend crucially on consistent and comparable data collection.A wealth of relevant information exists in various types of medical records, e.g. approximately 96% of cancer diagnoses originate in the surgical pathology laboratory [3] and as such they remain an important source for information to guide the treatment of patients with cancer. Synoptic reports emerged with the goal of structured data capture as means of improving the quality of data and collection methods. The College of American Pathologists (CAP) as part of their contribution to the International Collaboration on Cancer Reporting developed cancer checklists that prescribe collection of all critical elements that should be reported for cancer specimens [4]. Still, in many cases (e.g. colonoscopy) free-text reporting via dictation is still the norm [5]. While synoptic reporting systems can effectively address structured data collection in the future, it does not solve the problem of managing the legacy data in free text format.Text mining (TM) has emerged as a potential solution for bridging the gap between free-text and structured representation of cancer information. It uses techniques from natural language processing (NLP), knowledge management, data mining and machine learning (ML) to efficiently process large document collections in order to support information retrieval (which gathers and filters relevant documents), document classification (which maps documents to appropriate categories based on their content), information extraction (which selects specific facts about pre-specified types of entities and relationships of interest), terminology extraction (which collects domain-relevant terms from a corpus of domain-specific documents), named entity recognition (which identifies entities from predefined categories), etc.A recent article provides a review of TM applications in cancer research [6]. It describes biomedical TM in general terms and how it can be used in cancer systems biology. Systems biology studies complex interactions in biological systems such as gene regulatory networks, which are often explored to provide insight into the cell proliferation observed in cancer. Therefore, most of the TM approaches discussed in the mentioned review article focus on PubMed abstracts as the richest source of text data on gene interactions and NLP techniques to extract gene-related information. In this article, we depart from biological applications of TM to focus primarily on its clinical applications in the cancer domain. To address the interdisciplinary nature of such research, we searched the scientific literature encompassing the following areas: biomedicine, life sciences, engineering, technology, computing and information technology. We relied on three literature databases: Medline, IEEE Xplore and ACM digital libraries. The search results were supplemented with the literature identified through Google Scholar. The search terms included cancer and related terms (e.g. carcinoma, neoplasm, malignancy, etc.) in combination with terminology related to text mining (e.g. natural language processing, information retrieval, information extraction, etc.). To be included in the review, the citations were required to discuss text mining of cancer-related information demonstrated on or directly applicable to clinical narratives, which was determined by manually screening the full text of retrieved publications.Fig. 1presents the general framework in which TM is used in the clinical setting. Different types of cancer (e.g. breast cancer) will define a specific domain in which TM is used. It will determine the choice of available text data (e.g. mammography reports). Data interpretation, either by human experts or computers, naturally requires relevant knowledge in a given domain. Machine readable representations of relevant knowledge can be found in generic knowledge representation systems (e.g. UMLS [7]), specialised databases (e.g. BCGD [8]), reporting guidelines (e.g. BI-RADS [9]), etc. Specialised TM software systems are then used to extract information (e.g. cancer stage) as a joint function of data and knowledge. Extracted information can further support various applications including clinical research (e.g. epidemiology) and decision making (e.g. the choice of appropriate treatment). Before automatically extracted information can be used in clinical setting, its reliability needs to be validated. Analogously to establishing the validity of diagnostic tests, TM systems are evaluated in terms of a range of measures such as positive and negative predictive value to determine to what extent the extracted information corresponds to the reality represented by the ground truth.The TM framework given in Fig. 1 has been used to provide a structure of this review. In Section 2, we discuss which cancer domains have been the subject of TM efforts and which ones could be suitable targets of TM research in the near future. A specific cancer domain will constrain the types of available text data, which are discussed in Section 3. The available knowledge resources that can support TM of cancer-related information are summarised in Section 4. Section 5 describes TM systems that rely on knowledge and computational methods to convert text data into useful clinical information. To ascertain the feasibility of using TM to extract different types of cancer-related information, this section also features the means of formally evaluating TM systems. The presented systems are discussed in the context of their applications. Finally, we conclude the paper with a discussion of the current state of the art in this particular strand of TM and suggest future directions in TM development to support cancer research.Cancer is an umbrella term for diseases characterised by excessive cellular division and proliferation. Cancer is no longer viewed as a single disease or even a single collection of diseases. Cancer may start developing in any of over 60 body organs and is usually named after the affected organ (e.g. breast cancer). Each organ consists of different cell types that may be affected by cancer, so several cancer types may affect each organ (e.g. ductal carcinoma and lobular carcinoma are different types of breast cancer). There are more than 200 types of cancer having different causes, symptoms and treatments. Therefore, cancer as a term covers a diverse set of diseases, which are differentiated by a growing set of biomarkers. Naturally, different types of information will be reported for different types of cancer, so it may be expected that TM approaches to processing text data in different cancer domains will vary as well. Nonetheless, it would be useful to know what knowledge and software resources can be re-used in a specific domain. We, therefore, provide a brief summary of TM activities across different cancer types. Detailed information about the actual approaches taken is provided in Section 5.The literature review revealed that most of the articles on TM for cancer have been annotated with a MeSH term that identifies neoplasms by anatomical site, where neoplasm refers to autonomous tissue growth in which the malignancy status has not been established and for which the transformed cell type has not been specifically identified. Both NCI Thesaurus [10] and MeSH [11] organise neoplasms by anatomical site. Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) [7] currently integrates 168 vocabularies, including both NCI Thesaurus and MeSH. We therefore provide a unique concept identifier (CUI) in UMLS, from which cross-references can be obtained to both of these sources. Information from these knowledge sources can be used to obtain lexical information (e.g. synonyms) as well as links to other related concepts. For practical purposes, both resources are accessible via the UMLS Terminology Services [12] and BioPortal [13].Table 1provides the mappings of TM studies to particular cancer domains. Breast, lung, bowel and prostate cancers together account for over half of all new cancers each year [1]. Not surprisingly, most TM efforts have concentrated on these domains. While most common cancers have been covered, others such as bladder neoplasm, endometrial neoplasm, renal neoplasm and thyroid gland neoplasm still remain to be explored by TM. In addition, we have not identified any TM studies related specifically to haematologic neoplasms (e.g. leukaemia or lymphoma), which are located in the blood and blood-forming tissue (i.e. the bone marrow and lymphatic tissue).Cancer-related information is described in various types of text documents including scientific literature, medical records, web documents and those found in specialised databases. In this section, we focus on different types of text data used in TM studies to support cancer research. Most research in biomedical TM, including mining of cancer-related information, has been conducted on scientific literature. The availability of article abstracts via the PubMed database has made them the most popular source (e.g. [38]). While PubMed abstracts ensure the breadth of information that can be mined, they do not provide for depth, i.e. more detailed information can only be found in the body of the article and some studies have explored this information space with TM (e.g. [34]). Unfortunately, access restrictions limit the availability of full-text articles. Additionally, unlike the abstracts available in a single resource such as PubMed, which have a uniform format, full text articles will be in different formats, which poses difficulties in their processing. PubMed Central is an attempt to make full-text articles freely available in a uniform format, but it currently has a limited coverage compared to PubMed. In addition to literature, much information relevant to cancer available in free text records in specialised databases has been used in TM studies, e.g. AERS (Adverse Event Reporting System) [39], ClinicalTrials.gov [40] and HPV Sequence Database [41].In a clinical setting, cancer-related information can be found in various types of medical reports. For the purposes of TM, we focus on electronic medical records (EMRs) – electronic documents that may describe demographic information, medical history, medication and known allergies, laboratory test results, radiology images, etc. Fig. 2shows a hierarchy of medical reports that have been used as data sources in TM for cancer. In particular, two types of reports are relevant for recording cancer-related information: pathology and imaging reports. A pathology report describes the results of examining cells and tissues under a microscope following a biopsy or surgery [42]. It typically contains information about the patient, a description of how cells look under the microscope and a diagnosis. This information is then used by clinicians to support decision making on appropriate treatment.Imaging reports (or radiology reports) serve the same purpose of conveying a specialist interpretation of images and relate it to the patient's signs and symptoms in order to suggest diagnosis [43]. Depending on the type of imaging technique used, we can further differentiate between different subclasses of imaging reports each having its own reporting standards or guidelines, e.g. X-ray imaging reports (including chest radiography and mammography reports), computed tomography (CT) scan reports and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) reports. Table 2shows which types of reports have been used in TM studies focusing on different cancer types.Hospital discharge summaries may contain cancer-related information among other health-related topics. An anonymised data set was initially released for the i2b2 NLP challenge [44] and it can be used for research purposes (e.g. [37]). Finally, medical certificate of death is a document issued by a medical practitioner explaining the cause of death. Cancer monitoring and prevention rely on timely notification of cancer-related events including deaths. Cancer Registries systematically collect such information, but they may lag behind due to manual classification of cancer from the free-text documents such as death certificates, which is complex and time-consuming activity [45].While cancer research stands to benefit from automated processing of EMRs, there are ethical and legal issues associated with their use as they contain private and confidential information [46]. Patient data cannot be used for TM purposes without consent [47]. In the EU, Data Protection Directive (officially Directive 95/46/EC) [48] specifies rules on using information about individuals. In the USA, the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) [49] provides the standard for using patient data in electronic format. Their violations may incur legal responsibilities and penalties. In principle, no patient data should be individually identifiable. This applies to anonymous data (collected without patient-identifiable information), anonymized data (patient-identifiable information is removed) and de-identified data (patient-identifiable information is encoded or encrypted) [50]. Unfortunately, even when all reasonable measures to protect privacy and confidentiality are taken (e.g. de-identification and data use agreements), in most cases only researchers with local affiliation are allowed access [51]. This remains the main bottleneck, more widely, for progress in healthcare applications of NLP. Most systems described in this review were developed and evaluated on local data, which does not allow for their direct comparison or for estimating how generalisable their methods are.To identify different cancer patient cohorts from their medical records or obtain baseline classification for automated methods, many studies relied on the relevant coding systems used. In the USA, billing data typically consists of codes derived from the International Classification of Diseases (ICD) and Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) [52]. ICD is a taxonomy of diseases, signs, symptoms and procedure codes maintained by the World Health Organisation (WHO). For example, Coden et al. used ICD-9-CM codes (153.x, 154.x) to select pathology reports of patients diagnosed with colon cancer [23]. Similarly, D’Avolio et al. used ICD-9 codes to select pathology reports related to colorectal cancer (153.x, 154.x), prostate cancer (185.x) and lung cancer (162.x) [26]. ICD version 9-CM is in use in the USA (as of 2012), whereas the majority of other countries use ICD version 10. For example, Butt et al. relied on death classifications based on ICD-9 and ICD-10 codes that accompany the death certificate reports in Australia [45]. More detailed classification of oncology information is available via the International Classification of Diseases – Oncology (ICD-O) version 3, a domain-specific extension of ICD, which is considered as the lingua franca of pathologists and is in widespread use within tumour registries [23]. In PubMed, relevant literature can be selected using MeSH classifications [11]. Most articles relevant for cancer will be annotated with a term from the Neoplasms (C04) section.TM of cancer data requires understanding of the underlying terminology, which is described in the NCI Thesaurus [10], a reference terminology of the cancer domain. The NCI Thesaurus provides definitions and synonyms of nearly 10,000 cancers and related diseases, 8000 single agents and combination therapies and a range of other cancer-related topics. More general clinical terminology can be found in SNOMED CT, the Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine Clinical Terms [53].Although available independently, most of the mentioned resources are accessible via the UMLS Terminology Services [12] and BioPortal [13] (Table 3). Moreover, UMLS provides integration of these resources by linking the original identifiers to a single designated concept.BioPortal is a web portal that provides access to one of the largest repositories of biomedical ontologies [60]. It provides a uniform mechanism to access biomedical ontologies and terminologies provided in different representation formats, including OBO and OWL. The associated web services provide programmatic access to these ontologies [61], which allows for their easy integration into the TM framework. Tables 4 and 5provide a list of ontologies from BioPortal that are directly or indirectly related to cancer. In addition, one can define and share their own cancer-specific ontology on BioPortal and take advantage of its web services.Other resources that can be used as a guideline as to how to structure and report cancer information extracted from free text are listed in Table 6. The College of American Pathologist developed cancer checklists that prescribe collection of all critical elements that should be reported for cancer specimens [4]. These checklists provide templates for the types of information a TM system should aim to extract from free-text medical reports. Specifically, in the breast cancer domain BI-RADS defines a hierarchy of terms to describe findings in mammograms together with mammography assessment categories [9]. Classification of findings in free-text medical reports requires more complex text analysis as well as domain-specific knowledge. In general, tumours are classified using TNM (Tumour-Node-Metastases) classification of malignant tumours, an internationally agreed-upon standard to describe and categorise cancer stages and progression [62]. It is based on the extent of the primary tumour (T), spread to nearby lymph nodes (N) and distant metastasis (M). TNM guidelines are cancer-specific.In addition to formal knowledge resources, public web sites may be helpful to TM developers to familiarise with the domain. Table 7provides a list of credible web sites.In this section we focus on specific text processing tasks together with a review of methods and techniques used to solve them in the cancer domain. We differentiate between four major NLP tasks: named entity recognition (NER), information extraction (IE), text classification and information retrieval (IR). In order to assess the feasibility and compare different approaches, we first describe how the systems supporting these NLP tasks can be evaluated.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this article, we have reviewed current TM approaches with clinical applications in the cancer domain. The review highlighted a strong bias towards symbolic methods, e.g. NER largely based on dictionary lookup and IE relying on pattern matching. While these can be regarded as more conservative approaches to TM, they nonetheless deliver good performance. The F-measure of NER ranges between 80% and 90% (e.g. [73]), while that of IE for simple tasks is in the high 90s (e.g. [36]). This can be explained by the relative stability of the clinical sublanguage in this particular domain in comparison to biology, where dictionaries quickly become out of date, so ML approaches such as CRFs are more commonly used for NER (e.g. [90]). The comparatively slower dynamics of the clinical cancer domain allows for dictionaries to be updated manually when new concepts such as drugs, diagnostic tests and related genes are identified. However, the fact that clinical concept names vary considerably due to idiosyncrasies of the clinical sublanguage such as non-standard abbreviations (e.g. cscopy, C scopy are used as synonyms of colonoscopy) can be attributed to NER relying on standard dictionaries (e.g. UMLS) and tools (e.g. MetaMap) not performing better than 90% in terms of F-measure.The relatively limited domain scope still allows for manual extension of dictionaries with non-standard terminology (e.g. [21]), but the problems associated with the clinical sublanguage such as high degree of spelling and grammatical errors calls for a more general and robust approach to NER. To account for syntactic variation, Kang et al. [69] demonstrated how a rule-based approach mapping between the shallow parses and MetaMap outputs can improve the results of NER. Our investigation into automatic term recognition revealed that most syntactic, morphological and orthographic variations can be identified by simply ignoring the internal phrase structure in a bag-of-words approach and using phonetic and edit distance algorithms to map between individual tokens [91]. We, therefore, suggest that such an approach can be used to improve the performance of dictionary-based NER in order to effectively deal with both syntactic variation and spelling errors.Nonetheless, there remains a need for a comprehensive cancer ontology that would include rich terminologies for each cancer type as well as relationships to other relevant concepts (e.g. screening and treatment methods, synoptic reporting formats, checklists, etc.). The ontology should be an open community effort allowing seamless integration of internally developed terminologies, which currently are either not shared at all (e.g. [56]) or remain confined to supplementary materials (e.g. [25]) in non-standardised formats. The time saved on collection of vocabularies and construction of bespoke ontologies (e.g. [22]) and representation models (e.g. [23]) would allow more resources for development of the actual TM methods. Sharing the ontology in community portals comes with the benefit of readily available web services (e.g. [61,92]) that would automatically provide programmatic access to the ontology, which would allow easy integration into the TM framework [93].Most IE systems reviewed here are rule-based. For simple types of information, such methods are fast and easy to develop and they perform extremely well (e.g. [36]). However, for more complex and variable types of information, ML may be necessary. A range of synoptic reporting formats available for different types of cancer [4] clearly indicate what information should be targeted by future IE systems. Synoptic formats can act as IE templates. Where synoptic reports are already used in clinical practice, their content can be used to train the IE systems.The extent to which ML will be incorporated into IE system will undoubtedly be limited by strong preference for rule-based systems over “black box” ML models in clinical practice. Some ML approaches will be more acceptable than others. For example, approaches such as ILP can be used to induce rules, thus effectively addressing the knowledge elicitation bottleneck associated with rule-based systems while still benefiting from the explanatory power of rules (e.g. [18]). In many cases, the reporting guidelines such as those for TNM staging will readily provide the classification rules, hence the need for ML may be confined to extracting the relevant information not necessarily classification itself.Narrative reports such as pathology and radiology reports convey valuable diagnostic information that is predictive of the prognosis and biological behaviour of a disease process [63]. A range of studies have proven the feasibility of NLP for structuring free text reports (e.g. [16,20,23,27,94]). Evaluations of NLP systems suggest that they can provide accurate data on service provision and patient clinical status [95]. In some cases, NLP results were superior to formally coded information in EMRs (e.g. [25]), which opens a range of possible applications in clinical practice. Indeed, many NLP approaches have been developed with direct clinical applications for cancer monitoring and prevention in mind. For example, two studies have shown that NLP can be coupled with clinical decision support in order to improve colorectal cancer screening rates [25,29]. Unfortunately, the actual procedures for colorectal cancer screening are often inadequate and vary widely among physicians, but NLP can support routine measurement of colonoscopy quality [5]. Similarly, NLP was applied to radiology reports to investigate additional imaging recommendation practice as this task requires careful balance between healthcare cost and accuracy and timeliness of cancer diagnosis [81]. Most often, NLP was used for predictive modelling of cancer that can be used to inform clinical decision making. Examples include prediction of invasive cancer across different age cohorts [19], risk of malignancy of breast cancer [17], risk of pancreatic cancer [34], lung cancer stage [32], survival in metastatic prostate cancer [37], etc. Most of these NLP systems have been developed and used locally due to strict legal regulations, which make healthcare institutions reluctant to share free-text medical reports even when all reasonable measures to protect privacy and confidentiality are taken (e.g. de-identification and data use agreements) [51]. More widely, this issue remains the main bottleneck for progress in healthcare applications of NLP.JAK and GN conceived the overall study and scoped the review. IS conducted the literature search and drafted the manuscript. JL provided medical comments on the paper. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.The authors declare there is no conflict of interests.Summary pointsWhat was already known before this study:•Narrative reports such as pathology or radiology reports convey valuable diagnostic information that can be used for predictive modelling of cancer.Individual studies have proven the feasibility of specific NLP techniques for extracting structured information from free text reports.What this study has added to our knowledge:•An overview of available knowledge sources that can support semantic interpretation of clinical narratives related to cancer.An overview of available methods and techniques used for TM of clinical narratives related to cancer.The finding that ML approaches have not been fully explored in TM of cancer-related information.