@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Computational analysis of 3′UTR region of CASP3 with respect to miRSNPs and SNPs in targetting miRNAs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We identified miRSNPs in the CASP3 gene and SNPs in miRNAs genes targeting 3′UTR of CASP3.We assessed the impact of these miRSNPs and SNPs of miRNA genes with respect to apoptosis. We found 89 different miRNA binding sites for 43 different miRNAs and 16 different SNPs in binding sites.MiR-4802-3p’s binding site has a SNP on CASP3 3′UTR and its genomic sequence has a SNP at the same nucleotide.We report a strong association between miR-4802-3p and apoptosis upon computational targetting analysis.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Caspase-3,Apoptosis,miRSNP,3′UTR region,miRNA-targetting,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Apoptosis is a strictly organized course which keeps the healthy survival/death equilibrium. Disregulation in apoptosis may lead autoimmunity or cancer, but increased apoptosis can lead degenerative diseases. Studies during the last several years have identified numerous affected miRNAs in association with apoptosis, their target genes and biological functions, and possible drug interventions. Polymorphisms in miRNA genes or miRNA target sites (miRSNPs) can modify miRNA action. While polymorphisms in miRNA genes are relatively rare, SNPs in miRNA-binding sites in target genes are more frequent. Several studies have shown that SNPs in miRNA target sites enhance or weaken the interaction between miRNA and its target transcripts and are associated with cancers and other diseases. We aimed to identify miRSNPs on executioner caspase, CASP3 gene (caspase-3) and SNPs in miRNA genes targeting 3′UTR of CASP3 and assessing the impact of these miRSNPs and SNPs of miRNA genes targeting 3′UTR of CASP3 with respect to apoptosis. We identified 89 different miRNA binding sites (for 43 different miRNAs) and 16 different SNPs in binding sites of miRNA in the 3′UTR of the CASP3 gene. Also, 2 SNPs (rs372435266 and rs190144655) were found on this miRNA′ genomic sequence. One of them crossmatched with a SNP in the 3′UTR of CASP3 that we found formerly. This miRNA was miR-4802-3p. Besides, miR-4802-3p targets three other apoptosis related genes, XIAP, IL1A and SOX2. This means that miR-4802-3p may also have a critical effect on apoptosis via different pathways other than caspase-3. We can therefore conclude that this is the first study proving a strong association between miR-4802-3p and apoptosis upon computational targetting analysis.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Apoptosis is a strictly organized course having a crucial function in homeostasis and development. In addition, it works as a cellular protection mechanism against antiviral infections. The organization of apoptosis is designed genetically and apoptosis has an important act in directing disease, development and growth (Hengartner, 2000; Zhang and Herman, 2002; Gallaher et al., 2001). Apoptosis involves DNA disintegration, blebbing, and crumbling of the cell (Zhang and Herman, 2002). At the time aberrant apoptosis or disorganization of apoptosis occurs, many hazardous clinical outcomes may result, like cancer and neurodegenerative or autoimmune illnesses (Favaloro et al., 2012; Jacobson et al., 1997; Lemasters et al., 1999; Zhang and Herman, 2002).Apoptosis is triggered by apoptosis-related signaling via caspase-linked cascades (Budihardjo et al., 1999; Favaloro et al., 2012; Hengartner, 2000). Cytokines/Fas-triggered cascades (Hofmann, 1999), mitochondrial-triggered cascades (Mignotte and Vayssiere, 1998), and endoplasmic reticulum (ER)/Ca2+-triggered cascades (Pollack and Leeuwenburgh, 2001) are among them. Fas or cytokines (e.g., TNF-α, IL-1β) binding to their cell membrane receptors launch the apoptotic cascade via a collection of adaptor proteins (e.g., Fas-associated death domain, FADD). The constructed death-stimulating signal structure provides activation of caspase-8, which then triggers caspase-3 activation (Hofmann, 1999).Caspases are a series of protein-cutting enzymes which are cysteine dependent aspartate-specific proteases (Favaloro et al., 2012; Nicholson, 1999; Zhang et al., 2003). So far, 14 caspases directing to cell death via apoptosis have been found in mammals (Kumar, 1999). Caspases have crucial functions in apoptosis-related cascades and interact with the non-caspase apoptotic cascade via the inclusion of apoptosis inducing factor (AIF) and endonuclease G (Endo G) (Marzetti et al., 2012; Nicholson, 1999; Zhang et al., 2003). Cytochrome c interacts with pro-caspase-9 and Apaf-1 (apoptotic protease-activating factor 1) to construct the apoptosome, which provides activation of both caspase-3 and caspase-9, ensuing apoptosis via DNA disintegration (Favaloro et al., 2012; Kumar et al., 2002; Mignotte and Vayssiere, 1998; Pollack et al., 2002; Susin et al., 2000; Zhang et al., 2002; Kwak, 2013) (Fig. 1).An apoptotic cell can use both extrinsic (death ligand) and intrinsic (mitochondrial) cascades in order to activate caspase-3 (Salvesen, 2002; Ghavami et al., 2009). Caspase-3 has to possess the zymogen characteristics since if it is deregulated, the activity of the caspase kills cells promiscuously (Boatright and Salvesen, 2003). After apoptotic signaling incidents have realized and the caspase-3 zymogen is cleaved by a starter caspase, the executioner caspase-3 zymogen finally shows its activity (Walters et al., 2009).MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of 22–25 nucleotide non-coding RNAs that play a crucial role in the organization of different biological functions. MiRNAs bind to complementary sequences in the 3′-untranslated region (3′-UTR) of the target gene transcripts and regulate their gene expression and function including apoptosis of tumor cells. MiRNAs can function as tumor suppressors and oncogenes (Shimada, 2013). Dysregulation of miRNA expression has been reported in different human cancers including colon cancer, breast cancer, prostate cancer, hepatocellular carcinoma, and osteosarcoma (Nugent, 2014). Intensive studies during the last several years have identified numerous affected miRNAs in association with apoptosis, their target genes and biological functions, and possible drug interventions (Nana-Sinkam and Croce, 2011). For example, apoptosis is triggered by miR-15a and miR-16-1 (miR-15a/16-1) via the regulation of mitochondrial function. They are found as a cluster at the chromosomal region 13q14 and are often down-regulated or deleted in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) (Calin et al., 2005). MiR-1, a muscle specific miRNA, expression is raised with an accompanying cytochrome c release through mitochondria and a reduction in membrane potential upon apoptotic activation (Chen et al., 2006; Yu et al., 2008Yu et al., 2008).MiRNAs bind to target sequences (usually located in the 3′ untranslated region (3′UTR)) in messenger RNAs (mRNAs) and act by negatively regulating gene expression. This binding requires complementarity between the nucleotides 2 and 8 of miRNA (so called “seed” region) and the target mRNA. To date more than 2500 mature human miRNAs have been identified and they are predicted to regulate over 60% of human protein-coding genes. This regulatory network can be very complex as one miRNA may potentially regulate several mRNAs, and a given mRNA may possess in its sequence binding sites for several miRNAs (Bartel, 2009; Kozomara and Griffiths-Jones, 2014; Friedman et al., 2009; Grimson et al., 2007)Specific miRNA expression signatures can accurately discriminate different diseases, especially cancer, and are often of great prognostic relevance. Changes in miRNA expression may result from genomic and epigenetic alterations or the impairment of the miRNA biogenesis pathway (Melo and Esteller, 2011). In addition, polymorphisms in miRNA genes or miRNA target sites (miRSNPs) can modify miRNA action. While polymorphisms in miRNA genes are relatively rare, SNPs in miRNA-binding sites in target genes are more frequent. Several studies have shown that SNPs in miRNA target sites enhance or weaken the interaction between miRNAs and target transcripts and are associated with cancers and other diseases (Melo and Esteller, 2011; Salzman and Weidhaas, 2013).Considering that miRNAs have been shown to play an essential role in apoptosis and that SNPs in miRNA-binding sites in target genes have been associated with various cancers, in this study, we aimed at identifying miRSNPs on executioner caspase, CASP3 gene (caspase-3) and SNPs in miRNAs genes targeting 3′UTR of CASP3 and assessing the impact of these miRSNPs and SNPs of miRNA genes targeting 3′UTR of CASP3 with respect to apoptosis.In order to find out which miRNAs targets 3′UTR of CASP3 gene, 5 different online databases were used: DIANA Tools, miRTarBase, miRanda, TargetScan, STarMir. Five different databases were used instead of only one database since all these databases uses different algorithms and computational approaches so we thought that we could achieve to screen all miRNAs targets without missing any of them by using different databases.The DIANA-microT is a web server that aims to obtain in silico miRNA–mRNA interactions’ predictions. It is specified for an easy-to-use database and gives spacious data for predicted miRNA-target gene interactions like a global score for each interaction and elaborate data for each target sites predicted. It is particularly functions on a positive and a negative set of miRNA Recognition Elements (MREs) found in both the 3′UTR and coding regions. DIANA-microT-CDS gives a remarkable rise in precision when compared to experimental proteomics outputs (Paraskevopoulou et al., 2013; Reczko et al., 2012) (http://www.microrna.gr/microT-CDS).Approximately fifty thousand miRNA-target interactions (MTIs) are provided by the miRTarBase. This interaction information is obtained by manually examining appropriate literature after analyzing the text consistently to filter research articles regarding functional miRNAs studies. Usually, the obtained MTIs are confirmed by next-generation sequencing, reporter assay, micro array and western blot experiments. MiRTarBase gives the most updated and biggest amount of data when compared to formerly generated databases (Hsu et al., 2014) (http://mirtarbase.mbc.nctu.edu.tw/php/search.php).MiRanda is competitive with other target prediction databases in specifying target genes and predicting the range of their down-regulation at transcriptional or translational levels in a wide-ranging assessment. Significantly, this database determines a huge number of experimentally identified non-conserved and non-canonical sites (Betel et al., 2010) (http://www.microrna.org/microrna/home.do).TargetScan provides predictions of computational targets of miRNAs by filtering for the presence of conserved 8mer and 7mer regions matching the seed part of all miRNAs. Optionally, non-conserved regions are further predicted. Predictions are aligned with respect to the targeting efficacy according to calculations obtained by the context+scores of the sites in mammals. Selectively, predictions are additionally ranked by their targeting probability at conserved regions (Andrew et al., 2007) (http://www.targetscan.org/).On a target ribonucleic acid (RNA), microRNA (miRNA) binding regions are predicted by the STarMir database. STarMir is an application of logistic prediction tools generated from crosslinking immunoprecipitation (CLIP) studies performed on miRNA binding. In both intra-dataset and inter-dataset confirmation, the models showed important advancements over constructed algorithms in predictions of both seedless and seed regions (Liu et al., 2013; Rennie et al., 2014) (http://sfold.wadsworth.org/cgi-bin/starmirtest2.pl).The sites targeted by miRNAs in the 3′UTR of the CASP3 gene were taken from these five databases. A target site list was constructed. While doing this, direct pairing (A-U, G-C) and wobble pairing (G-U) were considered in target prediction. GU wobble in the seed match refers to the allowance of a G pairing with a U instead of a C. SNPs on 3′UTR of CASP3 were obtained from the dbSNP build 141 database. SNPs matching and not matching with these pairing sites were specified and evaluated with respect to caspase-3 activity and apoptosis.SNPs on miRNA gene targeting the 3′UTR of CASP3 were screened from NCBI database. SNPs in miRNAs’ genes and miRSNPs in the 3′UTR of CASP3 were matched. SNPs cross-matching were searched. SNPs matching and not matching were shown and interpreted in terms of caspase-3 activity and apoptosis.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
