@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Genomic studies on nitrogen metabolism in Halomonas boliviensis: Metabolic pathway, biochemistry and evolution

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Putative enzymes obtained from the genome of H. boliviensis should permit a complete glutamate metabolism. A similar metabolism should be followed by other halomonads.Some phenotypic differences between halomonads, such as the ability to assimilate ammonia, might be a consequence of horizontal gene transfer.Each enzyme that forms part of the glutamate metabolism in prokaryotes evolved following a different pattern and some genes that express the enzymes were transferred among microorganisms.Yet, most enzymes of halomonads diverged in phylogenetic clusters composed of Proteobacteria, as might be expected.Glutamate synthase α-subunits of halomonads evolved very differently from enzymes of other prokaryotes, and may be included a novel group of enzymes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Halomonas boliviensis,Halomonadaceae,Glutamate metabolism,Halophilic bacteria,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Halomonas boliviensis LC1T=DSM 15516T is a halophilic bacterium that copiously produces osmolytes and polyesters. The growth of H. boliviensis is restricted when glutamate or glutamine is not included in its culture medium. The concentration of glutamate in the medium can regulate the production of either osmolytes or polyesters. However, genomic studies on the nitrogen assimilation have not been performed on H. boliviensis and other members of the family Halomonadaceae. Glutamate metabolism in H. boliviensis was discerned based on genome sequence analysis. The genome sequences of other Halomonadaceae members revealed similar enzymes to those found in H. boliviensis. H. boliviensis and H. elongata DSM 2581T acquired distinct glutamate dehydrogenase genes through horizontal gene transfer from a different bacterium. Two alleles of glutamine synthetase could be found in H. boliviensis, one of which was obtained from a thermophilic archaeon via horizontal gene transfer. Two subunits of glutamate synthase were also present in H. boliviensis. The small β-subunit had a molecular weight of 52kDa and was phylogenetically closely affiliated to proteins of other halomonads and Gammaproteobacteria. The large (161kDa) α-subunit of the halomonads gathered in a separate phylogenetic group, hence glutamate synthase α-subunits of halomonads may be included a novel group of enzymes. Furthermore, putative enzymes obtained from the genome of H. boliviensis should permit complete glutamate metabolism. A similar metabolism should be followed by other halomonads. However, some phenotypic differences between halomonads, such as the ability to assimilate ammonia, resulted as a consequence of horizontal gene transfer. Each enzyme that forms part of the glutamate metabolism in prokaryotes evolved following a different pattern. Yet, most enzymes of halomonads diverged in phylogenetic clusters composed of Proteobacteria, as might be expected.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nitrogen is an essential component in cells. Ammonia is the most common inorganic nitrogen source assimilated by cells (Reitzer, 2003). The assimilation of ammonia into amino acids is initiated by three biochemical reactions that form part of glutamate metabolism (Forchhammer, 2007).(1)2-Ketoglutarate+NH3+NAD(P)H↔glutamate+NAD(P)+(2)Glutamate+NH3+ATP→glutamine+ADP+Pi(3)Glutamine+2-ketoglutarate+NAD(P)H→2 glutamate+NAD(P)+The first reaction is reversible and is catalyzed by glutamate dehydrogenases (GDHs), which can be divided in four classes with distinctive molecular weights (Harper et al., 2010). GDH-1 and GDH-2 are small hexameric enzymes (MW about 50kDa) that utilize either NAD+ (EC 1.4.1.2) or NADP+ (EC 1.4.1.4) as a coenzyme, respectively (Antonopoulos et al., 2003; Consalvi et al., 1991). Larger tetrameric enzymes (115kDa) were classified as GDH-3, and are dual coenzyme specific NAD(P)+ (Veronese et al., 1974). Finally, enzymes of a fourth class (GDH-4) are approximately 180kDa in size, hexameric and are NAD+ specific (Miñambres et al., 2000). On the other hand, the sequential irreversible reactions (2) and (3) are catalyzed by glutamine synthetase (GS) and glutamate synthase (GOGAT), respectively (Forchhammer, 2007). The net result of reactions (2) and (3) is in essence the same as that of reaction (1); both routes produce one molecule of glutamate (Forchhammer, 2007). The difference is that the hydrolysis of ATP is required for the glutamine synthetase/glutamate synthase route. In organisms that are able to accomplish the three reactions, ammonia will generally be assimilated via the GDH reaction when its extracellular concentration is high, and via the GS/GOGAT route when it is scant (Forchhammer, 2007).Genes encoding GDHs are ubiquitous in nature and have been subject of extensive horizontal gene transfer (HGT) (Andersson and Roger, 2003). These genes have been transferred among prokaryotes and from prokaryotes to eukaryotes (Andersson and Roger, 2003). Nevertheless, it has been recognized that most bacteria harbor genes that express GDH-1, whereas most archaea include GDH-2. GDH-3 enzymes are mainly found in eukaryotes and higher organisms, although these dehydrogenases are present in some bacteria as well (Andersson and Roger, 2003; Forchhammer, 2007; Miñambres et al., 2000). GDH-4 enzymes were more recently discovered in bacteria (Miñambres et al., 2000). On the other hand, glutamate synthases are found in three distinct forms: NADPH–GOGAT (EC 1.4.1.13) that is usually found in prokaryotes (Jongsareejit et al., 1997; Oliver et al., 1987), ferredoxin–GOGAT (EC 1.4.7.1) and NADH–GOGAT (EC 1.4.1.14) that are generally obtained from higher organisms (Forchhammer, 2007; Suzuki and Knaff, 2005). However, NADH–GOGATs are also found in cyanobacteria, yeasts and algae (Muro-Pastor et al., 2005). NADPH–GOGATs purified from Escherichia coli and Azospirillum brasilense are composed of two subunits of approximately 135kDa (large α-subunit) and 53kDa (small β-subunit) (Oliver et al., 1987). The phylogenetic delineation of the different type of GOGATs among organisms seems to reflect a lesser influence of HGT on genome evolution than that observed for GDHs. On the whole, evolution has retained the synthesis of glutamate and glutamine in all living organisms so that they have became the major donors of nitrogen for all other components in a cell (Andersson and Roger, 2003; Forchhammer, 2007). Glutamine is the biosynthetic precursor of purines, pyrimidines, a number of amino acids, glucosamine and ρ-benzoate, whilst glutamate provides nitrogen for most transaminases and participates in the formation of about 85% of the nitrogenous compounds in a cell (Fisher, 1999).Halomonas boliviensis is a halophilic (salt loving) bacterium and is able to accumulate polyesters when a nitrogen source restricts cell growth and when a carbohydrate is in excess in a culture medium (Quillaguamán et al., 2004, 2008). This bacterium is included in the family Halomonadaceae that forms part of the Gammaproteobacteria. All members of the family Halomonadaceae, herein referred as halomonads, are halophilic or halotolerant microorganisms (Oren, 2008). H. boliviensis is also able to produce ectoines that are used as intracellular osmolytes that help to maintain cell turgor pressure, cell volume, and concentration of electrolytes in the cell when the salt (NaCl) concentration in the culture medium is high (Van-Thuoc et al., 2010). However, the synthesis of ectoines requires the presence of nitrogen in the culture medium to attain high yields (Van-Thuoc et al., 2010). Bioprocesses that led to high yields and volumetric productivities of ectoines, polyesters, and the combination to these products were designed based on the nitrogen source availability for the cells (Guzmán et al., 2009; Van-Thuoc et al., 2010). The culture medium used for optimization of the production processes was based on a defined medium used for Halomonas elongata; the medium contains NH4Cl as the sole nitrogen source (Sauer and Galinski, 1998). However, unlike H. elongata, cell growth of H. boliviensis in such a medium is limited (Quillaguamán et al., 2008). In this respect, amino acids soluble in water were included in the medium composition for H. boliviensis. Only three amino acids (aspartic acid, glycine, and glutamine) were found to improve the growth of H. boliviensis (Quillaguamán et al., 2008). Glutamine is an amino acid that favors the growth of H. boliviensis. Replacement of glutamine by sodium glutamate does not affect the cell concentration attained by H. boliviensis (Quillaguamán et al., 2008). Microbial polyesters and osmolytes are used in biotechnological applications in medicine, pharmacy, and food technology (Philip et al., 2007). Biopolyesters can be used, for instance, as biodegradable tissue and bone implants, whereas osmolytes such as ectoines are employed as enzyme, DNA, and whole cell protectants against freezing, heating, and drying (Pastor et al., 2010).The genome sequence of H. boliviensis was recently obtained (Guzmán et al., 2012). Evolutionary studies on several genes of H. boliviensis revealed that various genes involved in carbohydrate transport and metabolism have been acquired by HGT (Guzmán et al., 2012). Gene transfer from other bacterium had a profound effect on H. boliviensis – 45% of the genes related to carbohydrate uptake and their metabolic assimilation were obtained from other bacteria (Guzmán et al., 2012). Moreover, genes attainment from thermophilic and halophilic archaea was also discovered, although in a lesser extent (Guzmán et al., 2012). Enzyme polymorphism was also found in the pathways of glycolysis and gluconeogenesis of H. boliviensis (Guzmán et al., 2012). However, glutamate metabolism in H. boliviensis and its link to these catabolic routes have not been studied.This research work presents the evolution of the glutamate metabolism in H. boliviensis based on analysis of supernetworks that were built from cluster of orthologous proteins (COGs). The COGs were obtained from the genome sequences of 90 microorganisms and H. boliviensis. Similarities between the protein evolution of H. boliviensis and other halomonads were also determined. Moreover, this report depicts the phylogeny of enzymes that catalyze reactions (1)–(3), describes and models the primary, secondary and tertiary structures of GDHs and GOGATs in H. boliviensis.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Putative enzymes obtained from the genome of H. boliviensis should permit a complete glutamate metabolism. A similar metabolism should be followed by other halomonads. Some phenotypic differences between halomonads, such as the ability to assimilate ammonia, might be a consequence of HGT. We found, for instance, that H. boliviensis and H. elongata differed in this trait because each strain acquired a distinct glutamate dehydrogenase from a different type of bacterium.Each enzyme that forms part of the glutamate metabolism in prokaryotes evolved following a different pattern and some genes that express the enzymes were transferred among microorganisms. Yet, most enzymes of halomonads diverged in phylogenetic clusters composed of Proteobacteria, as might be expected. Furthermore, GOGAT α-subunits of halomonads evolved very differently from enzymes of other prokaryotes, and may be included a novel group of enzymes.