@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Synchronous collaborative tunnel design based on consistency-preserving multi-scale models

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Multi-scale product model for shield tunnels provides multiple levels of detail.Cross-LoD consistency preservation is achieved by procedural geometry descriptions.Collaboration platform allows simultaneous model modifications by multiple users.Concurrency control method is based on procedural models and explicit dependencies.The platform allows integration of genuine parametric CAD system.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Collaborative design,Product modeling,Level of detail,Multi-scale modeling,Infrastructure,Shield tunnel,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The planning of large infrastructure projects such as inner-city subway tracks is a highly collaborative process in which numerous experts from different domains are involved. While performing the planning task, widely differing scales have to be taken into consideration, ranging from the kilometer scale for the general routing of the track down to the centimeter scale for the detailed design of connection points. Currently there is no technology available which supports both the collaborative as well as the multi-scale aspect in an adequate manner. To fill this technological gap and better support the collaborative design and engineering activities involved with infrastructure planning, this paper introduces a new methodology which allows engineers to simultaneously manipulate a shared multi-scale tunnel model. This methodology comprises two main aspects. The first aspect is a multi-scale model for shield tunnels, which provides five different levels of detail (LoD) representing the different levels of abstraction required throughout the planning progress. The second aspect is a conceived collaboration platform, which enables simultaneous modifications of the multi-scale model by multiple users. In existing multi-scale approaches, where the individual representations are stored independently from each other, there is a high risk of creating inconsistencies, in particular in the highly dynamic collaborative planning context. To overcome this issue, the concept presented in this paper makes use of procedural modeling techniques for creating explicit dependencies between the geometric entities on the different LoDs. This results in a highly flexible, yet inherently consistent multi-scale model where the manipulation of elements on coarser LoDs results in an automated update of all dependent elements on finer LoDs. The proposed multi-scale model forms a well-suited basis for realizing the collaboration concept, which allows several experts to simultaneously manipulate a shared infrastructure model on various scales while using the different design tools they are accustomed to. The paper discusses in detail the principles and advantages of the proposed multi-scale modeling approach as well as its application in the context of collaborative tunnel design. The paper concludes with a case study of a large infrastructure project: a new inner-city subway tunnel in Munich, Germany.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The built infrastructure – especially for transportation – is of crucial importance for today’s highly developed societies, since it guarantees the mobility of its population and is a prerequisite for the constant stream of goods provided to industry and private households. This particularly applies to the transport networks of large cities, comprising rail-based public transport as well as a complex road networks. Due to the continuous growth of the population in the world’s conurbations, the built infrastructure facilities are constantly being developed and extended.The design and engineering of inner-city infrastructure facilities is a highly complex task, as numerous constraints and boundary conditions have to be taken into account. This includes the connection with the existing transport network as well as the technical characteristics of the infrastructure facility itself. As a consequence, a large number of specialists are involved which requires intensive and continuous collaboration.Collaboration is usually organized in two different modi [1]: In the asynchronous form, information is exchanged between the different stakeholders without immediate feedback, i.e. the collaborative work is temporally decoupled. In the synchronous form, however, the participants work simultaneously and provide direct responses to proposed design modifications. While from a duration point of view, asynchronous collaboration is dominating the planning process, the synchronous phases play a more significant role: Here occurring problems involving the different parties are discussed and joint decisions are taken to solve them. For this reason, we focus on synchronous collaboration in this paper and present novel computational methods supporting it in the context of tunnel design.An important peculiarity of infrastructure design is that widely differing scales have to be considered – ranging from the kilometer scale for the general routing of the carriageway down to the centimeter scale for the detailed planning of individual track nodes.Today, these aspects are supported only to a very limited extent by currently available software tools for the planning of infrastructure projects. The majority of the projects still employ the conventional planning approach based on 2D technical drawings. This has a number of significant issues, including:•The consistency between the different 2D plans (top views, cross-sections, etc.) must be preserved manually. As these 2D plans must be produced at multiple scales and on different levels of detail, their mutual consistency again has to be preserved manually.In consequence, all plans have to be manually checked and updated, when modifications are made.These issues mean that the planning process is both laborious and error-prone, and that the engineers involved are forced to spend a disproportionate amount of time in dealing with minor administrative tasks and consistency preservation instead of being able to focus on the core engineering tasks.This paper presents a comprehensive methodological approach for improving computer support for the planning of infrastructure projects that has the potential to overcome these limitations. In our investigations, we have focused on the following aspects:•holistic application of 3D modeling techniques for the geometric design of the infrastructure project,development of a formal method for multi-scale modeling which supports automated consistency preservation between the different scales (each scale is represented by a dedicated level of detail),coherent coupling of semantic descriptions with multi-scale geometric models,techniques for supporting synchronous collaborative work on the basis of shared multi-scale models, including the development of locking mechanisms which allow engineers to work concurrently without disturbing one another and avoid to violate the consistency of the overall model.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 we introduce a new methodology for the inherently consistent multi-scale modeling of infrastructure projects which relies on the application of parametric modeling techniques for establishing dependencies between the different levels-of-detail. Based on this methodology, we describe a comprehensive data model in Section 3 with which it is possible to describe the primary track model, the multi-scale geometric model as well as the associated semantics in a three-fold data structure. This data model forms the basis for an infrastructure design collaboration platform which we describe in detail in Section 4. The paper concludes with a real-world case study: the second main subway track in Munich, Germany, which is currently in planning. We have applied our methodology to this project in order to prove its general suitability.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, a new methodology was introduced that makes it possible to create inherently consistent multi-scale models and to use them for synchronous engineering collaboration. The core concept is the definition of dependencies between geometry objects on different LoDs by using procedural geometry representations. The implementation of the concept is based on the application of parametric modeling techniques. The methodology is general and applicable to a wide range of infrastructure project types.In this study, we have focused on applying the multi-scale methodology for modeling shield tunnels. We presented how procedural geometry can be used to create an inherently consistent multi-scale tunnel model and discussed how it can be integrated with a corresponding semantic data model.We proposed a collaboration platform, which enables different planners to participate concurrently in the planning process. The procedural models’ neutral data format facilitates the usage of different proprietary modeling tools that the involved planners are accustomed to, while the concept of different levels of detail enables the planners to undertake specialized modeling tasks at their own specific level of abstraction. To enable different planners to work simultaneously on the shared multi-scale model we proposed a concurrency approach based on a locking strategy using the model inherent acyclic dependency graph.We applied the methodology in a real-world case study – the second main subway track in Munich, Germany. The case study conducted proves the general feasibility of the approach.An open question that has yet been not tackled is the possibility to propagate modifications made at finer LoDs to coarser ones. This requires the bi-directional modeling of dependencies and will be the subject of future research.