@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An ideation method for generating new product ideas using TRIZ, concept mapping, and fuzzy linguistic evaluation techniques

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper presents an ideation methodology for generating new product ideas.The Su-field enhanced concept mapping diagram is used to clarify potential problems.TRIZ methods are employed to abstract inventive problems and generate novel product ideas.Promising product ideas are determined using fuzzy linguistic evaluation techniques.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Ideation,New product idea,TRIZ,Concept mapping,Fuzzy linguistic evaluation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The quality of initial ideas is considered a critical determinant for successful new product development (NPD). This study presents an ideation method for generating new product ideas. The aims of the proposed method are (1) to clarify and identify potential problems involved in the knowledge domain of the product design through the Su-field enhanced concept mapping diagram; (2) to abstract inventive problems and generate novel product ideas by means of the theory of inventive problem solving (TRIZ) methodology; and, (3) to develop an effective decision aiding method for evaluating alternative ideas and determining promising product ideas using fuzzy linguistic evaluation techniques. The applicability of the ideation method is demonstrated through a case study of an air purifier design. The theoretical and practical implications of the ideation method are also discussed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
New product development (NPD) is the complete process of bringing a new product to market. Since a new product cannot emerge without new product ideas, research on idea generation for new products has mainly been centered on the notion of creativity. How to effectively generate novel and useful product ideas continues to be a critical issue for both design scholars and practitioners. Ideation is the initial process of generating and identifying the core ideas of a concept. It encompasses all stages of a thought cycle, from creative formulation to innovative manifestation of ideas. Various ideation methods have been developed and employed in the literature, such as brainstorming, lateral thinking, and synectics. These techniques generally increase the idea productivity of participants by guiding the direction and quality of their thoughts; however, relatively little emphasis has been given to structuring the outcomes of these techniques. Structured methods used to generate ideas include attribute listing, forced relationships, and morphological analysis, all of which seek to restructure a problem to facilitate creative solutions. Pictorial methods for organizing knowledge and developing creative thinking include mind maps and concept maps. The former is based on radial hierarchies and tree structures denoting relationships with a central governing concept, whereas the latter is based on connections between concepts in more diverse patterns.Previous research has indicated that the difficulty with idea generation techniques in general is that there is very little theoretical and empirical evidence that clearly points out direct benefits from their use [1,2]. Conventional ideation methods for generating new product ideas are sensitive to the demographic profiles and life style biases of respondent groups. Most of them involve intuitive belief systems with more or less arbitrary sources rather than empirically validated theory. Previous research has also suggested that a prerequisite for developing better idea generation procedures is to achieve a fundamental understanding of how ideas actually come into being through conceiving the characteristics of the cognitive processes and structures [3,4]. On the other hand, theory treats idea generation in design as a special type of problem solving activity, which is grounded on ill-defined problems [5,6]. Problem solving is a mental and cognitive process that includes problem finding and problem shaping. Problem definitions play a vital role in the problem solving and idea generation process since the quality of idea solutions depends highly on precise problem definitions. However, conventional ideation methods emphasize the importance of a contextual survey with respect to problem solving; most of them resolve problems based on paradigmatic problems (e.g., 5WH, SCAMPER, and Compass), and do not provide a conceptualized reflective manner for defining problems.In addition to idea generation, a holistic ideation method requires an effective evaluation to identify promising ideas. Idea evaluation is a systematic determination of merit, worth, and significance within the alternative ideas using criteria against a set of rules or standards. It is a distinct process, in contrast to idea generation, and as such involves uniquely identifiable mental operations [7–9]. There are a variety of idea evaluation tools and techniques that are commonly employed in the literature, such as NAF (Novelty, Attractiveness, and Feasibility) study, PMI (Plus/positive, Minus/negative, and Interesting) analysis, force field analysis, and impact analysis. Although these techniques are simple to use, their weakness is that the evaluations are often based on the evaluators’ subjective opinions. AHP-based approach is a sophisticated technique for evaluating ideas; however, it involves complex procedures for deriving the weights of criteria and requires that evaluators remain consistent in making pairwise comparisons among numerous decision criteria [10–14]. Idea evaluation involves the human perceptual interpretation with some uncertainty and imprecision, and can be iterated a few times since the ideas derived during the idea generation process are often abstract, conceptual, non-quantifiable, and unpredictable. How to develop an effective method to assist designers in evaluating product ideas is a critical issue for both academic and industrial circles.A holistic ideation method involves both the generation and evaluation of ideas. The former is focused on using insight to formulate an idea, while the latter is concerned primarily with the manifestation or implementation of the proposed idea. Conventional ideation methods mainly focus on the effectiveness of problem solving and idea generation but do not provide a structured conceptualization manner to formulate potential problems, avert trial-and-error iterations, and identify promising product ideas. Accordingly, this paper presents an ideation method for generating new product ideas, the purpose of which is to develop an effective idea generation and evaluation method that integrates TRIZ, concept mapping, and fuzzy linguistic evaluation techniques into a holistic methodology. This method can be used to assist designers in developing novel product ideas based on semantic technologies. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the theoretical background of TRIZ, concept map, and fuzzy linguistic evaluation, respectively. Section 3 describes the proposed ideation method. An empirical study is conducted in Section 4 to verify the applicability of the proposed method. A discussion is given in Section 5 and conclusions and recommendations for further research are offered in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The ideation quality is a very important determinant for a successful NPD task. It includes both the generation and evaluation of new product ideas conducted in the early stages of NPD. The generation of new product ideas requires both creativity and long-range forecasting abilities, whereas the evaluation of new product ideas inevitably encounters a high level of uncertainty. This study presented an ideation method for assisting designers in developing novel product ideas. In the proposed method, Su-field enhanced concept mapping diagrams are used as a meaning-centered technique to clarify and identify the potential problems involved in the knowledge domain of the product design. TRIZ methods are employed as knowledge-based guidelines to support design strategies as well as generate novel product ideas. Alternative ideas are evaluated using linguistic variables associated with the FWA aggregation operator. A case study showed that the proposed method is applicable to generating novel ideas and identifying promising ideas for innovative product designs based on semantic technologies.Product design is a complex problem-solving activity used to provide descriptions of physical structures that perform specified functions. TRIZ empowers designers with constructive guidelines for developing innovative product ideas through the implementation of analogical association. However, as mentioned above, individuals vary in the quantity and quality of the relevant domain knowledge, and also in the strength of their analogical reasoning abilities to seek ways to convert the TRIZ guidelines into concrete product ideas. The core of analogical reasoning stresses the process of mapping, which is crucial in allowing the useful transfer of domain knowledge. The technique of analogical mapping can be used to find appropriate correspondences between sources and target analogs. Based on the proposed ideation method, further research could focus on developing an analogical mapping technique to assist designers in transferring their relevant domain knowledge and determining the best correspondence between objects and relations in TRIZ solution domains and those in product idea domains.