@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Computational modeling of acrylodan-labeled cAMP dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit unfolding

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Structure of acrylodan-labeled protein kinase A catalytic subunit was modeled.Calculations were made at temperatures from 300 to 700K to model protein unfolding.Positioning of the reporter group was significantly changed during protein unfolding.Molten globule formation was observed between the native and unfolded protein structures

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Protein kinase A,Acrylodan label,Fluorescence assay,Protein unfolding,Intermediate,molten globule,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Structure of the cAMP-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit, where the asparagine residue 326 was replaced with acrylodan-cystein conjugate to implement this fluorescence reporter group into the enzyme, was modeled by molecular dynamics (MD) method and the positioning of the dye molecule in protein structure was characterized at temperatures 300K, 500K and 700K. It was found that the acrylodan moiety, which fluorescence is very sensitive to solvating properties of its microenvironment, was located on the surface of the native protein at 300K that enabled its partial solvation with water. At high temperatures the protein structure significantly changed, as the secondary and tertiary structure elements were unfolded and these changes were sensitively reflected in positioning of the dye molecule. At 700K complete unfolding of the protein occurred and the reporter group was entirely expelled into water. However, at 500K an intermediate of the protein unfolding process was formed, where the fluorescence reporter group was directed towards the protein interior and buried in the core of the formed molten globule state. This different positioning of the reporter group was in agreement with the two different shifts of emission spectrum of the covalently bound acrylodan, observed in the unfolding process of the protein.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Acrylodan (6-acryloyl-2-dimethylaminonaphthalene), when covalently bound to a cystein residue of a native or mutated protein, is a useful fluorescent probe for investigation into the protein structural dynamics, as the emission spectrum of this dye is highly sensitive to changes of its environment (Prendergast et al., 1983). In water the emission spectrum of the acrylodan adduct with model thiol compounds was characterized with the λmax value 540nm (Prendergast et al., 1983), and significant blue-shift was observed if this dye was transferred into water-free polar organic solvents acetone (λmax=465nm), dimethyl formamide (λmax=470nm) and acetonitrile (λmax=468nm) (Kawski et al., 2002). The fluorescence spectrum of acrylodan, which was covalently attached to cAMP-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit (PKAc), was characterized by the λmax value 496nm (Lew et al., 1997; Kivi et al., 2013). This result was similar to the spectral data for acrylodan-labeled parvalbumin (λmax=498nm) and papain (λmax=491nm) (Prendergast et al., 1983). Therefore it could be suggested that the reporter group was only partially accessible to water if bound to these proteins. Moreover, the emission spectrum of the protein bound acrylodan was red-shifted in the presence of specific ligands of these enzymes, indicating that conformational changes induced by ligand binding partially extruded the fluorophore from the protein interior into surrounding water (Prendergast et al., 1983). This conclusion was in agreement with the fact that transfer of the acrolydan-labeled troponin into 6M guanidine hydrochloride solution, where the protein structure was completely unfolded, shifted the λmax value to 532nm that was close to the emission spectrum of the dye in water medium (Prendergast et al., 1983). In the case of acrylodan-labeled PKAc similar shift of λmax to 520nm occurred in 4M guanidine hydrochloride solution (our unpublished data).In this study we performed computer modeling of the acrylodan-labeled PKAc structure and characterized positioning of the reporter group in the native enzyme, and also in protein structures modeled at high temperatures, where partial or complete destabilization of the secondary and tertiary structure elements emulated the protein unfolding process. It was found that dissolution of protein structure was, indeed, accompanied with alteration of positioning of the covalently attached acrylodan molecule, and these changes revealed formation of an intermediate state on the protein unfolding pathway, which could be characterized as a molten globule of this protein.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In the present work MD simulations were made to differentiate the “molten globule” and unfolded state of cAMP-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit, covalently labeled with acrylodan. The attached dye molecule acted as a reporter group, which fluorescence properties were sensitive to its micro-environment. Therefore it would be possible to compare the results of computational analysis with changes of experimental excitation spectra of the fluorophore. It was concluded that the folding/unfolding pathway of the enzyme should include intermediate, which has lost the enzymatic activity, but retained hydrophobic core and several elements of the enzyme secondary structure, as is expected in the case of protein “molten globule” intermediates.The main details of the computational work were published previously (Izvolski et al., 2013) and were briefly summarized below. The data for modeling of PKAc were taken from entry “1ATP” of the PDB database, where the atomic coordinates for PKAc ternary complex with AMP-PNP and PKI(5–24) were listed. This complex included two Mn ions (Zeng et al., 1993). Write errors in the PDB database for this complex were adjusted using the WHAT_IF software suite (Hooft et al., 1996). For MD modeling the Mn ions were replaced by Mg ions in all calculations. To obtain atomic coordinates for modeling the free enzyme, the nucleotide and peptide atoms were removed from the structure and the set of atomic coordinates was used for structure optimization.For modeling of the acrylodan labeled protein, the Asn326 residue was replaced by Cys moiety, covalently modified with acrylodan. The atomistic model of the acrylodan-Cys adduct was constructed by ChemSketch version 12 software (Advanced Chemistry Development, Inc., Canada). The initial geometry and atom charges of the acrylodan-Cys adduct were calculated by using the Spartan version 4.0 software suite (Wavefunction, Inc., USA). Conformational searches were carried out by using molecular mechanics with additional condition of aqueous medium for finding stable geometry. Final conformational search was done by semi-empirical method AM1. Atomic charges were calculated by using Hartree–Fock method with 6-31G(d) basis set. Parameterization of bond lengths, planar and dihedral angles for the fluorophore molecule was done manually using GROMOS53a6 force field parameterization set.The molecular dynamic simulations of the protein were realized by GROMACS version 4.5.4 simulation package (Hess et al., 2008) that included analysis tools of protein dynamics. The routine of MD simulations was defined in our previous work (Izvolski et al., 2013). The constrained bond lengths and angles, torsion angles, atomic point charges, and van der Waals parameters for the molecules were assigned using the GROMOS53a6 force field parameter set (Oostenbrink et al., 2004). The GROMOS53a6 force field was expanded by two phosphorylated amino acids – phosphorylated serine (SEP) and phosphorylated threonine (TPO) – which was needed to evaluate the presence of these two physiologically important phosphorylated amino acids in the PKAc structure. The temperature values 300K, 500K and 700K were selected to set up the thermostat for modeling of the enzyme unfolding. Analysis of MD trajectories was used to follow up the denaturation processes. This analysis was carried out by the gyrate tool of the GROMACS package that calculated the average size of protein globule at every point of molecular dynamics.The SAS tool of the same CROMACS package was used for calculation of the solvent accessible surface area values for the protein coupled acrylodan and for the same dye coupled to cysteine residue.