@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Binding energies of tyrosine kinase inhibitors: Error assessment of computational methods for imatinib and nilotinib binding

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors.Quantum mechanics.Binding energies.Error assessment.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors,Nilotinib,Imatinib,Quantum mechanics,Binding energies,Error assessment,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The binding energies of imatinib and nilotinib to tyrosine kinase have been determined by quantum mechanical (QM) computations, and compared with literature binding energy studies using molecular mechanics (MM). The potential errors in the computational methods include these critical factors:•Errors in X-ray structures such as structural distortions and steric clashes give unrealistically high van der Waals energies, and erroneous binding energies.•MM optimization gives a very different configuration to the QM optimization for nilotinib, whereas the imatinib ion gives similar configurations•Solvation energies are a major component of the overall binding energy. The QM based solvent model (PCM/SMD) gives different values from those used in the implicit PBSA solvent MM models. A major error in inhibitor—kinase binding lies in the non-polar solvation terms.•Solvent transfer free energies and the required empirical solvent accessible surface area factors for nilotinib and imatinib ion to give the transfer free energies have been reverse calculated. These values differ from those used in the MM PBSA studies.•An intertwined desolvation—conformational binding selectivity process is a balance of thermodynamic desolvation and intramolecular conformational kinetic control.•The configurational entropies (TΔS) are minor error sources.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Protein kinases have been the focus for many drug-based cancer treatments. Tyrosine kinases are enzymes responsible for the activation of many proteins by signal transduction cascades. The proteins are activated by adding a phosphate group to the protein (phosphorylation). Tyrosine kinase inhibitors can compete with adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the phosphorylating entity, the substrate, or both, or can act in an allosteric fashion, by binding to a site outside the active site, affecting its activity by a conformational change. Targeting the tyrosine kinases that regulate cell growth and proliferation has been very productive, as witnessed by the success of inhibitors such as imatinib mesylate, or Gleevec, and nilotinib, or Tasigna, for the treatment of both chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST). BCR-ABL is the oncogenic protein-tyrosine kinase responsible for the pathogenesis of chronic myelogenous leukemia (American Cancer Society, 2013; Okuno, 2011). Development of new tyrosine kinase inhibitors to overcome resistance, or improved efficacy, requires an understanding of the binding efficiency and effectiveness of the inhibitor with the tyrosine kinase. Nilotinib is a second generation inhibitor which is similar to imatinib, but 30 times more effective in treating CML.The computation of binding free energies between small molecule ligands and proteins is a difficult task since the binding energy usually involves small differences amongst large enthalpies and entropies related to the free and bound states of protein and the ligand. Inter-atomic forces are strong and short ranged, resulting in steep energy functions that are strongly dependent on molecular conformation. Proteins and ligands are usually very flexible, having many degrees of freedom, making conformational energy profiles very dominant contributing factors. Solvation effects can be very large for both free and bound protein and ligand, including protonation and salt effects. Dispersion or van der Waals and hydrophobic effects between ligands and proteins can also be large. It is also conceivable that small configurational changes (including molecular strain) in bond lengths and angles might occur during binding, which might have significant energy impacts (Gilson and Zhou, 2007; Mobley and Dill, 2009; Kuriyan et al., 2008; Bissantz et al., 2010). These effects will have large first order effects in any calculation. Second order effects include translational, rotational, vibrational, and repulsive effects, which are known to be smaller.Enthalpic contributions to binding free energy are driven by the strength and directed specificity of ionic, polar, hydrogen bond, electrostatic (coulombic), van der Waals and polarization interactions. These interactions usually have small entropy contributions. Changes in binding entropy include small configurational translational and rotational processes, somewhat larger conformational processes, or much larger solvent effects (which include desolvation or rearrangement during binding). The enthalpy changes (in vacuo or gas phase) between the protein and ligand before and after binding closely approximates the free energy of binding interaction, less any configurational entropy change, which may be significant. Gilson has suggested that configurational entropy (TΔS) between the free and bound ligand can be a loss of ca. 25kcal/mol (vibrational entropy and conformational entropy differences of 24.6 and 1.8kcal/mol, respectively) on amprenavir ligand binding to HIV protease, using a M2 mining minima method (Gilson and Zhou, 2007, Eq. (7)). The M2 method is based on calculating binding free energies, potential energy wells and solvation free energies, assuming molecules are rigid rotator/harmonic oscillators, and using force field energies. It is not known what errors are involved in all these assumptions, and the use of empirical force field energies which have no electrons, so cannot evaluate excited electronic or delocalized states. Often force field parameters have to be generated for specific inhibitor molecules during an investigation, when using molecular mechanics methods calibrated for protein molecules. In addition, various conformational states of the studied inhibitor would need specific force field parameters to be generated for the different states for each calculation which might be used in a molecular dynamics simulation (Mackerell, 2004). Real large molecules are far from rigid rotators/harmonic oscillators, and it has been shown (Carpinelli et al., 2015) that anharmonic, not-separable, ro-vibrational states must be considered. The contribution of electronically excited states, which have their own ro-vibrational states, have important roles.The free energies involved in solvation processes before and after binding can be calculated using the well established PCM/SMD quantum mechanical solvation model to compare solvation energies in vacuo and water (Marenich et al., 2009). This approach would be more rigorous than the solvent models typically used in molecular mechanics based methods (PBSA, GBSA) used to investigate protein-inhibitor binding, which comprise an electrostatic component and a non-polar component based on an arbitrary solvent accessible surface area (SASA) factor usually somewhere between 5 and 45cal/mol/Å2. Explicit solvent models require empirical interaction potentials between the solvent and solute, and between solvent molecules.The computational methodologies used (Gilson and Zhou, 2007; Mobley and Dill, 2009) vary considerably, from docking and scoring techniques to those using advanced force fields, incorporating electronic polarization, i.e., iteratively adjusting partial atomic charges from quantum mechanical calculations during docking. Molecular mechanics force field calculations can handle large molecular systems, like proteins, but due to the empirical nature of force fields, the neglect of electrons, electron polarization and charge transfer are not accounted for explicitly. This can limit the accuracy with which interactions are calculated and consequently the free energies obtained. Ideally ab initio quantum chemistry approaches should be used as these explicitly include electrons, however quantum mechanics is not practicable for large proteins.Calculating the conformational energies vary from docking methods using one conformation to more sophisticated molecular mechanics—molecular dynamics techniques where the free ligand, free protein, and the complexed ligand–protein conformations are simulated using an explicit solvent model. The difference between energy minimized snapshots of free and bound molecules can be found in molecular dynamics calculations. This approach has to account for many possible low energy conformations by seeding the calculations with best guesses. Molecular mechanics force fields may not give the lowest energy conformation, due to their empirical shortcomings and difficulties with parameter optimization particularly for conformational states (Mackerell, 2004). Force field energy minimizations can result in strained torsional angles, as torsion angles are the softest conformational parameters, and have the largest effects on molecular geometries (Brameld et al., 2008). Molecules which have significant ability to maximize π electronic delocalization over multiple aromatic rings, as found in nilotinib and imatinib, could show large conformational energy differences by using quantum mechanical energy minimization compared to force field energies.The conformational structure of the protein binding pocket is a crucial factor which defines inhibitor effectiveness (Seeliger et al., 2007; Aleksandrov and Simonson, 2010; Lin et al., 2013). Imatinib is known to bind 2400 times less tightly (experimentally measured 4.6kcal/mol penalty) to the c-SRC form (DFG-in) of tyrosine kinase than to the closely related c-ABL form (DFG-out), even though the X-ray crystal structures of both complexes are very similar. It has been shown that c-SRC can adopt the inactive ABL conformation which gives strong binding, but the free energy between these conformational states for the c-SRC is the dominant factor. The 4.6kcal/mol difference in binding energies between the c-SRC and c-ABL forms has been shown to almost the same (4.4kcal/mol) as the difference between the DGF-out and DFG-in conformations of the c-SRC kinase, suggesting that conformational selection is the main source of imatinib binding selection (Aleksandrov and Simonson, 2010).Electrostatic interactions in molecular mechanics force fields are commonly calculated from quantum mechanical Merz Kollman (MK)/RESP partial charges. Comparisons of MK, RESP and CHELPG methods show very similar performances (Sigfridsson and Ryde, 1998). However Sigfridsson and Ryde (1998) has shown that the MK method showed a significant rotational dependence on the orientation of the grid coordinate system (0.04–0.05e), whereas CHELPG showed a lesser rotational dependence, as it was specifically designed to remove such dependence (Breneman and Wiberg, 1990). Hence use of MK/RESP charges may induce some errors when calculating electrostatic interactions as inputs into force field calculations.The starting point for any calculation of binding energies is an X-ray structure of the complexed ligand–protein complex. However it has been shown (Davis et al., 2008) that published X-ray structures suffer from many problems, including poor fits, such that conformations and configurations (bond lengths, angles etc.) can be unrealistic and highly distorted. Amides can be cis or non-planar, and even planar aromatic rings can be deformed. There can be severe steric clashes in the X-ray structure which are not easily apparent. It has been shown (Thompson and Day, 2014) that molecular strain can be induced by intermolecular interactions in single-component crystal structures of molecules with no intramolecular hydrogen bonding, resulting in some molecules being distorted by up to 5kcal/mol by crystal packing forces. As inter-molecular hydrogen bonding is involved in inhibitor—protein binding, large distortions may occur due to crystal packing forces. Literature references often contain statements to the effect that anomalous bond lengths (orders) and angles were “corrected” prior to calculation of binding energies. The other major issue is the need to add hydrogen atoms to X-ray structures, which can also induce errors in molecular geometry. In particular the location of H atoms that may be involved in hydrogen bonding are critical. The geometry of hydrogen bonds in proteins has been analysed. Baker and Hubbard (1984) and Hubbard (2001) found that 90% of analysed NHO hydrogen bonds in the PDB structure data bank have bond angles about 158°, and most analysed COH hydrogen bonds have angles about 129°. Morozov et al. (2004) in a later examination of the high resolution X-ray PDB data bank found the average bond angle for single hydrogen bonds was around 110–120°. The extent of these errors in the X-ray structures and their effect on calculated binding energies is unknown, and may be large if configurational or molecular geometry distortions are also present.This study will focus on using established quantum mechanical methods to examine how possible distortions of ligand and protein structure from published X-ray structures can affect binding energy calculations for the tyrosine kinase inhibitors, nilotinib and imatinib, and compares these results from recent molecular mechanics—molecular dynamics studies. An assessment of potential errors in the different computational methods will be made. Accurate calculations of drug—protein binding are essential tools in understanding and predicting how new drugs might behave in vivo. An understanding of the various component energies that contribute to the overall binding energy can allow drug designers to better target desirable features required in potential new drugs.Atom labeling scheme for Nilotinib.Nilotinib: 4-methyl-N-[3-(4-methyl-1H-imidazol-1-yl)-5-(trifluoromethyl)phenyl]-3-[(4-pyridin-3-ylpyrimidin-2-yl)amino]benzamide. Imatinib: 4-[(4-methylpiperazin-1-yl) methyl]-N-(4-methyl-3-{[4-(pyridin-3-yl)pyrimidin-2-yl]amino}phenyl)benzamide. The ion is protonated at the 4-methyl piperazinyl N atom.All calculations were carried out using the Gaussian 09 package. Electrostatic potential at nuclei for solutions were calculated using the CHELPG method in Gaussian 09. The atomic charges produced by CHELPG are not strongly dependant on basis set selection. Using the B3LYP level of theory, calculated atomic charges were almost invariant amongst the basis sets 6-31G(d), 6-311(d,p), 6-311+(2d,2p), 6-311G++(3df,3dp) (Martin and Zipse, 2005; Kubelka, 2015). Errors between calculated and experimental dipole moments were 3%. A potential weakness of CHELPG (and other methods to calculate electrostatic charges at nuclei from the molecular electrostatic potential, MEP, around the molecule) is the treatment of larger systems, in which some of the innermost atoms are located far away from the points at which the MEP is evaluated. However, this study is concerned with charges at the molecular surface, and how such charges interact with solvents, or other atomic charges on molecules near the surface of the molecules. Test cases to probe for anomalous charges on “buried” atoms were conducted by removing “outer” non-hydrogen bonding residues and rerunning calculations where just hydrogen bonding residues interacted with the ligand, such that the atoms involved directly in hydrogen bonding were more exposed to the MEP grid. One example was found where the Thr315OHHN31(Ar)(Pyrim) hydrogen bond energies are artificially low, as a result of the bond being “buried” away from the MEP grid used in the CHELPG algorithm. Finally high absolute computational accuracy is not the objective of this study, comparative differences amongst physical and chemical interactions, particularly in solution, are the foci of the study.Riley et al. (2007) have shown that for small molecules commonly found in large biological molecules such as proteins, that atomic and molecular properties (such as bond lengths and angles, ionization potentials, electron affinities, heats of formation and hydrogen bond interaction energies) modelled by DFT using 6-31G*/6-31G** and the correlation consistent basis sets aug-cc-pVxZ showed very similar results. Studies of the accuracy of DFT functionals on biological hydrogen bonded systems have shown that B3LYP compares favorably with the MP2 functional (Sapse, 1998; Sponer and Lankas, 2006), and is comparable with other DFT functionals, though may slightly underestimate bond energies (Li et al., 2009; van der Wijst et al., 2006), but gives the best performance in calculating relative hydrogen energies. In this study, hydrogen bond energies are calculated from the electrostatic atomic charges, not by DFT energies.All solvent calculations were at the B3LYP/6-31G*(6d, 7f) level of theory, using optimized geometries, as this level has been shown to give accurate electrostatic atomic charges, and was used to optimize the IEFPCM/SMD solvent model. Where a solvent study was carried to compare different solvents, the same optimized solute geometry was used. With the 6-31G* basis set, the SMD model achieves mean unsigned errors of 0.6–1.0kcal/mol in the solvation free energies of tested neutrals and mean unsigned errors of 4kcal/mol on average for ions (Marenich et al., 2009). It has been found that the B3LYP/6-31G+* combination gives reasonably accurate PCM and SMD solvation energies for some highly polar polyfunctional molecules, which are not further improved using higher level basis sets (Rayne and Forest, 2010).Adding diffuse functions to the 6-31G* basis set (i.e., 6-31+*) had no significant effect on the solvation energies with a difference of ca 1% observed, which is within the literature error range for the IEFPCM/SMD solvent model.Rizzo et al. (2006) have also used the 6-31G* basis set with CHELPG charges (compared with 7 other atomic charge models) to calculate absolute free energies of solvation and compare these data with experimental results for more than 500 neutral and charged compounds. The calculated values were in good agreement with experimental results across a wide range of compounds. Sigfriddson has also compared CHELPG and MK electrostatic charges using the 6-31G* basis set, and found similar results with both methods, but the MK charges showed an appreciable rotational dependence on the orientation (within the co-ordinate system) of the molecule, which was much smaller in the CHELPG method. Charges calculated using the B3LYP and MP2 functionals showed comparable results. Kubelka (2015) and Martin and Zipse (2005) have shown that there is only a small dependence of electrostatic charges on the size of the basis sets (from 6-31G* to aug-cc-pV6Z) other than for very small basis sets (e.g., 3-21G, and to small extent 6-31G). The correlated methods B3LYP. MP2 and QCISD gave comparable performance.Other recent studies (Treitel et al., 2004,b; Bauza et al., 2013a,b; Matczak and Łukomska, 2014) have shown that weak non-covalent interactions, including those involving anionic halogens, are only moderately affected by the addition of diffuse functions. The use of polarized correlation-consistent basis sets e.g., cc-pVXZ (X=D, T, etc.) can improve the accuracy of grid based electrostatic potential methods such as CHELPG and MK (Martin and Zipse, 2005). Roy et al. (2012) has shown that the B3LYP functional can account for dispersion and induction interactions in intermolecular complexes as well as functionals (e.g., MP2) designed to treat dispersion.Generally for the calculation of hydrogen and polar bond binding energies in this study, there were only small differences between the CHELPG electrostatic atomic charges with the 6-31G*, 6-31G** and the correlation-consistent cc-pVDZ basis sets. An investigation of the addition of diffuse functions viz. aug-cc-pVDZ on calculated hydrogen and polar bond interactions (using the CHELPG atomic charges) showed that the side by side comparisons of hydrogen bond and polar bond energies using the diffuse aug-cc-pVDZ and cc-pVDZ basis sets were very similar, despite the overall molecular energy being lower for the aug-cc-pVDZ case as expected. This was demonstrated by an ONIOM calculation with the low level layer using the cc-pVDZ basis set, and the high level layer for the directly interacting group atoms of the hydrogen bond (e.g., COHN, NH−OC(O), NHN(pyridinyl), etc.) using the aug-cc-pVDZ basis set. This finding is consistent with previous studies that diffuse functions are not always necessary for (anionic) molecules which have a high degree of resonance delocalization, nor for weak non-covalent interactions such as hydrogen and polar bonds. It has been found (Treitel et al., 2004) that diffuse functions had a negligible effect on energy, geometry and charges for anions where conjugation or delocalization of the negative charge was occurring. The inhibitors in this study have high degrees of aromatic conjugation, and the carboxylate anion of the glutamic acid 286 residue which engages in hydrogen bonding with the amide N14H of nilotinib has a delocalized carboxylate structure (with both CO bonds having almost identical bond lengths in the complexed state in the X-ray structures).Dougherty (2007) has shown that π interactions involving the π electron cloud of an aromatic ring with a interacting molecule involve coulombic interactions caused by the H–C dipoles of the aromatic ring which create the π electron cloud over the ring. The π interactions were estimated by averaging the pairs of attractive coulombic interactions between the carbon and hydrogen atoms of tyrosine 253 and the C30 and its hydrogen atom of the pyrimidine ring. The pair interactions between CH of phenylalanine 382 and the N40 of the pyrimidine ring of nilotinib were averaged.Several tests for any basis set superposition error involving nilotinib and a hydrogen bonded residues (tyrosine, methionine at the X-ray determined distances) revealed no significant counterpoise errors at the B3LYP/cc-pVDZ level of theory in the gas phase.All inhibitors used in this study were downloaded from the PDB. The nilotinib-tyrosine kinase X-ray structure 3CS9 and the imatinib-tyrosine kinase X-ray structures (1IEP and 2HYY) were used in the binding studies, with all residues too far away (>7–8Å) from nilotinib to hydrogen/polar bond, or π stacked, being removed, along with all water molecules (Weisberg and Manley et al., 2005; Atomistry, 2015). To test whether the binding interactions were subjected to any “buried” effects where inner atoms were shielded from the MEP grid used by CHELPG, a layered approach was used to test for consistency, using at first all amino acid residues surrounding to nilotinib or imatinib, (i.e., residues directly hydrogen bonded to the ligand and other residues which are within van der Waals distance of the ligand) then removing residues that were not hydrogen bonded to the ligand. The electrostatic hydrogen bonding energy calculations did not show major discrepancies with this approach. Molecular mechanics optimizations were carried out using the Gaussview force field with empirical parameters kept constant for all optimizations.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The binding energies of imatinib and nilotinib to tyrosine kinase have been determined by quantum mechanical (QM) computations, and compared with literature binding energy studies using molecular mechanics (MM) or molecular mechanics/molecular dynamics methods.An assessment of potential errors in the computational methods has been made which indicates the following critical factors:•Much care must be taken when using published X-ray structures as the starting basis for determining binding energies, as it has been shown that two PDB structures 1IEP and 2HYY for the same imatinib–tyrosine kinase complex give vastly different binding energies owing to artificial structural distortions in the 1IEP structure. The structural distortions are steric clashes which give unrealistically high van der Waals energies. The 2HYY structure which has far fewer structural distortions gives a binding energy close to the experimental value.Surprisingly, the very different QM and MM/MD computational methods give binding energies close to experimental values, despite very different component contributions to the overall binding energy.It has been shown by comparing QM and MM optimised structures for nilotinib and imatinib ion in water for the free and complexed states that the MM optimisation gives a very different configuration to the QM optimisation for nilotinib, whereas the imatinib ion gives similar configurations. This finding reinforces the known weakness of empirical MM methods in determining the lowest energy configurational conformation, implying MM based binding energies may be suspect as a result.Solvation energies have been shown to be a major component contributing to the overall binding energy. The established and validated QM based solvent model (PCM/SMD) used in this study gives quite different values from those used in the implicit PBSA solvent models used in the MM based literature studies, which use an arbitrary empirical solvent accessible surface area factor, cal/(mol/Å2), to calculate the non-polar solvent contribution. A major error in inhibitor—kinase binding energy calculations lies in the non-polar solvation terms of the solvation calculations.Solvent transfer free energies have been calculated using the PCM/SMD model, and the required empirical solvent accessible surface area factors for nilotinib and imatinib ion to give the transfer free energies have been reverse calculated. These values are very different from those used in the MM PBSA studies, suggesting this area is a source of error in MM PBSA calculations.Comparison of the desolvation data of imatinib ion and the neutral nilotinib indicates that “pre-organisation” of the inhibitor prior to binding with tyrosine kinase is driven by the thermodynamics of desolvation and the kinetics of the available conformational states that can fit into the (possibly dynamic) kinase receptor pocket. An intertwined desolvation – conformational selectivity process for nilotinib and imatinib in their particular tyrosine kinase binding pockets is a balance of thermodynamic desolvation and intramolecular conformational kinetic control which results in the less stable conformations of the inhibitors becoming the dominant product in the complexes.The configurational entropy (TΔS) in water has been calculated for the imatinib ion from the free and bound configurations, and is similar to the MM literature values for imatinib (with one exception). As the QM or MM optimised imatinib ion gives similar conformations, the agreement with the literature TΔS values is expected. However the same result would not apply to nilotinib as the QM optimised structure is very different from the MM structure. These values fall within the literature range for TΔS for a wide range of protein-drug complexesThe author declares no conflict of interest.