@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Computer modeling of the dynamic properties of the cAMP-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Protein kinase A catalytic subunit was modeled using molecular dynamics computational methods.Structure of this protein as well as its complexes consisted of a large number of rapidly inter-converting conformations.The most mobile structure segments of the protein were located in the regions of substrate binding sites.The structure dynamics of protein kinase A was most significantly affected by the binding of the ATP and peptide ligand.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Molecular dynamics,cAMP-dependent protein kinase,Clustering of conformations,Ligand binding,Allostery,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The structural dynamics of the cAMP-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit were modeled using molecular dynamics computational methods. It was shown that the structure of this protein as well as its complexes with ATP and peptide ligand PKI(5-24) consisted of a large number of rapidly inter-converting conformations which could be grouped into subsets proceeding from their similarity. This cluster analysis revealed that conformations which correspond to the “opened” and “closed” structures of the protein were already present in the free enzyme, and most surprisingly co-existed in enzyme–ATP and enzyme–PKI(5-24) complexes as well as in the ternary complex, which included both of these ligands. The results also demonstrated that the most mobile structure segments of the protein were located in the regions of substrate binding sites and that their dynamics were most significantly affected by the binding of the ATP and peptide ligand.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Protein kinases play a central role in the regulation of most cellular processes and this explains the importance of understanding the regulation mechanisms of the activity and specificity of these enzymes. For different reasons the catalytic subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase, also denoted as protein kinase A (Hanks and Hunter, 1995), was selected as the model enzyme for these studies (Breitenlechner et al., 2004).Since 1991, when the first X-ray structure of this protein was resolved (Knighton et al., 1991a,b), many papers about the interrelationship between the catalytic properties and structure of this enzyme have been published. At the time of writing of this article the PDB database (Berman et al., 2000) returned 131 entries when searching for “cAMP-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit”. This list includes proteins purified from eight different organisms, and free enzyme structural data can be found for different enzyme–ligand complexes. The general message of all of these publications clearly emphasize that this protein has a highly dynamic structure. Moreover, the high degree of mobility of several parts of the free enzyme has hampered the establishment of the exact positioning of these amino acids, and therefore the structures obtained have been represented by a bunch of multiple peptide chains predominantly presenting the enzyme's core structure. Only co-crystallization of the enzyme with nucleotides and/or peptide ligands has improved the situation and enabled more precise structures to be obtained. Understandably, all of these X-ray structures present the static structure of this protein.The conclusion regarding the highly dynamic behavior of protein kinase A has also been confirmed using experimental methods which allow investigations into different aspects of the protein structure in solution, including hydrogen/deuterium exchange coupled with mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) (Burns-Hamuro et al., 2005), fluorescence anisotropy (Lew et al., 1997), small-angle X-ray scattering (Olah et al., 1993; Cheng et al., 2009), and circular dichroism (Reed and Kinzel, 1984). However, these studies have provided only a general understanding of the protein's dynamics and its role in the recognition of substrates and inhibitors. More specific conclusions about its structural dynamics can be drawn from NMR experiments, using chemical shifts to characterize changes in the location of particular atoms of amino acids and residue-by-residue conformational dynamics (Masterson et al., 2008; Langer et al., 2004). In the case of PKA this analysis has revealed significant shifts in the characteristic peaks of the free protein molecule in the process of complex formation with specific ligands, resembling the structure of the nucleotide substrate ATP, and peptide substrates and inhibitors (Masterson et al., 2008). Most importantly, these shifts were located in the specific regions of the protein molecule involved in binding these substrates and confirming the presence of highly dynamic areas in the protein structure.Although these results are rather precise and have been used to generate a picture of the structural changes accompanying different steps of the PKA-catalyzed reaction and molecular recognition of ligands (Engh et al., 1996; Masterson et al., 2010; Taylor et al., 2004), all of these conclusions still cover the behavior of the averaged enzyme structure. However, unlike this average structure the native structure of a protein may consist of a large number of rapidly inter-converting conformations, which may be grouped or clustered into subsets proceeding from the similarity or dissimilarity of their structures, and allowing a more convenient presentation of the structural and functional properties of the enzyme.The presence of conformational states, which are significantly different and thus can be grouped into appropriate clusters, may affect the observed catalytic behavior of the enzyme, if these structural differences are accompanied with differences in catalytic properties. Moreover, if these structural differences are flattened by an averaged structure of the protein, it may be impossible to understand the details of the catalytic mechanism and specificity, which might be governed by transitions between these clusters and structural dynamics within these clusters.These conformational clusters can be determined by using calculations of molecular dynamics (MD) which take into consideration the presence of several layers of water around the protein molecule, and thus should provide an adequate picture of the protein's dynamics under the set of given conditions. This understanding has motivated us to apply the MD methods in the computational modeling of a PKA-clustered structure for further analysis of the dynamic properties of this protein and its complexes with specific ligands.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The results of the MD simulation of PKA, its binary complexes with ATP or peptide PKI(5-24) and its ternary complex involving both of these ligands demonstrated that each of these states was covered by sets of protein conformations which can carry different functionalities and determine the overall behavior of the protein. These conformations were grouped into clusters based on their structural similarity, and this procedure simplified the analysis of the results of the MD simulation and was found to be an efficient tool for and visualization of the dynamism of the protein. The results demonstrated that the binding of the second ligand to the binary enzyme–ligand complex caused significant changes in the dynamics of the protein molecule, and there was no principal difference whether this ligand was nucleotide or peptide. Most interestingly, this phenomenon was actually observed in the kinetics of the PKA-catalyzed reaction of peptide phosphorylation, where the binding effectiveness of the second substrate was enhanced under conditions where another substrate was bound with the enzyme (Kuznetsov and Järv, 2009).The initial atomic coordinates for the modeling of the PKA structure were taken from entry 1ATP published for the PKA ternary complex with AMP–PNP and PKI(5-24) in the PDB database, including two Mn ions (Zheng et al., 1993). Write errors in the PDB database for this complex were adjusted using the WHAT_IF software suite (Hooft et al., 1996). For MD modeling the Mn ions were replaced by Mg ions in all calculations. To obtain atomic coordinates for modeling the free enzyme, the nucleotide and peptide atoms were removed from the structure and the set of atomic coordinates was used for structure optimization. Similarly, for the modeling of the enzyme–ATP complex the peptide was removed and AMP–PNP was reconstructed as ATP, while for the modeling of the enzyme–peptide complex the nucleotide analog AMP–PNP was deleted. The atomic coordinates for the ternary complex were obtained after replacement of AMP–PNP with ATP.The all-atom MD simulations were made using the GROMACS simulation package (Hess et al., 2008), version 4.5.4. The protonation of the protein was handled automatically by the GROMACS pdb2gmx tool, which takes the most common protonation state for an amino acid residue at pH 7. Thus, Lys was protonated, Asp and Glu were unprotonated, and His was kept neutral. The constrained bond lengths and angles, torsion angles, atomic point charges, and van der Waals parameters for the molecules were assigned using the GROMOS53a6 force field parameter set (Oostenbrink et al., 2004). The GROMOS53a6 force field was expanded by two phosphorylated amino acids – phosphorylated serine (SEP) and phosphorylated threonine (TPO) – which was needed to evaluate the presence of these two physiologically important phosphorylated amino acids in the PKA structure. Where ATP was included in the simulations, its atom charges and bond and angle parameters were defined using the PRODRG web service (Schüttelkopf and van Aalten, 2004). For each set-up the protein structure was solvated in a cubic box measuring 7.75nm×7.75nm×7.75nm with the SPC water model for solvent (Berendsen et al., 1987). Na+ and Cl− ions were added for system neutralization.At first the system was allowed to relax so as to equilibrate. The cell was first stirred in the NVT ensemble and, after that, in the NPT ensemble with constant pressure at 1atm and a temperature of 300K with a time step of 2fs. The temperature was controlled using the modified Berendsen thermostat algorithm (Berendsen et al., 1984) and pressure using the Parrinello–Rahman method (Parrinello and Rahman, 1981). Equilibrated simulations were performed on the systems for 10ns.Following the set-up of parameters the MD simulations were conducted for each protein state. Newton's equations of motion were integrated with the leap-frog algorithm with a time step of 2fs. For each subgroup (ions, water, protein and ligands) the temperature (300K) and isotropic pressure (1atm) were kept constant using the Berendsen coupling algorithm (Berendsen et al., 1984) with temperature time constants at 0.1ps and pressure time constants at 1ps, respectively. Interactions within the short range cut-off of 1.2nm were evaluated at every time step. Long-range electrostatic interactions were calculated using the particle mesh Ewald (PME) summation method (Darden et al., 1993), with a 6-order interpolation polynomial and a 1.2nm cut-off that were updated every 10 steps together with the pair-list. Bond lengths were constrained using the LINCS algorithm (Hess et al., 1997) for the protein. The set-ups were then simulated for 70ns.Cluster analysis of MD trajectories was used to avoid distortion of the globule by averaging the structure. Comparison of structures was performed based on criteria of the highest similarity. The root mean square distance based gromos clustering algorithm was used to cluster conformations (Daura et al., 1999).