@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
On the modelling and analysis of the regulatory network of dengue virus pathogenesis and clearance

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We used generalized logical approach introduced by Rene Thomas to study TLR3 mediated signaling pathway in dengue virus infection.We implement kinetic formalism of Rene Thomas along with Model Checking approaches to provide qualitative thresholds of entities in TLR3 associated Biological Regulatory Network of dengue virus, satisfying the biological observations.Qualitative model was analysed to observe the qualitative behaviours of the model.We incorporated delays in qualitative model to study the activation and inhibition orders of proteins by hybrid model checking tool HyTech.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Formal modelling,TLR3,Dengue,Type 1 interferons,SOCS-1,René Thomas,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Dengue virus can ignite both protective and pathogenic responses in human. The pathogenesis is related with modified functioning of our immune system during infection. Pattern recognition receptors like Toll like receptor 3 is vital for the induction of innate immunity in case of Dengue infection. Toll like receptor 3 induces TRIF mediated activation of Type 1 interferons and Fc receptor mediated induction of cytokines. Interferons have been related with clearance of Dengue virus but it has adopted modified regulatory mechanisms to counter this effect. SOCS protein is also induced due to the interferon and cytokine mediated signalling which can subsequently play its part in the regulation of interferon and cytokine production. Our hypothesis in this study relates the pathogenesis of Dengue virus with the SOCS mediated inhibition of our innate immunity. We used the qualitative formalism of René Thomas to model the biological regulatory network of Toll like receptor 3 mediated signalling pathway in an association with pathogenesis of dengue. Logical parameters for the qualitative modelling were inferred using a model checking approach implemented in SMBioNet. A linear hybrid model, parametric linear hybrid automaton, was constructed to incorporate the activation and inhibition time delays in the qualitative model. The qualitative model captured all the possible expression dynamics of the proteins in the form of paths, some of which were observed as abstract cycles (representing homoeostasis) and diverging paths towards stable states. The analysis of the qualitative model highlighted the importance of SOCS protein in elevating propagation of dengue virus through inhibition of type 1 interferons. Detailed qualitative analysis of regulatory network endorses our hypothesis that elevated levels of cytokine subsequently induce SOCS expression which in turn results into the continuous down-regulation of Toll like receptor 3 and interferon. This may result into the Dengue pathogenesis during the stage of immunosuppression. Further analysis with HyTech (HYbrid TECHnology) tool provided us with the real-time constraints (delay constraints) of the proteins involved in the cyclic paths of the regulatory network backing the evidence provided by the qualitative analysis. The HyTech results also suggest that the role of SOCS is vital in homoeostasis.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The incidences of dengue (DENV) fever have increased 30-fold in the last five decades (Deen et al., 2006). Today nearly 2.5 billion people, i.e. about 40 percent of the world population, is living in areas where there is a risk of DENV transmission. It has been reported as endemic in at least 100 countries (Guha-Sapir et al., 2005). According to a recent report of World Health Organization (WHO), around 50–100 million DENV infections occur per annum including 500,000 cases of DENV haemorrhagic fever (DHF) and 22,000 cases of mortality worldwide (C. for Disease Control, in press; Organization et al., 2014).Dengue virus belongs to the genus Flavivirus, family Flaviviridae. It has four serotypes including DENV-1, DENV-2, DENV-3 and DENV-4 (Atkinson, 2010; Organization et al., 2009). Transmission of the virus is mainly caused through the bites of the female Aedes aegypti mosquito. Female Aedes aegypti acquires this virus from the blood of an infected person (Rao and Durvasula, 2013; Kramer and Kauffman, 2008). The virus infects the mid-gut of the mosquito and transfers to the salivary glands over a period of 8–12 days, which then is transmitted to humans on next bite (Sam et al., 2013). The DENV virus after entering the systemic circulation replicates within the cell of mononuclear phagocyte lineage (macrophages, monocytes and B-cells). DENV infections may result in dengue fever (DF), dengue haemorrhagic fever (DHF), or dengue shock syndrome (DSS) marked with high fever, skin rash, headache and severe muscular and joint pains (Lam et al., 2013; Sam et al., 2013).Recent studies implicates that the course of DENV infection has been attributed to the innate immunity, particularly generated by the pattern-recognition receptors (PRRs) such as Toll-like receptors (TLRs) (De Kruif et al., 2008; Wang et al., 2006; Sun et al., 2009; Tsai et al., 2009). TLRs are the part of the innate immune system and activated by the recognition of pathogen associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) (Akira et al., 2006; Kawai and Akira, 2011). The study of Iwasaki and Medzhitov on human monocytic cells U937 strongly supports the role of TLR3 for inducing immune response against DENV (Iwasaki and Medzhitov, 2004). Fig. 1illustrates the possible signalling events generated by TLR3 during DENV infection. As key players of innate immunity, the recognition of several viruses via TLR is very important for the induction of various cytokines to avert pathogenesis (Iwasaki and Medzhitov, 2004). Several pro-inflammatory cytokines are induced as a result of the TLR3 activation and provide an interface between the innate and adaptive immune responses (Hoebe et al., 2004). Modulation of DENV infection by type 1 interferon alpha/beta (IFNα/β) has been suggested by observing DENV-infected patients and IFNα/β-receptor deficient mice (Ashour et al., 2009). In vitro analysis with several cell types and viral strains proved that DENV viral RNA decreased by multiple folds upon introduction of IFNα/β, however, IFN gamma (γ) showed variable responses depending on the cell type and signalling pathway (Diamond et al., 2000). At the early stage of viral infection, inflammatory response through PRRs provide dominant role in priming and regulating innate immune system (Kulka et al., 2004). Yi-Ting Sai et al. in their study demonstrated the role of TLR3 in mediating strong IFNα/β induction and subsequent inhibition of DENV viral replication, which limits its cytopathic effect (Tsai et al., 2009; Diamond et al., 2000). Type 1 interferons upon their interaction with IFN receptors elicit antiviral, anti-proliferative and immunomodulatory roles. Shresta et al. demonstrated critical and non-overlapping role of IFNα/β in resolving primary DENV infection in genetically deficient mice (Shresta et al., 2004).Expression of DENV non-structural (NS) proteins including NS2A, NS4A or NS4B in human cells support the elevated replication of an IFN sensitive virus (Muñoz-Jordán et al., 2003). Cells infested with NS4B protein or DENV do not exhibit IFN-α/β mediated induction of nuclear signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)1. By blocking STAT1 activities, NS4B protein of DENV may interfere with the IFNα/β mediated antiviral response (Muñoz-Jordán et al., 2003). These findings indicate that NS4B might be involved in blocking IFNα/β signalling during DENV infections.IFNα/β activate STAT1–STAT3 heterodimers (Qin et al., 2008), followed by SOCS1 and SOCS3 mediated down-regulation (Song and Shuai, 1998). Qin et al. implicated in their study about the up-regulation of IFN mediated induction of SOCS-1, which in return down-regulate IFN signalling and reduce the expression of CD40 cells (Qin et al., 2006; Song and Shuai, 1998). They also proposed the inhibitory mechanism of JAK/STAT phosphorylation which ultimately inhibit the vital signalling cascade for the induction of cytokines (Qin et al., 2006).Various studies have established the role of Antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) of dengue virus pathogenesis (Kliks et al., 1989). The pre-existing antibodies (Abs) are major contributors for development of DHF and DSS and fail in neutralizing the infecting serotype of DENV (Halstead, 2003). The Fc receptors (FcR) family offers a major example of how to promptly trigger, activation and inhibition of the signalling pathway to maintain harmony between innate and adaptive immune response (Ravetch and Lanier, 2000). In accumulation to their exact roles in prompting the activation of innate effector cells, FcγRs also play a role in the regulation of B-cell activation, antigen presentation and immune-complex mediated maturation of the dendritic cells (DCs) (Bolland and Ravetch, 1999). A new hypothesis termed as intrinsic ADE, suggests that DENV internalization via FcγR results in the induction of interleukin-10 (IL-10) production, biased T-helper-1 (Th)1 to Th2 response and suppression of innate immunity, which leads to both high levels of antibodies (Abs) and viral load in dengue patients (Ubol et al., 2010; Halstead et al., 2010). Fujii et al. in a recent study, suggested the up-regulation of IL-10 levels via FcγR (Fujii et al., 2013). As a consequence of ADE, complementary mechanism to higher viremia may be explained as FcγR mediated DENV entry due to suppressed antiviral immune response. In the case of DENV infection, suppressed levels of IL-12, IFNγ, TNFα and nitric oxide along with the elevated levels of anti-inflammatory cytokines tend to provide immunosuppressive environment for viral replication (Chareonsirisuthigul et al., 2007).Computational systems biology provides a compelling platform to answer critical scientific questions about signalling mechanisms based on pragmatic modelling and theoretical elucidation (Kitano, 2002). Multitude of biological facts have been uncovered by molecular biology including functional properties of the genes and proteins. However, for the interpretation of the dynamics of the biological system, these information require further investigation (Kitano, 2002). To understand the intrinsic complexity of biological systems experimental and computational approaches in combination are speculated to solve this problem (Kitano et al., 2001; Ideker et al., 2002). Various computational approaches assisted with the experimentally observed phenomenon in previous literature helped us to understand the behaviours of the complex biological regulatory networks involved in DENV replication and immune evasion (Ideker et al., 2002). A model that captures biological observations related to physiological and pathological conditions could also predict the underlying dynamics behind these observations: oscillations or cycles, stable states and bifurcation points. Interestingly, the bifurcation points (specific pattern of protein interactions), may play a role in leading the system towards pathogenic state, can provide us an insight about the useful therapeutic target. Thus, instead of targeting proteins in the pathogenic state (abnormal physiological state) drugs may target entities involved in the interactions causing the physiological abnormalities. We predicted with the help of a qualitative model the underlying causes of the hyper-inflammatory condition in the case of cerebral malaria (CM) pathogenesis (Ahmad et al., 2012). The model predicted that longer activation and interactions of two proteins BTK and MAL, and the pre-existing high levels of cytokines play key role in the pathogenesis of CM. The later hypothesis was validated with a study conducted by Franklin et al. (2011) (Khor et al., 2007; Hamann et al., 2009; Ferwerda et al., 2009; Ramasawmy et al., 2009) which emphasizes the relationship between elevated levels of inflammatory cytokines and CM. Our recent study (Paracha et al., 2014) shows a strong affinity of BTK with MAL protein. These studies suggest that the expression dynamics of the pathway should be studied in order to have an understanding of the behaviours of the systems and to predict drug targets which would ultimately increase our confidence about the potential drugs and would accelerate the drug design process.For the last few decades, formal methods have received the attention of researchers in various disciplines to formally model and verify complex systems. Model checking is an automatic formal verification technique which exhaustively explore dynamics of a system formally expressed as automata (M) to check whether it meets specifications formally expressed as formulas (Φ) (Clarke et al., 1999). Formally, a model checking process is represented asM⊨Φ. Verification could be carried out even if the system is parametric and in this case the values of the parameters are synthesised for the properties to be verified (Streck et al., 2012; Henzinger and Wong-Toi, 1995). Thus, parameter synthesis is another key feature of model checking.In the current study, TLR3 mediated signalling pathway has been studied using the generalized logical approach introduced by René Thomas (Thomas, 1991; Thomas et al., 1995). This approach represents the qualitative analysis of dynamic behaviour of the system with a focus on the feedback mechanisms.This approach is successfully applied on some other signalling systems including the MyD88-adapter-like (MAL) associated biological regulatory network (BRN) (Ahmad et al., 2012), control of differentiation process in helper T cells (Mendoza, 2006), control of organ differentiation in Arabidopsis thaliana flowers (Mendoza et al., 1999) and segmentation during embryogenesis in Drosophila melanogaster (Thieffry and Sanchez, 2002; Sanchez and Thieffry, 2003). Kinetic formalism of René Thomas and its implementation in GENOTECH (Ahmad et al., 2012) provided us an in silico approach to test hypotheses related to DENV pathogenesis. René Thomas’ logic relies on the discretization of expression levels which can be determined by the qualitative thresholds. The evolution of these levels are driven by the logical parameters. Values of these parameters can be inferred with the help of SMBioNet (Khalis et al., 2009), which implies a model checking approach by first expressing the observations (properties) in Computation Tree Logic (CTL) formulas and then computes all possible sets of parameters leading to models satisfying these observations. Once the reliable set of parameters are determined, the tool GENOTECH then computes the qualitative model showing all the behaviours of the network and where important behaviours can be seen as paths (trajectories), closed paths (cycles) and stable states (see state graph in Section 3). Delays are incorporated in the qualitative model to model the activation and inhibition orders of proteins; which protein activates or deactivates first now depends on their time delays. The values of such parameters can be synthesised using the hybrid model checking tool HyTech (Henzinger et al., 1997).In this study, we performed a formal analysis of TLR3 signalling pathway using its discrete and hybrid models. In these models, we analysed the role of SOCS protein in the context of TLR3 mediated IFNα/β production in DENV infection. The design of this study is graphically depicted in Section 2. First, the Biological Regulatory Network (BRN) is obtained (Fig. 2) by keeping the prominent entities (in which we are interested) of the pathway and abstracting the rest, provided that the behaviour is preserved. For example, if an entity ‘A’ activates(→+) ‘B’ which inhibits(→−) ‘C’, and the proteins ‘A’ and ‘C’ are the ones in which we are interested, we simply abstract it to A→−C while implicitly showing the behaviour that ‘A’ inhibits ‘C’ through the activation of ‘B’. This BRN is then used to obtain the logical parameters from SMBioNet. These parameters are used in GENOTECH which computed the qualitative cycles, a stable state, and transformed it into parametric linear hybrid automata in HyTech format. Cycles were showing the oscillations of all proteins while the stable state was showing the over-expression of SOCS along with DENV. The delay constraints of a significant cycle, representing its invariance kernel (a set of cyclic trajectories which start and end at the same point, see Definition 2.12, (Ahmad and Roux, 2010)), were computed by the analysis of parametric linear hybrid automaton (hybrid model) of TLR3 signalling pathway in HyTech tool. The computation of the invariance kernel enabled us to observe the sustained cyclic nature of this cycle, as well as the possible delay values in the form of linear constraints. Our study implicates that when SOCS was oscillating within the qualitative cycles then all the other proteins of the pathway including SOCS itself were showing sustained oscillations in the hybrid model. Our analysis suggests that altered oscillatory behaviours of SOCS protein play a vital role in the inhibition of TLR3 mediated IFNα/β production, which ultimately results in the down-regulated immune response with subsequent elevation in DENV titre.Figure 3

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
