@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Tri-peptide reference structures for the calculation of relative solvent accessible surface area in protein amino acid residues

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Geometry-optimised extended conformation tri-peptides obtained for 43 amino acids.Peptide models suitable for relative residue accessible area calculations in proteins.Systematic effects of internal energy strain on solvent accessibility are observed.Results accord with conformational dependence of protein backbone covalent geometry.Use of standard covalent peptide geometry in conformational searching is discussed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Peptide reference structure,Relative amino acid solvent-accessible surface area,Peptide geometry,Protein conformation,Quantum chemical modelling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Relative amino acid residue solvent accessibility values allow the quantitative comparison of atomic solvent-accessible surface areas in different residue types and physical environments in proteins and in protein structural alignments. Geometry-optimised tri-peptide structures in extended solvent-exposed reference conformations have been obtained for 43 amino acid residue types at a high level of quantum chemical theory. Significant increases in side-chain solvent accessibility, offset by reductions in main-chain atom solvent exposure, were observed for standard residue types in partially geometry-optimised structures when compared to non-minimised models built from identical sets of proper dihedral angles abstracted from the literature. Optimisation of proper dihedral angles led most notably to marked increases of up to 54% in proline main-chain atom solvent accessibility compared to literature values. Similar effects were observed for fully-optimised tri-peptides in implicit solvent. The relief of internal strain energy was associated with systematic variation in N, Cα and Cβ atom solvent accessibility across all standard residue types. The results underline the importance of optimisation of ‘hard’ degrees of freedom (bond lengths and valence bond angles) and improper dihedral angle values from force field or other context-independent reference values, and impact on the use of standardised fixed internal co-ordinate geometry in sampling approaches to the determination of absolute values of protein amino acid residue solvent accessibility. Quantum chemical methods provide a useful and accurate alternative to molecular mechanics methods to perform energy minimisation of peptides containing non-standard (chemically modified) amino acid residues frequently present in experimental protein structure data sets, for which force field parameters may not be available. Reference tri-peptide atomic co-ordinate sets including hydrogen atoms are made freely available.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Solvent-accessible surface area is a widely used physical environmental parameter in the comparison, prediction and design of protein structure (Hubbard and Blundell, 1987; Šali and Blundell, 1990; Rost and Sander, 1994; Eyal et al., 2004; Worth et al., 2009; Li et al., 2013). Fast surface area calculation methods allow implicit solvent models to be used to take account of solvation energy contributions in scoring protein conformations, or in simulations of protein folding and dynamics (Chen et al., 2008; Vorobjev, 2011; Kleinjung and Fraternali, 2014).Relative amino acid residue solvent accessibility values provide a convenient means with which to compare solvent accessible surface areas in different residue types, or residues in different protein environments. These values can be calculated by normalising summed atomic solvent-accessible surface areas with respect to summed areas in the same residue type in a common solvent-exposed conformation available to all residue types. The relative amino acid residue solvent accessibility metric affords a basis upon which different structural regions in proteins can be defined (Levy, 2010). It has been found that evolutionary rates of residues at protein interfaces depend on the extent of surface burial (Eames and Kortemme, 2009; Franzosa and Xia, 2009), and relative residue accessibility is an important parameter in the prediction of protein interaction sites (Porollo and Meller, 2007; Zellner et al., 2012). Normalisation permits the meaningful comparison of solvent accessibility between different amino acid residue types, for example, at structurally aligned positions within protein families and superfamilies (Mizuguchi et al., 1998; Holm and Rosenström, 2010). Relative accessibility-based physical environmental class descriptors are used in protein structural alignment algorithms (Madhusudhan et al., 2009; Topham et al., 2013) and as conditional feature variables in multi-dimensional amino acid substitution tables with diverse predictive applications (Overington et al., 1992; Topham et al., 1993; Worth et al., 2011).Tri-peptide models in extended conformations of sequence Ala-X-Ala or Gly-X-Gly where X is the residue of interest, often serve as reference molecules to represent the maximally solvent-exposed state (Lee and Richards, 1971; Chothia, 1976; Satow et al., 1980; Miller et al., 1987; Hubbard and Thornton, 1993; Samanta et al., 2002; Ahmad et al., 2003; Nguyen and Rajapakse, 2005). Extended conformation peptidic fragments containing all the naturally occurring residue types are frequently observed in proteins, and are represented in structural alphabet block descriptions of local protein structure (Etchebest et al., 2005). Molecular dynamics simulations of short terminally-blocked alanine- and glycine-containing peptides carried out in explicit solvent with additional provision for solute polarisation reveal heavy sampling of extended conformations in the β-sheet and polyproline II regions of the Ramachandran plot (Hu et al., 2003; Wang et al., 2006). Recently, Gly-X-Gly tri-peptide reference models in residue-specific conformations not available to all residue-types have been proposed in order to accommodate a minority of surface residue positions in protein structures that yield relative solvent accessibilities in excess of 100% with respect to maximal solvent accessibilities in extended conformations (Singh and Ahmad, 2009; Tien et al., 2013).Ideally, model tri-peptide structures in the designated reference conformation should exist in or close to (local) minima on potential energy surfaces, or at population maxima identified in statistical analyses of protein conformation databases. Reference tri-peptide atomic co-ordinate sets are generally built using selected values for the main-chain and side-chain proper dihedral angles observed in experimentally determined protein or peptide structures, whilst bond length, valence bond angle and improper dihedral internal co-ordinates are set to molecular mechanics force field or other reference values. However, force field reference values are not true equilibrium values in a minimum energy configuration, but correspond to values adopted when all other terms in the force field are set to zero. Thus unless the full form of the potential energy function is applied to minimise the energy, the accumulation of small deviations from equilibrium values may exert significant effects on inter-atomic separation, and hence solvent accessibility. An analogous argument applies concerning the use of context-independent average bond length and valence bond angle parameter values obtained from analyses of experimental structure databases in which distinct component conformation-dependent data distributions can remain hidden (Berkholz et al., 2009). The fixing of main-chain and side-chain proper dihedral angles to inappropriate or mutually incompatible combinations may also lead to poor estimates of maximal atomic solvent accessibility in reference state models, even when all other degrees of freedom have been optimised.Given the widespread availability of software packages for geometry optimisation based on either classical molecular mechanics force field or quantum chemical methods, it is perhaps surprising that neither constrained nor full energy minimisation protocols have apparently hitherto been implemented. In consequence, the literature abounds with calculated values of solvent accessible surface areas of amino acid residues in model-built tri-peptides in extended and other conformations. However, reference sets of the atomic co-ordinates themselves are generally not readily available. Not only does this render assessment of tri-peptide structural quality difficult, it also precludes the calculation of surface area using alternative parameter sets, such as solvent probe size and solute van der Waals radii, or the choice of alternative surface types and algorithms other than those used to report the original values. For example, the AGBNP (Gallicchio and Levy, 2004) Generalised Born rapid surface area calculation method is based on a Gaussian description of molecular shape (Grant and Pickup, 1995), and depends upon the use of a smaller increase in the solute van der Waals radii (0.5Å) than is typically employed (1.4Å) to represent the radius of a water molecule. In contrast, a larger water probe radius of 2.0Å used to approximate the dielectric boundary in Poisson–Boltzmann solvation energy calculations was found to give optimal agreement with molecular dynamics results for alanine decapeptide in explicit solvent (Aguilar et al., 2010). Moreover, solvation free energy calculation methods, whether physical–chemical or empirical (e.g. Wang et al., 2001; Hou et al., 2005) in origin, require the presence of both hydrogen and heavy atoms.Here we report on the application of density functional theory (DFT) quantum chemical modelling methods (Burke, 2012) in the geometry optimisation of solvent-exposed reference-state tri-peptides in extended conformations. These methods take explicit account of electronic structure, and their improved accuracy over pair-wise additive molecular mechanics methods with fixed partial charges that neglect polarisation effects has been demonstrated in benchmarking studies of relative performance on di-peptide (Kaminský and Jensen, 2007) and tetra-peptide (Jiang et al., 2010) systems containing cognate amino acids. Density functionals in popular use do not in general require further parametrisation for main-group chemistry applications. This affords an additional advantage in the treatment of non-standard (chemically modified) amino acid residue types, present in significant number in recombinant protein atomic co-ordinate data sets and structural bioinformatics databases (Chandonia et al., 2002; Garavelli, 2004), and for which molecular mechanics force field parameters are often lacking.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
High quality tri-peptide reference structures in maximally solvent-exposed extended conformations generally available to all residue types have been obtained for 43 amino acid residues using quantum chemical geometry optimisation methods in continuum solvent. The Ala-X-Ala tri-peptides constitute suitable representative reference structures for the calculation of relative residue solvent accessibility in proteins. The data set may also serve as a reference for the calculation of other potentially useful relational physical quantities in the comparison, prediction and design of proteins, such as residue solvation energy or relative distance from the protein surface.The motivation behind this work lay both in the lack of available reference atomic co-ordinate data sets, most particularly for chemically modified amino acid residues, and an understanding that published values of atomic solvent accessible surface areas correspond to values in potentially strained tri-peptide configurations. Strain can be caused by the introduction of idealised internal co-ordinate reference parameters describing bond length and bond angle “hard” degrees of conformational freedom, whereas these are expected to vary as a function of protein backbone conformation (Berkholz et al., 2009; Moriarty et al., 2014). Values of the NCαC (or τ) valence bond angle, which exhibits the most systematic variation, were well reproduced in the quantum chemically geometry-optimised Ala-X-Ala tri-peptides containing standard residue types in solvent exposed β-sheet (or polyproline II in the case of proline) extended conformations. For these peptides, we find that side-chain atomic solvent accessibility is increased, whilst that for main-chain atoms is decreased, relative to values for models in strained configurations and those reported in the literature. The net effect of strain removal in the extended conformations is to increase the all-residue atom solvent accessibility by an average of approximately 3% to 4%. Quantum chemical optimisation of proper dihedral angle sets typically used in model building of maximally solvent-exposed tri-peptide structures also led to residue-specific variations in summed atomic solvent accessible surface areas. This was most apparent in the case of the main-chain carbonyl group in proline, and for aspartate and asparagine side-chains participating in hydrogen bond interactions with the peptide backbone in extended conformations.The effects of geometry optimisation on solvent accessibility can be expected to apply to other model-built peptide residue conformations and sequences. Residue hydrophobicity scales have been derived as functions of relative residue solvent accessibility in proteins, determined by normalisation with respect to solvent exposure in Gly-X-Gly tri-peptide reference structures (Rose et al., 1985; Miller et al., 1987; Tien et al., 2013). Higher maximum upper bound estimates of residue solvent accessible surface area in protein structures, when compared to values for the Rose et al. (1985) or Miller et al. (1987) (non-minimised) model Gly-X-Gly reference tri-peptides, were interpreted by Tien et al. (2013) as evidence that reference tri-peptide conformations other than right- and left-handed helical conformations underestimate maximum residue solvent accessibility in proteins. Singh and Ahmad (2009) previously reached a similar conclusion. Solvent accessibility data for the Miller et al. (1987) extended conformation Gly-X-Gly tri-peptide reference models are (almost) systematically lower (on average by 8.8±5.0%) than the Tien et al. (2013) upper bound estimates in proteins. Some or all of this difference, which is of a similar magnitude to that found here for Ala-X-Ala tri-peptides in the same conformation, could be due to normalisation using reference tri-peptides with non-optimised geometry. Conversely, solvent accessible surface areas in Gly-X-Gly model reference tri-peptides, built by Tien et al. (2013) in (mostly right- or left-handed helical) residue-specific conformations using rigid geometry sampling techniques with average bond lengths and angles, are systematically higher (by on average 5.4±2.8%) than values for similar residue conformations in actual X-ray crystal structures. Main-chain τ bond angle distributions for general residues in right- and left-handed helical conformation regions in proteins predominantly lie above the CDL covalent geometry library conformation-independent mean of 110.8°, whereas τ values for the β-sheet region lie below it, approximately 6° to 8° lower than values for helical conformations (Berkholz et al., 2009; Moriarty et al., 2014). Observations of overestimation of the solvent accessible surface area in helical conformation tri-peptide models, rather than underestimation in extended conformations, may be related to the backbone conformational dependence of the τ bond angle.Many protein conformational sampling methods and loop closure algorithms make use of conformation-independent peptide (bond length and angle) covalent geometry as a means of reducing effective search space and computation time. These include procedures used for the generation of atomic models of unfolded protein ensembles from which sequence-specific solvent residue accessibilities are calculated in the prediction of protein stability (Gong and Rose, 2008; Estrada et al., 2009). The grafting of context-independent covalent peptide geometry onto experimentally observed residue conformers may lead to anomalies in computed solvent accessible surface areas and dielectric boundary definitions, affecting physics-based (Sitkoff et al., 1994) and empirical (Wang et al., 2001; Hou et al., 2005) methods for the calculation of solvation free energy. Approaches to the modelling of the unfolded protein state that employ energy minimisation protocols (Elcock, 1999; Seki et al., 2011) may provide more robust estimates of amino acid residue solvent accessible area in a sequence-specific context compared to peptide conformational sampling methods that rely on average bond length, valence bond angle and improper dihedral angle internal co-ordinates.Tri-peptide atomic co-ordinate sets including hydrogen atoms, conforming to the re-mediated version 3 RCSB PDB (Henrick et al., 2008) chemical component dictionary (http://www.wwpdb.org/ccd.html) are available as a downloadable supporting data archive file from http://cmb.ornl.gov/material/tripeptide-reference-structures. The data includes results of the MolProbity structural validation analyses (Chen et al., 2010) as Kineimage files, viewable using the KING molecular graphics package (Chen et al., 2009). For NACCESS users, we provide modified data files for use in calculations of relative amino acid residue solvent accessibility of the 20 standard and 23 non-standard residue types with default (1.4Å) probe radius and (0.05Å) z slice parameter values.