@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automated 3D compliance checking in pipe spool fabrication

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
In the industrial sector, inspection processes are critical because of the complexity of the components involved.An automated approach for early detection of deviations in pipe spools is developed based on scan-to-BIM registration.A set of experiments is performed to validate the proposed approach for pipe spools.Incurred deviations and defects are identified and characterized in a timely manner.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Point cloud registration,As-built status,Laser scanning,Staged fabrication,Quality assessment,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In pipe spool assemblies used in construction, pre-fabrication errors inevitably occur due to the complexity of the tasks involved in the pipe spool fabrication process, the inaccuracy of the tools employed for performing these tasks, human error, and inadequate inspection and monitoring during the process. Permanent deflections may also occur during shipment and transportation. After delivery at construction sites, defective spools must be detected and further consideration given to the erection of the spools to tolerance levels specified; otherwise, the repair and realignment associated with rework can cause schedule delays and consequent substantial costs increases. This paper presents an automated approach for monitoring and assessing fabricated pipe spools using automated scan-to-BIM registration. Defects are detected through a neighborhood-based Iterative Closest Point (ICP) approach for the registration process. While this technique can be broadly employed, this paper focuses on industrial construction facilities with particular emphasis on pipe spool assemblies. Experiments show that the proposed approach can be employed for the automatic and continual monitoring of such assemblies throughout fabrication, assembly and erection to enable timely detection and characterization of deviations. The main contribution of the work presented in this paper is an automated 3D inspection framework and algorithms for construction assemblies in general and pipe spools in particular.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Fabrication imperfections in construction assemblies are often unavoidable due to the intensive level of manual work involved. Such imperfections and errors can add significant costs to construction projects, especially when they are not detected early. According to Akinci et al. [1], Burati et al. [2], Hwang et al. [3], Josephson and Hammarlund [4], Patterson and Ledbetter [5], up to 10% of construction costs are attributable to rework due to the late and untimely identification of defects, and 5% are the result of rework during maintenance [1,5]. A major risk associated with construction projects is thus the cost of rework due to defects that occur as a result of human error or material flaws. It has been noted that more than 50% of rework cases arise from human errors due to an insufficient level of inspection or lack of regard for the importance of quality assessment in the construction phase [1]. Approximately 10% of the cost of construction rework is attributable to material defects [1,6]. Continual inspection and assessment to detect human error and the quality of construction materials can therefore prevent rework and save substantial associated costs.Even minor errors in the fabrication process may have a significant effect on the functionality of modular and fabricated parts. For example, in a steel structure, a wrongly fabricated beam can impose significant forces or bending moments in its structural system. In modular construction, to mate adjacent parts during installation they are often moved in order to compensate for fabrication errors, which can cause significant accumulated displacement, deflection, residual stress, and exceeded tolerances. Weather conditions at construction sites and temperature changes during welding are other examples of sources of error that produce inaccurate results [7]. To avoid rework, fabrication errors should therefore be systematically controlled.Current approaches for the inspection and assessment of materials, however, are time consuming, inadequate, and inefficient. Craft workers typically use conventional manual measurement devices, and most contractors or managers employ paper-based assessment procedures for the inspection of the quality of materials. These methods are flawed because of the inexact, infrequent and inadequate communication of the manual data among inspectors, contractors and managers. The management of traditional methods of communication between different interfaces is challenging due to the complexity involved. Surveyors and inspectors are too expensive to track continual changes while items are being fabricated, assembled or built. This may result for example in tolerance stacking of assemblies and spools in manifolds. The broader result is that the lack of an integrated and rapid monitoring system for tracking changes means that errors that could be fixed prior to significant rework are overlooked. Hence, providing the inspectors and superintendents [8] with a fast and automated monitoring framework for detecting fabrication errors or inaccuracies would make it possible to plan for the potential realignment, repair or replacement of a defective part in a timely manner.An automated approach should thus be developed to avoid conditions that can lead to inaccuracy, ineffectiveness, and inefficiency during the inspection procedure. Recent advances in electronic technology for data acquisition and processing have been fused for use in construction quality control procedures [1]. However, a fully automated procedure that is reasonably accurate with respect to the assessment of the dimensional quality of individual fabricated construction items is still lacking.Recent advances related to data acquisition for as-built assessment have provided beneficial information about real-time monitoring and inspection, and fabricated assemblies can now be scanned and accurately reconstructed within an acceptable time frame [9]. Of all available reconstruction approaches and data capturing devices, the laser scanner is the tool most commonly employed due to its ease of use, robustness, and accuracy [10,11,12,13]. Although it has become the most appropriate tool for retrieving the as-built status on construction sites, its cost of purchase is a major limitation. In contrast, photogrammetry and other 3D imaging techniques are significantly less expensive than laser scanners and are also effective sources of data for assessing the as-built status [9,14,15,16,17]. The determination of as-built status in construction projects has thus become possible using laser or image-based tools that are sufficiently accurate and reasonably rapid.This paper presents an automated approach to continual assessment of the fabrication process of steel assemblies in general and pipe spools in particular. This approach includes automated registration of scanned-to-designed data, followed by a comparison of the fabricated state at any point in the fabrication process with the desired states in order to identify fabrication accuracy. The 3D CAD models available in building information modeling (BIM) represent the data about the designed state, and laser-scanned point clouds indicate the as-built status of industrial assemblies and pipe spools. Enhancing the comparison through the use of automated registration, as proposed here for pipe spools that are randomly located and oriented on construction sites or in fabrication facilities, is challenging.As a means of comprehensively determining the knowledge gap, the relevant literature is investigated from two perspectives. First, studies related to 3D imaging techniques were examined because they have opened up potential solutions for automated inspection and defect detection. Approaches related to 3D point cloud acquisition and analysis are reviewed briefly in this section. The second focus of evaluation was staged fabrication process control based on simulation and visualization.In a variety of engineering fields, sensing technologies that provide 3D information have been used for the acquisition of data from construction sites. New technologies, such as global positioning systems (GPS), ultra wide band (UWB) tags, total stations, digital photos to be used in digital photogrammetry, and terrestrial laser scanners have been investigated for use in extracting information required for monitoring and controlling procedures. Of these technologies, the laser scanner (LADAR) is now viewed as the tool most applicable for construction engineering although its cost of purchase makes it less obtainable for all managers and contractors. The development and use of building information models (BIM) has also facilitated the integration of numerous types of data needed in construction projects. In addition to 3D drawings, which indicate the position of each component, other types of information are included in BIM, such as the schedule [13,15]. The use of an integrated system for acquiring data has enhanced the feasibility of site monitoring in a number of areas. In general, 3D as-built data acquired by sensing technologies must be compared with the designed state of objects data that are embedded in BIM. Three-dimensional information can also be extracted from 2D images or video records, using procedures known as photogrammetry and videogrammetry, respectively. Although photogrammetry and videogrammetry are significantly less expensive than laser scanning [18], the data preprocessing and computation involved are costlier and more time consuming.Bosche and Haas [10] presented an approach to the automated recognition of scanned objects based on knowledge of as-designed details of the BIM. Turkan et al. [13] developed an integrated approach for tracking project schedules by fusing the schedule with 3D CAD models for as-planned models which when compared with scan data for object recognition were then updated with the recognition results in an iterative cycle. This study employed Bosche’s algorithm for the recognition of objects in buildings. More recently, an approach based on machine learning was used to recognize and categorize structural objects and elements with the goal of measuring construction progress [19]. The results of these studies indicated a sufficiently reasonable level of accuracy for the methods developed to be used for schedule updating in subsequent work. 3D reconstruction of plants and pipeline segmentation are the recent examples of using laser-scanned data in the industrial construction sector [20,21,22]. In addition to laser-scanned point clouds, two-dimensional digital images can also be employed to generate 3D point clouds. Traditional photogrammetry integrated with a laser scanner can be used to measure construction work progress [23]. More recently, Golparvar-Fard et al. [16,15] presented an approach in which 2D digital photos are employed to generate a point cloud with a reasonable rate of recall in order to automatically track construction sites progress.Once 3D point clouds are generated using an appropriate method, registration is then employed in order to compare the acquired as-built status with the designed state. Fitting the acquired data to the original state has previously been performed in the construction industry by applying a least-square adjustment [24]. In general, registration is the process of transforming two datasets into a single coordinate system [25]. Recent innovative approaches to finding common features in 2D images are now being used in order to increase the level of accuracy provided and to expedite the recognition process. A scale invariant feature transform (SIFT) is an example of a registration technique based on non-visible features in 2D images that has been used for measuring progress in construction projects [16,26].Registration may also be used to extend 3D surfaces using a variety of 3D images. The registration of 3D point clouds consists of two primary steps: coarse registration and fine registration. Coarse registration is an initial step that produces rough alignment of the point clouds, which is then followed by accelerated fine registration in order to determine the best fit between corresponding point clouds through the minimization of the error that is the summation of the Euclidean distance between the correspondences [27].In construction technology, automated registration is used predominantly for progress tracking. Bosché [28] presented a method for the registration of construction laser scans with 3D/4D building models. The semi-automated coarse registration step is plane-based and is followed by an ICP-based approach for the fine registration step [28]. More recently, Kim et al. [29] presented a fully automated approach for scheduling and progress tracking. Their method is based on ICP as well, and the coarse registration employs the principal component analysis (PCA) method. The method presented in this work is directed toward defect prevention and rework avoidance using the same approach for registration.During the past few decades, the advantages provided by the enhancement of computer processors have enabled the increasing application of construction simulation. During the 1990s, simulation tools and their use were limited to academia and an insignificant number of contractors because they were neither affordable nor efficient. In later years and with the development of graphical programming interfaces, construction simulation became an inseparable part of a construction project, with consequent key improvements in scheduling and productivity [30]. The significant efforts of Abourizk and his collaborators [31] have resulted in simulation becoming a highly beneficial tool with a long-term impact on prediction and visualization of real projects.Recent 3D visualization applications have seen particular use in offsite construction modeling [32]. According to Han et al. [32], required BIM input is used in order to represent individual elements for the visualization, some of which require predefinition: project schedule, geometry, required tasks, and component specifications. Visualization facilitates the process of assessing projects after changes are applied in the simulated model. It can also assist with the prediction of both the impact of the changes on other processes and potential interference with other tasks assigned to the crews. The results underline the ability of visualization to expedite project schedule and prevent rework, both of which lead to improved productivity and cost saving. Conflicting processes and tasks can be easily determined using 3D visualization, and potential errors are automatically detected before they result in significant increases in project costs. A number of scenarios are investigated through visualization, and a favorable schedule can then be automatically generated [33]. However, most of the studies in this area have been limited to schedule planning and resource allocation at construction sites [34,35,36].As comprehensively discussed here, 3D imaging approaches have been applied predominantly for the detection of damages to civil infrastructure, and their impact on the quality control process has remained relatively limited, because they generally detect damage that has already occurred and indications such as cracks in concrete structures and potholes in pavement. They are generally incapable of detecting potential errors. On the other hand, in the fabrication process, the use of 3D images and associated approaches has been limited to simulation and visualization based on identifying conflicting tasks and resolving related issues. The research proposed here is directed instead toward defect detection and prevention through process control using 3D imaging techniques in order to address the deviations highlighted here. Fabrication errors are therefore caught early, prior to incurring substantial costs and creating significant delays in construction projects. Fig. 1depicts a summary of this research and the flows between different elements.As shown in Fig. 1, the proposed method of automated compliance checking consists of three primary steps: (1) preprocessing in order to prepare the point clouds, (2) registration for enhancing the comparison, and (3) condition assessment for detecting and characterizing the defects that have been identified. The whole process can then be considered as a feeder to the process controller and it can be applied at a variety of frequencies (e.g. hourly, daily, weekly). However, the ultimate and longer goal is to acquire real-time feedback data for automated process and fabrication robot control.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
An automated approach has been presented for defect detection and characterization with respect to pipe spools. An ICP-based approach, preceded by PCA for coarse registration, is employed for the automated registration step. The coarse registration initiated in the algorithm proposed here not only guarantees the determination of the global minimum but also accelerates the registration process (Fig. 4). The accuracy of the registration method proposed here strongly relies on the accuracy of the acquired point cloud. Scanning resolution and accuracy of the point cloud play an important role in acquiring a reliable point cloud to be used in the registration. Once reliable data is acquired, the proposed registration method guarantees the best fit with as-designed data. Inaccurate and unreliable scan data and registration result in larger RMS values. Automated distance-based deviation analysis has also been performed as a means of detecting, localizing, and visualizing the incurred defects present in the assemblies studied.An experimental study was conducted in order to examine the feasibility of automatically quantifying the deviations thus detected in the defective parts of the assemblies. The algorithm for defect detection and the characterization of the errors encountered includes sub-clustering and local RMS investigation. For investigating and establishing the relationship between the RMS value and the level of deviation present in the assembly a pure rotation has been applied at different alterations to the critical flange. The results definitely signify a robust linear relationship between the local RMS and the angle of rotation. The experimental results show that the proposed method is promising and has the potential to be employed for characterizing deviations in a preliminary fashion that occur in steel assemblies such as pipe spools with a reasonable degree of accuracy (less than 10% error). However, this is insufficient accuracy for input to a realignment planning model, so subsequent, automated, precise deviation analysis is being developed.One of the limitations of the proposed model is that for the symmetrical geometries, it might not operate properly during the registration phase. The registration should also be customizable so that it can indicate and fix in space previously identified perfectly fabricated parts, a factor that obviously plays a role in the registration results. These assumptions have been disregarded in the current study and will be investigated later as potential avenues for the improvement and customization of the registration process. However, significantly improved and more reliable results can certainly be expected if such assumptions are considered in the model and incorporated in new algorithms. An additional consideration is that pure angular displacement is the only deviation investigated in this research. Deviations combined with translations thus represent an additional possibility of extending the scope of this work in the future.