@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Genome-wide analysis and evolutionary study of sucrose non-fermenting 1-related protein kinase 2 (SnRK2) gene family members in Arabidopsis and Oryza

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We studied the evolution based on the phylogenetic studies of SnRK2 gene family in different plant lineages.We also analyzed the chromosomal distributions of duplicated SnRK2 members in Arabidopsis and Oryza.We showed that ancestral SnRK2 gene of land plants gradually evolved by duplication and diversification.The SnRK2 gene modified itself through exon–intron loss events to survive under stress conditions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Abiotic stress,Phylogenetic tree,Promoter element,SNF1-related protein kinase 2,SnRK2,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The over-expression of plant specific SnRK2 gene family members by hyperosmotic stress and some by abscisic acid is well established. In this report, we have analyzed the evolution of SnRK2 gene family in different plant lineages including green algae, moss, lycophyte, dicot and monocot. Our results provide some evidences to indicate that the natural selection pressure had considerable influence on cis-regulatory promoter region and coding region of SnRK2 members in Arabidopsis and Oryza independently through time. Observed degree of sequence/motif conservation amongst SnRK2 homolog in all the analyzed plant lineages strongly supported their inclusion as members of this family. The chromosomal distributions of duplicated SnRK2 members have also been analyzed in Arabidopsis and Oryza. Massively Parallel Signature Sequencing (MPSS) database derived expression data and the presence of abiotic stress related promoter elements within the 1kb upstream promoter region of these SnRK2 family members further strengthen the observations of previous workers. Additionally, the phylogenetic relationships of SnRK2 have been studied in all plant lineages along with their respective exon–intron structural patterns. Our results indicate that the ancestral SnRK2 gene of land plants gradually evolved by duplication and diversification and modified itself through exon–intron loss events to survive under environmental stress conditions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Plants have acquired several adaptive features to survive against abiotic stresses, such as temperature, UV irradiation, drought, salinity, pH variation, high light intensity and rising atmospheric pollutant levels that have severely affected crop growth and quality (Mattoo et al., 2000; Basra, 2001; Serraj and Sinclair, 2002; Xiong and Zhu, 2002; Long et al., 2006). The adverse effect of most of these stresses lead to the osmotic stress, ionic imbalance, DNA and/or protein damage and many other harmful physiological phenotypes (Serraj and Sinclair, 2002). Plants that perceive these extracellular environmental cues modulate intracellular signaling cascades and facilitate genetic, biochemical and physiological changes to cope up with such myriad stresses (Finkelstein et al., 2002; Zhu, 2002; Chinnusamy et al., 2004; Cao et al., 2007; Gupta et al., 2013). The plants that do not have such protective machinery eventually perish.The sucrose non-fermenting 1-related protein kinase (SnRK), homologous to yeast SNF1 genes and mammal AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), have been found to be widely distributed in plants and act as key switches in sugar signaling, biotic and abiotic stresses, seed germination and seedling growth (Chevalier and Walker, 2005; Xue-Fei et al., 2012). Plant SNF-1 related protein kinases have been categorized into three sub-families: SnRK1, SnRK2 and SnRK3 (Wang et al., 2010). SnRK1 complex is a heterotrimeric complex composed of α, β and γ-subunits containing N-terminal kinase domain and C-terminal regulatory domain that are involved in global regulation of carbon and nitrogen metabolism (Shukla and Mattoo, 2008; Xue-Fei et al., 2012). SnRK2 subfamily has previously been reported to have kinase domain, ATP binding domain, serine/threonine active site and four N-fourteen sites (Xue-Fei et al., 2012). SnRK3 kinases are rare plant kinases, named as calcineurin B-like calcium sensor-interacting protein kinases (CIPK) that interact with calcium-binding protein salt overly sensitive3 (SOS3), SOS3-like calcium-binding proteins (SCaBPS) and CBL (calcineurin B-like calcium sensor, CBL) (Xue-Fei et al., 2012). The kinase domain of this family was reported to contain a binding site for calcium-binding proteins and calcium-sensitive CBL in the C-terminal region, which combine to activate protein kinase (Guo et al., 2001). SnRK2 and SnRK3 play a key role in stress signaling and a direct relationship has recently been established between abscisic acid (ABA) signal transduction and SnRK2 members (Shukla and Mattoo, 2008). The common feature shared by SnRK1 and SnRK2 family is their catalytic domain with a divergent C-terminal region whereas SnRK3 family is shown to represent unique members (Shukla and Mattoo, 2008). In this report we have focused on SnRK2 family members within different plant lineages.The first SnRK2 cDNA clone (PKABA1) was identified in ABA-treated wheat embryo cDNA library (Anderberg and Walker-Simmons, 1992). Hyperosmotic stress induces the expression of two homologous SnRK2 genes, SPK1 and SPK2, in soybean (Monks et al., 2001). In maize, a SnRK2 homolog (ZmSPK1) was shown to express in different plant tissues including roots, mature leaves and vessels, most abundantly being in the reproductive organs (Zou et al., 2006). A 42kDa protein kinase (NtOSAK), belonging to SnRK2 family, was found to be activated due to osmotic stress in tobacco (Kelner et al., 2004). Previous investigation identified 10 genes that encoded SnRK2 family members in the Arabidopsis and rice genomes (Mustilli et al., 2002; Kobayashi et al., 2004). In this work, we have performed the promoter analysis with the 1kb upstream region of the Arabidopsis and Oryza SnRK2 kinase genes to gain insight into their regulatory mechanism. Although there are some reports on the expression profile of SnRK2 gene family members in different plants, our in silico investigation elucidates the overall expression pattern of the members of SnRK2 family using the Massively Parallel Signature Sequencing (MPSS) database derived information emphasizing on Arabidopsis and Oryza genome. Moreover, we have made an attempt to identify the evolutionary attributes of the SnRK2 family members among different plant lineages elaborating on their exon–intron structural features and the pattern of conserved motifs.We have retrieved the coding sequences (CDSs) and protein sequences of 10 SnRK2 family members from Arabidopsis thaliana and Oryza sativa genome database available in TAIR (http://www.arabidopsis.org/) and TIGR Rice Genome Annotation Project (http://rice.plantbiology.msu.edu/analyses_search_locus.shtml) (AtSRK2 and OsSAPK2 members respectively). The nucleotide length, number of exons, predicted amino acid length, chromosomal location and gene annotation of each of the A. thaliana and O. sativa SnRK2 genes are represented in supplementary table S1 and S2 respectively. We searched for the homologous SnRK2 protein kinase members in major plant lineages including green algae (Chlamydomonas reinhardtii), moss (Physcomitrella patens) and lycophyte (Selaginella moellendorffii) by performing homology based ‘BLAST’ search with the query sequences derived from Arabidopsis and rice genome and downloaded those sequences from National Centre for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Genbank/index.html). The GenBank accession numbers and the length of nucleotide and amino acid sequences are given in supplementary table S3. The 1kb upstream promoter sequence of each SnRK2 gene family members of Arabidopsis and rice were downloaded from plant promoter database 2.1 (http://ppdb.agr.gifu-u.ac.jp/ppdb/cgi-bin/index.cgi) using the GeneBank accessions as query.The 1kb upstream promoter region of each gene sequence was searched for abiotic stress associated promoter element in the Plant Promoter Analysis Navigator (PlantPAN) (Chang et al., 2008). The exon–intron structural diagram of each member of the SnRK2 family was obtained using the online available Gene Structure Display Server (http://gsds.cbi.pku.edu.cn/) with coding sequences (CDS) and genomic sequences.Multiple sequence alignment of related proteins belonging to SnRK2 family members from five major plant lineages (algae, moss, lycophyte, monocot and dicot) were performed with the mRNA and amino acid sequences, using CLUSTALW software (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalw2/). Program SCANPROSITE was employed to detect conserved domains (http://prosite.expasy.org/scanprosite/).Phylogenetic analyses of the SnRK2 proteins identified from Physcomitrella patens (moss), Selaginella moellendorffii (lycophyte), Arabidopsis thaliana (dicot) and Oryza sativa (monocot) were conducted based on the CDS and amino acid sequences. The related SnRK2 genes from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii (algae) were used as alternative outgroups to assess the robustness of the phylogenetic results. Neighbor-joining (NJ) and maximum-likelihood (ML) method were implemented through MEGA 5.05 (Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis software) (Tamura et al., 2011) to construct phylogenetic trees as done by Saha et al. (2013a,b). NJ analysis for the nucleotide dataset was performed using p-distances based on nucleotide substitution per site. NJ and ML analyses were implemented using Poisson corrected model (Zuckerkandl and Pauling, 1965), Dayhoff matrix (Schwarz and Dayhoff, 1979) and JTT (Jones et al., 1992) model for the amino acid dataset to examine their effect on the topological stability. The robustness of the tree topology was estimated by bootstrap analysis with 1000 and 100 replicates to construct the NJ tree and ML tree respectively (Felsenstein, 1985). Pair wise sequence divergence was measured for the 1kb upstream promoter region and the coding region of each of the SnRK2 gene from Arabidopsis and rice genomes based on nucleotide substitution per site using p-distance in the MEGA 5.05 (Tamura et al., 2011).We have searched the MPSS database to gain knowledge about the expression profiles of AtSRK2 members in A. thaliana (http://mpss.udel.edu/at/mpss_index.php) and OsSAPK members in O. sativa (http://mpss.udel.edu/Rice/mpss_index.php) in various tissues and stresses opting for 20-nucleotide signature sequences using the locus IDs given in the TIGR database. The information obtained from the database was analyzed based on stress and tissue specificity.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
