@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Collaborative planning of inner-city-railway-tracks: A generic description of the geographic context and its dynamic integration in a collaborative multi-scale geometry modelling environment

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We describe the geographical context for planning inner-city-railway-tracks.We show how collaborative work with geographical information can be improved.We integrate the geographical context into a collaborative planning process.Combined and collaborative use of geo-information in planning tools is demonstrated.Results are validated using an actual real world scenario.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Collaboration,Synchronous work,Procedural model,Geo web services,Geographic context,GIS,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Planning sub terrestrial inner-city-railway-tracks is an interdisciplinary and highly complex task, which involves plenty of different stakeholders. Currently, the different planners work more or less separated in an asynchronous manner. To facilitate a collaborative planning process between these different stakeholders we developed a collaboration platform. Clearly, the integration of geographical information and geoprocessing results into the planning process and the different modelling tools will improve this process in a significant way. In this paper, we show how to describe the needed geographical information by so-called Geospatial Web Service Context Documents in a suitable way and how to integrate these pieces of information into the different planning tools via the collaboration platform in a unified, dynamic, and generic way.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Naturally, the highly complex process of planning sub terrestrial inner-city-railway-tracks involves plenty of different stakeholders from various domains such as civil engineers, as well as subsoil, environment, and fire safety experts. These different adepts often use their own specific geometric modelling and planning tools thereby creating their own specific data in its own proprietary data structure. Thus, the different stakeholders work more or less separated in a not very contiguous manner. To combine, evaluate, and revise their specific work, the created data is exchanged between the different adepts in a file-based fashion or even on paper plans. Normally, the results of this evaluation and revision process are discussed in personal meetings or teleconferences resulting in an iterative process. This kind of collaboration obviously extends the duration of the planning process in a significant and undesired way.Clearly, in the process of planning inner-city-carriageways the geographic context of the objects to be built is of major importance. For instance, to plan the specific track course one needs information concerning the soil conditions, the sub terrestrial buildings, the sewage water system, etc. The geographic context is especially of major importance at locations where the sub terrestrial track is connected to the terrain surface, for example at emergency-rescue-shafts. Thanks to spatial data infrastructure initiatives such as INSPIRE1Directive 2007/2/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 March 2007 establishing an Infrastructure for Spatial Information in the European Community (INSPIRE).1these pieces of information are or at least will in future be provided by certain web services. Even though information on the geographic context of the planned track is available in principle, at the moment, the sheer integration of this information into the common modelling and planning tools is not facilitated in a convenient way. Additionally, there are at least three further problems concerning these web services. Specifically different services are hosted by different dispersed servers; different services provide the needed data, but they provide this data in diverging scales; and standardized web service interfaces have limitations compared to the requirements of a synchronous collaborative planning scenario [7].In order to overcome the problems described above we developed a collaboration platform. This platform facilitates a synchronous modelling and planning process between modelling engineers and Geographic Information System (GIS) experts. The basis for the synchronous modelling process is a multi-scale procedural geometry model of the planned track, which describes the geometry by its several construction steps in contrary to an explicit representation. This procedural model supports the concept of different Levels of Detail (LoDs), which enable different planners to work in the abstraction level of their specific task, thereby using the geometry modelling tools they are accustomed to. Additionally, we designed a component structure, which allows the integration of different data sources into the different planning tools via the collaboration platform. In order to incorporate the geographic context into the planning process and the planning tools respectively, we investigated the description of collections of geospatial web services in so-called Geospatial Web Service Context Documents and used the developed component structure to do the integration.In this paper, we describe the principle idea of Geospatial Web Service Context Documents. Then we will illustrate the integration of web services using these documents and a newly developed component structure. In doing so, we will show that this integration process is facilitated in a convenient way, (i.e., a unified, dynamic, and generic one). Finally, we will describe how this integration strategy of GIS-data can significantly improve the collaboration between different experts in the process of planning a subway tunnel by providing a use case, in which an emergency-rescue-shaft is located.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
