@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
MATEPRED-A-SVM-Based Prediction Method for Multidrug And Toxin Extrusion (MATE) Proteins

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The prediction of MATE proteins is made using SVM based method.The model was derived using PSSM classifier and achieved an overall accuracy of 92.06%.MATEPred efficiently distinguishes MATE proteins from non-MATE proteins.This tool is helpful to general users and also for the researchers working in this field.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Antibiotics,Drug resistance,MATE,PSSM,SVM,Diarrheal pathogens,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The growth and spread of drug resistance in bacteria have been well established in both mankind and beasts and thus is a serious public health concern. Due to the increasing problem of drug resistance, control of infectious diseases like diarrhea, pneumonia etc. is becoming more difficult. Hence, it is crucial to understand the underlying mechanism of drug resistance mechanism and devising novel solution to address this problem. Multidrug And Toxin Extrusion (MATE) proteins, first characterized as bacterial drug transporters, are present in almost all species. It plays a very important function in the secretion of cationic drugs across the cell membrane. In this work, we propose SVM based method for prediction of MATE proteins. The data set employed for training consists of 189 non-redundant protein sequences, that are further classified as positive (63 sequences) set comprising of sequences from MATE family, and negative (126 sequences) set having protein sequences from other transporters families proteins and random protein sequences taken from NCBI while in the test set, there are 120 protein sequences in all (8 in positive and 112 in negative set). The model was derived using Position Specific Scoring Matrix (PSSM) composition and achieved an overall accuracy 92.06%. The five-fold cross validation was used to optimize SVM parameter and select the best model. The prediction algorithm presented here is implemented as a freely available web server MATEPred, which will assist in rapid identification of MATE proteins.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The discovery of the antibiotics has been the most important step towards the control of infectious disease. However, with the emergence of drug resistant pathogens, currently available drugs are becoming ineffective (Putman et al., 2000). Multidrug efflux is an important mechanism of biocide and antimicrobial agent resistance in bacteria. They have been divided into various groups, which include the Major Facilitator Super (MFS) family, the Small Multidrug Resistance (SMR) family, the Resistance Nodulation and Cell Division (RND) family, the ATP binding cassette (ABC) family, and the Multidrug And Toxin Extrusion (MATE) family (Otsuka et al., 2005). Multidrug and Toxin Extrusion (MATE) proteins form a class of proteins that function as drug and proton antiporters. Initially, due to the presence of 12 transmembrane helices, they were designated as the member of MFS family. Shortly afterwards, it was reported that they showed no sequence identity to other known multidrug transporters, therefore, categorized as a new family of multidrug transporters, and are widely propagated in all realms of living beings (Omote et al., 2006). MATE proteins have been characterized as important transporters that mediate the final excretion of cationic drugs into bile and urine (Nies et al., 2012). In plants, transporter proteins from the MATE family are essential in metabolite transport, which directly changes crop yields. In bacteria and mammals, these MATE transporters facilitate multiple-drug resistance (MDR), thus regulating the efficacy of many pharmaceutical drugs used in curing a variety of diseases (He et al., 2010). MATE family transporters are conserved in the three pinion domains of life (Archaea, Bacteria and Eukarya), and export xenobiotics using an electrochemical exchange of H+ or Na+ across the tissue layer. MATE transporters confer resistance to bacterial pathogens and cancer cells, thus causing critical reductions in the curative efficacies of antibiotics and anti-cancer drugs, respectively (Tanaka et al., 2013). An example of one such protein is NorM, of Vibrio parahaemolyticus which is a multidrug Na+-antiporter, and was found to confer resistance to dyes, fluoroquinolones and aminoglycosides (Mohanty et al., 2012; Li and Nikaido, 2004).As reported, MATE family efflux pumps depend upon Na+/H+ gradient for transport and have three major branches: the NorM branch, a branch containing several eukaryotic proteins and a branch containing E. coli DinF (Mohanty et al., 2012). MATE protein length varies from 400 to 700 residues comprising of 12 transmembrane helices. In MATE proteins, there is no conserved consensus sequence; however, they share ∼40% sequence similarity (Omote et al., 2006). Granting to the studies, it has been reported that sequence information for very few MATE proteins is available till date. Also, due to its primary structure heterogeneity, it is hard to recognize these proteins based on sequence. The alignment based tools like Pfam and BLAST are not sufficient to identify all the MATE proteins (as described in Section 3.1).To combat the problem of drug resistance, it is all important to extensively understand and identify multidrug resistance proteins at a faster pace. Owing to the time limit and cost of experiments, there is a demand to have computational methods to rapidly examine and interpret relevant data (Ramana and Gupta, 2010a). In this study, we attempted to develop a prediction tool for identification of MATE proteins on the basis of Position Specific Scoring Matrix (PSSM) using Support Vector Machine (SVM). First, we used different features for generating SVMs (i) Amino Acid composition (ii) Dipeptide composition (iii) Hydrophobicity (iv) Charge composition (v) Mutliplets composition (vi) PSSM composition. However, it was observed that the performance of these SVMs was poor when compared to PSSM based SVM.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
