@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Impact of heuristics in clustering large biological networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
In this paper, we have proposed two new heuristics for clustering biological networks.We have incorporated these heuristics into a celebrated clustering algorithm called SPICi to get three new clustering algorithms.We have conducted extensive experiments and analysis to analyze the performance of the new algorithm and the results are found to be promising.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Algorithms,Biological networks,Clustering,Heuristics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Traditional clustering algorithms often exhibit poor performance for large networks. On the contrary, greedy algorithms are found to be relatively efficient while uncovering functional modules from large biological networks. The quality of the clusters produced by these greedy techniques largely depends on the underlying heuristics employed. Different heuristics based on different attributes and properties perform differently in terms of the quality of the clusters produced. This motivates us to design new heuristics for clustering large networks. In this paper, we have proposed two new heuristics and analyzed the performance thereof after incorporating those with three different combinations in a recently celebrated greedy clustering algorithm named SPICi. We have extensively analyzed the effectiveness of these new variants. The results are found to be promising.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Clustering is an important tool in biological network analysis. However, traditional clustering algorithms do not perform well in the analysis of large biological networks being either extremely slow or even unable to cluster (Song and Singh, 2009). On the other hand, recent advancement of the state of the art technologies along with computational predictions have resulted in large scale biological networks for numerous organisms (Brun et al., 2004). As a result, faster clustering algorithms are of tremendous interest. There exist a number of clustering algorithms that work well on small to moderate biological networks. For instance, a number of algorithms in the literature can guarantee that they would generate clusters with some specific properties (e.g., Cfinder (Adamcsek et al., 2006; Palla et al., 2005; Colak et al., 2009; Georgii et al., 2009)). They are however computationally very intensive and hence do not scale well as the size of the biological network increases. Algorithms like WPNCA (Peng et al., 2014) and ClusterONE (Nepusz et al., 2012) are new approaches to handle weighted biological networks of moderate size. But in many cases they fail or require a large amount of time to cluster.To this end, some more efficient approaches have been introduced most of which are based on greedy techniques (e.g., SPICi (Jiang and Singh, 2010), DPClus (Altaf-Ul-Amin et al., 2006), etc.). However, algorithms like MGclus (Frings et al., 2013) suit relatively well for clustering large biological networks with dense neighborhood. In most cases, clusters produced by greedy approaches are highly dependent on the heuristic(s) employed. It is expected that a better heuristic will yield even more improved results. This motivates us to search for a better heuristic for a well-performing greedy approach to devise an even better clustering algorithm that not only runs faster but also provides quality solutions.SPICi (Jiang and Singh, 2010) is a relatively recent and new approach among the greedy techniques that can cluster large biological networks. After carefully studying and analyzing the implementation of SPICi, we have discovered that some essential modification in the heuristics employed can bring drastic change in the clusters’ quality. In this paper, we have proposed a couple of new heuristics for SPICi with an aim to devise an even better clustering algorithm. We have implemented three new versions of SPICi and have conducted extensive experiments to analyze the performance our new implementations. Experimental results are found to be promising with respect to both speed and accuracy. Some preliminary results of this paper have been presented at Shafin et al. (2015).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
