@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A systems chemical biology study of malate synthase and isocitrate lyase inhibition in Mycobacterium tuberculosis during active and NRP growth

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
SCB related virtual screening and docking studies can provide mechanistic insight on inhibition.Unlike glyoxlate response, inhibitor impact on malate seems microenvironment dependent.For similar microenvironments, ICL versus MS inhibition is metabolically more consequential.Strong ICL inhibition causes metabolite levels in persistent Mtb toward levels in non-viable Mtb.SCB points to a complex interplay between network structure, kinetics, and therapeutic outcome.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Biological networks,Cheminformatics,Biochemical network simulations,Systems biology,Chemical biology,Mycobacterium tuberculosis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The ability of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) to survive in low oxygen environments enables the bacterium to persist in a latent state within host tissues. In vitro studies of Mtb growth have identified changes in isocitrate lyase (ICL) and malate synthase (MS) that enable bacterial persistence under low oxygen and other environmentally limiting conditions. Systems chemical biology (SCB) enables us to evaluate the effects of small molecule inhibitors not only on the reaction catalyzed by malate synthase and isocitrate lyase, but the effect on the complete tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA) by taking into account complex network relationships within that system.To study the kinetic consequences of inhibition on persistent bacilli, we implement a systems-chemical biology (SCB) platform and perform a chemistry-centric analysis of key metabolic pathways believed to impact Mtb latency. We explore consequences of disrupting the function of malate synthase (MS) and isocitrate lyase (ICL) during aerobic and hypoxic non-replicating persistence (NRP) growth by using the SCB method to identify small molecules that inhibit the function of MS and ICL, and simulating the metabolic consequence of the disruption.Results indicate variations in target and non-target reaction steps, clear differences in the normal and low oxygen models, as well as dosage dependent response. Simulation results from singular and combined enzyme inhibition strategies suggest ICL may be the more effective target for chemotherapeutic treatment against Mtb growing in a microenvironment where oxygen is slowly depleted, which may favor persistence.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), the causative agent of tuberculosis (TB), is able to persist in host tissues in a non-replicating persistence (NRP) or latent state, with 2 billion people estimated to serve as a reservoir for the bacterium (Jasmer et al., 2002). This presents a challenge in the treatment of TB and latent TB specifically, which has a re-activation rate of ten percent for individuals with normal immune systems, higher for those with compromised immune systems. Previous and current studies of Mtb attempt to identify and analyze mechanisms that enable the bacterium to survive within a presumably low oxygen, low nutrient, and acidic microenvironment created as a result of host-response to infection (Cosma et al., 2003; Deb et al., 2009; Schnappinger et al., 2006). Researchers have used theoretical models and quantitative analysis of Mtb metabolism and latency-associated biochemical pathways to integrate empirical data into models that can provide additional insight on how various mechanisms interact to enable the bacilli to survive under harsh physiological conditions (Belta et al., 2003; Beste et al., 2007; Singh and Ghosh, 2006). Computational models that analyze the impact of enzyme inhibition on Mtb fatty acid and iron metabolism pathways, and consequentially on Mtb growth, have been developed using dynamic flux balance analysis methods to capture the metabolic consequences of inhibition (Fang et al., 2009, 2011). Improving and expanding the level of chemistry awareness in these models through the inclusion of cheminformatics and pharmacokinetics data in theoretical models and analysis platforms will allow scientists to explore possible means for disrupting metabolic mechanisms that enable Mtb persistence.Systems chemical biology (SCB), the integration of systems biology and chemical biology (Oprea et al., 2007), and computational systems biology, recently described in (Oprea et al., 2011), provide tools for developing SCB platforms for analysis of biological systems. In this work we use the SCB methodology to study the interruption of malate synthase and isocitrate lyase in Mtb during aerated growth and low oxygen growth resulting in non-replicating persistence (Fig. 1). These two enzymes are part of Mtb's glyoxylate bypass, a particularly attractive therapeutic target due to the importance of this pathway to Mtb survival during a persistent infection and the absence of this pathway in mammalian cells (Smith et al., 2003). Combining our understanding of metabolic pathways that contribute to Mtb survival with information on how small molecules and chemotherapeutic agents disrupt these pathways will aid in the development of more effective methods to counter and reduce TB associated fatalities.Studies of Mtb metabolism indicate that the glyoxylate bypass, which consists of two reaction steps catalyzed by isocitrate lyase (ICL, gene icl) and malate synthase (MS, gene glcB), is a key metabolic pathway that may enable Mtb to adapt to low nutrient conditions and low oxygen or hypoxic conditions (Smith et al., 2003; Wayne and Hayes, 1996; Wayne and Sohaskey, 2001). During growth on glucose, the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA) cycle uses carbon moieties produced through glycolysis to generate reducing agents (NADH, FADH2) that are used to produce cellular energy in the form of ATP by way of the electron transport chain (ETC) and oxidative phosphorylation (Nelson and Cox, 2005). The generation of reducing agents for oxidative phosphorylation through the TCA cycle requires oxidizing agents (NAD, FAD), which are proportionately regenerated during oxidative phosphorylation and are important metabolic cofactors. In addition, oxaloacetate and α-ketoglutarate generated in the TCA cycle can feed into the amino acid biosynthesis pathway. During low nutrient and low oxygen conditions Mtb presumably needs alternative mechanisms for generating sufficient cellular energy and regenerating redox and cofactor molecules.The Wayne in vitro model of non-replicating persistence (NRP) suggests that up regulation of ICL may replenish oxidative cofactors through alternative NAD generation pathways activated in the oxygen limited bacilli (Wayne and Lin, 1982; Wayne and Hayes, 1996; Wayne and Sohaskey, 2001). Wayne and colleagues observed that during hypoxic growth conditions isocitrate lyase (ICL) increased five-fold, however a comparable increase in the second enzyme in the pathway, malate synthase (MS) was not observed. Thus they hypothesized that the increase in ICL and subsequent increase in glyoxylate may serve to replenish NAD by way of the glyoxylate-to-glycine (GtG) shunt. The observed ten-fold increase in glycine dehydrogenase (GDH), the key enzyme in the GtG shunt, during slow stirred NRP growth further substantiated their argument. An alternative explanation suggests that the glyoxylate bypass may be used to generate malate to move into gluconeogenesis, which would presumably replenish NAD (Smith et al., 2003).While increase in glyoxylate may partially serve to replenish NAD, low nutrient conditions would reduce the carbon-containing molecules entering the TCA cycle through the glycolysis pathway. Glycolysis-produced pyruvate is converted to acetyl-CoA, and acetyl-CoA enters the TCA cycle. Mtb's mycolic acid cell wall may reduce the reliance on glycolysis in favor of beta-oxidation for production of acetyl-CoA via fatty acid metabolism. The glyoxylate pathway combined with malate synthase conversion of glyoxylate to malate allows Mtb to bypass two energy-requiring steps of the standard TCA cycle while producing the necessary intermediates to maintain the cycle (Smith et al., 2003). In addition the bypass conserves carbon while producing necessary biosynthetic precursors such as oxaloacetate, an important substrate in the synthesis of amino acids. Therefore both glyoxylate and malate, and by extension isocitrate lyase and malate synthase, are important for sufficient regeneration of oxidizing cofactors for energy production and conservation of carbon moieties during Mtb growth under low oxygen and low nutrient conditions. We explore consequences of disrupting the function of Mtb's malate synthase and isocitrate lyase enzymes during aerobic active growth and hypoxic NRP growth using the SCB method to study how small molecules can inhibit the function of these two enzymes. We simulate the metabolic consequences of the disruption and evaluate how addition of small molecules impacts metabolites required for bacterial survival.As described by Oprea et al. (2011) the goal of computational SCB is to develop platform tools that integrate cheminformatics and systems biology data acquisition, processing, and integration into a theoretical framework for scientific exploration. In this study we apply two key computational platforms used in SCB: (1) modeling and simulation of Mtb's TCA cycle and glyoxylate bypass network; (2) use of cheminformatics to perform virtual screening of inhibitory molecules that interact with enzymes.We develop a theoretical model of the TCA cycle, glyoxylate bypass, and the glyoxylate-to-glycine shunt (depicted in Fig. 1, reactions listed in Table 1) based on the Singh and Ghosh model, the Wayne NRP model, and data from Beste et al.’s reconstructed metabolic network of Mtb (Singh and Ghosh, 2006; Wayne and Hayes, 1996; Beste et al., 2007).The model explicitly incorporates NAD/NADH and FAD/FADH2 substrates and uses updated kinetic parameters from the BRENDA Enzyme database and empirical data on Mtb growth under low oxygen conditions (Scheer et al., 2011; Wayne and Hayes, 1996; Smith et al., 2003). We use traditional Michaelis-Menten assumptions (Nelson and Cox, 2005) to determine reaction rate equations. Parameters are based on values used in the Singh–Ghosh model, growth rates and conditions reported for the Wayne NRP model, or kinetic values specified in the BRENDA Enzyme Database. We use the relation VMax=Kcat×Etotal, where the enzyme concentration used in the simulation is Etotal×10−2, making the reaction rate (e.g. for S=P reaction): V=(VMax×10−2[S]/[S]+KM). To capture empirically observed fold changes in the glyoxylate bypass enzymes (ICL, MS, GDH) due to growth under low oxygen conditions we multiply V by the fold change value. We capture oxygen-mediated regeneration of NAD/FAD by approximating the net effect of oxidative phosphorylation using the following stoichiometric relation: NADH+½ O2=NAD; FADH2+½ O2=FAD. The relative amount of available oxygen, [O2], is determined using an initial oxygen concentration of 8.0e−5mM and oxygen depletion data for Mtb grown under aerobic, slow-stirred hypoxic, and vigorously agitated hypoxic conditions reported in the Wayne NRP models. The initial oxygen concentration value was calculated as twice the KMvalue of O2 for the Cytochrome C oxidase (EC 1.9.3.1) as reported in BRENDA for Helicobacter pylori.We use a circuit based simulation platform, BioXyce, to implement the model (May and Schiek, 2009; May, 2011). At the cellular level, biochemical pathways are modeled as electrical circuits where signals are produced, propagated and consumed. BioXyce uses the following equivalents: chemical mass as charge, mass flux as electric current, concentration as voltage, stoichiometric conservation as Kirchhoff's voltage law, and mass conservation as Kirchhoff's current law. With BioXyce, we can focus on subsystems as described in this work as well as simulate large control networks consisting of entire cells, heterogeneous, and homogeneous cell populations.The second aspect of computational SCB used in this work is the use of an automatable cheminformatics pipeline to screen for small molecule inhibitors of the malate synthase enzymes and identification of critical parameters associated with the inhibitors. Fig. 2illustrates the workflow used to obtain information regarding the ligand–protein interactions of interest in this work:First we perform searches in WOMBAT and SciFinder using names or Enzyme Commission (EC) numbers of the enzymes in order to retrieve small molecules with relevant biological activity. We consider different protonation states for the molecules. Most of the compounds have a carboxylic acid. Using the Omega software package (OpenEye Scientific Software, Santa Fe, NM) (Boström et al., 2003; Hawkins et al., 2010; Hawkins and Nicholls, 2012) we generate three-dimensional conformations for the set of compounds. For enzymes in the glyoxylate cycle, we use the Protein Data Bank (PDB) as the source for 3D structures of malate synthase (2GQ3) and isocitrate lyase (1F8M). Mutations in the sequence of each protein are checked by aligning them in ClustalW with the reference amino acid sequences. Next we prepare the enzymes and perform docking analysis (Fig. 3) with FRED (version 2.1 (OpenEye Scientific Software, Santa Fe, NM) (McGann et al., 2003) generating a total of 500 poses and saving 20 alternative poses for each molecule after using the chemgauss3 scoring function, keeping default values to the remaining parameters. Two docking conditions are tested: (1) after removal of the water molecules in the active pocket; (2) considering the water molecules in the pocket.Before running any docking study using crystallographic water molecules, we analyzed the enzyme pockets with GRID v. 22 (Molecular Discovery Inc., London) to better understand the environment of the active pockets and to determine the most important crystallographic water molecules to keep during docking. This was accomplished by using a set of virtual probes in default mode (water, carbonyl oxygen, amide nitrogen, hydrophobic and Csp2) to compute the interaction energies between the probe and the amino acids from the enzyme at the lattices of a grid cage.The docking results are used to determine how well a candidate ligand fits in the enzyme pocket and the plausibility of the putative inhibitor pose. This process is used to identify potential inhibitors of the enzyme of interest, which are then incorporated into the theoretical model of the system described in Section 2.1.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
