@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Improving the prediction of chemotherapeutic sensitivity of tumors in breast cancer via optimizing the selection of candidate genes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The prediction of chemotherapeutic sensitivity is important in cancer treatment.False positive genes seriously impact the performance of predictive models.We proposed a combined strategy for optimizing the selection of candidate genes.The performance of predictive models is improved when using the refined genes.This research will benefit the guidance of the personalized chemotherapy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cancer outcome prediction,Gene expression profiling,Gene prioritization,Support vector machine,Breast cancer,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Estrogen receptor status and the pathologic response to preoperative chemotherapy are two important indicators of chemotherapeutic sensitivity of tumors in breast cancer, which are used to guide the selection of specific regimens for patients. Microarray-based gene expression profiling, which is successfully applied to the discovery of tumor biomarkers and the prediction of drug response, was suggested to predict the cancer outcomes using the gene signatures differentially expressed between two clinical states. However, many false positive genes unrelated to the phenotypic differences will be involved in the lists of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) when only using the statistical methods for gene selection, e.g. Student's t test, and subsequently affect the performance of the predictive models. For the purpose of improving the prediction of clinical outcomes, we optimized the selection of DEGs by using a combined strategy, for which the DEGs were firstly identified by the statistical methods, and then filtered by a similarity profiling approach that used for candidate gene prioritization. In our study, we firstly verified the molecular functions of the DEGs identified by the combined strategy with the gene expression data generated in the microarray experiments of Si-Wu-Tang, which is a popular formula in traditional Chinese medicine. The results showed that, for Si-Wu-Tang experimental data set, the cancer-related signaling pathways were significantly enriched by gene set enrichment analysis when using the DEG lists generated by the combined strategy, confirming the potentially cancer-preventive effect of Si-Wu-Tang. To verify the performance of the predictive models in clinical application, we used the combined strategy to select the DEGs as features from the gene expression data of the clinical samples, which were collected from the breast cancer patients, and constructed models to predict the chemotherapeutic sensitivity of tumors in breast cancer. After refining the DEG lists by a similarity profiling approach, the Matthew's correlation coefficients of predicting estrogen receptor status and the pathologic response to preoperative chemotherapy with the DEGs selected by the fold change ranking were 0.770 and 0.428, respectively, and were 0.748 and 0.373 with the DEGs selected by SAM, respectively, which were generally higher than those achieved with unrefined DEG lists and those achieved by the candidate models in the second phase of Microarray Quality Control project (0.732 and 0.301, respectively). Our results demonstrated that the strategy of integrating the statistical methods with the gene prioritization methods based on similarity profiling was a powerful tool for DEG selection, which effectively improved the performance of prediction models in clinical applications and can guide the personalized chemotherapy better.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In breast cancer treatment, the chemotherapeutic sensitivity of tumor is crucial for guiding the selection of the most effective chemotherapy for a specific patient (Early Breast Cancer Trialists Collaborative Group, 1998). The estrogen receptor status is considered as one of the important indicators of chemotherapeutic sensitivity in diagnostic test (Bast et al., 2001; Ross et al., 2003; Paik et al., 2006), for which the estrogen receptor positive (ER positive) indicates that the growth of the tumor is caused by estrogen and should be effectively suppressed by hormone suppression treatments, while the estrogen receptor negative (ER negative) indicates bad response to hormone suppression treatments. Differ from the estrogen receptor status, the pathologic response to preoperative chemotherapy, a surrogate endpoint in neoadjuvant treatment, can directly evaluate the tumor response to the chemotherapy for the individual patient (Fisher et al., 1998; Kuerer et al., 1999). The pathologic complete response (pCR) indicates the well postoperative recovery and long-term survival for the patients, while residual disease (RD) means the high risk of recurrence. Consequently, it is necessary to accurately obtain the information about the estrogen receptor status and the tumor response to preoperative chemotherapy for the purpose of determining the best regimen and achieving the best clinical outcomes in breast cancer treatments.The gene expression profiling generated by the DNA microarrays is highly associated with the phenotypic differences between the clinical samples and has been suggested to investigate the molecular functions, impacted signaling pathways and cellular behaviors for better understanding of the molecular mechanisms of breast cancer (Perou et al., 2000; Weigelt et al., 2005a,b; Sotiriou et al., 2006; Pusztai et al., 2007; Liu et al., 2008; Wirapati et al., 2008; Loi et al., 2009; Daves et al., 2011; Mohammadi et al., 2011). The differentially expressed genes (DEGs) are routinely identified from the microarray-based gene expression profiles and used as the predictors for the prediction of chemotherapeutic response and clinical outcomes in breast cancer trials (van‘t Veer et al., 2002; Ma et al., 2004; Goetz et al., 2006; Hess et al., 2006; Nuyten and van de Vijver, 2006–2007; Cronin et al., 2007; Ross, 2009; Lee et al., 2010; Yau et al., 2010; Fan et al., 2011; Patsialou et al., 2012; Hallett et al., 2012). The Microarray Quality Control (MAQC) project systematically evaluated the reproducibility and reliability of the DEG lists generated by different microarray platforms (Shi et al., 2006) and the reliability of models for predicting the preclinical and clinical endpoints with the selected DEGs, providing the best practices on the development and validation of microarray-based predictive models (Shi et al., 2010). However, most of the statistical methods and feature selection methods used in DEG identification can only discriminate between DEG and non-DEG according to the differences of gene expression levels between two biological states, but do not ensure the biological relevance of a selected DEG to the phenotypic differences, resulting in many false positive genes unrelated to the phenotypic differences involving in the DEG lists.For the sake of screening out the false positive genes and improving the performance of the predictive models, we suggested a combined strategy, for which the DEGs were firstly identified by the statistical methods, and then filtered by a similarity profiling approach that used for candidate gene prioritization. The gene prioritization methods based on similarity profiling ranked the candidate genes according to their similarity scores, which were calculated by considering the similarities of the candidate genes to a set of known seed genes in a specific disease or biological process, and identified the most promising genes with the maximal relevance to that disease or biological process (van Driel et al., 2003; Aerts et al., 2006; Tranchevent et al., 2008; Seelow et al., 2008; Chen et al., 2009; Fontaine et al., 2011; Britto et al., 2012; Moreau and Tranchevent, 2012). As a complementary method to DEG identification, the similarity profiling approach should well select the genes actually related to phenotypic differences from the DEG list generated by statistical methods. In our study, the breast cancer-related gene sets were collected by the similarity profiling approach from the DEG lists generated by two statistical methods, fold change ranking combined with a non-stringent p value cutoff and significant analysis of microarrays (SAM). In order to answer the two questions: (a) whether the gene sets identified by the combined strategy were still significantly correlated with the phenotypic status and (b) whether the DEGs identified by the combined strategy can improve the performance of the predictive models in clinical research, we conducted a comparative study, which included two components. The one is the verification of the molecular functions of the gene sets identified by the combined strategy using the gene expression data generated in the microarray experiments of Si-Wu-Tang (Wen et al., 2011). In this part of the work, we examined whether the gene sets identified by the combined strategy from the microarray data generated from the MCF-7 cell lines with and without treatment (Si-Wu-Tang) were still significantly correlated with cancer. The other is the verification of the performance of the predictive models. The gene expression data of the clinical samples from 230 breast cancer patients were collected and separated into training set (130 samples) and validation set (100 samples). We selected the DEGs as features by using the combined strategy and constructed the predictive models to predict the chemotherapeutic sensitivity of tumor by using the training set. The predictive models were validated by the validation set. Our results demonstrated that the strategy of integrating the statistical methods with the similarity profiling-based gene prioritization methods for DEG identification can effectively enhance the reliability of the predictive models and improve the prediction results of clinical outcomes in breast cancer.The data set was comprised of two subsets generated from Michigan Cancer Foundation-7 (MCF-7) cell lines before and after treatment by Si-Wu-Tang (series accession number: GSE23610) (Wen et al., 2011) and the clinical samples of 230 breast cancer patients (series accession number: GSE16716) (Hess et al., 2006; Shi et al., 2006; Popovici et al., 2010). All microarray data (Series MATRIX files) were downloaded through the National Center for Biotechnology Information's Gene Expression Omnibus. In the previous subset, the gene expression data were generated by using Affymetrix Human Genome U133Plus2 microarrays, which included 54,675 probesets. Only the gene expression data of MCF-7 cell lines before and after treatment with high concentration (2.56mg/ml) of Si-Wu-Tang (SH) were used to examine the molecular functions of gene sets identified by our combined strategy. For the latter one, the gene expression data were generated by using Affymetrix Human Genome U133A microarrays, which included 22,283 probesets. According to the data analysis protocol in MAQC-II project, the gene expression data generated from 130 out of 230 clinical samples of breast cancer patients were assigned as training set and the rest were used as independent test set. The two prediction endpoints, the estrogen receptor status and the pathologic response to preoperative chemotherapy, were determined by immunohistochemistry and histopathologic study, respectively. A case was considered as ER positive where ≥10% of tumor cells stained positive for estrogen receptor with immunohistochemistry. A pCR was defined as no residual invasive cancer in the breast or lymph nodes, or the residual in situ carcinoma without invasive component (Hess et al., 2006).Microarray experiments detected the fluorescence intensity on the individual probeset to infer a transcript abundance level of a specific gene. A gene may be detected by multiple probesets on the arrays. Before identifying DEGs, the multiple probesets were mapped to a unique HOGO gene symbol by using the probeset with the highest fold change value between two groups of samples. Accordingly, for the subsets of the Si-Wu-Tang experimental data set and the expression data of breast cancer samples, 54,675 probesets were mapped to 15,961 unique genes and 22,283 probesets were mapped to 11,285 unique genes, respectively.Student's t-test is a statistical method commonly used for DEG selection. The p value calculated by Student's t-test indicates the significance of a gene differentially expressed between two biological states. In our study, the p values for all of the genes were directly used for gene filtering without any multiple-testing correction. The genes were firstly filtered by a non-stringent p value cutoff (p value<0.05), and then ranked by their fold changes (the intensity in sample A/the intensity in sample B), which indicate to what extent the genes are differentially expressed between two groups of samples. Finally, a list of genes was considered to be DEGs when its fold change>1.5 (FC>1.5) or fold change<0.667 (FC<0.667) and used for the subsequently analysis.Significant analysis of microarrays (SAM) (Tusher et al., 2001), which was firstly proposed by Tusher in 2001, determine whether a gene is differentially expressed between two groups of samples by running a permutation procedure of combining the gene-specific t-test with a statistical d value. The identification of DEGs by SAM was conducted with siggenes package in Bioconductor 2.10 within R 3.0.1. When running SAM, the parameter Δ was set to 0.4 for DEG identification in the gene set enrichment analysis, and was set to 1.0 and 1.1 in the prediction of pathologic response to preoperative chemotherapy and ER status, respectively, for the purpose of keeping the false discovery rate (FDR) less than 0.05 (FDR<0.05).Similarity profiling-based gene prioritization scored each of the candidate genes in light of the similarity of candidate gene to a set of known seed genes and ranked the candidates from most similar to least similar. Finally, the top n candidates were selected as the most promising genes for further biological analysis. A gene prioritization approach termed Endeavour, which prioritized genes through data fusion (Aerts et al., 2006, 2009; Tranchevent et al., 2008), was applied to our study for identifying the breast cancer-related genes from the DEG lists generated by statistical methods. In prioritization procedure, Endeavour evaluated the similarities between the candidate genes and the seed genes according to the information of each of the given data sources, which was well defined by prior knowledge, e.g. Gene Ontology (GO) annotations, and ranked the candidates based on the similarity scores for each data source. The overall similarity scores were given to the candidates by fusing each of the rankings from the separate data sources into a single ranking. In this paper, the nine data sources provided by Endeavor, namely GO annotations, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database, sequence similarity obtained by BLAST, Biomolecular Interaction Network Database (BIND), Human Protein Reference Database (HPRD), protein–protein interactions database (IntAct), known and predicted protein–proteins interaction database (STRING), transcriptional motifs and published literatures, were selected to prioritized the candidate genes. The genes with the final rank ratios less than 0.5 (the rank ratio ranged from 0 to 1, which indicated the relationship between the candidates and seed genes was from the most similar to the least similar) were selected as the breast cancer-related genes for further analysis. Endeavour can be freely available at the website: http://homes.esat.kuleuven.be/∼bioiuser/endeavour/index.php.Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA), which was firstly proposed by Mootha et al. (2003) and then extended by Subramanian et al. (2005), is a powerful tool for inspecting whether the identified DEGs are significantly associated with the prior biological knowledge, e.g. GO categories, and is widely used in genomic analysis. GSEA assigned an enrichment score corresponded to Kolmogorov–Smirnow statistic for each predefined gene set and subsequently normalized the score according to its size. Finally, based on the normalized enrichment score, a permutation-based false discovery rate (FDR) was generated to indicate the significance of enriched gene sets. In our study, the KEGG pathways, which were used to examine the molecular functions of the gene sets identified by our combined strategy, were enriched by the GSEA methodology described by Subramanian et al. (2005). GSEA software can be downloaded from web site (http://www.broadinstitute.org/gsea/index.jsp).The classification models for predicting the ER status and the pathologic response to preoperative chemotherapy were constructed by using support vector machine (SVM), a popular learning machine based on statistical learning theory (Vapnik, 1995, 1998). Radial basic function was chosen as the kernel function in SVM. The regularization parameter c and the kernel width parameter σ were optimized by a grid search approach. In this paper, two SVM models were separately built for the two clinical endpoints by using the training set and the leave-one-out cross-validation and validated by the independent test set. To evaluate the performance of SVM models, the accuracy and the Matthew's correlation coefficient (MCC) were applied in our study and defined as follows:(1)Accuracy=TP+TNTP+FP+TN+FN(2)MCC=TP×TN−FP×FN(TP+FP)×(TP+FN)×(TN+FP)×(TN+FN)where TP, FP, TN, FN represent true positive, false positive, true negative and false negative, respectively. The MCC value of 1 indicated all of the samples were correctly predicted, whereas the MCC value of 0 indicated none of the samples was correctly predicted. The software libsvm 3.17 for SVM modeling (Chang and Lin, 2011) can be freely downloaded from the website: http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/∼cjlin/libsvm/.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, a combined strategy of integrating the statistical method with the similarity profiling-based gene prioritization approach was proposed to identify the DEGs for the purpose of excluding the genes unrelated to the phenotypic differences. Our results demonstrated that, when predicting the clinical outcomes of breast cancer, the performance of the predictive models can be efficiently improved by using the DEGs selected by the combined strategy as predictors, which will benefit the guidance of the personalized chemotherapy in cancer treatment. In addition, the DEG lists prioritized by combined strategy are more adaptable to the further biological interpretation, e.g. gene set enrichment analysis, and the study of biomarker identification.