@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A study that applies aesthetic theory and genetic algorithms to product form optimization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Propose evaluation equations of aesthetic measures in aesthetics.Apply genetic algorithms on the optimization of product forms.Reduce the difference in the aesthetic cognitions between designers and consumer.Apply this on the measurement of product aesthetics to shorten design procedures.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Aesthetic measure,Form optimization,Fuzzy theory,Genetic algorithm,Aesthetic product design,Product evaluations,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In the past, designers developed new products by virtue of their own accumulation of aesthetic perception and experience. Because the information that designers could master was limited, it was difficult to develop quickly the capability of satisfying consumer-oriented markets. This limitation may consequently cause the enterprises unnecessary risks. Based on this, a set of aesthetic evaluations and an optimization system for form aesthetics are proposed in this study. Calculations of explicit equations were performed so as to assisting in measuring the aesthetic characteristics; next, a fuzzy judgment was invoked to calculate the perceptual aesthetic measures of a product style so as to establish the overall aesthetic standard for the product. Aesthetic measurement principles were combined with the genetic algorithm (GA) and applied to the optimization of the product’s shape. All-in-one stereos were chosen to serve as the target products as a case study. Further form optimization was conducted on two of the stereos and the questionnaire survey indicated that their aesthetic measures increased after the optimization. The errors that resulted from the equations for aesthetic measurements and judgments were also reduced accordingly. The precision and feasibility of the aesthetic theory that was constructed in this study were assessed, tested, and verified.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The value added to each product is continuously enhanced under the globalization of competition. Therefore, an innovative design of products is the key factor for enterprises to acquire a competitive edge. In the past, designers developed new products by virtue of self-accumulation of aesthetic perception and experience. With this approach, it was difficult to secure the capability of satisfying the consumer-oriented markets. And it possibly brought about unnecessary risks for the enterprises. The currently marketplace has already approached a perceptual consumption pattern. The value of a product is not limited to the function and having an attractive appearance but is also required to correspond to the preferences of the consumers. Therefore, designers must understand consumers’ expectation for the best products in their minds. And they must endow a product with the best form, material, and color so that the value added to a product can be enhanced for the most product benefit.To that end, the usage behavior of users, the functions of the products and the techniques required during the product design stages must first be considered. Form developments were then performed, and this process is the so-called “form follows function”. However, this approach is a topic that is worthy of further research with respect to having a method which make products prolific with aesthetic perceptions during form developments so as to attract the consumers. At the same time, design teams are required to continuously survey every detail of a product during form developments so as to make sure the product meets the aesthetic conditions. The purpose of this study is to apply the foundation of aesthetics to the design and evaluation of product forms so as to solve the uncertainty toward the aesthetic perception of the forms during the development of the product forms. The final purpose is to obtain optimized forms that correspond with the requirements by aesthetic perception so as to provide designers with an approach which could shorten a product’s development time and enhance its competitiveness in the marketplace.The current trend for the studies on the quantification of customers’ emotional and psychological requirements moves toward the Kansei engineering. This study also used the Kansei vocabularies for the study on the aesthetic measures of product forms as an attempt to understand customers’ aesthetic perception of product shapes. Birkhoff [1] was the first scholar to propose applying the quantization of aesthetic measures to fields such as styling, poetry, and music; in this approach, the orderliness and complexity was calculated and served as an index of the aesthetics. Subsequently, Moon and Spencer [2] applied a measure and introduced it into the quantitative evaluation of colors; they called it the color aesthetics measure. The complexity C of the color aesthetic measure is C=(color count)+(hue error of color pair count)+(lightness difference of color pair count)+(chroma difference of color pair count). In the past, this approach was firmly believed to encompass the principles of beauty in aesthetics. And he proposed that beauty is based on “Unity in Variety”, which reflects the degree of beauty. Birkhoff applied this type of beauty to the quantification of beauty; his theory also applied to cases such as decorations, vases, music, and poetry. In the aesthetic measure equation of Birkhoff (Eq. (1)), M represents the aesthetic measure, O represents the orderliness, C represents the complexity, and the quotient from dividing the orderliness number by the complexity number then represents the evaluation of the aesthetics.(1)M=OCBirkhoff and Japanese scholar Hiroshi Ohchi aimed at the aesthetic theory proposed by Moon and Spencer and constructed an integration of a set of color equations for aesthetic measures that were calculated while using the orderliness and complexity. Davis [3] examined the hypothesis of Birkhoff on 162 psychology students; he asked them to sort 10 polygons by preference, and the result failed to support the claim of Birkhoff. Although this model indeed comprises the important elements of aesthetics, it still tends to be simple. More importantly, it does not supply an interpretative emotional response such as the example that the cross-shaped polygons possibly contain “positively implicit relevance”. On the other hand, Tatepsian [4] explained that when this procedure was considered to aim at the form characteristics of the aesthetics, the quotient by dividing the orderliness number by the complexity number then indicates the evaluation of the aesthetics. At the same time, Ngo et al. [5–9] corrected the interface layout design of computer screens by applying a large number of principles of Birkhoff’s aesthetic-measure equations and conducted related aesthetics studies. He investigated methods of enhancing the usability of the user interface of a computer, specifically screen-type user interfaces. He proposed that the imagery of users on screen-type user interfaces could be quantized by applying the method of aesthetic-measure measurements, and the correlation of aesthetic-measure elements and the emotional imagery could be found via back-propagation neural networks. Finally, an operational interface of the evaluations was established, and it assists designers in rapidly mastering the perceptions of users with respect to aesthetic-measure elements and then enhances the aesthetic perceptions of the computer screens. Staudek [10,11] discussed a method for the aesthetics measure of Birkhoff to contribute to the aesthetics measurement of the external form of vases by means of the aesthetic measure equation of Birkhoff. He established a plurality of characteristic points along the contours, and these include the terminal point H, the inscribed point V, the vertical tangent point P, and the variation point of the tangent direction T, which are all redefined to improve the measurement equation of Birkhoff.Greenfield [12] summarized studies that were related to aesthetics in the last couple of years. Birkhoff conducted, in 1928, a study that was related to the measurement of the aesthetic measures [13]. Hsiao et al. [14,15] proposed applying aesthetic measures to the color design of products and did successfully optimized the design process. Hsiao et al. [16] proposed that with the addition of adequate parameters, the aesthetic measures can be transformed into 2D shapes with curves and 3D shapes with curved surfaces. They also proposed calculation models for aesthetic measures of balance, equilibrium, symmetry, unity, and proportion which serve as the basis for evaluating the aesthetics of product shapes for designers. Since there are distinctive 3D product shapes for the evaluation by the aesthetic measures of balance, equilibrium, and symmetry in earlier studies, the equations for calculating these three aesthetic measures serve as the basis for the evaluation in this study.The genetic algorithm looks for approximately optimized solutions via rules of evolution; this method has been widely applied in many fields of optimization design, such as computer science, electrical engineering, and mechanical engineering. From a design point of view, the design could be viewed as a succession of processes of searching for the best solution. Many factors (such as the material, structure, cost, and usability) are required to be considered during these processes. In the problem-solving process, a very large solution package will be generated as more factors are considered. Remaining to be solved is the topic of finding the optimal scheme to satisfy market demands on the constantly changing markets. Hsiao and Tsai [17] used neural networks to establish the relationship between product feature parameters and the image vocabulary, which was followed by a study on the most ideal product forms. Their approach used the demand vocabularies along with the GA method. Hsiao et al. [18] also applied Quantification Theory Type 1 along with the morphological chart method and attempted to obtain, by using a genetic algorithm, the optimal combination scheme of the styling that corresponds to the customer demands.Chang and Chen [19] tried to represent consumers’ perception of vehicle shapes numerically as values based on the Kansei engineering principles and the relationship between contour characteristics and consumers’ image perception can be established and predicted by the back-propagation network (BPN).In addition, it is required to address a plurality of related factors during the process of evaluating things. At the same time, fuzzy theory is suitable for objectively assessing identical things that are provided with many types of attributes. It is thus called fuzzy combined judgment when there is an influence of many types of factors, when integral considerations and fuzzy factors are involved. For fuzzy theory applied to strategic decisions on product models, Hsiao [20] applied fuzzy theory to strategic decisions on product concepts of fruit juicers.The purpose of this study is to establish a set of strategic decision systems for evaluations products’ aesthetic measures. Additionally, aesthetic-measure principles serve as a foundation that is applied to the optimization of product forms. Aiming at a design procedure, this study provides designers who are in search of the best product form with a type of criterion for evaluating aesthetics. According to the demands of the principles of aesthetic patterns for the market or designers, the genetic algorithm is applied to the search for the characteristics of the best solution. The parameterization of product styling is converged to correspond with the aesthetic forms that are demanded by the market. The time, efforts and resources that are consumed during the design and development processes can be reduced and the competitiveness of the industry can be enhanced.Aesthetic measures were utilized in this study as the fitness function of genetic algorithms for the evolution of product styling with an attempt to obtain a solution that corresponds with the best solution in the aesthetics. Six equations for aesthetic measures were used and they are the equations of balance, equilibrium, symmetry, proportion, unity, and minimalist.Object forms generate the perception of balance via the distribution of elements, the size, and the transmittance of the materials in the layout space. People visually sense a stronger feeling of weight for elements that have larger volumes. On the other hand, elements with smaller volumes deliver a lighter feeling of weight. In addition, the transmittance of elements also affects the feeling of weight for an object, and this circumstance presents a proportional relationship. Thus, the element volume, the element distribution, and the transmittance of materials all affect the balance of the object forms. There are three elements that affect the balance of the objects in space. They include the volume, the distance between the centroid of each element and the centroid of the layout space, and the transmittance of the materials.The balance of object and element forms is represented by Eq. (2), where Mo is the form moment, which represents the moment that is generated by the styling of the objects and elements when affected by the vision (Fig. 1). When its body passes through point O while being subject to Mo with a value of zero, the form, distribution, and transmittance of its object and element are all in a steady state. If Mo is non-zero, then it is called a non-steady state, which represents the form of the body being in a non-stable state. Therefore, the visual balance can be represented by Eq. (2).(2)BM=1-∑MO,0⩽BM⩽1where(3)∑MO=13Mx+My+MzMx,My, andMzare, respectively, the form moments of the body along the axes ofx,y, and z, which can be represented by Eqs. (4)–(6)(4)Mx=∑i=1nmximaxmxi(5)My=∑i=1nmyimaxmyi(6)Mz=∑i=1nmzimaxmziWhen considering the transmittance of the elements in the object, the form moments on the three axes can be calculated as Eqs. (7)–(9).(7)mxi=βi∫y→i+zi→dv(8)myi=βi∫z→i+xi→dv(9)mzi=βi∫x→i+yi→dvwhereβiis the transmittance of theith element, and this transmittance parameter will refer to the values of the degree of transmittance in the materials library that is constructed by the 3D software.Fig. 2shows the values for balancing the aesthetic perceptions of the case products, which areBMa=0.670andBMb=0.667. It is known that the difference between them is not large. From the exterior styling, it is also known that for both of them, regardless of whether the curved styling exists, its calculated results do not have a large difference. Table 1lists the attributes of balancing the layout values for the case styling.Equilibrium represents the elements’ degree of uniformity in an object when being scattered in the layout space. The higher the equilibrium is, the higher the influence of the layout of the elements in the space on the stability of the styling.Ifxi-xcrepresents the degree of dispersion of the elements in the object in the x direction, then when the summation of all of the elements in the x axis is 0, the distribution of the elements in the object in the x direction is uniform. Therefore, for the elements in the object,Ex,Ey, andEzrepresent the degree of uniformity of the distribution in the x, y, and z directions. Then, they can be defined as Eq. (10)–(13), where d in Eq. (10) is the largest span of the object in the x direction (Fig. 4). Similarly, b and h in Eqs. (11) and (12), respectively, represent the largest spans of the object in the y and z directions.(10)Ex=1-∑i=1nxi-xcd(11)Ey=1-∑i=1nyi-ycb(12)Ez=1-∑i=1nzi-zch(13)EM=1-Ex+Ey+Ez3,0⩽EM⩽1Therefore, the equilibrium equationEMOof the distribution of the elements in the object in the x, y, and z directions can be defined as in Eq. (13), with a value between 0 and 1. Additionally, O represents the center of the constructed layout framework of the object. Here,xi,yi,zirepresents the coordinate values of the elements, andxc,yc,zcrepresents the coordinate point of the center of the overall styling. Fig. 5shows the equilibrium values of the product stylingEMa=0.867 andEMb=0.716. From these values, it is known that the equilibriumEMais superior toEMb. Fig. 5 also reveals thatEMaof the product styling element presents a distribution in longitudinal equilibrium for the element and its surrounding petals. The shape ofEMbresembles the English letter ‘T’ and thus the shape has a larger top half and a smaller bottom half. This difference also greatly reduced the equilibrium extent of the distribution. Table 2lists the attribute values of the equilibrium layout for the two case products.The symmetry is primarily used for the detection of the axial duplication of a body, which means detecting it regardless of whether the unit elements on one side of the centerline are indeed reproduced on the other side. The symmetry can be differentiated into three classifications, which are vertical, horizontal, and diagonal symmetries. The symmetry of the products can be defined by Fig. 6as Eq. (14).(14)SYM=1-SYMFV+SYMFH+SYMFR+SYMRV+SYMRD+SYMRR+SYMTH+SYMTD+SYMTR9,0⩽SYM⩽1where SYM is the overall symmetry;SYMFVis the bilateral symmetry in the front-view direction;SYMFHis the longitudinal symmetry in the front-view direction; andSYMFRis the diagonal symmetry in the front-view direction.SYMRVis the vertical symmetry in the right-side-view direction;SYMRDis the symmetry that is in-depth in the right-side-view direction; andSYMRRis the diagonal symmetry in the right-side-view direction.SYMTHis the horizontal symmetry in the top-view direction;SYMTDis the symmetry that is in-depth in the top-view direction; andSYMTRis the diagonal symmetry in the top-view direction. It is required to avoid any difference in the dimensional values of the body form which is too large during the calculation of the aesthetic-perception equations of the symmetry (which causes errors in the processing of the numerical calculations). Therefore, non-dimensional parameters are substituted into the equations for the calculation. The closer the obtained value is to 1, the higher the styling symmetry.The front view is the yz plane; therefore, three types of symmetry can be obtained, which are the bilateral, longitudinal, and diagonal symmetries.(15)SYMFV=YUR′-YUL′+YLR′-YLL′+ZUR′-ZUL′+ZLR′-ZLL′+BUR′-BUL′+BLR′-BLL′+HUR′-HUL′+HLR′-HLL′+ΘFUR′-ΘFUL′+ΘFLR′-ΘFLL′+RFUR′-RFUL′+RFLR′-RFLL′12(16)SYMFH=YUL′-YLL′+YUR′-YLR′+ZUL′-ZLL′+ZUR′-ZLR′+BUL′-BLL′+BUR′-BLR′+HUL′-HLL′+HUR′-HLR′+ΘFUL′-ΘFLL′+ΘFUR′-ΘFLR′+RFUL′-RFLL′+RFUR′-RFLR′12(17)SYMFR=YUL′-YLR′+YUR′-YLL′+ZUL′-ZLR′+ZUR′-ZLL′+BUL′-BLR′+BUR′-BLL′+HUL′-HLR′+HUR′-HLL′+ΘFUL′-ΘFLR′+ΘFUR′-ΘFLL′+RFUL′-RFLR′+RFUR′-RFLL′12The right side view is the xz plane; therefore, three types of symmetry can be obtained, which are the bilateral, fore-and-aft, and diagonal symmetries.(18)SYMRV=XUL′-XUR′+XLL′-XLR′+ZUL′-ZUR′+ZLL′-ZLR′+HUL′-HUR′+HLL′-HLR′+DUL′-DUR′+DLL′-DLR′+ΘRUL′-ΘRUR′+ΘRLL′-ΘRLR′+RRUL′-RRUR′+RRLL′-RRLR′12(19)SYMRD=XUL′-XLL′+XUR′-XLR′+ZUL′-ZLL′+ZUR′-ZLR′+HUL′-HLL′+HUR′-HLR′+DUL′-DLL′+DUR′-DLR′+ΘRUL′-ΘRLL′+ΘRUR′-ΘRLR′+RRUL′-RRLL′+RRUR′-RRLR′12(20)SYMRR=XUL′-XLR′+XLL′-XUR′+ZUL′-ZLR′+ZLL′-ZUR′+HUL′-HLR′+HLL′-HUR′+DUL′-DLR′+DLL′-DUR′+ΘRUL′-ΘRLR′+ΘRLL′-ΘRUR′+RRUL′-RRLR′+RRLL′-RRUR′12The top view is the xy plane; therefore, three types of symmetry can be obtained, which are the longitudinal, fore-and-aft, and diagonal symmetries.(21)SYMTH=YLL′-YUL′+YLR′-YUR′+XLL′-XUL′+XLR′-XUR′+BLL′-BUL′+BLR′-BUR′+DLL′-DUL′+DLR′-DUR′+ΘTLL′-ΘTUL′+ΘTLR′-ΘTUR′+RTLL′-RTUL′+RTLR′-RTUR′12(22)SYMTD=YUR′-YUL′+YLR′-YLL′+XUR′-XUL′+XLR′-XLL′+BUR′-BUL′+BLR′-BLL′+DUR′-DUL′+DLR′-DLL′+ΘTUR′-ΘTUL′+ΘTLR′-ΘTLL′+RTUR′-RTUL′+RTLR′-RTLL′12(23)SYMTR=YUL′-YLR′+YUR′-YLL′+XUL′-XLR′+XUR′-XLL′+BUL′-BLR′+BUR′-BLL′+DUL′-DLR′+DUR′-DLL′+ΘTUL′-ΘTLR′+ΘTUR′-ΘTLL′+RTUL′-RTLR′+RTUR′-RTLL′12whereXj′,Yj′,Zj′,Hj′,Bj′,ΘFj′,ΘRj′,ΘTj′,RFj′,RRj′,RTj′are, respectively, defined as follows:Xj′=∑injxij-xcj=UL,UR,LL,LRYj′=∑injyij-ycj=UL,UR,LL,LRZj′=∑injZij-Zcj=UL,UR,LL,LRHj′=∑injhijj=UL,UR,LL,LRBj′=∑injbijj=UL,UR,LL,LRDj′=∑injdijj=UL,UR,LL,LRΘFj′=∑injyij-ycxij-xcj=UL,UR,LL,LRΘRj′=∑injzij-zcyij-ycj=UL,UR,LL,LRΘTj′=∑injxij-xczij-zcj=UL,UR,LL,LRRFj′=∑injxij-xc2+yij-yc2j=UL,UR,LL,LRRRj′=∑injyij-yc2+zij-zc2j=UL,UR,LL,LRRTj′=∑injxij-xc2+zij-zc2j=UL,UR,LL,LRwhere UL represents the upper left; UR represents the upper right; LL represents the lower left; and LR represents the lower right.Here,xij,yij,zijis the coordinate point of body i on the position j of a quarter circle;xc,yc,zcis the center of the overall styling;bijis the width of bodyi;hijis the height of bodyi;dijis the depth of body i; andnjis the overall amount of the body in the quadrant. Here,ΘFj′,ΘRj′, andΘTj′are values of angles in the four quadrants of a quarter circle in the front view, the right side view, and the top view, respectively.RFj′,RRj′, andRTj′are the distance (in mm) between the center of each object to the center of all objects in quadrants in the front view, the right side view, and the top view, respectively. Based on Eq. (14), two types of product forms in Fig. 7are calculated to obtain the aesthetic-perception value of the symmetry, which areSYMa=0.889 andSYMb=0.492. It is known that the styling symmetry ofSYMais superior to that ofSYMb. Table 3lists the symmetrical layout data of the two types of styling. It is known from Fig. 7 that theSYMaof the product styling element presents a distribution in bilateral symmetry while the longitudinal symmetry also holds to a certain extent. The shape ofSYMbĖMbresembles the English letter ‘T’ and is in bilateral symmetry. However, the longitudinal shape has a larger top half and a smaller bottom half and thus it belongs to a very asymmetric shape.Proportion is also an important parameter of beauty and the earlier culture of human beings already had preferred proportion relation. Though different cultures may not have the same preference of beauty, some proportion shapes withstand the test of time, and are preserved until now. Marcus [32] described below shapes as beauty that pleases: squares (1:1), the square root of 2 (1:1.414); golden rectangles (1:1.618); the square root of 3 (1:1.732), and 2 times of square (1:2). He also added the golden proportion of5and the standard-ratio rectangles of 1:1.31 of books and newspapers proposed by an American Maitland Graves.It is better when the proportional ratio of an object’s scale and layout is approaching 1, 1.31, 1.414, 1.618, 1.732, 2, and 2.236. Therefore the index of judgment of beauty could be evaluated by measuring the degree of correspondence of the proportion of the object and the all elements inside as they approach the ideal proportion. When the proximity (PM) of the ideal proportion is 1, the object and elements all reach ideal proportion principles, and its proportional value is between 0 and 1, which could be calculated from Eq. (24).(24)PM=Po+Pe2,0⩽PM⩽1Among whichPois the proximity of object proportion and the ideal proportion;Peis the proximity of elements proportion and the ideal proportion. The larger the values ofPoandPeare, this represents the proportion of the object and elements is closer to the ideal proportion. Fig. 8shows relations of the ideal proportion of overall shape and different view angles of elements.(a)Ideal-proportion proximity of objectPo:Pois the proximity of the layout framework and ideal proportion constructed by the object. It is the degree of similarity between the proportion of object in three view angles summed up and the ideal proportion sequence as shown in Eq. (25). Among them,screpresents the difference between ideal proportionpjand the proportion (pc) of the object on view angle C is shown in Eq. (26).(25)Po=13∑c=131-scAmong which(26)sc=minpj-pc(27)Pj=1,11.31,11.414,11.618,11.732,12,12.236(28)pc=rc,ifrc⩽11rc,ifrc>1(29)rc=hb,ifC=1hd,ifC=2db,ifC=3Ideal-proportion proximity of elementsPe:Peis the proximity of each element and ideal proportion. It is the degree of similarity between the proportion all elements of object in three view angles summed up and the ideal proportion sequence as shown in Eq. (30). Among them,sicrepresents the difference between the ideal proportionpjand view angle proportion (pic) of theith element C as shown in Eq. (31).(30)Pe=13n∑i=1n∑c=131-sicAmong which(31)sic=minpj-pic(32)Pj=1,11.31,11.414,11.618,11.732,12,12.236(33)pic=ric,ifric⩽11ric,ifric>1(34)ric=hibi,ifC=1hidi,ifC=2dibi,ifC=3The above-mentioned Eq. (24) is utilized to calculate shapes of two different case examples as shown in Fig. 9. After calculation, it is known thatPMais 0.929,PMbis 0.867. Therefore the product-shape proportion ofPMais better thanPMb. Table 4is then the proportional layout attributes of shapes of case examples. The shape proportions in Fig. 9 seem to be close to each other. However, during the design process, dimensional designs based on some adequate proportional criteria are still required for obtaining better results.The essence of unity is on the feeling of unity resulted by object elements of approximate sizes and close distances. And it is required that the distance in between must be smaller than the distance from the overall shape frame as shown in Fig. 10. Fig. 10(a) delivers more feeling of unity because the distances between each object element are smaller than the distance from the overall shape frame; there is less feeling of unity among shape elements when the distance between each object elements equals to the distance from the overall shape frame as shown in Fig. 10(b). Foley and others also noticed that two times of visual stimulus will share a common characteristic or approach each other [33]. Each individual element is grouped and surrounded by the white space. Unity is used for the inspection of object consistence. If unity exists, then all elements visually construct as a whole. When unity equals to 1, this means constructed elements are completely identical, at the moment the assembly of all elements possesses the feeling of wholeness and feeling of order. Therefore, the unity of overall shape design is better as it is closer to1. Eq. (35) is a quantitative method used for the evaluation of a design’s unity.(35)UM=Ue+Uo2,0⩽UM⩽1(a)Unity of element class in an object:(36)Ue=1-ns-1nAmong whichns-1nis the difference of each element in an object, and its value is zero, representing no difference among element categories.Uerepresents the unity among elements,nis the quantity of elements in overall shape, andnsis the quantity of element classes.Aggregation of elements:(37)Uo=1-ao-∑i=1naiaoAmong whichUorepresents the aggregation of elements in an object.ao-∑i=1naiis used to calculate the gaps among elements in an object.aorepresents the volume constructed by object framework.aiis the volume of theith element.The essence of minimalist is on the resulting feeling of minimalist by the overall shape with pure or identical object shapes, and the simpler the relation between objects the better it is. In the design process of shapes, it realizes the quantity of shape elements of the optimal product. It reduces the number of alignment points between shape elements and that of different shape elements to the minimum. Mullet and Sano [34] proposed fundamental design principles: simplicity, which requires the minimum construction elements and a simplified relation between parts and other parts. Another kind of cognitive meaning is succinctness, which means a set of methods which are able to directly get down to brass tacks, to supply fundamental aesthetics evaluation in the art or science aspect, and it suggests that object elements should be similar. Tullis derived from the study of Bonsiepe [35] who proposed that screen complexity is based on character foundations and proposed a complexity measurement method applied on information methods and intelligence theories through the printed design. This approach requires the calculation of data-item quantity of different rows or columns constructed by characters or numbers in the initial position [35,36]. The intelligence theory is used for the calculation of arrangement complexity of the initial position, and the measurement of Tullis is based on the characteristic of character arrangement, this study utilizes this concept to transform product shape and proceeds with the measurement of product-shape minimalist.Minimalist is used for the inspection of simple messages of object shapes. If the minimalist exists, then visually all essential factors are more simplified. When the minimalist equals to 1, this means constructed elements are completely identical, then the assembly of each element will have the feeling of wholeness and feeling of order. Therefore, it is better that the minimalist of overall design is closer to 1. Eq. (38) is a quantitative method that is used for the evaluation of design minimalist.(38)MinM=2ns+n,0⩽MinM⩽1Among which MinM is the minimalist of overall shape andnsis the class quantity of elements; n is the quantity of overall shape elements.The aesthetic perception of products cannot be interpreted by a single aesthetic measuring principle, and the aesthetic measures of the products should be assessed from a comprehensive point of view. In this study, the values calculated by each item of the aesthetic measure principles represent the aesthetic measure of such a principle. If it is required to assess the aesthetic perception of a product, except for the aesthetic-measure principles that are considered by average designers, the emphasis on every item of the aesthetic measures differs from person to person. Thus, the designers’ degree of emphasis on each item of the aesthetic-measure principles should be introduced to ensure that the aesthetic measures of the products can be obtained from an objective point of view. In this study, the aesthetic-measure measurement of the products is calculated by the weighted average aesthetic measures, as shown in Eq. (39).(39)OM=∑inαiMinwhere n is the count of aesthetic-measure-principle items;αiis the weight of theith aesthetic measure; andMiis the assessed value of theith aesthetic measure.In this study, weighted average aesthetic equations were established based on a rational foundation, and an application of fuzzy theory was proposed that was based on an emotional foundation. By using an evaluation method that included the quantization of the subjects’ perceptions, the differences in the results of the aesthetic evaluation were compared. Therefore, the difference in the aesthetic evaluation (AE) can be calculated by means of Eq. (40).(40)AE=AR-Miwhere AE is the difference in the aesthetic evaluation; AR is the quantization value of the aesthetic perception by fuzzy evaluations; andMiis the value that is calculated by theith equation for aesthetic measures.Since Professor Zadeh proposed fuzzy set theory in 1965 [21,22], it has been applied in various fields to solve decision analyses problems by using uncertain factors in a fuzzy environment [23–30].In this study, a fuzzy comprehensive evaluation is adopted for the quantization of consumers’ opinions, and the operation procedures are as follows:Step 1:Establish the factor set, which comprises the aggregation of various types of factors that are represented by U, whereU=u1,u2,…,um,uii=1,2,…,mrepresents each affecting factor.Establish the weight set, which reflects the degree of importance of each factor. A corresponding weighting factoraii=1,2,…,mis assigned for each factor, while the aggregation from that combines the weighting factors isÃ=a1,a2,…,am, which is called the weight set; at the same time, each weighting factoraishould satisfy normalization and should be non-negative.(41)∑i=1mai=1,ai>>0(i=1,2,…,m)The weight set is a fuzzy subset on the factor set, and it can be represented by(42)A∼=a1u1+a2u2+⋯+amumEstablish the evaluation set. The evaluation set, which is represented by VV=V1,V2,…,Vn, is the aggregation of all of the evaluation results when the referees are making a strategic decision. Here,Vi(i=1,2,…,n)represents various types of evaluation results that could possibly appear.Perform a single factor fuzzy evaluation. This evaluation is conducted separately by aiming at one factor to determine the degree of membership of the evaluation target on the evaluation elements. A fuzzy set that is formed by a combination of evaluation results is called a single-factor evaluation setR∼1:(43)R∼1=ri1V1+ri2V2+⋯+rimVmwhich can be represented simply by(44)R∼1=ri1,ri2,…,rimThe matrix that combines the membership grades of each single-factor evaluation set is called the single-factor evaluation matrix:(45)R∼=r11r12⋯r1nr21r22⋯r2n⋮⋮⋮⋮rm1rm2⋯rmnPerform a fuzzy comprehensive evaluation. With a comprehensive consideration of the influence of all of the factors, a correct evaluation result is obtained. For the evaluated valuerijof each factor, the weighting factor of the corresponding factoraii=1,2,…,mis added, and the fuzzy comprehensive evaluation that is obtained can be represented by Eq. (46).(46)B∼=A∼∘R∼(47)B∼=a1,a2,…,am∘r11r12⋯r1nr21r22⋯r2n⋮⋮⋮⋮rm1rm2⋯rmn=b1,b2,…,bn(48)bj=Vi=1mai∧rijj=1,2,…,nwhereB∼is the fuzzy-setsevaluation set, andbjis called the fuzzy comprehensive evaluation index, which is abbreviated to be called the evaluation index.Process the evaluation index. Based on the evaluation indexbjj=1,2,…,n, the concrete results of the evaluation targets can be confirmed by three types of methods.(1) The method of maximum degree of membership: Take the evaluation elementVLthat corresponds to the maximum evaluation indexmaxbjas the evaluation result:(49)V=VLVL→maxbj(2) The weighted-average method: Withbjas a weighting factor, the weighted average that is performed on each evaluation elementVjis the evaluation result.(50)V=∑j=1nbjvj∑j=1nbjIf the evaluation index is normalized, then(51)V=∑j=1nbjvj(3) The method of fuzzy analysis: The evaluation index directly serves as the evaluation result; alternatively, the evaluation standard is normalized, and the method for performing the normalization is(52)b=∑j=1mbjThen, each evaluation standard is divided by b(53)B′=b1b,b2b,…,bnb=b1′,b2′,…,bn′wherebj′j=1,2,…,nis the normalized fuzzy evaluation standard.The genetic algorithm (GA) proposed by Professor John Holland [31] defines an evolution process as finding the better chromosomes among those of the current generation via inheritance. Each generation results in an even better adaption to the environment for the chromosomes of the next generation. This approach looks for an approximate optimized solution via the rules of evolution and has been widely applied in many fields of optimization design, such as computer science, electrical engineering, and mechanical engineering.Fig. 11shows the process of the generation of the best aesthetic styling by real-coded genetic algorithms. Its procedures are described separately, as follows:Step 1:The definition of the product styling parametersFor every product styling, it is required to define a group of parameters and the range to which each parameter corresponds, which are for the encoding of genes and the constraints of the upper and lower bounds.The encoding of product feature parametersThe product feature parameters are represented by the aggregation of P, which is {P1,…,Pn} and becomes the encoding of the real-coded genes.The initialization of the chromosome groupsThe first population is randomly generated and the equation for generating the chromosomes is as follows:(54)Population[i][j]=random[Min,Max]wherei=1,2,…,Psize;j=1,2,…,Clength.In Eq. (54), Population represents the group, while i and j represent thejth gene of theith chromosome in the group;Psizeis the group size;Clengthis the chromosome length; random is the random function, and Min and Max represent the minimum and maximum values of the random function.The assessment of the chromosomes’ degree of adaptationThe evaluation standard for assessing the degree of adaptation of the chromosomes is the comprehensive aesthetic measures that are obtained by the questionnaire. In the evolutionary process, the calculation of the chromosomes’ degree of adaptation can be used to obtain the weighted average aesthetic measures from Eq. (39). This approach is the aggregation of the fitness values of three aesthetic measure principles. The higher the fitness value is, the higher the chance for the chromosomes to survive.The convergence ruleThe convergence rule is used to determine whether the chromosomes reach the fitness value. If a chromosome meets the requirement, then it is the best solution. If no chromosome meets the requirement, then the population enters the mechanism of selection, crossover, and mutation, to generate new filial generations.The mechanisms of selection, crossover, and mutation(a) Crossover:In the group in the parent generationPsize, two chromosomes, P1 and P2, are selected. By a simple arithmetic crossover that uses the mechanism of crossover, new filial instances are generated. Based on Eq. (55), the first three filial instances are generated from two parents in the parent population. Then, the filial instances that are outside the bounds are eliminated, keeping two new filial instances.(55)C1=0.5P1+0.5P2C2=1.5P1-0.5P2C3=-0.5P1+1.5P2(b) Mutation:After the determination that a mutation will take place, it is determined that thePithgene of a specific chromosome undergoes mutation. Within the upper and lower bounds of the parameter range, which are(Ui)and(Li), a value r (0⩽r⩽1) is randomly generated for the replacement of thePithgene with the existing gene after the mutationPi′. The uniform mutation is as follows:Pi′=Li+rUi-Li, and the chromosome after the mutation is P=(P1, P2, …,Pi′, …,Pn).Conformity to requirementsWhen chromosomes reach the fixed final generation or the target fitness value, then the styling that corresponds with the aesthetic requirements of the market is generated.In Section 2 thumbtacks are used for deriving the equations of aesthetic measures of product shapes. However, the target product should not be limited to the stationery but can also be extended to information products with large variations in product styling. Since all-in-one stereos do not have a complex operation interface, which may get this study obscured, they are selected as the case study for verifying the standpoints in this study.In this case study, all-in-one stereos were adopted as the case for the optimization of form aesthetics. Such all-in-one stereos on the market were classified by structure and morphology, as shown in Table 5. The representative samples of various structure types in Table 5 were screened out, collected, and organized for the case operations in this study.The comprehensive aesthetic evaluation is an assessment approach based on the fuzzy theory. It provides the quantization of the fuzzy degree of subjects’ perception of things and objects. The questionnaire includes six product samples and 3 aesthetic-measure principles for the aesthetic evaluation. The 30 subjects being investigated include 15 designers is the same industry and 15 design students and male and female subjects both account for half of the total subjects.This manuscript considers only the influence of styling on the aesthetic principles but the color and texture are not considered. Therefore all sample figures are presented in gray scale, and the representative product sample is for the aesthetic perception in the three-dimensional space instead of single angle of view.A semantic assessment was conducted on the six representative product samples so as to establish consumers’ aesthetic-measure evaluation set and weight set. And the fuzzy comprehensive evaluation is also utilized to obtain every sample’s comprehensive aesthetic evaluation, which assists in assessing the quality of the collected products’ aesthetics styling. This way the representative product styling for further correction can be determined.Step 1:Establish the aesthetic-measure evaluation matrix, which is the evaluation matrix of the ith aesthetic measure of the jth sample for the kth subject, and it can be represented by Eq. (56).(56)R∼ij(k)=r∼ij(k)m×n=r∼11(k)⋯r∼1n(k)⋮⋱⋮r∼m1(k)⋯r∼mn(k)m×nwith aesthetic-measure principles i=1, 2, …, m;samples j=1, 2, …, n;subjects k=1, 2, …, t.Establish the aesthetic-measure weight set, which is the emphasis for the kth subject on the ith aesthetic principle, and it can be represented by Eq. (57).(57)W∼i(k)=W∼i(k)1×m=W∼1(k),…,W∼m(k)1×mwith aesthetic-measure principles i=1, 2, …, m;subjects k=1, 2, …, t.Combine the opinion of the kth subject, and establish the average evaluation matrix and the average weight set.(a) The average evaluation matrix is obtained by taking the average membership grade of the ith aesthetic measure of the jth sample for the tth consumer, which means to take the membership grade of the aesthetic principles of the samples for all of the subjects.(58)AR∼=ar∼ijm×nwhere(59)ar∼ij=∑k=1tR∼ij(k)taesthetic-measure principles i=1, 2, …, m;subjects k=1, 2, …, t;the number of subjects t.The average weight set is obtained by taking the average of the importance of the ith aesthetic measure after the appraisal through a comparison for the tth consumer, which means taking the average of the emphasis of each aesthetic principle for all of the subjects.(60)AW∼i(k)=aw∼i1×m=aw∼1,…,aw∼m1×mwhere(61)aw∼i=∑k=1tw∼i(k)taesthetic-measure principles i=1, 2, …, m;subjects k=1, 2, …, t;the number of subjects t.Comprehensively consider the influence of all of the aesthetic principles by the fuzzy comprehensive evaluation, to obtain the correct evaluation results. ForAR∼, by adding the corresponding factor of weightAW∼, the comprehensive influence of all of the factors can be reasonably reflected. Therefore, the fuzzy-comprehensive evaluation is represented by(62)E∼=AW∼∘AR∼=e1,e2,…,enwhere n=the sample count.In this study, the fuzzy-comprehensive-evaluation results of the samples areE∼=AW∼∘AR∼=0.830.550.750.740.710.54. The comprehensive aesthetic evaluation of Sample 1 is 0.83, which is the best among 6 samples. The evaluated value of Sample 6 is 0.54, which is the lowest. In this study, the sample with the lower aesthetic evaluation (i.e., Sample 6) will serve as the sample to be improved by the form-aesthetics optimization of the genetic algorithms.A 3D model of Sample 6 was built, and product characteristic parameters of the sample were encoded in real-coded form, as shown in Table 6. Each characteristic parameter value represents one gene, and all of the genes constitute a chromosome that represents a whole product. The real-coded encoding omits the encoding and decoding procedures that are required in a binary system, and it directly restores the genes to the original answer, which can effectively improve the searching efficiency of the system and increase the chance for reaching the global optimum within the systems. As shown in Table 6, the parameter sequence of P1∼P14 represents a group of chromosomes, which is a group of solutions. It is required to define the corresponding parameter range of each gene as well, which prevents the condition of the parameters from exceeding the range during the processes of crossover and mutation (of the genes).In this study, the equation for aesthetic measures serves as the fitness function of the genetic algorithms and serves as the assessment standard of the product forms. The aesthetic-measure principles considered in this case are balance, equilibrium, and symmetry, i.e., M1, M2 and M3. The design of the fitness functions is obtained by integrating three aesthetic-measure principles, using Eq. (39) for the weighted average aesthetic measures:OM=∑inαiMin=OptOM(Pi)=Max[OM(Pi)]=α1OptMbalance(Pi)+α2OptMequilibrium(Pi)+α3OptMsymmetry(Pi)+α4OptMproportion(Pi)+α5OptMunity(Pi)+α6OptMminimalist(Pi)6wheren=the item count of the aesthetic-measure principles (Three aesthetic-measure principles are considered in this case, and therefore, n=6);α1is the weight of the aesthetic measure for balance;α2is the weight of the aesthetic measure for equilibrium;α3is the weight of the aesthetic measure for symmetry;α4is the weight of the aesthetic measure for proportion;α5is the weight of the aesthetic measure for unity;α6is the weight of the aesthetic measure for minimalist; and the aesthetic measure setMi=M1,M2,M3,M4,M5,M6=Mbalance,Mequilibrium,Msymmetry,Mproportion,Munity,MminimalistFor the design of the fitness functions, it is required to first define the design characteristics, the relationship between each characteristic parameter, the design demands, and the equation definitions of the parameter modifications for Sample 6, which are shown in Table 7. A comparison of the parameter encodings is shown in Table 7.(1)The setting of the fitness function of balanceThe fitness function of the balance BM is related to parameterPi, and the variation in the parameters will approach a balance performance with the optimal styling. The design of the fitness function of the balance takes the maximum value, as in Eq. (63).(63)OptMbalance(Pi)=Max[BM(Pi)]where(64)BM=1-∑MO(65)∑MO=23Mx(66)Mx=∑i=1nmximax[mxi]The variation of the form moment of the ith elements in the object is related to only the z direction, such as in Eqs. (67)–(69).(67)mxi=βi∫z⇀idv(68)myi=βi∫z⇀idv(69)mzi≅0Because the form moments of each element in the object in the x and y directions are equal, i.e.,mxi=myi, the result is thatMx=My. Therefore, the degree of stability of the objects and elements in the layout space can be represented by Eq. (65). This circumstance indicates a steady state when its total value is zero, and the balance of styling the BM can be calculated by Eq. (64).The setting of the fitness function of equilibriumThe fitness function of the equilibriumEMOis related to parameterPi, and the variation in the parameters will affect the stability of the element layouts. Therefore, the fitness function of the equilibrium is defined by Eq. (70).(70)OptMequilibrium(Pi)=MaxEMO(Pi)where(71)EMO=13Ez(72)Ez=1-∑i=1nzi-zchBecause the styling elements of the samples are all fore-and-aft and bilateral symmetrical, the influence of the layout from its elements on equilibrium is related only to the z-axis direction. The performance of the equilibrium of the styling on the x and y directions approaches zero(Ex=Ey≒0). Additionally, the equilibrium of the elements in the object in the z direction is shown in Eq. (72).The design of the fitness function of symmetrysymmetry is designed as follows, which is explained in Fig. 12:(73)OptMsymmetry(Pi)=Max[SYM(Pi)]=1-SYMFV+SYMFH+SYMFR+SYMRV+SYMRD+SYMRR+SYMTH+SYMTD+SYMTR9whereSYMFV=0, which indicates the bilateral symmetry against the vertical axis of the front view;SYMRV≅0, which indicates the approximate bilateral symmetry against the vertical axis of the right side view;SYMTH≅0, which indicates the approximate bilateral symmetry against the horizontal axis of the top view;SYMTD=0, which indicates the bilateral symmetry against the depth of axis of the top view; andSYMTR≅0, which indicates the approximate bilateral symmetry against the radial axis of the top view.As shown in Fig. 12, the symmetry of Sample 6 only needs to considerSYMFH(the bilateral symmetry against the horizontal axis of the front view),SYMFR(the symmetry against the radial axis of the front view),SYMRD(the bilateral symmetry against the depth axis of the right side view), andSYMRR(the bilateral symmetry against the radial axis of the right side view). Therefore, the fitness function of the symmetry of Sample 6 can be represented as(74)MaxSYMPi=1-SYMFH+SYMFR+SYMRD+SYMRR9(a) The bilateral symmetry against the horizontal axis of the front view:SYMFH=YUL′-YLL′+YUR′-YLR′+ZUL′-ZLL′+ZUR′-ZLR′+BUL′-BLL′+BUR′-BLR′+HUL′-HLL′+HUR′-HLR′+ΘFUL′-ΘFLL′+ΘFUR′-ΘFLR′+RFUL′-RFLL′+RFUR′-RFLR′12(b) The bilateral symmetry against the radial axis of the front view:SYMFR=YUL′-YLR′+YUR′-YLL′+ZUL′-ZLR′+ZUR′-ZLL′+BUL′-BLR′+BUR′-BLL′+HUL′-HLR′+HUR′-HLL′+ΘFUL′-ΘFLR′+ΘFUR′-ΘFLL′+RFUL′-RFLR′+RFUR′-RFLL′12(c) The bilateral symmetry against the depth axis of the right side view:SYMRD=XUL′-XLL′+XUR′-XLR′+ZUL′-ZLL′+ZUR′-ZLR′+HUL′-HLL′+HUR′-HLR′+DUL′-DLL′+DUR′-DLR′+ΘRUL′-ΘRLL′+ΘRUR′-ΘRLR′+RRUL′-RRLL′+RRUR′-RRLR′12(d) The bilateral symmetry against the radial axis of the right side view:SYMRR=XUL′-XLR′+XLL′-XUR′+ZUL′-ZLR′+ZLL′-ZUR′+HUL′-HLR′+HLL′-HUR′+DUL′-DLR′+DLL′-DUR′+ΘRUL′-ΘRLR′+ΘRLL′-ΘRUR′+RRUL′-RRLR′+RRLL′-RRUR′12The design of the fitness function of proportionThe fitness function of proportion PM is related to parameterPi. The parameter variations shall approach the optimal proportional presentation of a form. The maximum proportional fitness value was taken for calculation in Eq. (75).(75)OptMproportion(Pi)=MaxPM(Pi)where(76)PM=Po+Pe2The design of the fitness function of unityThe fitness function of the unity UM is related to parameterPi. Similarly, the maximum unity fitness value was taken for calculation in Eq. (77).(77)OptMunity(Pi)=MaxUM(Pi)where(78)UM=Uo+Ue2The design of the fitness function of minimalistThe fitness function of the minimalist MinM is related to parameterPi. Similarly, the maximum minimalist fitness value was taken for calculation in Eq. (79).(79)OptMminimalist(Pi)=MaxMinM(Pi)where(80)MinM=2ns+nWhen conducting generation evolutions to seek a solution by applying genetic algorithms, the termination criteria for evolution must first be decided, to determine when to terminate the evolution procedures. There are two criteria as follows. 1. The fitness function reaches a certain fitness value; 2. The number of evolutionary generations reaches the maximum set value. In this study, the maximum set number of evolutionary generations is 200, and the initial population is 100.The framework of the form optimization in this study is shown in Fig. 8. The genetic algorithm system is written in the programming language of Matlab. Its algorithm handles the design parameters that are acquired by the original case from 3D models and the design conditions and parameter ranges that are set by the designers. By means of the genetic algorithm system, the optimized design parameters were acquired and restored to the 3D models, and the optimized scheme of the styling is obtained. In this study, although the number of evolution generations is set to 200, its fitness function reached the fitness value and converged when it was at approximately 50 generations. This phenomenon can be observed from the convergence graph of the fitness function in Fig. 13.The evolution results of the genes are shown in Table 8, and the fitness function is OM. In the three schemes, the quality of the aesthetic measures is compared by the fitness values, which are between 0 and 1. The function is designed asOM′=1-OMin Matlab. By taking the minimum value, the obtainedOM′leads toOM=1-OM′, which is the fitness value of the comprehensive aesthetics. It is known from the results that the performance of the optimized scheme on the fitness value is higher than that of the original case (0.968).The parameter sequence of the optimized scheme is transformed into 3D models, the results of which are shown in Table 9. This Table 9 indicates that the results of the genetic algorithms meet the pre-set aesthetic requirements (balance, equilibrium, symmetry, proportion, unity, and minimalist).The results of the comprehensive aesthetic evaluation and the equation for the aesthetic measures were compared to assess whether the equation for the aesthetic measures is in agreement with the subjects’ perception of beauty and to adequately correct the equation accordingly. Finally, by comparing the styling that was generated by the genetic algorithms, it was possible to determine whether the styling corresponded with the best aesthetic demand. The results of this determination are shown in Table 9.The equation for aesthetic measure is based on the objective calculation that is established on a rational foundation, while the comprehensive aesthetic evaluation is based on fuzzy theory and is an evaluation method established by the quantization of the subjects’ perceptions. Here, the difference between the results of the equation for the aesthetic measure and that of the comprehensive aesthetic evaluation are compared.Each aesthetic measure can be obtained by substituting the parameter set that is established by the research sample and initial values within the parameter range of Table 8 into the parametric equations of balance, equilibrium, and symmetry. A comparison between the results of the equation for the aesthetic measures (M) and the aesthetic evaluation set (AR) is shown in Table 9, in which the difference of the aesthetic evaluations (AE) in the balance, equilibrium and symmetry lie in the range 0.198–0.424. While the function interval is [0,1], the differences between the subjects’ aesthetic perceptions for “balance”, “equilibrium”, “symmetry”, “proportion”, “unity” and “minimalist” can thus be clearly observed.To investigate this difference, in this study, form optimization was performed on the balance, equilibrium, and symmetry of Sample 6. The difference between the solution to the equation for the aesthetic measures and a comprehensive aesthetic evaluation was compared for the best sample of shape generation, the original case, and other samples. This process serves as the correction of the equation for aesthetics or the investigation of human aesthetic cognition.Although a comprehensive aesthetic evaluation can assist in the quantization of consumers’ perceptions, the results of this study indicate that a slight difference still exists between calculated and measured results. The difference in the balance of the aesthetic perception between Sample 6’s calculated and measured results for balance is 0.23; similarly, 0.424 for equilibrium; 0.33 for symmetry; 0.29 for proportion; 0.235 for unity; 0.198 for minimalist. Additionally, for the best styling generated by gene styling (GA-S6), the three evaluations of aesthetics on the equation for aesthetics and the aesthetic evaluation consistently indicate a favorable aesthetic-perception performance.With this phenomenon, the error in the assessment of the aesthetic cognition of humans can be discovered, while the equation for aesthetics supplies a method of objective evaluation that can allow designers to find the factors that have a substantial influence on the aesthetic perception of styling. Taking this case as an example, for Sample 6 in the fuzzy evaluation, the subjects all indicate that the three assessed values for the aesthetics are 0.438–0.784, which are not high. However, in the calculation of the equation for the aesthetic measures, only the value of the balance is 0.775, which means that the result is not satisfactory. The other values are 0.862 for equilibrium, 0.955 for symmetry, 0.874 for proportion, 0.893 for unity, and 0.982 for minimalist and these values indicate the performance is better.This type of difference between the fuzzy evaluation and the equation for aesthetic perception obtains an apparent improvement in the scheme (Ga-S6) of Sample 6, with the optimization attained by the genetic algorithms. The values of Ga-S6 in the fuzzy evaluation (0.912, 0.853, 0.832, 0.829, 0.889, 0.796) and the solutions to the aesthetic-measure equation (0.988, 0.968, 0.962, 0.952, 0.946, 0.982) both consistently indicate that the three indices of aesthetic measures have a high performance.Such variation comes from an illusion in the judgment of aesthetic perception by the perception of humans. Among the calculation results of Sample 6’s aesthetic measures, only the performance in terms of balance requires further improvement. The subjects’ perception of balance does not meet the criteria but in contrary, the assessments of equilibrium, symmetry, proportion, and unity are indirectly affected. Moreover, the values of minimalist do not vary to a greater extent in the case study. It is known from Table 9 that Sample 6’s measure of balance is smaller than those of the others among all of the aesthetic measures. The results of the fuzzy evaluation indicated that the aesthetic perceptions of balance and equilibrium are lower than others. The lower aesthetic measures were then selected as the target to be modified for further optimization. For those with lower aesthetic measures, the results of the optimization designs revealed that the rest of the aesthetic measures can be enhanced as well. In this case study, the physical meaning of the minimalist aesthetic perception is defined as the simplification of the product styling elements. However, the styling elements in this case study just underwent adjustments to a smaller extent and thus no variation in the minimalist aesthetic measure can be observed.This is due to the fact that the parts and form types do not change for the optimized sample. This circumstance makes the degrees of conformity of the three indices be on the low side. Because the equation for aesthetic perception supplies an objective assessment measure, the real problem lies in the improvement in the balance. If the balancing layout of the products can be improved while retaining the equilibrium and the symmetry, the subjects’ perception of the styling of Sample 6 will then be somewhat improved. From the optimization of Ga-S6, it is thus clear that, except for the enhancement in the degree of conformity of the equation for aesthetic perception, the subjects’ degrees of conformity in the fuzzy evaluation are also enhanced at the same time.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study utilized the Kansei vocabulary concept and the principles of balance, equilibrium, symmetry, proportion, unity, and minimalist are considered for selecting the Kansei vocabularies. Fuzzy evaluation was utilized for the quantization consumers’ perception of the product-shape aesthetics. The product shapes which are less preferable for the consumers were corrected and re-designed based on the genetic algorithms. With genetic algorithms, this approach assists designers in looking for a design parameter combination of the best aesthetics scheme within the specified parameter range. This approach reduces the time spent on the process of adjusting the characteristic parameters of the products and designers’ difference with respect to the aesthetic cognition can be eliminated. The equation for aesthetic measures was applied to the measurement of product aesthetics and the adjustment of product form aesthetics. This approach can shorten the procedures of adjusting the modifications of the product styling parameters with the designers. Additionally, the designers can objectively assess the aesthetic perception and can set the critical styling parameters based on the definition of the equation for aesthetic measures. A comprehensive aesthetic evaluation of the target products for consumers is obtained and compared with an equation of aesthetic-measure principles. The fitness value of the genetic algorithms is introduced into the comprehensive aesthetic evaluation, which can convey the expectation of the market to the demands of the aesthetic perception. This approach can achieve the goal of meeting market-oriented demands by satisfying the fitness value.The research results showed the difference between peoples’ assessments of aesthetic cognition, while the equation for aesthetic measure supplies an objective method for evaluations that allow designers to find the factors that have substantial influence on the aesthetic perception of product forms. Recent studies of genetic algorithms assist in the data analysis, future trend forecasting, budgeting, and solving of many other problems in the field of combinatorial optimization. There are very few researchers who apply genetic algorithms to the optimization of product styling based on the aesthetics. Follow-up research can consider the design conditions by combining various problems that involve product designs, which serve as the design for the fitness functions of the genetic algorithms. This approach enables the optimization of the product design while considering the design demands and the considerations of various levels, such as engineering, aesthetics, and manufacturing.