@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A knowledge centric methodology for dental implant technology assessment using ontology based patent analysis and clinical meta-analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Combines patent and clinical meta-analysis as a novel way to assess medical R&D.Identifies state-of-the-art dental implant device development trends.Discovers essential design strategies for improving prosthetic dental technology.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Patent analysis,Ontology schema,Meta-analysis,Clinical trials,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The medical equipment industry has been one of the fastest growing sectors of the decade with predicted global sales reaching US$ 430billion in 2017 [22]. During the period from 1995 to 2008, the patent applications in medical technology increased rapidly worldwide (World Intellectual Property Organization, 2012). Patent analysis, although useful in forecasting technology development trends, has posed a challenging analysis task since the volume and diversity of new patent applications has surpassed the ability of regular firms and research teams to process and identify relevant information. Further, medical related technologies rely on clinical trials to validate and gain regulatory approval for patient treatment even though patents, protecting the intellectual property rights of inventors, have been granted. This research focuses on developing a knowledge centric methodology and system to analyze and assess viable medical technology innovations and trends considering both patents and clinical reports. Specifically, the design innovations of dental implant connections are used as a case study. A novel and generic methodology combining ontology based patent analysis and clinical meta-analysis is developed to analyze and identify the most effective patented techniques in the dental implant field. The research establishes and verifies a computer supported analytical approach and system for the strategic prediction of medical technology development trends.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The World Health Organization [59] reported that about 30% of the population whose age is between 65 and 74 are likely to lose some of their natural teeth. Dental implants are a medical treatment with a range of products used to restore oral functions when losing teeth to caries, periodontitis, or accident. The global dental implant and prosthetics market was valued at US $ 6.8billion dollars in 2011 and is expected to reach US $10.5billion dollars in 2016 [5]. The surgical success and consumer acceptance have increased the global demand for implants and the prosthesis market. The demand for dental implants continues to attract companies and researchers to improve the design and development of dental implant components, devices, and techniques.Modern dental implants have been used since the 1960s [1]. Since then, many improvements in dental implants have been introduced resulting in a variety of patents filed and granted. Fig. 1depicts the number of patents related to dental implants in the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) from 1990 to 2012. Most dental implants consist of implant bodies (screws embedded in the jawbone), abutments (the platform for connection between the implant and crown), and crowns (the aesthetic and functional artificial replacement to the tooth). Many forms of dental implant connections have been developed as a critical part of dental implant R&D to improve torque transfer, gain stability between the implant body and the abutment, and subsequently minimize implant connection failure. Thus, this research focuses on the case study of dental implant connections to demonstrate the knowledge centric methodology of DS technology assessment and trend prediction.The FDA [17] establishes regulations for dental implants abutments and enforces rigorous procedures of mechanical tests and clinical studies. However, there are still some implant designs in use with relatively high failure rates that pass the FDA regulations [46,2]. This research focuses on efficiently and accurately predicting medical technology trends with computer supported analyses of published patents and collective clinical trial literatures. Patent documents contain technical details of the innovations and inventions. In order to better understand the performance of new medical technologies and gain approval from regulatory agencies, reports of updated clinical trials on human subjects are also collectively analyzed. The objective of this research is to combine text mining, data mining, and meta-analysis within a specific domain, i.e., dental implant connections, including related patents and the corresponding clinical trials to better understand successful trends in medical technology innovation and adaptation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study proposes a methodology combining patent analysis and clinical meta-analysis. The critical text of patent documents is extracted using knowledge discovery to build the ontology. The ontology is validated by a dental expert and the construction of a visual map of key terms expresses and inter-relates the diverse terminologies from patent documents. The results help researchers utilize the knowledge of dental implant connections for further research and development. Meta-analysis provides a summary of the results from clinical trials which in turn is used to study the effectiveness of the related patents and implant designs. The research uses dental implants as a case study. The results help researchers and market analysts understand the implant connector market trends and determine the future design directions. In addition, the methodology developed in this research is broad enough to be applied to medical devices in general and can easily be extended to pharmaceutical products. The ability to link successful clinical trials and their effectiveness to patent designs and innovations provides a new means to access patent value.