@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Crosstalk events in the estrogen signaling pathway may affect tamoxifen efficacy in breast cancer molecular subtypes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A methodological pipeline to analyze enrichment in crosstalking pathways implicated in phenotypes of interest is presented.The aforementioned pipeline is used to explore deregulation of pathways crosstalking with the estrogen signaling pathway in breast cancer samples of different molecular subtypes.Exploration of enrichment lead to the generation of hypothesis related to the influence of crosstalking pathways to resistance to anti-estrogenic drugs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pathway crosstalk,Breast cancer,Estrogen signaling,Systems biology,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Steroid hormones are involved on cell growth, development and differentiation. Such effects are often mediated by steroid receptors. One paradigmatic example of this coupling is the estrogen signaling pathway. Its dysregulation is involved in most tumors of the mammary gland. It is thus an important pharmacological target in breast cancer. This pathway, however, crosstalks with several other molecular pathways, a fact that may have consequences for the effectiveness of hormone modulating drug therapies, such as tamoxifen. For this work, we performed a systematic analysis of the major routes involved in crosstalk phenomena with the estrogen pathway – based on gene expression experiments (819 samples) and pathway analysis (493 samples) – for biopsy-captured tissue and contrasted in two independent datasets with in vivo and in vitro pharmacological stimulation. Our results confirm the presence of a number of crosstalk events across the estrogen signaling pathway with others that are dysregulated in different molecular subtypes of breast cancer. These may be involved in proliferation, invasiveness and apoptosis-evasion in patients. The results presented may open the way to new designs of adjuvant and neoadjuvant therapies for breast cancer treatment.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Breast cancer is a complex disease (Polyak, 2011) with a very heterogeneous nature; several attempts at classifying the disease have been developed, at the clinical (Viale, 2012), histopathological (Malhotra et al., 2010), and molecular level (Sørlie et al., 2001). Said differences give way to different therapeutical approaches to deal with different prognosis.Mammary epithelial cells can be stimulated by estrogen, acting as a survival and proliferation signal (Levin, 2005). Canonically, estrogen binds to nuclear receptors, acting as a transcription factor. Estrogen receptors are also found on the membrane, which can activate second messenger proteins to relay the estrogen signal and exert physiological changes. These second messenger proteins can also directly affect estrogen receptors, modifying their affinity for ligands and for DNA and therefore changing their transcription factor activity. These interactions constitute the Estrogen Signaling Pathway (ESP), a pharmacological target for cancer therapy.Tamoxifen is a selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM) used for the neoadjuvant and adjuvant treatment of breast cancer. Its mechanism of action consists in the competitive inhibition of estrogen, inhibiting its various actions at the signaling and transcriptional level.Adjuvant tamoxifen therapy significantly reduces the risk of recurrence and death from breast cancer in all age groups (Wood et al., 2003; Group et al., 1998). Benefits related to tamoxifen adjuvant therapy include an increase in overall survival and distant disease-free survival, reduction of breast cancer-specific mortality, decreased risk of recurrence, and decreased risk of contralateral breast cancer (Cardoso et al., 2014).For these reasons, tamoxifen is the election drug in current clinical practice (Burstein et al., 2014; CENETEC, 2009). When compared with cytotoxic chemotherapy, SERMs are well tolerated and are associated with mostly minor toxicities. Despite the relative safety and significant antineoplastic and chemopreventive activities of antiestrogens, most initially responsive breast tumors acquire resistance (Clarke et al., 2003; Viedma-Rodrí guez et al., 2014).Breast cancer mortality is a major public health concern, particularly in developing countries. This is partially a result that most cancer cases in low- and middle-income countries are detected at later stages than in high-income countries. For this reason, surgical treatment is generally delayed in these countries, increasing the dependence on pharmacological treatment (Unger-Salda na and Infante-Casta neda, 2009).In this regard, let us recall that cancer is a pathway-based disease (Hanahan and Weinberg, 2000), and as such, pathway analysis is a powerful tool to understand the complex relationships and interactions that are involved in the pathology. Pathways are useful representations of these interactions, derived from our current knowledge of cellular function. As representations of the molecular biology of the cell, it comes as no surprise that many of these pathways share many molecules, being able to crosstalk (see Definition 1 and Fig. 1) with each other (Gilbert, 2000).These interactions are non-trivial, as many of the processes involved with a physiological (or pathological) function can be working in such a way that an alteration in one pathway leads to an alteration in many others. A systems biology approach is thus needed in order to properly contextualize such subtle interactions in a global, integrative manner. By understanding the mechanisms underlying the biological processes, a comprehensive analysis might lead to insights into the molecular phenomenology that further the pathological phenotypes (Hernández-Lemus, 2014).Definition 1A biological network is formally defined as a graphG(V,E)over a duplex formed by two sets, a set V of nodes or vertices (vi∈V) given by biomolecules, and a set E of edges connecting such vertices (ei∈E) representing physical or chemical interactions of several classes among such biomolecules. The connectivity rule is represented by the so-called adjacency matrixA=Ai,j, where Ai,j≠0 implies a non-null interaction between biomoleculesviandvj. If the biological network represents a biochemical or metabolic network, we can define trajectories over such network – i.e. specific concatenated sequences of interactions – representing previously defined biological processes. Such trajectories are called biochemical pathways.A given pathway is a trajectoryPm→n=vm→vm+1→vm+2⋯→vn−1→vnconnecting a series of moleculesvm,vm+1,vm+2,…,vn−1,vnby interactions leading to a particular biological process. Each one of the successive arrows represent a non-null interaction of strength Am,m+1, Am+1,m+2, …An−1,n, respectively.Within this graph approach, we say that crosstalk between two pathwaysPAandPBoccurs if there is a setvA,B(containing at least one molecule,viA,B) such that∀viA,B∈vA,Bit holds thatviA,B∈PAandviA,B∈PB. If A is the whole set of molecules inPAand B the whole set of molecules inPBthenvA,B=A⋂B. Every moleculeviA,B∈vA,Bis said to participate in a crosstalk event between pathwaysPAandPB.In this article, we explore deregulation of pathways crosstalking with the ESP, as a probable source of resistance to anti-estrogen therapy.We propose a pipeline designed to study deregulation of pathways that crosstalk with a pathway of biological interest. For this work, we centered on the Estrogen Signaling Pathway, as it is, as mentioned before, a pharmacological target in the treatment of breast cancer.We identified the pathways within the KEGG database (Kanehisa and Goto, 2000; Kanehisa et al., 2014) that crosstalk with said the ESP, and the molecules through which said crosstalk occurs.We studied the enrichment of said pathways in a highly curated dataset consisting in more than 800 microarray samples of breast cancer tumors, from different molecular subtypes.Given the definition of crosstalk we present, we assume that a pathway's enrichment status may directly be affected by the enrichment status of other pathway, only if this second pathway presents crosstalk (that is, shares at least a molecule) with the first one. We also assume that the deregulation of any one pathway in crosstalk with another pathway may (or may not), be involved in the deregulation of the second.To further explore some of the enriched pathways in relation to tamoxifen resistance, we applied the same methodology to data obtained from experiments in MCF-7 cell lines with resistance to tamoxifen, as well as data from patients treated with tamoxifen in the adjuvant context.Finally, we discuss some implications that the deregulation of certain pathways that crosstalk with the ESP (such as apoptosis and immune response pathways may have in the pharmacological treatment of breast cancer.Our work proposes an analysis pipeline described in Fig. 2. This pipeline takes data from current biological knowledge (pathway databases) and experimental expression data of different phenotypes. Pathways that crosstalk with a pathway of biological interest are identified, and Pathway enrichment profiles are generated for each of the phenotypes studied. This information is then used to generate biological hypothesis to be tested.In our work, we take pathways from the KEGG database and identify those that crosstalk with our pathway of biological interest, the Estrogen Signaling Pathway. Expression data of breast cancer samples classified into molecular subtypes is used. Enrichment profiles of the identified pathways are obtained for each molecular subtype.A dataset of 819 expression microarrays from untreated, primary breast cancer biopsy samples was compiled and curated from data obtained from GEO. We used microarray data from GSE 4922 (Ivshina et al., 2006), 1456 (Pawitan et al., 2005),7390 (Desmedt et al., 2007), 1561 (Farmer et al., 2005), 2603 (Minn et al., 2005), 2990 (Sotiriou et al., 2006), and 3494 (Miller et al., 2005). All of these sets were analyzed on the Affymetrix HGU133A platform. The expression levels of this dataset had been previously preprocessed and normalized by our group. Statistical procedures specific to deal with batch effects and other sources of non-biological variability were implemented (Baca-López et al., 2012). None of the patients had received previous pharmacological treatment.Data from 61 expression microarrays from normal breast epithelium tissue obtained from reduction mammoplasties of healthy women (GSE 9574 (Tripathi et al., 2008) and 6883 (Liu et al., 2007)), as well as data from healthy breast tissue obtained from breast cancer patients (GSE 15852 (Ni et al., 2010)). None of these samples were taken from patients of our case group, and no pharmacological treatment had been administered.For the assessment of deregulated pathway in resistant phenotypes, we explored two different datasets: The first one contains in vitro data from microarray expression studies on tamoxifen-resistant MCF-7 cell lines (Oyama et al., 2011), used to evaluate changes in pathway expression after estrogen and tamoxifen administration. The second contains microarray expression data from in vivo tamoxifen-treated women with known estrogen receptor status as collected from GSE2990 (Sotiriou et al., 2006).Several algorithms have been developed for single-sample assignation of breast cancer subtypes (Kittaneh et al., 2013). We classified our breast cancer microarray samples into the molecular subtypes of Luminal A, Luminal B, basal and Her2+, as these are classifications that are associated to concrete physiological differences (Perou et al., 2000).To achieve a maximum consistence in our classification, we decided to use a two-algorithm approach. For this, we used the algorithms CITBCMST (Guedj et al., 2012), and PAM50 (Parker et al., 2009) in tandem. These algorithms employ a nearest centroid method of subtype assignation, based on the expression profiles of a molecular signature (Tibshirani et al., 2002).Our methodology consisted of the following steps: first, we ran the CITBCMST algorithm on our control group, in order to identify the maximum distance from the healthy samples to the centroids defined by the algorithm's training set; this empirical distance was chosen as a cutoff measure to reduce ambiguity in classification; tumor samples that exceeded this distance to the nearest centroid were discarded from further study. Second, we ran the CITBCMST algorithm on our sample set. After that, we ran PAM50 on the same set. We kept those samples where both classifiers matched. We decided to group all Her2+ samples in one group, regardless of estrogen receptor status, as defined by the PAM50 predictor. Since CITBCMST splits Her2+ samples in two different subgroups (molecular apocrine, and a third luminal subgroup), we accepted any of these two as a match to a Her2+ assignation in PAM50 (Fig. 3).Our main objective in this study was to explore the ESP and its connections to other pathways. With this in mind, we developed a systematic approach to identify crosstalks events between pathways. This is so, since such pathways may be involved in the development of pharmacological resistance to tamoxifen and other hormone modulators. From Definition 1, a crosstalk event is any occurrence of the same molecule in two different pathways; this allows us to explore interactions through different mechanisms of signal transduction as annotated in biochemical pathway databases (see Fig. 1).We focused on pathways obtained from the KEGG Database as obtained from the Broad Institute Molecular Signature Database (Subramanian et al., 2005). We did not exclude disease related pathways. As a quantitative measure of the relative degree of crosstalk, we used the Jaccard coefficient (JAB), defined as A⋂B/A⋃B. We calculated JABfor each pair {A, B} of pathways in the KEGG database. Higher values of JABindicate higher similarity between pathways, and as such, a higher number of crosstalk events, up to a value of 1, which would indicate sameness. The use of the Jaccard index has been previously used (Jia et al., 2011; Donato et al., 2013) as a well-defined quantitative measure of pathway crosstalk.A number of pathways were identified to present crosstalk events with the ESP and were selected for further gene expression analysis. As pathways can be seen as collections of molecules, a gene-set enrichment strategy was performed. We selected Generally Applicable Gene-set Enrichment (GAGE), an algorithm for the study of gene-set enrichment based on a parametric gene randomization procedure upon the distribution of individual sample gene expression levels. This algorithm has shown to be quite sensitive for unpaired sample statistics (Luo et al., 2009). Comparisons were made between each of the breast cancer molecular subtype subsets of microarray data and the set of normal, healthy control microarray data.The algorithm was used considering unpaired samples, with a cut-off of False Discovery Rate (FDR) corrected p-value <0.1. As mentioned earlier, this study uses unpaired samples, due to sample availability constraints in the datasets included. Changes in pathway gene expression were tested in a single direction, identifying both upregulated and downregulated pathways.In order to identify the genes that are deregulated and therefore contribute to the enrichment of pathways described before, a differential expression analysis was performed. Each molecular subtype group is compared against the control group using the limma algorithm (Smyth, 2005). For each gene comparison, logfold change, FDR-corrected p-value and B-statistic were computed.Genes were considered differentially expressed if they had a logfold change >1, and a B-statistic >5, with corrected p-values <1×10−7.The goal of our work is to generate hypothesis relating the deregulation of pathways to pharmacological resistance, in particular in relation to the effect of tamoxifen on the estrogen receptor pathway. We searched data across the GEO database looking for pathway enrichment, profiles consistent with the ones encountered in our main dataset, in phenotypes associated with resistance. Raw expression data was independently processed and normalized according to the previously cited methodology (Baca-López et al., 2012). Pathway enrichment analysis for these experimental datasets was also performed by means of the GAGE algorithm as previously described.We analyzed the effects of estrogen stimulation and its blocking by tamoxifen in pathway expression. To identify possible crosstalk compensation in a resistant phenotype, we searched for differences in enrichment in the previously identified pathways that crosstalk with the ESP, between tamoxifen-resistant and tamoxifen-sensitive cells. We used data from GSE21618 (Oyama et al., 2011). In this dataset, a tamoxifen-resistant clone of MCF-7 cells was selected, and compared to the wild-type, sensitive cell line.We selected data from both cell types at their baseline levels, after 24h of estrogen administration, or 24h of estrogen+tamoxifen administration. We performed a similar pathway enrichment analysis, including the following contrasts (see Fig. 4).We searched for pathway expression differences marked by difference in estrogen receptor levels. Using data from GSE2990, we selected a subset of data of microarrays from tamoxifen-treated patients, with characterized estrogen receptor levels (as determined in Sotiriou et al., 2006). We performed pathway enrichment analysis of the previously identified pathways that crosstalk with the ESP, between patients with positive and negative estrogen receptor status. Pathways enriched in this comparison in our original dataset were chosen to validate a common profile of enrichment between histologically classified samples and molecularly profiled samples.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
