@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Product design concept evaluation using rough sets and VIKOR method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This work proposes a rough number enabled VIKOR method for concept evaluation.The perceptions of designers and customers are captured through rough numbers.The proposed method selects the best concept for both the designers and customers.The proposed method provides novel and more effective concepts ranking framework.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Design concept evaluation,Product design,VIKOR,Interval numbers,Rough numbers,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Design concept evaluation is one of the most important phases in the early stages of the design process as it not only significantly affects the later stages of the design process but also influences the success of the final design solutions. The main objective of this work is to reduce the imprecise content of customer evaluation process and thus, improve the effectiveness and objectivity of the product design. This paper proposes a novel way of performing design concept evaluations where instead of considering cost and benefit characteristics of design criteria, the work identifies best concept which satisfy constraints imposed by the team of designers on design criteria’s as well as fulfilling maximum customers’ preferences. In this work, the rough number enabled modified Vlsekriterijumska Optimizacija I Kompromisno Resenje (VIKOR) method for design concept evaluation is developed by modifying the extended VIKOR method with interval numbers. The proposed technique is labeled as modified rough VIKOR (MR-VIKOR) analysis. The work primarily involves two phases of concept evaluation. In the first phase, relative importance ranking and initial weights of design criteria are computed through the importance assigned to each design criteria by the designers or the decision makers (DM); and in the second phase, customers’ preferences to the generated user needs are captured in the form of rough numbers. The relative importance ranking computed in first phase along with customers’ preferences is incorporated in the second phase to select the best concept.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Concept evaluation is an important stage in the design process as it helps to assess the overall utility of design alternatives against the design objectives. Early concept evaluation can save both time and cost as 80% of overall product quality and 70–80% of product development cost is committed in the early stages of the design process [1–4]. The importance of design concept evaluation is obvious because the poor selection of a design concept can hardly ever be compensated at later stages of design process and may lead to large redesign costs [5]. Concept evaluation is a complex multi-criteria decision making problem inherent with a number of difficulties. Decision making during this process is hindered due to the complexity of problem solving, handling of conflicting decision-making criteria and assessment of product performance [6]. The need to incorporate highly subjective customer preferences in evaluation process, evaluation of trade-offs between conflicting design criteria, subjective judgments of experienced designers (or decision makers), calculating degree of satisfaction level of customers against the generated design alternatives and performance capabilities of design alternatives in terms of meeting the final technical specifications introduces various degree of uncertainty in the concept evaluation process.The main design objectives that helps to determine the success of the final design concept (design solution) are customers’ satisfaction, product development time and product cost. A designer should embrace these objectives in the design process to ensure competitive advantage in the fast growing market. Many previous concept evaluation frameworks consider customer satisfaction as most important objective, but most of the times, out of the real requirements specified by the customers, majority of the requirements are of poor quality. They are inconsistent, vague, infeasible to implement or manufacture, besides being not really mandatory, unverifiable and unobtainable. Poor quality requirements results in increase in product development time and cost besides leading to mistakes which have negative impact during the subsequent downstream design activities. Many a times, customer demands specification in a product without considering cost and benefit characteristics of design criteria and designer has to implement features in a product merely because user swore they needed badly, but after sometimes the user loses interest. Thus, considering only customer satisfaction during the concept evaluation phase of product design does not make the design process effective. It is required to give equal importance and incorporate customers’ requirements as well as designers’ limitation (or company constraints) for the success of the final design concept(s).Earlier most of the concept evaluation frameworks consider cost and benefit characteristics of design criteria and select the best concept which performs the best based on these conflicting criteria. This paper considers importance level of design criteria (very high, high, medium and low) based on the judgments given by a team of designers, and thus proposes a different and novel way of concept evaluation. This method identifies the best concept that can fully satisfy designers or company specific constraints based on importance level of design criteria as well as maximize customer satisfaction. The proposed framework proves to be useful, during early stages of design when information about many attributes is not clear. With the help of proposed work, designers can easily find which concept is most preferable for certain important design attributes and least preferred for the uncertain design attributes. The work primarily involves two phases for concept evaluation. In the first phase, the rough numbers introduced by Zhai et al. [7] are used to calculate relative importance ranking and rating of conflicting design criteria from the team of designers’ vague judgements. In the second phase, these computed ranking of design criteria in terms of importance level (designers’ constraints) and highly subjective customer preferences for design specifications captured in the form of rough numbers is incorporated in the framework of extended VIKOR method with interval numbers [8] to evolve a new concept evaluation technique, labelled as, modified rough VIKOR (MR-VIKOR) analysis. The use of rough numbers would improve the overall effectiveness and help the designers to take good decisions in an uncertain environment.Two approaches, numerical and non-numerical, are developed by the designers to solve complex multi-criteria decision making (MCDM) problem of concept evaluation [9,10]. Non-numerical methods are graphical based methods, which are simple, effective and easier to use for quick selection of design concepts, but this approach have lower efficiency and accuracy as compared to the numerical approach. Some of the non-numerical methods are concept screening [11] and Pugh charts [12]. These approaches do not effectively deal with uncertain, vague and subjective judgement of the decision maker. Numerical approaches support both quantitative and qualitative judgement of design criteria by the decision makers. Utility function analysis [13,14] and goal programming [15,16] allows judgement of decision maker to be expressed in quantitative form only. The limitation of these approaches is that it is very difficult to represent some intangible design criteria and factors in quantitative form accurately during early design stages [13,14]. Other category of numerical approach for example, Fuzzy set theory and Analytical Hierarchy process (AHP) allows decision maker’s judgement to represent in both quantitative and linguistic form.King and Sivaloganathan [17] have classified concept selection into five categories i.e. utility theory, AHP, graphical tools, quality function deployment (QFD) and fuzzy logic method. Among these approaches developed so far, AHP and fuzzy set theory have been mostly used by the researchers due to their ability to handle uncertainty [18]. Integrated decision making method is preferred over single MCDM method to solve efficiently the problem of concept evaluation. Huang et al. [19] used fuzzy sets with neural network and genetic algorithm to propose an integrated approach to solve the concept evaluation problem. This approach has lengthy training process and unable to solve real world problems due to complex and difficult algorithm structure. Fuzzy set theory supports favouring evidence only, and does not allow the designer to express hesitancy degree. Geng et al. [10] have proposed integrated concept evaluation method based on vague set theory where linguistic judgements of decision makers are transformed into vague numbers. Modified weighted least square model (WSLM) is used to combine all the judgements and techniques for order preference by similarity to ideal solution (TOPSIS) are proposed to rank the design concepts. The advantage of using vague set theory is that it supports both favouring and opposing evidences in achieving subjective judgement of the designer. Zhai et al. [9] proposed an integrated approach to improve subjectivity in concept evaluation process by combining rough set theory [20] and grey relation analysis.AHP and simulation analysis is combined by Ayag [21] and proposed an integrated approach to perform design concept evaluations. Song et al. [22] proposed a hybrid approach in which rough numbers and AHP are combined for evaluating criteria weights of alternatives; and rough numbers and TOPSIS are combined to select the best alternative. AHP can be time consuming process with increase in the number of design criteria and alternatives. Large number of criteria results in large pair wise comparisons and huge evaluation matrix [23,24]. There is strict requirement to control consistency in pair wise comparisons of criteria’s at higher levels, as AHP at lower levels of consistency does not produce correct results [25]. Besides fuzzy set and AHP, some other theories have also been used by designers for design evaluations. Yang and Sen [26] developed evidence reasoning approach based on Dempster–Shafer theory of evidence to perform design concept evaluation. Evidence reasoning approach does not efficiently model vague subjective judgement during design evaluation [22].It is clear from the above discussions, that many methods are developed so far to perform design concept evaluations but except a few methods which are effective in some cases, many methods fails or lacks the support to effectively represent designers’ and decision makers’ vague perception, and uncertain and subjective information.One of the challenges which are faced by researchers today in the field of fuzzy set theory is selection of membership function which is a necessary requirement for effective performance of the fuzzy system [27]. This work proposes the use of rough numbers based on rough set theory, to reduce the vague and subjective perception of designer in concept evaluation process. Rough set theory [20] is a mathematical tool which was proposed to take advantage of information inherent in a given data without requiring any auxiliary information or subjective judgement (e.g. membership functions in the case of fuzzy set theory) for analysis of data. It uses approximation operators like approximation space, lower and upper approximations of a set to deal with vagueness and uncertainty [28]. In general, rough set theory uses a set of objects comprising multi-valued attributes to analyse any data. This structure of objects is called an information table.Zhai et al. [7] defined rough numbers and rough boundary interval through the use of upper and lower approximations which is extended from basic rough set theory. Mathematically, the rough numbers are defined in the following way:All the objects described by multi-attributes in any information table are represented by universe U. A set of n classes, i.e.,R={C1,C2,…,Cn}ordered in the manner ofC1<C2<⋯<Cnare used for analysing attributes of objects. For any classCi∈Rand any object Y of U the lower approximation(Apr̲(Ci)), and upper approximation(Apr‾(Ci))are defined as:(1)Apr̲(Ci)=∪{Y∈U/R(Y)⩽Ci}(2)Apr‾(Ci)=∪Y∈UR(Y)⩾Ci;In a set of ordered classes, all the objects in the information table, that have class values equal to or less than C forms lower approximation of C and those objects which have class values equal to or greater than C in same information table forms upper approximation of C. All the objects in information table which have different class values than C forms the boundary region of class C.(3)Boundary region:Bnd(Ci)=∪{Y∈U/R(Y)≠Ci}=Y∈U/R(Y)>Ci∪{Y∈U/R(Y)<Ci}The approximations of class defined above can be used to define lower limit(Lim̲Ci)and upper limit(Lim‾Ci)of rough number. Thus, any class can be efficiently represented by its rough number. Mathematically,(4)Lim̲Ci=1ML∑R(Y)|Y∈Apr̲(Ci)(5)Lim‾(Ci)=1MU∑R(Y)|Y∈Apr‾(Ci)whereMLandMUare number of objects contained in lower and upper approximation ofCirespectively.Rough boundary interval(RBnd(Ci))is the interval between lower limit and upper limit and can be defined as:(6)RBndCi=Lim‾Ci-Lim̲(Ci)Any vague class can be effectively represented by rough number, which consist lower and upper limit. Rough number is expressed mathematically as:(7)RNCi=Lim̲Ci,Lim‾(Ci)Rough numbers and rough boundary interval enables a designer to express vagueness of any class, as large rough boundary interval means class is less precise or vague.Zhai et al. [7] adapted the operations of interval mathematics to manipulate rough numbers. If [A1,B1] and [A2,B2] are the lower and upper limit of rough numbersRN1andRN2respectively and k is a constant, then(8)RN1×RN2=[A1,B1]×[A2,B2]=[A1×A2,B1×B2](9)RN1+RN2=[A1,B1]+[A2,B2]=[A1+A2,B1+B2](10)RN2×k=[A2,B2]×k=[kA2,kB2]Although, rough number is an effective tool to deal with subjectivity and vagueness in the early design stages, but it may be inefficient in dealing with other elements. This is due to the lack of effective evaluation framework for rough numbers in early design stages. There is need of effective methodology to systematically deal with subjectivity, uncertainty and vagueness in early design stages (e.g. concept evaluation). Traditionally MCDM approaches are integrated with fuzzy set theory to solve the issue described above. Torfi et al. [29] has proposed the integrated fuzzy set theory with AHP to determine criteria weights and with TOPSIS to rank the alternatives. This integrated method requires pre-setting membership function, which makes this method less efficient in subjective and vague environment of concept evaluation process. Also fixed fuzzy number interval is another limitation of this integrated method. The work developed here explores the possibility of using rough numbers with MCDM approach to propose modified rough VIKOR concept evaluation framework. This integrated method is expected to solve the problem of integrated fuzzy MCDM approach described above. Therefore in this respect, the proposed work presents a novel modified rough VIKOR methodology for design concept evaluation.Vlsekriterijumska Optimizacija I Kompromisno Resenje (VIKOR) method was proposed by Opricovic [30] for ranking of alternatives and generating compromise solution in the presence of conflicting and non-commensurable criteria. This method determines solution for multicriteria optimization of complex system. VIKOR method generates a multi-criteria ranking index, which is developed from an aggregating function representing “closeness” to “ideal” solution [30]. The ranking index is developed fromLP-metric, an aggregating function in compromise programming [31,32]. VIKOR method uses linear normalization method to eliminate the units of criteria and determines a compromise solution, which represents maximum “group utility” and a minimum individual regret for the “majority” and “opponent” respectively [33].Let, there are m alternativesA1,A2,…,Amgenerated for any complex problem of decision making. For an alternativeAi,fijis the performance value of jth criterion function.LP-metricwhich was used for starting the development of ranking measure of VIKOR method is as follows:Lpi=∑j=1n[(fj∗-fij)/(fj∗-fj-)]p1/p1⩽p⩽∞;i=1,2,…,m.L1,iandL∞,iare used to formulate ranking measureSiandRiin VIKOR method respectively. The maximum group utility (“majority rule”) and minimum individual regret of the “opponent” is calculated by minSiand minRirespectively.In this work, Extension of VIKOR method for decision making problem with interval numbers proposed by Sayadi et al. [8] is modified to include importance ranking of design criteria. The compromise ranking algorithm proposed by Sayadi et al. [8] is as follows:SupposeA1,A2,…,Amare alternatives considered andC1,C2,…,Cnare criteria available to evaluate performance of an alternative. The rating of alternativeAiwith respect to criteriaCjisfijandwjis weight of criterion. The decision matrix representing the performance of each alternative in the form of interval numbers is:C1C2…CnA1f11L,f11Uf12L,f12U…f1nL,f1nUA2f21L,f21Uf22L,f22U…f2nL,f2nU……………Amfm1L,fm1Ufm2L,fm2U…fmnL,fmnUa.Determine Positive ideal solution (PIS) and Negative ideal solution (NIS).(11a)PIS=fj∗=maxifijU|j∈IorminifijL|j∈Jj=1,2,…,n(11b)NIS=fj-=minifijL|j∈IormaxifijU|j∈Jj=1,2,…,nwhere I is associated with benefit criteria and J is associated with cost criteria.ComputeSiL,SiUandRiL,RiUintervals as below:(12a)SiL=∑j∈Iwjfj∗-fijUfj∗-fj-+∑j∈KwjfijL-fj∗fj--fj∗i=1,2,…,m(12b)SiU=∑j∈Iwjfj∗-fijLfj∗-fj-+∑j∈KwjfijU-fj∗fj--fj∗i=1,2,…,m(13a)RiL=maxwjfj∗-fijUfj∗-fj-j∈I,wjfijL-fj∗fj--fj∗j∈Ji=1,2,…,m(13b)RiU=maxwjfj∗-fijLfj∗-fj-j∈I,wjfijU-fj∗fj--fj∗j∈Ji=1,2,…,mCompute the aggregating function intervalQi=QiL,QiU(14a)QiL=v∗SiL-S∗S--S∗+1-v∗RiL-R∗R--R∗(14b)QiU=v∗SiU-S∗S--S∗+1-v∗RiU-R∗R--R∗where(15)S∗=mini(SiL),S-=maxi(SiU)(16)R∗=mini(RiL),R-=maxi(RiU)v=Weight of the strategy of “the majority criteria” (or “the maximum group utility”)According to VIKOR method, the alternative that has minimumQiis the best alternative. However, for interval numbers, Sayadi et al. [8] introduced a new method of comparison which was as follows:Supposea1L,a1Uanda2L,a2Uare two interval numbers. For choosing minimum interval numbers four cases are:1.If the interval number has no intersection, then minimum interval is one that has lower values i.e. ifa1U⩽a2Lthen, we choosea1L,a1Uas minimum interval number.If two interval numbers are same then both are of same priority.If interval numbers have intersection, then for situation – Ifa1L⩽a2Landa2U⩽a1Uand∝∗(a2L-a1L)⩾(1-α)(a1U-a2U)thena1L,a1Uis minimum elsea2L,a2Uis minimumIfa1L⩽a2Landa1U⩽a2Uand∝∗(a2L-a1L)⩾(1-α)(a2U-a1U)thena1L,a1Uis minimum elsea2L,a2Uis minimumHere∝is optimism level of decision maker0⩽α⩽1. The optimist decision maker has higher∝values than pessimist decision maker. For rational decision maker value of∝is 0.5.The two important steps in design concept evaluation are (i) determination of design criteria and their relative importance rating (criteria weights) and (ii) development of an evaluation model. The design criteria are predetermined and developed based on customer needs [10]. The proposed method of concept evaluation is divided into two phases. In phase I, relative importance ranking and relative importance rating of each design criteria’s is determined by the rough set enhanced fuzzy approach proposed by Zhai et al. [7] based on rough numbers. In phase II, these ranking and rating of design criteria are introduced in extended VIKOR method with interval numbers proposed by Sayadi et al. [8] along with captured customers’ preferences for design specifications in the form of rough numbers to propose a novel method, named here as, modified rough VIKOR (MR-VIKOR) analysis. This method in terms of novelty captures the designers’ perception of design attributes (in the terms of their importance level) along with the customers’ perception of design attributes values by rough numbers, and tries to propose the best concept(s) which satisfies the designers’ constraints on design criteria as well as fulfilling maximum customer requirements. As designers can give actual judgement about the design criteria and customers preferences may be poor in terms of quality, so taking this into account, the method, in the phase I, classifies the design criteria in terms of their importance, and in phase II uses this classification along with customers’ preferences in extended VIKOR with interval numbers [8] framework by some modifications to identify the best concept.As already mentioned design criteria are pre-determined and are generated based on customer requirements. Here, design attributes (DAs) serve as design criteria, which are developed by a team of designers working on the project. Each DA has its own values which are called here as design attribute values (AVs). These AVs are developed based on customer requirements so can act as customer needs. Design Alternatives (As) are generated by a team of different designers based on a combination of different attribute values for each design criteria.Generation of design alternatives;Suppose there are m design alternativesA1,A2,…,Amand n design attributesDA1,DA2,…,DAngenerated by team of designers and experts.Design attributes are denoted by layered vector set asDA=DA1,DA2,…,DAn. Further eachDAjhas values which are denoted here as:For example,DA1=AV11,AV12,…,AV1khave k attribute values.AV11, here denote as first value of the first design attribute. Design alternatives are generated based on combination of attribute values and denoted here asAi=AVjpwherej→1ton; and p indicate index of attribute value from design attributes.The basic steps of this phase are as follows:1.Generation of design attributes, customer needs and design alternatives.Obtain linguistic and subjective judgement (importance assignment) on each design attribute by different designers.Aggregate designers’ judgement on each design attributes and transforms them into rough numbers by using Eqs. (1)–(10).Normalize the rough number importance rating for comparison and compute the relative importance ranking of design attributes based on rules proposed by Zhai et al. [7] as the most important, important, medium important and low important design attribute. Zhai et al. [7] have used these ranking rules for customer needs but in this paper it is used for ranking of design attributes.In this phase, linguistic judgements on preferences of AVs assigned by customers are captured by using rough numbers. The relative importance rating and ranking of DAs computed in phase I along with preferences of customers are introduced in the framework of extended VIKOR method with interval numbers to develop evaluation model for concept selection process. The basic steps of this phase are as follows:1.Obtain linguistic and subjective judgement (preference assignment) on each design attributes values by different customers.Aggregate all customers’ preference judgement on each AV and transforms them into rough numbers by using Eqs. (1)–(10). This will form rough group preference decision matrix which shows diversity of customers’ perceptions for each AV.Construct the framework of modified VIKOR with interval numbers: identify the PIS and NIS from rough group preference decision matrix according to relative importance ranking of DAs. The rules to select the PIS and NIS for the proposed work are as follows:a.Alternative whose attribute value is most preferred by the customers for the case of important and most important design attribute is PIS and least preferred attribute value is NISAlternative whose attribute value least preferred by the customers for the case of the low importance design attribute is PIS and most preferred attribute value is NISCalculate the aggregating function (ranking measure), and then rank the alternatives according to relative closeness to the “ideal” solution.The process of implementing the proposed approach is shown with the help of Figs. 1 and 2.After computing relative importance ranking of DAs in phase I, they are classified into categories like the most important DA, important DA, medium importance DA and low importance DA. The steps of modified rough VIKOR method with interval numbers are as follows:1.Suppose rough group preference decision matrix computed through Step 2 of phase II has the following form:(17)X=x11-,x11+x12-,x12+…x1n-,x1n+x21-,x21+x22-,x22+…x2n-,x2n+…………xm1-,xm1+xm2-,xm2+…xmn-,xmn+wherexij-,xij+is the combined preference rating of alternativeAiwith respect to design attributeDAjassigned by customers in the form of rough numbers.xij-andxij+are the lower and upper limits, respectively.Generate the PIS and NIS based on importance category of DA unlike on the basis of benefit and cost as proposed by many concept evaluation frameworks. For the most important and the important DAs, the PIS would be the largest preference value it may take. Thus, in this work, the largest upper limit of all the rough numbers that these DAs takes is selected as PIS. For NIS, smallest lower limit of all rough numbers is chosen. Similar analysis can be done for the low importance DA. As for medium importance DA, average value of upper limits of all rough numbers is chosen as PIS and average value of lower limits is chosen as NIS. Mathematically,For, most important and important DAs:(18a)PIS,xj∗=maxi(xij+)|j∈Ij=1,2,…,n;i=1,2,…,m(18b)NIS,xj-=mini(xij-)|j∈Ij=1,2,…,n;i=1,2,…,mFor, medium importance DAs(19a)PIS,xj∗=avgi(xij+)|j∈Jj=1,2,…,n;i=1,2,…,m(19b)NIS,xj-=avgi(xij-)|j∈Jj=1,2,…,n;i=1,2,…,mFor, low importance DAs(20a)PIS,xj∗=mini(xij+)|j∈Kj=1,2,…,n;i=1,2,…,m(20b)NIS,xj-=maxi(xij-)|j∈Kj=1,2,…,n;i=1,2,…,mwhere I is associated with the most important and important DAs, and J is associated with medium importance DAs, K is associated with low importance DAs. Alternative whose attribute value is most preferred by the maximum customers for the most important and important design attribute and least preferred by the customers for low importance design attribute is the ideal solution for the case proposed. For medium important design attribute, alternative whose attribute value is neither most preferred nor least preferred is the ideal solution.The values ofSi-,Si+andRi-,Ri+are computed here according to the importance level of design attribute. So modified formulas according to the case proposed is shown as below:(21a)Si-=∑j∈Iwj-xj∗-xij+xj∗-xj-+∑j∈Jwj-min(A,B)xj∗-xj-+∑j∈Kwj-xij--xj∗xj--xj∗(21b)Si+=∑j∈Iwj+xj∗-xij-xj∗-xj-+∑j∈Jwj+max(A,B)xj∗-xj-+∑j∈Kwj+xij+-xj∗xj--xj∗(22a)Ri-=maxwj-xj∗-xij+xj∗-xj-j∈I,wj-minA,Bxj∗-xj-j∈J,wj-xij--xj∗xj--xj∗j∈K(22b)Ri+=maxwj+xj∗-xij-xj∗-xj-j∈I,wj+max(A,B)xj∗-xj-j∈J,wj+xij+-xj∗xj--xj∗j∈Kwherewj=wj-,wj+are DA’s relative importance rating (weights) calculated from phase I. The values of A and B depend on following rules:(a)Ifxj∗>xij+thenA=xj∗-xij+andB=xj∗-xij-Ifxj∗<xij+butxj∗>xij-thenA=-(xj∗-xij+)andB=xj∗-xij-Ifxj∗<xij-thenA=-(xj∗-xij+)andB=-(xj∗-xij-)Compute the aggregating function intervalQi=Qi-,Qi+(23a)Qi-=v∗Si--S∗S--S∗+1-v∗Ri--R∗R--R∗(23b)Qi+=v∗Si+-S∗S--S∗+1-v∗Ri+-R∗R--R∗where(24)S∗=mini(Si-),S-=maxi(Si+)(25)R∗=mini(Ri-),R-=maxi(Ri+)v=Weight of the strategy of “the majority criteria”The best concept is chosen by the comparison rules as mentioned in Step ‘d’ of VIKOR method with interval numbers.In this section, design concept evaluation of a testing rig (used for carrying out load tests) machine is taken as a case study to demonstrate the application of the proposed method. Further, comparison among the proposed method, the extended VIKOR method with interval numbers [8] and integrated method based on rough number, AHP and TOPSIS [22] are carried out to analyse the performance of the proposed Modified rough VIKOR method (MR-VIKOR). Suppose, a company ‘Y’ is a design and manufacturing firm of testing rig. A total of four design alternatives(A1,A2,A3,A4)of testing rig have been generated by a team of designers during the conceptual design phase. The objective of this evaluation is to identify the best concept which satisfies all, the constraints imposed by the team of the designers on design attributes as well as satisfy the needs of group of maximum customers.Customer survey reveals that, small-sized customers are mainly interested in reliable, safe, simple and cost effective performance of the testing rig machine. Therefore, in order to meet customers basic requirements, team of experts and designers have identified some core functional requirements of testing rig which are namely, safe and reliable operation, cost effective and simple design, easy to manufacture and good operating characteristics. Design team and experts chooses four DAs (i.e. design criteria).DA1: Expected mechanical safety,DA2: Amount of wear,DA3: Operating and maintenance cost andDA4: Overload reserve of a machine. Each DA has values which represents customer requirement. AVs for each DA areDA1: low, average, high, very high;DA2: very low, low, medium, high;DA3: low, medium, high, very high andDA4: low, medium, high, very high. Design alternatives are generated based on different combinations of attribute values from each DA. Table 1shows design attribute values of each design alternatives i.e. specifications of each design alternative. The evolved alternatives with their specification values are presented in Table 1 and are:Design Alternative (or Concept)A1includes high mechanical safety, very low amount of wear, very high operating and maintenance cost and high overload reserve of machine; AlternativeA2includes low mechanical safety, low amount of wear, medium operating and maintenance cost and medium overload reserve of the machine;A3includes very high mechanical safety, medium amount of wear, high maintenance and operating cost and very high overload reserve of the machine;A4includes average mechanical safety, high amount of wear, low operating and maintenance cost and low overload reserve of the machine.During this phase, team of four designers have been asked to assign judgment (importance rating) on each DA. Symmetrical triangular fuzzy numbers (STFNs) are used to capture the vagueness of designer’s perception towards DAs. These STFNs are used by many researchers [34–36] to analyse voice of customers. To capture “Voice of designer”, 9-Point scale, as proposed by [36] is used. This scale can be represented by crisp numbers or STFNs and have values represented by Table 2.Four designersD1,D2,D3andD4have assigned importance from 9-Point scale to each DA which is shown in Table 3. Although STFNs can be used to capture vague perception of designers’ mind, but, it is very difficult to determine appropriate fuzzy membership function in case of STFNs [7]. From Table 2, STFNs has fixed boundary interval of “2”. This may not correctly represent degree of vagueness of different importance ratings assigned by designers. Therefore, rough number (RN) may be good alternative to capture more effectively the diversity of designers’ opinion. Thus, each designer’s importance assignment in the form of STFNs is converted into rough numbers as shown in Table 4using Eqs. (1)–(10). Combined importance assignment as shown in Table 5is obtained by taking average sum of importance assignment of each DA by every designer. Relative importance rating (Attribute weight) is obtained by normalizing value of RN for every DA as shown in fourth column of Table 5. These values are then analysed by the comparison rules proposed by [7] to obtain relative importance ranking of DA. Based on comparison rules, importance ranking of DA and their classification is as follows:(26)DA2>DA1>DA3>DA4DA2=Most important criteria;DA1=Important criteria;DA3=Medium important criteria;DA4=Low importance criteria.Table 1 is rearranged to achieve decision matrix which has the form shown below.In order to obtain customers’ perception for each attribute values, a customer survey is conducted, during which four customers are asked to assign their preferences as shown below inD1,D2,D3,D4for design attribute values in the form of crisp values through following assumption:7=high preference; 5=medium preference; 3=low preference; 1=very low preferenceD1=7517577133551133D2=5731751533571173D3=5713753133571175D4=3517173371755351These four matrices are then assembled to form combined decision matrix as shown belowDcombined=A1A2A3A47,5,5,35,7,7,51,3,1,17,1,3,75,7,7,17,5,5,77,1,3,31,5,1,33,3,3,73,3,3,15,5,5,75,7,7,51,1,1,51,1,1,33,7,7,53,3,5,1Rough group preference decision matrix is obtained by converting these preferences into rough numbers form using Eqs. (1)–(10) is shown below:DRcombined=[4.5,5.83]5.5,6.51.125,1.8753,6.043.5,6.335.5,6.52.29,4.791.54,3.53.22,4.752.125,5.755.125,5.8755.5,6.51.25,2.751.125,1.8754.5,4.702.165,3.831.Rough group preference decision matrix depicts the customers’ perception towards AVs and is shown below(27)DRcombined=[4.5,5.83]5.5,6.51.125,1.8753,6.043.5,6.335.5,6.52.29,4.791.54,3.53.22,4.752.125,5.755.125,5.8755.5,6.51.25,2.751.125,1.8754.5,4.702.165,3.83where for example4.5,5.83is the combined preference rating of attribute valueAV13, assigned by customers, for alternativeA1with respect to design attributeDA1.Generate the PIS and NIS based on importance classification of DA from Eqs. (18)–(20), unlike on the basis of benefit and cost according to the rules proposed in phase II.For, most important and important DAs:PIS,x1∗=6.33;x2∗=6.5NIS,x1-=1.25;x2-=1.125For, medium importance DAsPIS,x3∗=4.31NIS,x3-=3.26For, low importance DAsPIS,x4∗=1.54NIS,x4-=6.5ComputeSi-,Si+andRi-,Ri+intervals from Eqs. (21) and (22) respectively. Values ofSi-,Si+andRi-,Ri+are shown in Table 6.The aggregating functionQi=Qi-,Qi+is computed from Eq. (23) and its values for each alternative is shown in Table 7.The best design alternative (s) based on constraints imposed by the team of the designers on design attributes and preferences of customers is chosen by the comparison rules as mentioned in Step ‘d’ of VIKOR method with interval numbers. For different values of optimism level of decision maker(α), alternative ranking is computed as shown in Table 8.Forα=0.5, design alternative ranking is asA2>A1>A4>A3. As seen in Table 8 for values ofα⩾0.5,A2is the best concept based on both customers’ preferences for AVs and designers’ importance assignment for DAs. But, forα<0.5,A1is the best concept followed byA4.As this paper proposes novel way of incorporating designers’ constraints along with customers’ preferences in concept evaluation framework, the best concept i.e.A2is correct choice based on assumed rules because alternativeA2’s attribute values is most preferred by the customers for most important and important design attribute (Amount of wear and expected mechanical safety) and least preferred for low importance design attribute (overload reserve of a machine). Also for medium importance design attribute, its values are close to averagely preferred ideal attribute values.To reveal the advantages of the proposed method, comparison has been done with other methods namely, the extended VIKOR method with interval numbers [8] and integrated method based on rough number, AHP and TOPSIS [22]. The ranking of design alternatives are calculated for different values of optimism level of decision makers for the same case study of a testing rig. The results are depicted in Table 9. The proposed method captures both subjective and vague perceptions of designers’ as well as preferences of customers’ and select best design concept based on satisfaction of both designers and customers. The other two methods considers cost and benefit characteristics of design criteria (DAs, here) for performing concept evaluations; but, the proposed method uses importance ranking of DAs for computing design alternatives ranking. Thus, ranking computed by proposed method is different from other two methods. As in the proposed case study,A2comes out to be the correct choice based on assumed rules of selection as alternativeA2’s attribute values are most preferred by the customers for the most important, and important design attributes i.e. Amount of wear and expected mechanical safety; and the least preferred for the low importance design attribute i.e. overload reserve of a machine. Further, for medium importance design attribute, its values are close to averagely preferred ideal attribute values. The other method integrated method based on rough number, AHP and TOPSIS [22] concludesA1andA3as the best concept based on only cost and benefit characteristics of design criteria.The proposed concept evaluation framework allows designers to consider the importance of design criteria in concept evaluations instead of cost and benefit characteristics of criteria, thus developing alternative way of concept selection process which might be useful to the industries in some cases. The proposed framework proves to be useful, when the team of designers are confident about values of certain design attribute while uncertain about the rest of attribute values, which is the common case during early stages of design when information about many attributes are not clear. Based on the proposed work, designers can easily find which concept is most preferable for certain important design attributes and least preferred for the uncertain design attributes. The solution obtained by integrated method based on rough numbers, AHP and TOPSIS [22] is different than the extended VIKOR method with interval numbers [8] due to difference in normalization methods and difference in calculating aggregating functions. Moreover, in integrated method based on rough numbers, AHP and TOPSIS [22], the rough numbers are converted to crisp values which may lead to miss some information due to approximations.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This work proposes a rough number enabled VIKOR method with the objective of developing a systematic framework for concept evaluation process and to reduce subjectivity associated with this process. In the proposed method, the vague, raw and subjective perceptions of designers’ and continuously changing preferences of customers are captured and represented in the form of rough numbers. The new concept of incorporating importance ranking of design criteria in the framework of concept evaluation process along with customers’ preferences provides a novel alternative for this critical task during early stages of product development. The proposed method selects the best concept, which satisfies both the constraints imposed by the designers and satisfies the preferences of customers. The results of the case study presented in this work, shows that proposed method provides novel and more effective design alternative ranking framework, while considering both designers’ and customers’ conflicting thoughts. One of the limitation of the proposed best concept might be that selected concept might be more close to designers’ expectation than the customers’ expectations.