@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Distribution of putative xenogeneic silencers in prokaryote genomes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Xenogeneic silencer-like regulators were searched in fully sequenced prokaryote genomes.Putative xenogeneic silencer regulators are limited to some bacteria and are specific for each division.Xenogeneic silencer regulators from the H-NS family are the most diversified.Other nucleoid-associated proteins were also searched and their distribution was also assessed.Our search updates and extends xenogeneic silencer regulators database.Results showed that xenogeneic silencer-like regulators are specific for the bacteria they are found in and exclusive, as members of the other families are excluded.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Foreign DNA,Comparative genomics,Bacterial transcriptional regulators,Archaea and Bacteria,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Gene silencing is an important function as it keeps newly acquired foreign DNA repressed, thereby avoiding possible deleterious effects in the host organism. Known transcriptional regulators associated with this process are called xenogeneic silencers (XS) and belong to either the H-NS, Lsr2, MvaT or Rok families. In the work described here we looked for XS-like regulators and their distribution in prokaryotic organisms was evaluated. Our analysis showed that putative XS regulators similar to H-NS, Lsr2, MvaT or Rok are present only in bacteria (31.7%). This does not exclude the existence of alternative XS in the rest of the organisms analyzed. Additionally, of the four XS groups evaluated in this work, those from the H-NS family have diversified more than the other groups. In order to compare the distribution of these putative XS regulators we also searched for other nucleoid-associated proteins (NAPs) not included in this group such as Fis, EbfC/YbaB, HU/IHF and Alba. Results showed that NAPs from the Fis, EbfC/YbaB, HU/IHF and Alba families are widely (94%) distributed among prokaryotes. These NAPs were found in multiple combinations with or without XS-like proteins. In regard with XS regulators, results showed that only XS proteins from one family were found in those organisms containing them. This suggests specificity for this type of regulators and their corresponding genomes.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
It is generally accepted that the fastest source of acquisition of new genetic material in a cell is by horizontal gene transfer (HGT), an extensive and common occurrence in nature (Syvanen, 2012). These events provide evolutionary and functional advantages to the receptor cell, including antibiotic and heavy metal resistance, new metabolic elements or pathways, and virulence factors, among others. However, genetic material acquired through HGT could also imply a risk for cell homeostasis if, for example, restriction enzymes, cell toxins or DNA-binding transcription factors (TFs), that might disrupt established regulatory networks in the host cell, are obtained. In this regard, one possible fate for foreign (or xenogeneic) DNA is to be degraded by restriction enzymes, or by the CRISPR/Cas system or by the Rec system and then to have its components recycled. Alternatively, xenogeneic DNA can potentially be adapted by the internal regulatory network and then expressed in order to assist the host cell in multiple metabolic processes, environment adaptation, pathogenesis and symbiosis. Thus, material obtained through HGT represents a functional and potential evolutionary advantage for the receptor cell making its retention worthwhile. Proteins in charge of regulating the expression of xenogeneic DNA in bacteria are called xenogeneic silencers (XS) (Ali et al., 2013). XS regulators belong to the group of proteins with the ability to associate to DNA also called nucleoid-associated proteins (NAPs). NAPs are small and basic proteins with roles such as DNA compaction and gene regulation (Dillon and Dorman, 2010). The paradigm of XS regulators is H-NS in the Gram-negative bacterium Salmonella (Oshima et al., 2006; Lucchini et al., 2006; Navarre et al., 2006). Proteins with a similar role as XS regulators but little or no sequence similarity to H-NS have been described in other bacteria, such as MvaT in Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Tendeng et al., 2003; Li et al., 2009), Lsr2 in Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Gordon et al., 2008), and Rok in Bacillus subtilis (Smits and Grossman, 2010). Given that the HGT processes take place among all prokaryotes, it is possible that XS regulators are widely distributed. In this work, in order to determine how extensive the presence of XS regulators is, we surveyed the presence of H-NS-like proteins (HLPs), MvaT-like, Lsr2-like and Rok-like proteins in prokaryotic genomes and evaluated its significance in abundance and functional terms. Results showed that these proteins are limited and specialized in certain prokaryote groups. Given the exclusiveness of XS regulators we also aimed to define how other NAPs (Fis, EbfC/YbaB, HU/IHF and Alba), not known to function as XS proteins, are distributed. Except for Alba and in contrast to XS regulators, most of the times these proteins were found in combination with other NAPs and in very few occasions by themselves.The complete genomes of 2413 prokaryotic organisms were obtained from ftp://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov section genomes. 148 of these were archaea and 2265 bacteria. For our purposes, annotated genes were defined as those genes with ORFs that might be encoding predicted protein sequences (the proteome) in all organisms.In order to exclude the overrepresentation of bacterial and archaeal genomes associated with particular bacteria and archaea divisions representative bacterial and archaeal species were selected. Selection was made through the concatenation of 21 conserved proteins across diverse sequenced genomes and a single data set for phylogenetic analysis was constructed (Brown et al., 2001). The phylogenetic tree reconstruction was based on a maximum likelihood method as it was reported previously (Brown et al., 2001). Thus, genomes located more closely together on a phylogenetic tree were excluded leaving a set of 790 genomes phylogenetically distant from each other, including 704 classified as bacteria and 86 as archaea.In order to identify the repertoire of family-specific xenogeneic silencers (XS) the hidden Markov models (HMM) of PF00816 (H-NS), and PF11774 (Lsr2) were retrieved from the PFAM database (Finn et al., 2008) and used to scan the predicted proteome sequences from all organisms (E-value threshold of 10−3 and a Z-value of 23193494), with the “hmmsearch” module from the HMMer suite of programs (http://HMMER.wustl.edu). Given that for MvaT and Rok there are no HMM models deposited in PFAM, both MvaT (PA4315) from P. aeruginosa (strain PAO1) and Rok (BSU14240) from B. subtilis strain 168 were used as seeds to compare them against the non-redundant database (NCBI) by using the Blastp program (E-value threshold of 10−6 and a ≥60% of coverage). Then the sequences retrieved from each search were filtered at 100% of identity to exclude a bias and posteriorly were aligned with the Muscle program (default parameters) (Edgar, 2004). After this, the alignments were used to construct the HMMs and scan the predicted proteome sequences from all the organisms with the same parameters as previously described.In order to predict putative new XS regulators two approaches were performed: In the first one, an HMM was constructed using the structural alignment described by Gordon et al. (2011) an E-value threshold of ≤10−3 was used to scan all the bacterial and archaeal genomes in the complete data set. As a second alternative, we constructed a regular expression pattern for the following consensus ({[TS]-X-[QR]-G-R-X-P-A}), considering the already mentioned structural alignment (Gordon et al., 2011) and this was used to scan all the genomes.A similar procedure as the one described for detecting XS-like regulators was done for identifying some NAP-like proteins. Briefly, the HMMs of PF02954 (Fis), PF02575 (EbfC/YbaB), PF00216 (IHF) and PF01918 (Alba) were retrieved from PFAM (Finn et al., 2008) and used to scan the predicted proteome sequences from the complete and the non-redundant bacterial and archaeal genomes using the parameters described above. Because proteins from the Fis group belong to the bacterial enhancer binding proteins family with different regulatory mechanisms (Morett and Bork, 1998), we considered only proteins that exclusively exhibited the Fis domain, i.e. monodomain proteins (DNA-binding domains).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Acquisition of foreign DNA is thought to be of key relevance for evolution. Despite this a genetic control of such material is critical for the possible harm it can cause in the recipient cell. In this work, we found that XS regulators are present only in some phyla in the bacteria domain or in specific bacterial divisions. This does not mean that xenogeneic silencing occurs only in a few bacteria, as this very likely happens also in archaea and the rest of bacteria. This role might be accomplished by new types of XS regulators or by already known NAPs. It is interesting to note that structural data associated with these DNA-binding proteins suggest different evolutionary origins, because almost all proteins have different structural arrangements (folds), and as a consequence of events of convergence. What seems to be obvious from our analysis is that once an XS regulator evolves from a specific family, only members of this family will prevail. Therefore, for those organisms containing XS homologs extensive experimental work needs to be done in order to define a silencing role, but we consider that our study establishes the necessary groundwork for these future experiments.