@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A combination of epitope prediction and molecular docking allows for good identification of MHC class I restricted T-cell epitopes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Combining epitope prediction methods with molecular docking techniques to identify MHC class I restricted T-cell epitopes.Based on available experimental data, the prediction accuracy is up to 90%.Providing a valuable step forward for the design of better vaccines.Better understanding the activation of T-cell epitopes by MHC binding peptides.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
T-cell epitope,Computational prediction,Docking,Vaccine design,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In silico identification of T-cell epitopes is emerging as a new methodology for the study of epitope-based vaccines against viruses and cancer. In order to improve accuracy of prediction, we designed a novel approach, using epitope prediction methods in combination with molecular docking techniques, to identify MHC class I restricted T-cell epitopes. Analysis of the HIV-1 p24 protein and influenza virus matrix protein revealed that the present approach is effective, yielding prediction accuracy of over 80% with respect to experimental data. Subsequently, we applied such a method for prediction of T-cell epitopes in SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV) S, N and M proteins. Based on available experimental data, the prediction accuracy is up to 90% for S protein. We suggest the use of epitope prediction methods in combination with 3D structural modelling of peptide-MHC-TCR complex to identify MHC class I restricted T-cell epitopes for use in epitope based vaccines like HIV and human cancers, which should provide a valuable step forward for the design of better vaccines and may provide in depth understanding about activation of T-cell epitopes by MHC binding peptides.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Two major T-cell responses are involved in cellular immune response to pathogens: the first is mediated by MHC (major histocompatibility complex) class I-restricted CD8+ CTL (cytotoxic T lymphocytes), and the second is mediated by MHC class II-restricted CD4+ T helper responses (De Groot et al., 2001). The short peptides (~9 residues) primarily derived from intracellularly proteolysed proteins and long peptides (typically 12–28 residues) mainly derived from exogenous antigens are presented on the surface of infected cells to specific T-cell receptors (TCR) by MHC class I and II molecules respectively (Bian et al., 2003; Martin et al., 2003). Multi-epitope vaccine based on combination of different T-cell epitopes could induce potent multi-epitope-specific immune responses both in preventing viral infection and in blocking the possibility of immune evasion (Liu et al., 2003; Fayolle et al., 2001; Whitton et al., 1993). Crystallographic analyses of class I MHC/peptide complexes have shown that the charged peptide amino- and carboxyl-termini are coordinated to polar residues at the two ends of a binding groove with MHC residues, most of the central residues of the peptides are exposed in the MHC complexes and are recognized by TCRs (Garboczi et al., 1996). The rapid and reliable identification of T-cell epitopes is of great importance, as it will reduce significantly experimental workload for epitope-based vaccine design. Fortunately, many predictive methods are currently available (Doytchinova and Flower, 2002). However, each method has limited accuracy, none consistently outperforms the rest (Lundegaard et al., 2010; Roomp et al., 2010; Yu et al., 2002). The prediction based on primary sequence data alone is therefore not sufficient (Schueler-Furman et al., 1998).In this study, we present a novel computational approach for the rapid and accurate selection of MHC class I restricted T-cell epitopes, to improve epitope-based vaccine design using HLA-A2/A0201-restricted epitopes in HIV p24 and influenza virus matrix proteins and S, M and N proteins of SARS-CoV as a model. Specifically, epitopes were selected following a sequential three-step strategy: (1) T-cell epitopes were predicted using available 12 epitope prediction methods, (2) molecular docking techniques were used to model the interactions between the selected peptide with MHC class I, and (3) peptide-loaded MHC class I molecule interaction with TCR α and β was modelled. While the first step allows to narrow down the candidate T-cell epitope list. The second and third allow to identify peptides resulting in negative free energy of peptide-MHC-TCR binding.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
