@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A computational model for enhancing recombinant Penicillin G Acylase production from Escherichia coli DH5α

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A computational model to maximize Penicillin G Acylase production is proposed.Bioprocess is modeled using ANN and optimized using ACO.Effect of applying local search techniques within global ACO process is analyzed.Computationally obtained optimized solution was successfully verified in the lab.Proposed method can be employed for modeling and optimization of other bioprocesses.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Penicillin G Acylase production,Ant colony optimization,Artificial neural network,Local search,Preferential local search,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
An attempt was made to develop a computational model based on artificial neural network and ant colony optimization to estimate the composition of medium components for maximizing the productivity of Penicillin G Acylase (PGA) enzyme from Escherichia coli DH5α strain harboring the plasmid pPROPAC. As a first step, an artificial neural network (ANN) model was developed to predict the PGA activity by considering the concentrations of seven important components of the medium. Design of experiments employing central composite design technique was used to obtain the training samples. In the second step, ant colony optimization technique for continuous domain was employed to maximize the PGA activity by finding the optimal inputs for the developed ANN model. Further, the effect of a combination of ant colony optimization for continuous domain with a preferential local search strategy was studied to analyze the performance. For a comparative study, the training samples were fed into the response surface methodology optimization software to maximize the PGA production. The obtained PGA activity (56.94U/mL) by the proposed approach was found to be higher than that of the obtained value (45.60U/mL) with the response surface methodology. The optimum solution obtained computationally was experimentally verified. The observed PGA activity (55.60U/mL) exhibited a close agreement with the model predictions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Penicillin G Acylase (PGA) also known as Penicillin amidohydrolases (EC 3.5.1.11) (Cai et al., 2004; McDonough et al., 1999) is a commercially vital enzyme that cleaves Penicillin G into 6-amino penicillanic acid (6-APA) and phenyl acetic acid (PAA). It is widely used for the production of 6-APA which is a key constituent in the production of various semi synthetic penicillin products.Usually PGA is obtained from microbial sources such as Escherichia coli (Cole, 1969), Arthrobacter viscous (Ohashi et al., 1989), Alcaligenes faecalis (Verhaert et al., 1997), Providencia rettgeri (Klei et al., 1995), Bacillus megaterium (Martin et al., 1995) and Achromobacter xylosoxidans (Cai et al., 2004). The enzyme is secreted either as intercellular or extracellular or inclusion bodies. Since the success of any fermentation process depends on the composition and concentration of medium components, a set of experiments has to be carefully designed in vitro to quantify the effect of each medium component so as to maximize the production.One of the popular techniques used in the design of experiments is the central composite design (CCD) (Box et al., 1978). The experimental runs of the CCD can be used as samples to generate a mathematical model relating the medium components with the enzyme activity. Generation of mathematical models may be done using a variety of techniques such as statistical methods, response surface methodology (Fannin et al., 1981; Banerjee and Bhattacharyya, 1992; Coninck et al., 2000), artificial neural networks (Chhatpar et al., 2003) and genetic algorithm (Singh et al., 2009). The pac gene found expressed in E. coli strain DH5α in the LB media yielded the maximum recombinant enzyme activity of 1820U/L (Rajendhran and Gunasekaran, 2007).In this study, an attempt was made to optimize the PGA enzyme productivity by computationally optimizing the composition of media components using artificial neural network and ant colony optimization. In the first phase, two different models were designed which would accept seven important medium components as input parameters to predict the PGA activity as output. During the second phase, the optimal composition of the medium components of the developed models was determined to maximize the productivity of PGA enzyme using ant colony optimization algorithm for continuous domain.Generally various local search techniques may be combined with global optimization process to generate the best quality solution quickly by minimizing the number of solutions to be surfed over (Neumann et al., 2008). To reduce the computational cost, preferential local search methods can be integrated with the optimization techniques (Bhuvana and Aravindan, 2011) to identify the promising solutions and iteratively deepen the local search on them. In this work, this preferential local search strategy was combined with ant colony optimization algorithm and the performance was analyzed.For a comparative study, the experimental samples were fed into the response surface methodology optimization software with an objective of maximizing PGA activity.Based on the preliminary experiments results, the media components glucose, fructose, yeast extract, disodium hydrogen phosphate, potassium dihydrogen phosphate, sodium chloride and magnesium sulfate were found to be the major elements in PGA production. The present work was carried out according to the Circumscribed CCD. The coded levels for independent variables are given in Table 1. Some additional experiments were manually added to the CCD designed 152 experiments to obtain an uniform distribution and widening of the search space. As a result, a total of 180 experiments were performed to measure the enzyme activities. (Table 8 in Appendix A). Experiments were carried out in duplicate. The data have ±1% error.Since the early development of recombinant DNA technology, E. coli have been widely used as a host to obtain a high level expression of recombinant proteins. The strain used in this work was recombinant E. coli DH5α harboring recombinant construct pPROPAC (pET-30b carrying pac gene from Bacillus badius with its own promoter). The nucleotide sequences of the B. badius 16S rRNA and pac genes were deposited in the GenBank database under the accession numbers AY803745 and DQ115799. The strain was obtained from the Culture Bank, Department of Microbial Technology, Centre for Advanced Studies in Functional Genomics, School of Biological Sciences (Madurai Kamaraj University, Madurai, Tamil Nadu, India).The strain E. coli DH5α containing B. badius pac gene was recovered from glycerol stock by inoculating it in 2 mL LB medium containing kanamycin (kan) (30μg/mL) kept overnight at 37̊C, 170rpm. LB agar (kan) plates were prepared and streaked with the overnight culture to develop single colonies at 37̊C for 24h. For inoculum, 150mL fermentation media (kan (30μg/mL)) was subcultured with a single colony grown from overnight in LB agar plate. Absorbence above 0.50 was taken for inoculations.The medium contained 10.00g/L fructose, 10.00g/L glucose, 6.00g/L yeast extract, 1.85mL/L MgSO4·7H2O (100mM), 9.00g/L disodium hydrogen phosphate, 4.00g/L potassium dihydrogen phosphate, 0.75g/L sodium chloride, 2.00mL/L calcium chloride (10mM) and 2.00mL/L thiamine-HCl (100mM). Some components such as MgSO4·7H2O, thiamine-HCl and calcium chloride were autoclaved separately due to their tendency to precipitate. Fructose and glucose were filter sterilized separately (0.22μm, Steritop, Millipore Corporation, Billerica, USA). Remaining components such as yeast extract, disodium hydrogen phosphate, potassium dihydrogen phosphate and sodium chloride were autoclaved together before mixing with the autoclaved components. The medium was further supplemented with kan (30μg/mL) (all components of the media were obtained from Himedia chemicals, India). An inoculum (1μL/mL) from the culture was grown for 24h (28̊C, pH 7) in a refrigerated shaker (New Brunswick Scientific Classic Series, C76, USA) at 170rpm.Cells from the sample (10mL) were recovered by centrifugation at 1574×g for 10min (Hitachi high speed centrifuge, CF15R, Japan). The pellet was resuspended in 2mL of 50mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.0). The cells were lysed by sonication (B. Braun, Labsonic2000, Germany), and centrifuged at 9838 ×g for 30min. The clear supernatant liquid was assayed with an equal volume of Penicillin G (20mg/mL) as the substrate. The assay was carried out at 50̊C for an hour. To 0.50mL of reaction mix, 3.50mL of Balasingham reagent was added (Balasingham et al., 1972) and incubated at room temperature for 5min. Absorbence was measured at 415nm (Hitachi UV-VIS Spectrophotometer, U2800, Japan). One unit of PGA activity is defined as the amount of enzyme required to release 1μmol of 6-APA/h at pH 7 and 50̊C.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
