@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Three-dimensional protein structure prediction: Methods and computational strategies

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Predicting the correct three-dimensional structure of a protein molecule is an intricate and arduous task.First principle methods without database information.First principle methods with database information.Fold recognition and threading methods.Comparative modeling methods and sequence alignment strategies.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Three-dimensional protein structure prediction,Structural bioinformatics,Ab initio methods,Knowledge-based methods,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A long standing problem in structural bioinformatics is to determine the three-dimensional (3-D) structure of a protein when only a sequence of amino acid residues is given. Many computational methodologies and algorithms have been proposed as a solution to the 3-D Protein Structure Prediction (3-D-PSP) problem. These methods can be divided in four main classes: (a) first principle methods without database information; (b) first principle methods with database information; (c) fold recognition and threading methods; and (d) comparative modeling methods and sequence alignment strategies. Deterministic computational techniques, optimization techniques, data mining and machine learning approaches are typically used in the construction of computational solutions for the PSP problem. Our main goal with this work is to review the methods and computational strategies that are currently used in 3-D protein prediction.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Structural Bioinformatics is one of the key research areas in the field of Computational Biology (Zhang et al., 2005; Altman and Dugan, 2005; Clote and Backofen, 2000; Pevzner, 2000; Liljas et al., 2001; Gopakumar, 2012). Structural Bioinformatics concerns the analysis and prediction of three-dimensional (3-D) structures of biological macromolecules such as Proteins11In this review proteins and polypeptides are treated as synonymous., RNA and DNA (Zhang et al., 2005; Altman and Dugan, 2005). This structural information corresponds to 3-D macromolecular structures obtained through different experimental methods such as protein crystallography (X-ray diffraction), electron microscopy or nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). This information allows one to study folds and local motifs in proteins, molecular folding, evolution and structure/function relationships.One of the main research problems in structural bioinformatics is the prediction of three-dimensional protein structures. Proteins are long sequences formed out of 20 different amino acid residues that in physiological conditions adopt a unique 3-D structure22Anfinsen hypothesis states that “all the information that dictates the native fold of protein domain is encoded in their amino acid sequence”.(Anfinsen et al., 1961). Knowledge of the protein structure allows the investigation of biological processes more directly, with higher resolution and finer detail. The sequence–protein–structure paradigm (also known as the “lock-and-key” hypothesis) says that the protein can achieve its biological function only by folding into a unique, structured state determined by its amino acid sequence (Anfinsen, 1973). Nevertheless, currently it has been recognized that not all protein functions are associated to a folded state (Dunker et al., 2008, 2001; Uversky, 2001; Tompa and Csermely, 2004; Tompa, 2002; Wright and Dyson, 1999). In some cases proteins must be unfolded or disordered to perform their functions (Gunasekaran et al., 2003). These proteins are called intrinsically disordered proteins (IDP) and represent around 30% of the protein sequences. Despite the presence of IDP proteins an important aspect of understanding and interpreting the function of a given protein involves characterizing molecular interactions. These interactions can be intramolecular (ionic bonds, covalent bonds, metallic bonds, etc) or intermolecular (hydrogen bonds and other non-covalent bonds such as van der Waals forces). The knowledge of the 3-D structure of polypeptides gives researchers very important information to infer the function of the protein in the cell (Branden and Tooze, 1998; Laskowiski et al., 2005a,b; Lesk, 2002): structural functions; catalysis in chemical reactions; transport and storage; regulatory functions; gene transcription control; recognition functions. Further details about protein function prediction can be found in Whisstock and Lesk (Whisstock and Lesk, 2003), Rentzsch and Orengo (Rentzsch and Orengo, 2009) and Lee et al. (Lee et al., 2007).The determination of protein structure is both experimentally expensive (due to the costs associated to crystallography, electron microscopy or NMR), and time consuming (Guntert, 2004). The difficulty in determining and finding out the 3-D structure of proteins has generated a large discrepancy between the volume of data (sequences of amino acid residues) generated by the Genome Projects33DOE Genomic Science. http://genomics.energy.gov (accessed 01.09.14).and the number of 3-D structures of proteins which are currently known. Only a tiny portion of protein sequences have experimentally solved three-dimensional structures. These figures not only clearly illustrate the need for, but also motivate further research in computational protein structure prediction methods. Over the last 10 years several computational methodologies, systems and algorithms have been proposed as a solution to the three-dimensional protein structure prediction (3-D PSP) problem (Bujnicki, 2006; Moult, 2005; Osguthorpe, 2000; Tramontano, 2006). These methods are divided into four classes, that shall be described in detail in this review (Floudas et al., 2006): (1) First principle methods without database information (Osguthorpe, 2000); (2) First principle methods with database information (Rohl et al., 2004; Srinivasan and Rose, 1995); (3) Fold recognition and threading methods (Bowie et al., 1991; Jones et al., 1992; Bryant and Altschul, 1995; Turcotte et al., 1998); and (4) Comparative modeling methods and sequence alignment strategies (Martí-Renom et al., 2000; Sánchez and Sali, 1997). The first group of methods aims at predicting new folds only through (computational) simulation of physicochemical properties of the folding process of the proteins in nature. The other groups represent the methods that are able of performing fast and effective prediction of protein 3-D structures when known template structures and fold libraries are available (Kolinski, 2004).Predicting the correct 3-D structure of a protein molecule is an intricate and arduous task. The 3-D PSP and Protein Folding (PF) problems44Protein folding is the physical process by which a polypeptide folds into its characteristic and functional three-dimensional structure from random coil.are classified in computational complexity theory as NP-complete problems (Crescenzi et al., 1998; Fraenkel, 1993; Hart and Istrail, 1997; Levinthal, 1968; Ngo et al., 1997), i.e., they are among the hardest problems in terms of computational requirements. For a formal definition of NP-completeness see Garey and Johnson (Garey and Johnson, 1979). This complexity is due to the folding process of a protein being highly selective. A long amino acid chain ends up in one out of a huge number of 3-D conformations. In contrast, the conformational preferences of single amino acid residues are weak. Thus, the high selectivity of protein folding is only possible through the interaction of many residues. Therefore, non-local interactions play an important role in protein three-dimensional structure, as local sequence–structure relationships are not absolute (Rackovsky, 2010). Ab initio methods (first principle methods without database information) can obtain novel and unknown protein folds. Nevertheless, the complexity and the high dimensionality of the search space (Ngo et al., 1997) even for a small protein molecule makes the problem intractable (Levinthal, 1968). The direct simulation of protein folding in atomic details, as used in Molecular Dynamics (MD)55MD is a simulation method in which the protein system is placed into a random conformation and then the system reacts to force atoms to exert on each other. The model assumes that, as a result of these forces, atoms move in a Newtonian manner. The trajectory of the system should lead to the native conformation., is not tractable (van Gunsteren and Berendsen, 1990) (for large proteins of medical and scientific interest) due to high computational costs, despite the efforts towards the development of distributed computing platforms. On the other hand, homology modelling does not lead to such problems; however, it can only predict structures of protein sequences which are similar or nearly identical to other sequences of known structures. Fold recognition via threading, in turn, is limited to the fold library derived from the Protein Data Bank (PDB) structures (Berman et al., 2000).In order to tackle the computational complexity of the 3-D PSP problem, current 3-D protein structure prediction methods make use of a wide range of optimization algorithms (Klepeis et al., 2003). Metaheuristics are used to provide near optimal solutions. In addition, considering the limitations of the four classes of protein structure prediction methods, researchers have recently developed hybrid methods which combine principles of the four classes, as can be observed in last CASP editions (Moult et al., 2014, 2011). For example, the accuracy presented by homology modeling methods is combined with the capacity of Ab initio methods in predicting novel folds (Dhingra and Jayaram, 2013; Dorn et al., 2008; Fan and Mark, 2004). In order to reduce the complexity and the high dimensionality of the conformational search space inherent to Ab initio methods, information about structural motifs found in known protein structures can be used to construct approximate conformations. These approximate conformations are expected to be sufficient to allow later refinement by means of Molecular Mechanics (MM) such as MD simulation (van Gunsteren and Berendsen, 1990). In a refinement step, global interactions between all atoms in the molecule (including e.g. non-bond interactions) are evaluated and deviations in the polypeptide main-chain and side-chain torsion angles can be corrected (Fan and Mark, 2004). These in turn reduce the total time spent by Ab initio methods – which usually start from a fully extended conformation of a polypeptide – to fold a sequence of unknown structure (Breda et al., 2007). The first principle methods that make use of database information cover this class. Such methods use previous protein structural information from existing databases in order to construct starting point 3-D protein structures. Machine learning and data mining techniques are also applied in order to extract useful information from known protein 3-D structures.Our main goal is to review the methods and computational strategies that are currently used in 3-D protein structure prediction. In order to do so, we present the most important results needed to understand the four classes of prediction methods. The main contributions of this review are addressed through the organization and description of the main computational techniques and strategies that are currently used in the development of in silico methods for the 3-D PSP problem. This will contribute toward the development of new computational methods and strategies for the 3-D PSP problem. The review is structured as follows. In Section 2 the fundamental concepts of proteins are briefly described (readers familiar with these fundamental concepts can clearly skip this section). Section 3 describes the four classes in which the 3-D protein structure prediction methods and algorithms are classified. In addition, we present details of the main prediction methods and outline the computational strategies performed. Section 4 concludes the paper and points out directions for further research.From a structural perspective, a protein is an ordered linear chain of building blocks known as amino acid residues. Each protein is defined by its unique sequence of amino acids. This sequence causes the protein to fold into a particular three-dimensional shape. Predicting the folded structure of a protein only from its amino acid sequence remains a challenging problem in mathematical optimization (Lander and Waterman, 1999). The challenge arises due to the combinatorial explosion of plausible shapes each of which represent a local minimum of an intricate non-convex function of which the global minimum is sought. In nature, proteins typically present 50 to 500 amino acid residues. The books by Lesk (Lesk, 2002) and Tramontano (Tramontano, 2006) present elegant, comprehensive overviews of protein structure.In nature there are 20 distinct proteinogenic amino acids, each one with its own chemical properties (including size, charge, polarity, hydrophobicity, i.e. the tendency to avoid water packing) (Lodish et al., 1990; Lehninger et al., 2005). Depending on the polarity of the side-chain, amino acids vary in their hydrophilic or hydrophobic character. The importance of the physical properties of the side-chains comes from the influence they have on the amino acid residues interactions in the 3-D structure. The distribution of the hydrophilic and hydrophobic amino acids are important to determine the tertiary structure of the polypeptide. A detailed description of the amino acid properties can be found in Lehninger (Lehninger et al., 2005) and Lodish (Lodish et al., 1990). A peptide is a molecule composed of two or more amino acid residues chained by a chemical bond called the peptide bond. This peptide bond is formed when the carboxyl group of one residue reacts with the amino group of the other residue, thereby releasing a water molecule (H2O). Two or more linked amino acid residues are referred to as a peptide, and larger peptides are generally referred to as polypeptides or proteins (Creighton, 1990; Lesk, 2002). The peptide bond (C-N) has a double bond and is not allowed rotation of the molecule around this bond. The rotation is only permitted around the bonds N-Cαand Cα-C. These bonds are known as PHI (ϕ) and PSI (ψ) angles, respectively, and are free to rotate (Lesk, 2002; Lodish et al., 1990). This freedom is mostly responsible for the conformation adopted by the polypeptide backbone. However, the rotational freedom around the ϕ (N-Cα) and ψ (Cα-C) angles is limited by steric hindrance between the side chain of the amino acid residue and the peptide backbone (Branden and Tooze, 1998; Lesk, 2002; Scheef and Fink, 2003). As a consequence, the possible conformation of a given polypeptide is quite limited and depends on the amino acid chemical properties. The peptide bond itself tends to be planar, with two allowed states: trans, ω ≃ 180° (usually) and cis, ω ≃ 0° (rarely) (Branden and Tooze, 1998; Lesk, 2002). The sequence of ϕ, ψ and ω angles of all residues in a protein defines the backbone conformation or fold (Hovmoller and Ohlson, 2002). The angles ϕ and ψ can have any value between −180° and +180°. However, some combinations are prohibited by steric interferences between atoms from the main-chain and atoms from the side-chain (two atoms cannot occupy the same space) (Hovmoller and Ohlson, 2002). The allowed and prohibited values for the torsion angles ϕ and ψ are graphically demonstrated by the map of Sasisekharan–Ramakrishnan–Ramachandran, or simply Ramachandran map (Ramachandran and Sasisekharan, 1968).Proteins can be analysed at four levels (Lehninger et al., 2005; Lodish et al., 1990): (a) primary structure, (b) secondary structure, (c) tertiary structure and (d) quaternary structure. This hierarchy facilitates the description and the understanding of proteins. However, it does not aim at describing precisely the physical laws that produce protein structures; it is an abstraction that aims at making protein structure studies more tractable (Scheef and Fink, 2003). The primary structure simply describes the sequence of amino acid residues in a linear order (Branden and Tooze, 1998; Lehninger et al., 2005; Lesk, 2002; Lodish et al., 1990). Each amino acid residue binds to other amino acid residue through a peptide bond. The beginning of the primary structure corresponds to its N-terminal region and the end of its primary structure is the C-terminal region. Proteins are linear polymers that can assume several conformations. The stable arrangement of amino acid residues of the polypeptide forms structural patterns (Lehninger et al., 2005). These structural patterns represent the secondary structure of a polypeptide. The secondary structure is defined by the presence of hydrogen bond patterns between the hydrogen atoms of the amino groups and the oxygen atoms of the carboxyl groups in the polypeptide chain. A regularity in the spatial conformation is maintained through these intermolecular interactions. There are two regular secondary structures: α-helices (Pauling et al., 1951) and β-sheets (Pauling and Corey, 1951). There are also irregular conformations (coil and turns), but the α-helix and β-sheets are the most stable and can be considered as the main elements present in 3-D protein structures.The tertiary structure of a protein is represented by the distribution of secondary structures in a 3-D space. The three-dimensional shape assumed by a protein is also called native structure of the protein or functional structure. The native structure of a protein is formed by the variation of thermodynamic factors, i.e., covalent interactions, hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic interactions, electrostatic interactions, van der Waals, and repulsive forces (Gibas and Jambeck, 2001; Lehninger et al., 2005; Lesk, 2002; Lodish et al., 1990). In addition, the side-chains play an important role in creating the final structure of the polypeptide (Scheef and Fink, 2003). The tertiary structure of a protein allows the analysis and prediction of the function of the protein in the cell. It is possible to identify the active site, binding sites on a receptor, or a recombination site for the action of another protein (Lehninger et al., 2005). The tertiary structure of a protein is related to its topology (or fold). The topology of a protein is given by the type of succession of secondary structures that are connected to and from the shape in which these structures are organized in a 3-D space. A protein may have different polypeptide chains (or subunits) forming a quaternary structure. The quaternary structure of a protein is the arrangement of various tertiary structures. This structure is maintained by the same forces that determine the secondary and tertiary structures (hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic interactions, hydrophilic interactions) (Lehninger et al., 2005; Lesk, 2002; Lodish et al., 1990).The prediction of the 3-D structure of polypeptides based only on the amino acid sequence (primary structure) is a problem that has, over the last decades, challenged biochemists, biologists, computer scientists and mathematicians (Baxevanis and Quellette, 1990). The Protein Structure Prediction Problem (Creighton, 1990) is one of the main research problems in Structural Bioinformatics. The main challenge is to understand how the information encoded in the linear sequence of amino acid residues is translated into the 3-D structure, and from this acquired knowledge, to develop computational methodologies that can correctly predict the native structure of a protein molecule. Many methods and algorithms have been proposed, tested and analyzed over the years as a solution to this complex problem. In the literature, one can find several classifications of the 3-D protein structure prediction methods. In this work, we adopt a classification similar to the one described in Floudas (Floudas et al., 2006), which classifies the computational methods for protein structure prediction into four groups:1.First principle methods without database information - Section 3.1;First principle methods with database information – Section 3.2;Fold recognition and threading methods – Section 3.3; andComparative modeling methods and sequence alignment strategies – Section 3.4.Regardless of the group, all developed 3-D protein structure prediction methods have to be tested for the ability to predict new protein structures. Every other year since 1994 a worldwide experiment called CASP (Critical Assessment of Structure Prediction) is performed to test protein structure prediction methods. Structural biologists who are about to publish a structure are asked to submit the corresponding sequence for structure prediction. The predictions are then compared with the newly experimentally determined structures (by NMR or X-ray crystallography methods). CASP allows research groups with an opportunity to objectively test their structure prediction methods and provides an independent assessment of the state-of-the art protein structure modeling. The CASP competition involves a large number of research groups using a variety of methods from the four groups listed above. The most significant progress in last CASP was identified by template-based modeling methods (methods that use database information) (Huang et al., 2014; Koop et al., 2007; Cozzetto et al., 2009; Zhang, 2008b; Xu et al., 2011). There was evidence of improved accuracy for targets of mid range difficulty, probably due to improved methods that combine information from multiple templates (Wu and Zhang, 2007a; Cheng, 2008). The major remaining challenge in this class of methods is the development of better methods for template production and identification (Soding, 2005); accurate structure for those regions are not easily derived from an obvious template.CASP9 an CASP10 did not reveal much progress in Free Modeling methods (first principle methods without database information) (Tai et al., 2014; Jauch et al., 2007; Ben-David et al., 2009; Floudas et al., 2006; Xu et al., 2011). Among the methods that have been tested, I-Tasser presented a significant improvement in its predictions (Xu et al., 2011; Roy et al., 2010). This improvement happened because I-Tasser incorporates two components: REMO (Li and Zhang, 2009) and FG-MD (Li and Zhang, 2011). REMO is a method for atomic structure construction and improvement of hydrogen-bonding network and FG-MD is fragment-guided molecular dynamics based method that uses constrained molecular dynamics simulation to adjust the position of each atom in the protein. Each of the four classes of protein structure prediction methods that will be detailed below have some limitations. The analysis of CASP9 experiments reveals that the best results are achieved by methods which combine principles of the four groups of methods. First principle methods without database information have limitations with respect to the size of the conformational search space (Karplus, 1997; Levinthal, 1968). It is not possible to simulate, in plausible time, all folding process of long sequences of amino acid residues. Methods that use fragments still have two major limitations: the first one is related to the challenge of dealing with large conformational search spaces caused by different combination of such fragments; the second refers to the challenge of reducing the potential energy in regions where combination of fragments occur. Despite the high quality predictions, comparative modeling and fold recognition also have some limitations such as the inability to perform prediction of new folds. This is explained by the fact that these methodologies can only predict structures of protein sequences which are similar or nearly identical to other protein sequences of known structures in the PDB. Another limitation is that it is not possible to study the folding process of the protein, i.e., the path that an unfolded protein traverses to the functional state (native state).Ab initio methods, the first principle methods without database information, are founded on thermodynamics and based on the fact that the native structure of a protein corresponds to the global minimum of its free energy (Anfinsen et al., 1961; Anfinsen, 1973; Tramontano, 2006). Ab initio structure prediction methods aim at predicting the native conformation of a protein considering only the amino acid sequence (Bonneau and Baker, 2001). Osguthorpe (Osguthorpe, 2000) defines “Ab initio folding” as the class of methods that are based on potential energy functions that describe the physics of a current conformational state and where only this potential function is used to search the native structure of the polypeptide. In pure Ab initio methods the use of structural templates from a database such as the PDB is not allowed. The structural information from determined structures is only used in the parameterization of empirical all-atoms potentials used in force-fields (potential energy functions) such as AMBER (Cornell et al., 1995), CHARMM (Brooks et al., 1983; MacKerell et al., 1998), GROMOS (Christen et al., 2005), GROMACS (van der Spoel et al., 2005), OPLS (Jorgensen et al., 1996) and ECEPP/2 (Momany et al., 1975), among others. Ab initio protein folding is considered a global optimization problem where the goal is to identify the values of a variable set (torsion angles, position of all atoms or a specific set of atoms in the protein structure) that describe the minimum energy of the polypeptide conformation.Ab initio methods simulate the protein conformational space using an energy function, which describes the internal energy of the protein and its interactions with the environment in which it is inserted. The goal is to find a global minimum of free energy that corresponds to the native or functional state of the protein (Osguthorpe, 2000; Tramontano, 2006). Ab initio methods can predict new folds because they are not limited to templates from the PDB. However, these methods have some limitations with respect to the size of the conformational search space (Karplus, 1997; Levinthal, 1968). This problem is frequently referred to by many authors as the Levinthal's paradox (Zwanzig et al., 1991) following studies carried out by Cyrus Levinthal in 1968 (Levinthal, 1968). In his experiments, Levinthal noted that due to the very large number of degrees of freedom in an unfolded polypeptide chain, a protein molecule has an enormous number of possible conformations (thus rendering a NP-Complete problem) (Crescenzi et al., 1998; Fraenkel, 1993; Hart and Istrail, 1997; Ngo et al., 1997; Levinthal, 1968). In general an Ab initio method requires three elements (Chivian et al., 2003; Osguthorpe, 2000): (i) a geometric representation of the protein chain, (ii) a potential function and (iii) an energy surface searching technique. In the sequel, each of these elements are described in further detail.Geometric representation: this representation corresponds to the way that computationally we will represent the structure of a protein. The most detailed representations include all atoms of the protein and the surrounding solvent molecules (for example, H2O). Using all atoms to represent the protein is computationally expensive. Such representations can be simplified in a number of ways (Chivian et al., 2003): the all-atom model of both the protein and the solvent environment (explicit solvent) is usually replaced by employing an united atom model, where the solvent is modeled by potential fields of various descriptions (implicit solvent). In general, the united-atom model is frequently used to reduce the computational cost (Khalili et al., 2005). In this model, explicit hydrogen atoms-with the exception of those that have the capability to participate in hydrogen bonds – are eliminated. Virtual-atoms can also be used to represent one residue and reduce the computational cost (Osguthorpe, 2000). In turn, Rotamers (Dunbrack and Karplus, 2003) can also be used to represent a limited set of conformations that side-chains can adopt in the polypeptide structure. Almost all Ab initio folding methods use some form of simplified geometry model, in which single virtual atoms of the model represent a number of atoms in the all-atom model (Osguthorpe, 2000). The geometric representation is one of the most important elements of an Ab initio method and is directly related to the reduction or increase of the associated computational complexity. An all-atom model can demand enormous computational effort during a simulation. On the other hand, simplified representation models can preserve the main structure characteristics and reduce the computational time demanded by a protein folding simulation.Potential functions: the second element of an Ab initio method is a potential energy function. Potential energy functions are used in Molecular Mechanics (MM) simulations (Jorgensen and Tirado-Rives, 2005; Mackerell, 2004), protein design (Li et al., 2013; Gordon et al., 1999; Pokala and Handel, 2000) and protein structure prediction (Lazaridis and Karplus, 2000). There are two categories of potentials: MM potentials and protein structure-derived potential functions (scoring functions) (Zhang and Skolnick, 2004). The first category aims at modeling the forces that determine protein conformations using physically-based parameterized functional forms from small molecule data or in vacuo quantum mechanics calculations (Chivian et al., 2003). The second category is empirically derived from experimental structures from the PDB (Chivian et al., 2003; Hao and Scheraga, 1999; Koppensteiner and Sippl, 1995; Lazaridis and Karplus, 2000; Mohanty et al., 1999; Sippl et al., 1992; Sippl, 1995; Lu and Skolnick, 2001; Gohlkea et al., 2000). These two classes of potentials represent the forces that determine the macromolecular conformation: solvation,66Solvation is the process of attraction and association of molecules of a solvent with molecules or ions of a solution.electrostatic,77Composed by hydrogen bonds, salt bridges and van der Waals. It provides attractive forces between molecules.van der Waals interactions,88van der Waals are the attractive or repulsive forces between molecules or between parts of the same molecule.covalent bonds,99A covalent bond is a form of chemical bonding that is characterized by the sharing of pairs of electrons between atoms, and other covalent bonds.angles, torsions (Boas and Harbury, 2007; Chivian et al., 2003; Park et al., 1997; Pokala and Handel, 2000). The main advantage of using a knowledge-based energy function is that it can model any behavior observed in known protein crystal structures, even when there is no good physical understanding of their behavior (Boas and Harbury, 2007). The disadvantage is that these functions cannot predict new behaviors absent in the training set obtained from the experimental database. A potential energy function incorporates two types of terms: bonded and non-bonded. The bonded terms (bonds, angles and torsions) are covalently linked. The bonded terms constrain bond lengths and angles near their equilibrium values. The bonded terms also include a torsional potential (torsion) that models the periodic energy barriers encountered during bond rotation. The non-bonded potential includes: ionic bonds, hydrophobic interactions, hydrogen bonds, van der Waals forces, and dipole–dipole bonds. There is a great number of potential energy functions used in computational molecular biology. AMBER (Cornell et al., 1995), CHARMM (Brooks et al., 1983; MacKerell et al., 1998) and ECEPP (Momany et al., 1975) are the most widely used potential energy functions in 3-D PSP and Protein Folding problems. A review of potential energy functions is found in Halgren (Halgren, 1995). Eq. (1) presents the CHARMM force field (MacKerell et al., 1998).(1)Etotal=∑bondsKb(b−b0)2+∑UBKUB(S−S0)2+∑angleKθ(θ−θ0)2+∑dihedralsKχ(1+cos(η−δ))+∑impropersKimp(φ−φ0)2)+∑nonbondϵ[(Rminijrij)12−(Rminijrij)6]+qiqjϵ1rijwhere Kb, KUB, Kθ, Kχand Kimpare the bond, Urey-Bradley angle (Hagler et al., 1979; Lifson and Warshel, 1968), dihedral angle and improper dihedral angle force constants, respectively; b, S, θ, χ and φ are the bond length, Urey-Bradley 1.3 distance, bond angle, dihedral angle, and improper torsion angle, respectively. The subscript zero represents the equilibrium value for the individual terms. Coulomb and Lennard-Jones 6-12 terms contribute to the external or non-bonded interactions; ϵ is the Lennard-Jones (the depth of the potential well) and Rminis the distance at the Lennard-Jones minimum, qiis the partial atomic charge, ϵ1 is the effective dielectric constant, and rijis the distance between atoms i and j.Energy surface search techniques: methods for Ab initio prediction include Molecular Dynamics simulations of proteins and protein-substrate complexes (van Gunsteren and Berendsen, 1990; Rapaport, 2004; Koza, 1992); Monte Carlo simulations that do not use forces but rather compare energies, via the use of Boltzmann probabilities (Simons et al., 1997); Genetic Algorithms which are based on populations of solutions by iterative cycles of operations (Holland, 1993; Pokala and Handel, 2000) and try to improve on the sampling and the convergence of Monte Carlo approaches (Pedersen and Moult, 1997; Tuffery et al., 1991; Bowie and Eisenberg, 1994), and exhaustive and semi-exhaustive lattice-based studies which are based on using a crude/approximate fold representation (such as two residues per lattice point) and then exploring all or large amounts of the conformational space given the crude representation.There are many computational packages used in Ab initio protein structure simulations. These simulation packages are frequently used in the protein folding problem and in other molecular modeling problems such as molecular docking (Lengauer and Rarey, 1996; Kitchen et al., 2004), which predicts the preferred orientation of a molecule with respect to another molecule when bound to each other to form a stable complex (Lengauer and Rarey, 1996). There are also Ab initio algorithms developed specifically for the 3-D PSP problem. Section 3.1.1 present an overview of the most common Ab initio approaches for the 3-D PSP problem.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The study of protein structure and the prediction of their three-dimensional (3-D) structures is one of the key research problems in Structural Bioinformatics. Predicting the three-dimensional structure of a protein that has no templates in the Protein Data Bank is a very hard and sometimes virtually intractable task. Over the last years, many computational methods, systems and algorithms have been developed with the purpose of solving this complex problem. However, the problem still challenges biologists bioinformaticians, chemists, computer scientists, and mathematicians because of the complexity and high dimensionality of the protein conformational search space.Experimentally, the generation of a protein sequence is considerably easier than the determination of its 3-D structure. However, the knowledge of the 3-D structure of the polypeptide gives researchers very important information about the function of the protein in the cell. The difficulty in determining and finding out the 3-D structure of proteins has generated a large discrepancy between the volume of data (sequences of amino acid residues) generated by the Genome Projects2323DOE Genomic Science. http://genomics.energy.gov (accessed 01.09.14).and the number of 3-D structures of proteins which are known nowadays. These figures not only clearly illustrate the need for, but also motivate further research in Computational Protein Structure Prediction Methods. In addition, this analysis demonstrates the importance of the development of accurate computational methods that can compute and predict the 3-D structure of proteins when only their amino acid sequence is known. We have presented several computational techniques that have been widely applied in the context of the 3-D PSP problem. All these techniques present good results in specific case studies. However, there is still a paucity of general methods applicable to all classes of proteins, or to very large amino acid sequences.The classification of the prediction methods into four classes, (1) first principle methods without database information; (2) first principle methods with database information; (3) fold recognition and threading methods and (4) comparative modeling methods and sequence alignment strategies – gives a more general view about which methods can be used in the prediction, how experimental data can be used in the prediction tasks, and how a protein conformation can be represented in terms of physical and chemical laws (in the protein folding process). Knowledge-based methods are limited to experimental data, e.g., homology modeling can only predict structures of protein sequences which are similar or nearly identical to other protein sequences of known structure. Fold recognition via threading is limited to the fold library derived from the PDB structure database. Ab initio methods can obtain new structures with novel folds. However, the complexity and high dimensionality of the conformational search space even for a small protein molecule still makes the problem intractable.Over the last years, probably the most important results in this field were produced by hybrid methods such as the ones based on first principles with database information. Such hybrid methods combine the accuracy of knowledge-based methods with a more realistic, force field-based, physicochemical description of a protein. The last results presented in the CASP competition corroborate this statement. ROSETTA, FRAGFOLD, I-TASSER and LINUS all belong to this class of methods. ROSETTA and I-TASSER have been the most successful predictors over the last years according to data from the CASP experiments. In the last CASP, the bioinformatics community focused on the problem of predicting the local and global regions of the 3-D model when experimental structural data are not available. Machine learning techniques, statistical potentials, physical energy functions have been applied in order to find accurate structures.Finally, protein structure prediction is a very difficult problem and further research remains to be done. The development of new strategies, the adaptation and investigation of new methods and the combination of existing and state-of-the-art computational methods and techniques to the 3-D PSP problem are clearly needed. Understanding how experimental data can be better used in combination with Ab initio techniques is another open research question. In summary, there are several research opportunities and avenues to be explored in this field, with relevant multidisciplinary applications in computer science, bioinformatics, chemistry, biochemistry, and the medical sciences.