@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Analysis of image-based phenotypic parameters for high throughput gene perturbation assays

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Image-based multiplexing assay was attempted for siRNA library screening.Diverse orthogonal phenotypic parameters were retrieved from a single screening.Image-based cell count provided better resolution than the viability measure.Geneset analysis revealed biological implications of various image-based parameters.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
siRNA screening,Gene perturbation,Image-based assay,Phenotypic parameter,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Although image-based phenotypic assays are considered a powerful tool for siRNA library screening, the reproducibility and biological implications of various image-based assays are not well-characterized in a systematic manner. Here, we compared the resolution of high throughput assays of image-based cell count and typical cell viability measures for cancer samples. It was found that the optimal plating density of cells was important to obtain maximal resolution in both types of assays. In general, cell counting provided better resolution than the cell viability measure in diverse batches of siRNAs. In addition to cell count, diverse image-based measures were simultaneously collected from a single screening and showed good reproducibility in repetitions. They were classified into a few functional categories according to biological process, based on the differential patterns of hit (i.e., siRNAs) prioritization from the same screening data. The presented systematic analyses of image-based parameters provide new insight to a multitude of applications and better biological interpretation of high content cell-based assays.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
High throughput cell-based screening is useful for identifying the effect of individual gene knockdowns or compound treatments on target samples (Rausch, 2006). It is also a useful tool for identifying key genes that contribute to phenotypic changes through other interactions (Zhang and Boutros, 2013). In cell-based high throughput assays, biological readouts can be measured by biochemical methods such as cell viability or apoptosis assays, or by quantifying imaging data. In recent reports, the most widely accepted methods to measure biological endpoints are fluorescence-, luminescence-, or absorbance-based viability assays, in addition to simple cell or nucleus counting methods (Gilbert et al., 2011). However, image-based assays can produce various simultaneous measures of phenotypes from a single screening, whereas biochemical assays have limitations in high content screening (Carpenter et al., 2006; Fuchs et al., 2010; Gilbert et al., 2011).Several studies have reported multiparametric analyses following siRNA-mediated gene knockdown. Image parameters revealed correlations between morphological focal adhesion features by gene perturbation and uncovered signaling mechanisms that regulate the formation of integrin adhesions (Winograd-Katz et al., 2009). Genes in discrete mitotic processes were identified using ontology annotations for siRNA datasets (Rines et al., 2008). The genetic interactions among various phenotypes were described, such as cell count, cell eccentricity, nuclear major axis, and nuclear area from single cell phenotyping (Simpson et al., 2008; Bai et al., 2011; Laufer et al., 2013). In addition, phenotypic profiles including cell cycle phases, migration, and cell death were generated from automated time-lapse imaging using high throughput siRNA screening (Neumann et al., 2006, 2010; Failmezger et al., 2013). However, understanding the interactions among cellular phenotypes, genes, and biological functions remains a challenge.In this study, we tried to analyze the relationship between an image parameter and a functional group of gene knockdown, which might be varied depending on tested cell lines and experimental conditions. A single image gave a lot of cellular phenotypic information for multiple levels of visible and hidden changes (Hamilton 2009; Harma et al., 2014). The cellular phenotypes reflect the total changes of complex biological pathways and those phenotypic parameters are closely related with each other (Feng et al., 2009). Therefore, it is possible to understand a variety of phenotypic changes through geneset-based analysis (Rappaz et al., 2014). We demonstrated how diverse image parameters obtained from a single assay could be used for the interpretation of various phenotypic aspects resulted from diverse gene knockdown.Furthermore, we attempted to analyze the resolution and reproducibility as well as the biological implications of various phenotypic parameters in image-based high throughput siRNA screening. In addition, experimental factors such as cell plating density and incubation time were taken into consideration for the optimization of cell-based assays. Automatic imaging systems were used to acquire images, which were quantified for phenotypic changes induced from gene perturbation using gene-specific siRNAs. From these data, we were able to analytically classify image-based parameters based on their patterns of hit enrichment. In addition, geneset-based clustering analysis highlighted the interactions between image parameters and the physiological implications of individual gene perturbation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
