@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A model for the proteolytic regulation of LpxC in the lipopolysaccharide pathway of Escherichia coli

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Simulation of the first two reactions in the LPS pathway.Kinetic parameters were obtained from the literature whilst others were estimated from our simulations.The possibility of the unfavourable equilibrium constant in the first step of the LPS pathway was analyzed.The mechanism of LpxC regulation by FtsH activation was investigated using differential time trigger in our model.Under extreme increases in LpxC concentration, FtsH is incapable of regulating production of excess end-product.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Metabolic pathway,Lipid A,Simulation,FtsH cleavage,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is an essential structural component found in Gram-negative bacteria. The molecule is comprised of a highly conserved lipid A and a variable outer core consisting of various sugars. LPS plays important roles in membrane stability in the bacterial cell and is also a potent activator of the human immune system. Despite its obvious importance, little is understood regarding the regulation of the individual enzymes involved or the pathway as a whole. LpxA and LpxC catalyze the first two steps in the LPS pathway. The reaction catalyzed by LpxA possesses a highly unfavourable equilibrium constant with no evidence of coupling to an energetically favourable reaction. In our model the presence of the second enzyme LpxC was sufficient to abate this unfavourable reaction and confirming previous studies suggesting that this reaction is the first committed step in LPS synthesis. It is believed that the protease FtsH regulates LpxC activity via cleavage. It is also suspected that the activity of FtsH is regulated by a metabolite produced by the LPS pathway; however, it is not known which one. In order to investigate these mechanisms, we obtained kinetic parameters from literature and developed estimates for other simulation parameters. Our simulations suggest that under modest increases in LpxC activity, FtsH is able to regulate the rate of product formation. However, under extreme increases in LpxC activities such as over-expression or asymmetrical cell division then FtsH activation may not be sufficient to regulate this first stage of synthesis.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is an important structural component in the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria (Poxton, 1995). This molecule is involved in important biological properties such as immune evasion, membrane stabilization and attachment to various surfaces (Walker et al., 2004). LPS has three distinctive structural sections; lipid A, core oligosaccharide and O-antigen (Raetz and Whitfield, 2002). The lipid A component is essential for growth and its structure is relatively well conserved amongst the Gram-negatives (Raetz et al., 2009). Biochemical studies of the LPS pathway have proved difficult for a number of reasons. Firstly, some of the reactions occur within the cytoplasm whilst subsequent steps occur within the membrane (Raetz and Whitfield, 2002). Secondly, a number of these enzymes have been difficult to purify (Garrett et al., 1997) presumably due to stability problems and finally, the substrates and products of some of these reactions are difficult to assay for (Belunis and Raetz, 1992). Therefore, an in silico metabolic model of this pathway would prove extremely useful for a complete understanding of both the synthesis and regulation of LPS.The first obligatory enzyme in the biosynthesis of lipid A is UDP-N-acetylglucosamine acyltransferase (LpxA) (Anderson and Raetz, 1987). This enzyme is encoded for by the lpxA gene (Coleman and Raetz, 1988) and is responsible for the transfer of R-3-hydroxyl chain to glucosamine 3-OH of UDP glucosamine from R-3-hydroxyacyl-acyl carrier protein (Anderson et al., 1985). Its substrate (UDP-N-acetylglucosamine) is located at a biosynthetic branchpoint which was previously unknown prior to the discovery of LpxA (Anderson and Raetz, 1987). This enables the substrate to be utilized either in the biosynthesis of lipid A or for the synthesis of peptidoglycan (Creuzenet et al., 2000). An interesting feature of the reaction catalyzed by LpxA is the thermodynamically unfavourable equilibrium constant of approximately 0.01 (Anderson et al., 1993). Such large unequilibriums exist for other enzymes such as creatine kinase which solve the energetics either by coupling the reaction to an energetically favourable one or by interacting directly with subsequent proteins (Shih and Whitesides, 1977). There is no evidence of either of these mechanisms occurring for this enzyme and to date there have been no studies aimed at examining the impact of this unfavourable reaction in context of subsequent lipid A metabolism.UDP-3-O-N-acetylglucosamine deacetylase (LpxC) catalyzes the second reaction and due to the unfavourable LpxA reaction, it represents the first committed step in the biosynthesis of lipid A (Barb and Zhou, 2008). The reaction involves hydrolyzing UDP-3-O-(3-hydroxymyristoyl)-N-acetylglucosamine to UDP-3-O-(3-hydroxymyristoyl) glucosamine and acetate (Young et al., 1995). It is known that very low levels of LpxC are detrimental to the cell viability (Schäkermann et al., 2013); however, very high levels of this enzyme also appear to be toxic to the organism presumably due to a build up of lipid A (Sorensen et al., 1996). Therefore, regulation of LpxC is crucial for microbial survival. In Escherichia coli, LpxC is regulated in a unique manner involving proteolytic cleavage of the enzyme by the protease FtsH (Ogura et al., 1999). The activity of the proteolysis is in turn thought to be dependent on the balance of phospholipid to lipopolysaccharide molecules (Schäkermann et al., 2013) but this has not been established experimentally. However, to date no studies have investigated the combined activities of the individual enzyme kinetic properties and subsequent regulatory mechanisms on the overall synthesis of LPS. Additionally, no mathematical models exist which would be capable of testing our current understanding based on published experimental research. Such a model could substantiate the proposed mechanism of lipid A synthesis as well as providing new insights into this complex and important microbial pathway.Here we provide a model for the first two reactions of lipid A biosynthesis investigating the unfavourable reaction of LpxA and the subsequent committed step catalyzed by LpxC. Our model utilizes transcription/translation rates, enzymic rates and protein half lives/degradation rates to investigate the flow of substrates through this stage and interrogate the proposed regulatory mechanisms.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
