@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Inter-domain linker prediction using amino acid compositional index

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We developed a domain linker predictor from amino acid sequence information.A modified formula for amino acid compositional index is proposed.Domain-linker regions are identified using the amino acid compositional index.A simulated annealing algorithm is employed and tuned to enhance the prediction.The method showed a significant improvement over current methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Domain linker prediction,Amino acid composition,Compositional index,Simulated annealing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Protein chains are generally long and consist of multiple domains. Domains are distinct structural units of a protein that can evolve and function independently. The accurate and reliable prediction of protein domain linkers and boundaries is often considered to be the initial step of protein tertiary structure and function predictions. In this paper, we introduce CISA as a method for predicting inter-domain linker regions solely from the amino acid sequence information. The method first computes the amino acid compositional index from the protein sequence dataset of domain-linker segments and the amino acid composition. A preference profile is then generated by calculating the average compositional index values along the amino acid sequence using a sliding window. Finally, the protein sequence is segmented into intervals and a simulated annealing algorithm is employed to enhance the prediction by finding the optimal threshold value for each segment that separates domains from inter-domain linkers. The method was tested on two standard protein datasets and showed considerable improvement over the state-of-the-art domain linker prediction methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Proteins can be considered to be built up from domains, and each of which can be considered as a semi-independent structural unit of a protein capable of folding independently (Sun et al., 2013). On the other hand, several domains are often joined together in several combinations to form multi-domain protein sequences (Chothia, 1992; Yoo et al., 2008). Inter-domain linkers tie neighboring domains and support inter-domain communication in multi-domain proteins. They also provide sufficient flexibility to facilitate domain motions and regulate the inter-domain geometry (Bhaskara et al., 2012). Domain linkers play a key role in inter-domain interactions, function regulation, and protein stability (Gokhale and Khosla, 2000; Lehtinen et al., 2004; Dumontier et al., 2005). Several domain prediction methods first detect domain linkers, and, in turn, predict the location of domain regions. The knowledge of structural domains is used to classify proteins, understand their structures, functions and evolution, and predict protein–protein interactions (PPI) (Zaki, 2009). Therefore, accurate computational methods for splitting proteins into structural domains are essential in proteomics research (Hondoh et al., 2006).Several impressive inter-domain linker prediction methods have been developed and can be generally classified into statistical-based and machine learning-based methods. One of the earlier statistical-based methods is DomCut11http://www.bork.embl.de/∼suyama/domcut/.(Suyama and Ohara, 2003) which predicts inter-domain linker regions based on the differences in amino acid (AA) composition between domain and linker regions in a protein sequence. To represent the preference for AA residues in linker regions, the authors defined the linker index as:Si=−ln(fil/fid), wherefilandfidare the frequencies of AA residue i in the linker (l) and domain (d) region, respectively. A linker is predicted if there is a trough in the linker index profile and the averaged linker index value at the bottom of the trough is lower than a defined threshold value. Domcut was tested on a non-redundant 273 protein sequences and achieved 53.5% recall and 50.1% precision. Despite the fact that DomCut showed glimpse of potential success, it was reported by Dong et al. (2006) that DomCut has low sensitivity and specificity in comparison to other later published methods. Therefore, integrating more biological evidences in the linker index could enhance the prediction of the inter-domain linkers and therefore, the idea of DomCut was later expanded by several researchers such as Pang et al. (2008) to identify foldable regions and Zaki et al. (2011a,b) to identify transmembrane helical segments in a protein sequence.Linding et al. (2003) presented another statistical-based method named GlobPlot.22http://globplot.embl.de.GlobPlot allows users to plot the tendency within protein sequences for exploring both potential globular and disordered/flexible regions in proteins based on their AA sequence, and to identify inter-domain segments containing linear motifs. Other statistical-based methods were presented by Udwary et al. (2002) which predicts the locations of linker regions within large multifunctional proteins and Dumontier et al. (2005) which predicts domain linkers by using AA composition.Machine learning (ML) based methods are the most commonly used approaches in protein domain linker prediction. Most of the recent approaches employ either Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) such as PRODO (Sim et al., 2005) or Support Vector Machines (SVM) such as DROP (Ebina et al., 2011) to improve the prediction. Other examples of ML-based methods include DomNet (Yoo et al., 2008), Chatterjee et al. (2009), DoBo (Eickholt et al., 2011) and ThreaDom (Xue et al., 2013). However, despite the success of the above mentioned methods they mainly suffer from the following limitations:•Most ML-based methods such as PRODO, DROP, and DomNet are computationally expensive. They require high computational cost to generate the Position-Specific Scoring Matrix (PSSM) and/or predict secondary structure information in a single protein sequence. Finding the structural information by itself is another challenge. In contrast, predicting the domain linkers could lead to inferring the structural information.Some methods such as PRODO are evaluated based on the overall prediction accuracy which is not a good evaluation strategy in imbalanced data problems. Protein data are imbalanced as domain regions are much longer than linkers and, therefore, classifiers will usually be biased towards the majority class. For example, if domain regions occupy a long portion of a protein sequence, then a classifier could simply assign a domain to the whole protein sequence with high classification accuracy, however, the linkers in this case will not be predicted (all instances classified as +ve and no −ve classes are predicted).In this work, we develop CISA, a simple but yet effective method for domain-linker prediction solely from AA information. Domain-linker regions will be determined using AA compositional index (CI), and then, a simulated annealing (SA) algorithm will be employed to enhance the prediction by finding the optimal threshold value that separates domains from linkers.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
