@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Deceptive responsive genes in gel-based proteomics

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A mathematical formula was constructed in order to estimate the high abundant proteins impact on 2DE-based proteome analysis.An experimental method was simulated by adding a new protein.35% of root proteins were absent in the presence of 40μg new protein.2-DE without depletion of high-abundant proteins is a deceptive tool for gene expression analysis in some research areas.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Two-dimensional electrophoresis (2DE),Proteomics,Mathematical equation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The standard method of the global quantitative analysis of gene expression at the protein level combines high-resolution two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2DE) with mass spectrometric identification of protein spots. One of the major concerns with the application of gel-based proteomics is the need for the analytical and biological accuracy of the datasets. We mathematically and empirically simulated the possibility of the technical regulations of gene expression using 2DE. Our developed equation predicted a detectable alteration in the quantity of protein spots in response to a new protein added in, with various amounts. Testing the predictability of the developed equation, we observed that a new protein could form deceptive expression profiles, classified using prevalent tools for the analysis of 2DE results. In spite of the theoretically predicted overall reduction of proteins that resulted from adding the new protein, the empirical data revealed differential amount of proteins when various quantities of the new protein were added to the protein sample. The present work emphasize that employment of 2DE would not be a reliable approach for biological samples with extensive proteome alterations such as the developmental and differentiation stages of cells without depletion of high abundant proteins.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2DE) is a central high-throughput technique in proteomics that has served in many studies for investigating gene expression. This technique sorts proteins extracted from biological samples of interest in two steps, first by isoelectric point and then by molecular weight. The spots displayed on polyacrylamide gels represent the quantification of expressed genes at the protein level. Generally, a reliable extraction and quantification method is employed, depending on the sample. The protein concentration applied to a gel can be varied between several micrograms to one milligram. The first dimension is performed by rehydrated IPG strips in a solution containing the necessary additives and, optionally, the desired protein concentration. In the isoelectric focusing stage, the pH gradient of IPG strips helps the proteins to separate according to their isoelectric point under the electric field strength. In the second dimension, the separation of proteins is performed using SDS-PAGE.Multiple levels of gene regulation mediate the differentiation of cells during organ morphogenesis. In this way, gel-based proteome analysis has been frequently employed to reach greater overall proteome coverage in uncovering proteomes that are responsible for different developmental stages. Analysis of proteome dynamics, during light-induced development of rice (Oryza sativa) chloroplasts from etioplasts using quantitative 2DE, showed the exclusive identification of 237 etioplast proteins in comparison with 118 proteins which were exclusively identified using the shotgun approach reported by Zychlinski et al. (2005) (Kleffmann et al., 2007). Hence, 2DE analysis was preferred to identify molecular processes that may be involved in the regulation of plastids during the early illumination phase. A study on the proteome expression pattern of maize plastids during photo morphogenesis processes at five time points (0, 2, 4, 12 and 48h) showed that one third of the reproducible spots first appeared after two hours from greening initiation (Lonosky et al., 2004). A dynamic pattern of gene expression can be concluded from the great alteration in 2D gel patterns during different seed developmental stages. Interestingly, around 50% of the most abundant proteins at the final stage of barley seed development appeared, whereas these were not detectable in the first stages (Finnie et al., 2002). Proteome analysis of soybean seeds revealed the protein expression profile to be approximately the same at the first developmental stages while around 60% of the total spots were seed storage proteins that were only detected at the final stage (Hajduch et al., 2005). A superficial judgment about proteome maps obtained from the skin tissue of grapes in three stages of ripening (Deytieux et al., 2007) showed a large increase in quantity of some protein spots at the maturity stage compared with those spots in two other stages.During protein expression analysis using 2DE, all gels have to experience the same protein amount, which is both the prerequisite and the challenge for proteome analysis. This fact, along with a large increase or decrease in the amount of some proteins during the developmental stages, results in the elimination or presence of some less abundant ones. Here, we have indicated a few examples of studies on developmental phases that investigate proteome analysis by utilizing two-dimensional gel electrophoresis regardless of depleting the high abundant proteins. Although depletion of high abundant protein in human, bovine (Faulkner et al., 2011; Hannan et al., 2009) and plant organs (Kim et al., 2013; Gupta et al., 2015) are investigated in several researches, there are several studies carried out without considering this fact.In this paper, we constructed a mathematical method which states that the accuracy of 2DE-based proteome analysis needs to be approved through the determination of a certain threshold level. Along with the mathematical method, an experimental one was simulated by adding a reference protein (BSA) as high abundant protein as well, in order to demonstrate the deceptive gene expression.Rice seeds (O. sativa cv. IR651) were obtained from International Rice Research Institute (IRRI). Seeds were germinated in plates at 28°C. Three-days-old seedlings were transplanted into full strength Yoshida solution and grown in growth chamber at 30°C/26°C (day/night), photoperiod 16h, relative humidity 70%, and a photon flux density 250μMm−2S−1. The root of 75 days old plants were harvested for protein analysis.Total protein was isolated from roots by TRIzol reagent according to manufacturer’s guidelines (Molecular Research Center, Inc., Cincinnati, OH). The extracted protein was dissolved in lysis buffer consisted of 8M Urea, 4% CHAPS, 1% DTT, 1% pH 3–10 ampholytes, 35mM Tris base and stored in aliquots at −80°C until further use. Protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay kit (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA) using BSA as the standard.Different amounts of bovine serum albumin fraction V (5, 10, 20 and 40μg) were separately added to 80μg of root protein, and then 80μg of the resulting protein solution was subtracted and loaded onto the analytical gels. One of the samples was left without the addition of BSA and nominated as a standard sample.The gels were scanned using ImageScanner™ III (GE Healthcare Bio Science AB) at a resolution of 600 dots per in. The data were analysed using ImageMaster 2D Platinum 4 software. Protein spots were quantified based on their relative volumes (%vol), computed by the software itself as below, where VolSis the volume of spot ‘s’ in a gel containing ‘n’ spots.%Vol=Vol∑s=1nVolsHierarchical clustering was carried out using Cluster software version 2.11 (http://rana.lbl.gov/EisenSoftware.htm). Clustering of protein expression patterns was performed as described by the software user manual. Input data for pre-processing were the percentage volume of each protein spot at the BSA treatments by percentage volume of the same protein spot at control conditions (no BSA).The alteration rate of the protein quantity as a result of BSA addition can be modeled using the following equations. In a protein mixture with n different types of proteins with various quantities ofw1town, the total protein quantity (TPQ), designated by W, can be found as below:(1)w1+w2+⋯+wi+⋯+wn=Wwhere wi is the quantity of the ith protein. It is also assumed that the ith protein has the lowest quantity in the mixture. Adding a new protein type indexed by n+1 with the quantity ofwn+1to the mixture raises the TPQ of the solution to:(2)Wnew=W+wn+1The appropriate TPQ for the experiment is W. Therefore, the quantity of W is obtained from the new quantity ofWnew. In this regard, the new sample of the solution will be comprised ofw′1tow′n+1, where(3)w′1+w′2+⋯+w′i+⋯+w′n+w′n+1=WIt is interesting to find the quantity of the new protein,wn+1, that results in losing information about the ith protein with the quantity of wi. We assume that the accuracy of the experimental instruments for measuring the quantity of the proteins isε^which can be defined as follows:(4)ε^=εwwhere ε is the lowest weight of a protein that can be detected by the experimental instrument. Moreover, the weight percentages of the ith protein (qi) can be calculated as follows:(5)qi=w′iW=wiW+wn+1Hence, ifqi<ε^, the information about the ith protein will be missed. In this condition, we would be able to calculate the critical quantity of the (n+1)th protein added to the mixture by which, the information for the ith protein will be lost:(6)εˆ=wiW+wn+1→wn+1=wiε^−WAnd the quantity of the (n+1) th protein in the new mixture of the solution is as below:(7)w′n+1=(wi/ε^−W)WW+(wi/ε^−W)It can be concluded from the above equation (Eq. (7)) that, proteins with a weight of wior less could not be detectable by experimental instrument, if a protein with quantity ofw′n+1or more presents in the solution of weight W.The data from control conditions were converted according to Eq. (5) for 5, 10, 20 and 40μg BSA treatments:(8)wsyn=woW+wn+1×100where Wsyn is the synthetic quantity of each protein in various treatments of BSA, and w0 is the quantity of the same protein in control conditions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
