@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Insights into the Functions of M-T Hook Structure in HIV Fusion Inhibitor Using Molecular Modeling

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We explored the mechanism why M-T could improve the activity of inhibitors.The system with the M-T hook structure formed more stable hydrogen bonds than without M-T hook structure.The M-T hook could further fortify the interaction by “hooking” the pocket residues tightly; in contrast, this structure do not appear in the system without the M-T hook.Binding free energy of the ligand with M-T was higher than the other without M-T.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Molecular dynamic simulation,MM-PB/GBSA,Binding free energy,HIV-1,Fusion inhibitors,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
HIV-1 membrane fusion plays an important role in the process that HIV-1 entries host cells. As a treatment strategy targeting HIV-1 entry process, fusion inhibitors have been proposed. Nevertheless, development of a short peptide possessing high anti-HIV potency is considered a daunting challenge. He et al. found that two residues, Met626 and Thr627, located the upstream of the C-terminal heptad repeat of the gp41, formed a unique hook-like structure (M-T hook) that can dramatically improve the binding stability and anti-HIV activity of the inhibitors. In this work, we explored the molecular mechanism why M-T hook structure could improve the anti-HIV activity of inhibitors. Firstly, molecular dynamic simulation was used to obtain information on the time evolution between gp41 and ligands. Secondly, based on the simulations, molecular mechanics Poisson–Boltzmann surface area (MM-PBSA) and molecular mechanics Generalized Born surface area (MM-GBSA) methods were used to calculate the binding free energies. The binding free energy of the ligand with M-T hook was considerably higher than the other without M-T. Further studies showed that the hydrophobic interactions made the dominant contribution to the binding free energy. The numbers of Hydrogen bonds between gp41 and the ligand with M-T hook structure were more than the other. These findings should provide insights into the inhibition mechanism of the short peptide fusion inhibitors and be useful for the rational design of novel fusion inhibitors in the future.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS), which is induced by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, has become one of the major medical and humanitarian challenges (Allen and Rizzo, 2012). So far, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approves four classes of anti-HIV drugs: (i) reverse transcriptase inhibitors (RTIs), (ii) protease inhibitors (PIs), (iii) fusion and entry inhibitors, and (iv) integrase inhibitors (Su et al., 2015). In particular, HIV-1 fusion/entry inhibitors can inhibit early steps of the HIV replication cycle, thereby inhibiting the spread of infection in the first time (Yu et al., 2013). Fusion of HIV virus membrane with host cell membrane is an essential event for virus infection and proliferation. This process is mediated by HIV envelope glycoprotein 120 (gp120) (Tsvetkov and Serbin 2014) and glycoprotein 41 (gp41) (Ma et al., 2014), thus, it is served as an attractive target for designing a novel HIV-1fusion/entry inhibitors (Zheng et al., 2014).T20 (Enfuvirtide, Fuzeon) is the first HIV fusion inhibitor approved by U.S. FDA. Although T20 is effective (Augusto et al., 2014; Tan et al., 2013), T20 has some shortcomings that limit its clinical usefulness. Firstly, owing to its nature characteristic, T20 is marketed in an injectable form. Patients are subcutaneously injected twice in every day. Because of the chronic nature of the disease therapy, this dosage form may be one of major problems for the patient’s adherence to this drug regimen. Secondly, T20 clinical efficacy is also negatively affected by gp41 resistance mutations that arise owing to continued use. To overcome these disadvantages, a number of strategies have been applied to discover the next generation inhibitors with improved potency and pharmaceutical properties (Lu et al., 2014). However, the resulting peptides usually inherit a longer sequence (Liu et al., 2014), such as SC35EK (35-mer) (Kajiwara et al., 2009), SFT (sifuvirtide, 36-mer) (Yao et al., 2012), and T2635 (39-mer) (Eggink et al., 2011). Undoubtedly, the length of peptide closely relates to difficulty and cost of its production, but short peptides (amino acid residue numbers<14) lead to a dramatic loss of antiviral potency and binding stability (Paulsen et al., 2002). Therefore, the development of peptide’s fusion inhibitor with highly active antiretroviral efficacy and reasonable residue numbers faces great challenges (Zhang and Sagui, 2014).Promisingly, He’s group discovered a novel strategy to solve above problem. By studying the inhibit’s mechanism of gp41, they found that two key residues, Met626 and Thr627, which forms a hook-like structure (M-T hook), located upstream of the pocket-binding domain (PBD) of the C-terminal heptad repeat (CHR). The M-T hook can dramatically improve the binding stability of the inhibitors (Chong et al., 2012a,b); and the addition of the M-T hook structure to the N terminus of C-peptide could markedly enhance its antiviral activity (Chong et al., 2012b, 2013). Based on their former research, Chong et al. proposed a prototype that the short C-peptide fusion inhibitors could be developed by adding an M-T hook structure. They introduced the methionine and threonine to the N terminus of a panel of C peptides (24-mer or less), and found one pepide, named MT-SC22EK, was highly active against diverse HIV-1 variants, including those T20- and SC29EK-resistant variants. Based on the crystal structures of MT-SC22EK, their paper reported that MT-SC22EK primarily targets on the hydrophobic pocket region on N-heptad repeat (NHR) trimer with its PBD and M-T hook regions, whereas the sites conferring T20-resistance are not bound by the inhibitor. Therefore, the M-T hook structure provides a novel strategy for designing short peptide fusion inhibitors that can overcome the problem of drug resistance.The major problem affected activity of HIV-1 fusion inhibitors is molecular resistance. Owing to point mutations in the GIV motif of NHR (L33 to L45), the inhibit activity of T20 is on the decrease (Liu et al., 2005). Some studies reported that mutations on NHR of gp41 would induce the compensatory mutation on CHR, which may balance those damages and remedy the function of gp41 (Xu et al., 2005). In our former work, we studied the two kinds of mutants systems of gp41, N43D single mutation and compensatory mutation S138A (yielding N43D/S138A), respectively, and the analyses of structural alteration indicated that the inhibitor C34 displays different binding modes in wild type and two mutants (Ma et al., 2014). In N43D single mutation system, it was founded that the N43D mutation introduced a negative charge on receptor, thus led to repulsion between receptor and ligand, and induced the conformation changes of complex, and led to greater losses in hydrophobic interactions and hydrogen bond interaction. In N43D/S138A double mutation system, we founded CHR have more contact with hydrophobic residues of receptor, induced more van der Waals contributions. This great hydrophobic interaction of double mutant could partially offset the energy loss arising from N43D mutation. The change of binding mode on N43D/S138A could explain why compensatory mutation S138A could partially restores infectivity, lead to increased infectivity and greater resistance to inhibitors than mutation N43D.In order to explore the role of M-T hook structure in improving the activity of fusion inhibitors, we used molecular dynamics (MD) simulations and molecular mechanics Poisson–Boltzmann/Generalized Born surface area (MM-PB/GBSA) approach to analyze structure-function relationships between gp41 and two ligands (SC22EK and MT-SC22EK) (Fig. 1). The only difference of the two ligands is that MT-SC22EK includes M-T hook, the other without. These results may be useful for designing novel HIV fusion inhibitors (Tan et al., 2016), or optimizing the lead compounds.The initial structures were downloaded from the RSCB protein data bank (www.rcsb.org) (PDB ID: 3VU5, 3VU6). The amino acid sequences of the two ligands are shown in Fig. 1. The receptor was one N-terminal heptad repeat (NHR) chain of gp41. We named the system including NHR and MT-SC22EK as complex 1, the other as complex 2.The MD simulations were carried out for each complex system using NAMD2.9 software and amber ff03 force-field. Firstly, the each system was solvated with TIP3P (Jorgensen et al., 1983) water box, 10Å of space between the protein and the simulation box boundaries on each direction. After model generation, each system was neutralized separately with Cl− ions. Then, two successive minimization steps were performed: (i) the system was minimized by 20,000 steps using the conjugate gradient with 2.0kcal/mol restraints on the backbone of the protein; (ii) the system was minimized by 20,000 steps using the conjugate gradient without constrained atoms. Next, the systems were gradually heated from 10K to 300K using Langevin dynamics in a slow, stepwise fashion (20K every 100ps). During heating, no restraint was utilized in the complex. Finally, the MD simulations were performed in the NPT ensemble (a constant temperature of 300K and a pressure of 1atm) for 50ns (the time step is 2fs) with all restraints removed. Throughout the MD simulations, a cut-off of 12Å was used for nonbonded interactions while the SHAKE and Particle Mesh Ewald (PME) were used with periodic boundary conditions (Ryckaert et al., 1977).The binding free energies were calculated by subtracting the free energies of the unbound receptor and ligand from the free energy of the bound complex, shown in Eq. (1): (Kollman et al., 2000; Kuhn and Kollman 2000)(1)ΔG=〈Gcomplex〉−〈Greceptor〉−〈Gligand〉where〈Gcomplex〉,〈Greceptor〉,〈Gligand〉are the average values of the Gibbs free energy for the complex, receptor, and ligand, respectively.Binding free energies were calculated using the MMPBSA.py approaches as implemented in AMBER12 and AmberTools13. MMPBSA (Venken et al., 2011) computed the binding free energy by using a thermodynamic cycle that combined the molecular mechanical energies with the solvated approaches.(2)ΔGMMPB(GB)SA=ΔEeleMM+ΔEvdWMM+ΔGnonpolsol+ΔGpolsolwhere theΔGnonpolsolandΔGpolsolare nonpolar and polar terms in solution, respectively.ΔEeleMMandΔEvdWMMare the electrostatic and van der Waals contributions to the molecular mechanics energy, respectively. The polar part expresses the electrostatic contribution to solvation, which is obtained by solving the linear Poisson–Boltzmann equation in a continuum model of solvent. On the other hand, the other part accounted for the nonpolar contribution is related linearly to the solvent accessible surface area. The solvation free energies are calculated using an implicit solvent model. Several implicit solvent models are available to calculate the solvation free energies, including Generalized Bron (GB), Poisson–Boltzmann (PB), and Reference Interaction Site Model (RISM) etc. In this experiment, we calculated the solvation free energies with the PB and GB methods.Using Eq. (3) calculated the nonpolar solvation energy,ΔGnonpolsol:(3)ΔGnonpolsol=γA+Bwhere A is the solvent accessible surface area (SASA), using the MSMS program (Sanner et al., 1996) with a 1.4Å radius probe; γ is the surface tension, and β is the offset. The value of constants γ and β are 0.0052kcalmol−1Å−2 and 0.92kcalmol−1, respectively.The nonpolar solvation term in the MM(GB)PBSA method combines an implicit estimate of the entropic changes associated with the insertion of a solute into the solvent. However, it is obvious that the entropic impact of changes in the configurational freedom of the protein and ligand upon complex formation in vacuo. As a general rule, in the process of protein–ligand binding, the restrictions to the number of conformations causes a reduction in entropy; this contribution is known as the configurational (or conformational) entropy. For some systems, some researchers have found that the calculated binding affinity values is more colse experimental binding affinity values by incorporating a normal mode estimation of the entropic component of the binding free energy alongside MMPB(GB)SA(Sadiq et al., 2010; Wright et al., 2014). Including this contribution, the final binding affinity estimate ΔGtheor is given by(4)ΔGtheor−PB(GB)=ΔGMMPB(GB)SA−TΔSwhereΔGMMPB(GB)SAis the MMPBSA or MMGBSA binding free energy, T is the thermodynamic temperature, and −TΔS is the normal mode estimate of the configurational entropy penalty of the binding process of ligand.As implemented within the AMBER 12 package employed in this study, ΔS is calculted as Eq. (5):(5)ΔS=ΔStra+ΔSrot+ΔSvibwhere ΔStra, ΔSrot, and ΔSvib are the contributions to changes in translational, rotational, and vibrational freedoms, respectively.To explore the impact of the binding residue for binding energies, the intermolecular interactions between each residue of the NHR of gp41 and inhibitors were calculated in terms of the pair interaction decomposition of free energy (Miller et al., 2012). The calculations were also performed over MD trajectories using the decomposition energy module in AMBER12 and AmberTools13. The steps of the experiment are shown in Fig. 2.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
