@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Dynamic conformational ensembles regulate casein kinase-1 isoforms: Insights from molecular dynamics and molecular docking studies

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A comparative MD simulation of two isoforms of CK1 reveals their synchronized behavior.The two state conformational mechanism for CK1-isoforms is proposed.Docking studies at different conformations validates the conformational switch.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wnt signaling pathway,Molecular dynamics simulation,Principal component analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Casein kinase-1 (CK1) isoforms actively participate in the down-regulation of canonical Wnt signaling pathway; however recent studies have shown their active roles in oncogenesis of various tissues through this pathway. Functional loss of two isoforms (CK1-α/ε) has been shown to activate the carcinogenic pathway which involves the stabilization of of cytoplasmic β-catenin. Development of anticancer therapeutics is very laborious task and depends upon the structural and conformational details of the target. This study focuses on, how the structural dynamics and conformational changes of two CK1 isoforms are synchronized in carcinogenic pathway. The conformational dynamics in kinases is the responsible for their action as has been supported by the molecular docking experiments.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The role of Wnt signaling pathway in carcinogenesis of various origins (colon, ovarian, prostate etc.), with temporal deregulations (or mutations) of different components, has recently been documented (Klaus and Birchmeier, 2008). One of the key regulators of the pathway is β-catenin; which is strictly regulated by glycogen synthase kinase-3β (GSK-3β). The presence of Wnt factors (or deregulatory signals) stabilizes β-catenin in the cytosol; the stable β-catenin translocates to nucleus and regulates the transcription of TCF/LEF-induced genes ultimately resulting in malignancy (Polakis, 2000).In humans, CK1 constitutes a family of serine/threonine protein kinases (viz. α, γ1, γ2, γ3, δ and ε isoforms) which participate in various metabolic pathways (Amit et al., 2002; Long et al., 2012a). Recently, they have been studied as potential drug targets for the development of anticancer therapeutics (Long et al., 2012b). Among the six isoforms of CK1 at least two (i.e. α and ε) have been reported for their roles in cell survival and carcinogenesis via direct or indirect stabilization of β-catenin in the Wnt signaling pathway (Knippschild et al., 2005). The biological activity of CK1 depends on its special catalytic site which recognizes -Ser(p) XXSer/Thr- motif to phosphorylate target protein (Xu et al., 1995).The coordinated action of CK1α and ε, over lipoprotein receptor-related protein 5 and 6 (LRP5/6), nucleates a binding site for GSK-3β at C-terminal domain of LRP5/6. The receptor bound GSK-3β is incapable for inhibitory phosphorylation of β-catenin; as an effect of this the half-life of β-catenin is increased (del Valle-Perez et al., 2011). Recently, Brockschmidt et al. (2008) and Rosenberg et al. (2013) have also shown highly increased level of CK1-ε in pancreatic and breast cancer cell respectively.The proteins are the soft materials and its flexibility is critical for the biological functions. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulation is a standard computational tool to access the flexibility of biological molecules (Karplus and Petsko, 1990; Karplus and McCammon, 2002). The conformational selection model (Monod et al., 1965; Meireles et al., 2011) explains that all the conformations of proteins pre-exist in dynamical equilibrium prior to the ligand binding. Once the lingand binds to a conformation, and stabilizes it, shifting the equilibrium toward bound state conformations. Here, we present the comparative dynamic etiquette of two CK1 isoforms (α and ε) under physiological condition in an aqueous environment. Moreover, we also analyzed the conformational substates sampled during the dynamics. In order to substantiate the role of each substate, we performed molecular docking of several conformations from each substate of each isoform with ATP and ADP.The native tridimensional structure of human CK1-α is unavailable in Protein Data Bank (PDB); however, that for CK1-ε it is found (id: 4HOK at 2.77Å). The 3D structure of CK1-α was built by homology modeling using its sequence (UniProt id: P48729), and a template structure of apo form of CK1-δ (PDB id: 3UYS at 2.3Å). The CK1-ε structure obtained from PDB is incomplete therefore, the missing residues were repaired using model refinement/loop modeling tool of Chimera 1.8.1. All the homology modeling and model repair experiments were performed by Modeller-9.10 (Sali and Blundell, 1993; Eswar et al., 2006). The quality of each newly modeled structure was estimated on the basis of Ramachandran plot (Laskowski et al., 1993) and Z-score (Sippl, 1993) analytics. To avoid any ambiguity and for simplicity these modeled structures are renamed as alpha and epsilon for α- and ε- isoforms respectively.The united atom GROMOS 53a6 force field was used for preparing the topologies of each system using pdb2gmx tool of Gromacs 4.5.5 package (Oostenbrink et al., 2004; van der Spoel et al., 2005; Hess et al., 2008). Two proteins were kept in the center of cubic boxes with the minimum distance of 10Å between wall and any atom of the protein; then each box was filled with extended simple point charge (SPC/E) water molecules (Berendsen et al., 1987; Mark and Nilsson, 2001). The systems were neutralized by adding appropriate numbers of sodium and chloride ions. Further, to pacify each system, energy minimization was performed with non-bonded cutoff of 9.0Å for five thousand cycles of steepest descent without any restraints to the systems. Table 1lists details of each system.The MD simulations were performed using Gromacs 4.5.5. Ahead of the production dynamics, each system was equilibrated in two phases for 1ns (nanosecond) with integration time step of 2fs (femtoseconds). The first phase of equilibration was 100ps (picoseconds) dynamics, to raise the system’s temperature by 300K, at NVT ensemble; the Berendsen thermostat (Berendsen et al., 1984) was used to maintain the constant temperature. During NVT ensemble the initial velocities were assigned from the Maxwell’s distribution of temperature. The second equilibration step was also a dynamics of 900ps maintaining homogeneous density in the system using NPT ensemble; the constant pressure of the system was maintained by Parrinello–Rahman barostat (Parrinello and Rahman, 1981). Linear Constraint Solver (LINCS) (Hess et al., 1997) algorithm was applied to preserve the length of all bonds. The long-range electrostatic interactions were treated by particle mesh Ewald (PME) (Darden et al., 1993) method with non-bonded cut-off distance of 9Å, under periodic boundary conditions. Two systems were passed to production run, computing 30ns (nanoseconds) trajectories under NPT ensemble.Production simulation of each system generated trajectories of 20ns, each with snapshot at 2ps intervals. It was ensured that each trajectory obeyed NPT ensemble during entire simulation period on the basis of variations in energies (potential, kinetic and total energy), as well as the temperature, pressure and density as function of time. Gromacs 4.5.5 analysis tools were used for the analysis of trajectories. The flexibility of the proteins was estimated on the basis of root mean square deviation (RMSD) of backbone atoms with reference to the respective initial structures and root mean square fluctuation (RMSF) of alpha carbon atoms (Cα) of each protein. The temporal changes in accessible surface area (SASA) and radius of gyration (Rg) were computed by g sas and g gyrate tools respectively.Principal component analysis (PCA) was executed for both trajectories to study the collective motions in CK1 isoforms (Hayward and Go, 1995; Stein et al., 2006a; Hayward and de Groot, 2008; Amadei et al., 1993; Amadei et al., 1996). For all the PCA analyses g covar and g anaeig tools were used. The covariance matrices were constructed from the backbone atoms. Snapshots at every 2ps were collected for visual inspection of concerted motions corresponding to each eigenvector in both molecules. Projections of eigenvectors to their respective trajectory, also known as principal components (PC), were obtained for essential dynamics sampling. For both trajectories it was observed that only first few PCs contribute significantly to the internal motions. Moreover, 1st and 3rd eigenvectors were selected for essential dynamics sampling since these eigenvectors comprised highest proportion of concerted motions throughout the molecules whereas the second eigenvector showed only jiggling of the C-terminus while the rest of the protein remained almost stable.The free energy landscapes (FEL) were obtained by computing the probability distribution from the essential plane composed of first two eigenvectors. Free energiesΔGwere calculated according to:ΔG=−kBTlnP(r)wherekBis Boltzmann constant, T is absolute temperature, and P is probability distribution along coordinate r.We performed molecular docking for conformations at different time-frames of trajectories. A total of 38 conformations (nineteen for each) at different time points (i.e. from 2 to 20ns at interval of 1ns) were isolated from both trajectories. Each conformation was used for blind docking with ATP and ADP. All the input files for docking experiments were prepared by AutoDockTool 1.5.6 (Sanner, 1999) and the binding affinity, for each conformation with ATP as well as with ADP, were computed by AutoDock Vina 1.1.2 (Trott and Olson, 2010). The grid size (at the grid spacing of 1Å) was adjusted for every round of docking study in such a way that it could cover the entire receptor. The exhaustiveness of global search was kept 20.The homology modeling based generated inactive structure of alpha as well as repaired structure of epsilon were first subjected to the quality assessment. The Ramachandran plot analysis for both structures revealed the excellent distribution of amino acids over the allowed regions of the map (Supp. Fig. 1(a)). All amino acids of both structures were distributed over allowed and partially allowed regions. The Z-Scores were also excellent for both, −6.06 and −7.13 for alpha and epsilon respectively. These analytics suggested reliability of these newly prepared structures and appreciable closeness to the experimental structures (Supp. Fig. 1(b)). Superimposed apo forms of both kinases are shown in cartoon model. Various structural elements are highlighted along with the highly conserved Lys and Asp residue in ATP binding site and substrate protein binding site respectively (Fig. 1).Ahead of trajectory analysis, the stability and convergence was estimated on the basis of Rg and total energies. On this ground it was found that trajectories of both systems are stable. The compactness of a system during course of MD simulation is measured by Rg analytics. The Rg profile of both the systems shows very small fluctuations during simulation which indicates that protein structure remains compact throughout the simulation period (Supp. Fig. 2).The molecular flexibility during simulation period was estimated on the basis of RMSD and RMSF (Figs. 2 and 3). RMSDs of both trajectories were calculated for backbone atoms of each snapshot with reference to its respective initial structure. The RMSD profile of each trajectory reveals that the two proteins are equilibrated around 7ns of simulation time after that the trajectory has achieved stable RMSD (Fig. 2). The RMSD profile of alpha shows smaller values as compared to that of epsilon. Further around the 22ns epsilon trajectory is showing an elevation in the RMSD which remains upto the end of simulation. The average RMSD for alpha is 2.3Å whereas that for epsilon is 3.0Å. The fluctuations of RMSD data are indicative of molecular flexibility in different parts which are verified by the RMSF data.Root mean square fluctuations (RMSF) were computed for each trajectory and averaged over per alpha-carbon residue (Cα) of respective isoform. The RMSF profile shows significantly small values, 0.5–1.0Å, throughout the simulation (Fig. 3 and Table 2), except the N- and the C- terminal regions. However, some high fluctuations are clearly visible. These high fluctuations are associated with different loop regions highlighted in Fig. 1 and discussed below in detail. The first distribution of high fluctuation corresponds to the ATP binding loop (i.e. Glycine rich P-loop in Fig. 1) which extends over nine residues, for alpha I23–I31 and for epsilon I17–I25. Relatively high fluctuations in this loop are vital for the enzyme functioning as it stabilizes the triphosphate groups of ATP with a conserved Lys residue of 3rd β strand is present in the active site (Fig. 1). The second high fluctuation is associated to L2 loop region in stretching between A34-G40 in alpha while in epsilon it spreads between G28-G34. During this distribution both isoforms, do not reveal any structural change, but a small translational shift. The third distribution corresponds to the L3 loop (a loop that connects β3 strand with αC-helix) which is positioned between residues L47 and L58 for alpha whereas for epsilon between residues L41 and H52. In this region, some structural changes are visible inasmuch as the alpha shows transition from α-helix to random coil at Q56 while epsilon shows change of helix to coil between residues Q50 and L51. The fourth distribution of high fluctuation extends between residues G145 and C150 for alpha and for epsilon between residues G139 and G144; interestingly, in this region the alpha shows very small fluctuation of 1.2Å while epsilon shows a large fluctuation of 3.4Å, which seems to correlate with the transition of α-helix to loop between K142 and G144. The fifth distribution spreads between residues K163 and H176 for alpha and R157 and H166 for epsilon. This region constitutes a big loop (i.e. the activation loop) in both the isoforms and is highly flexible (viz. 3.2Å, and 3.6Å for alpha and epsilon respectively) providing sufficient flexibility for the association with substrate protein. However, the N-terminal end of this loop possesses a highly conserved motif (i.e. DFG motif highlighted in yellow color in Fig. 1), which does not fluctuate much as it coordinate with Mg2+ ion (in the active site) to stabilize the transition state during catalysis (Thaimattam et al., 2007). The last distribution in RMSF profile is associated with the ‘L6’ which is located between residues W221 and K232 for alpha and between residues W215 and K226 for epsilon; once again the RMSF values for this region is very high (viz. 6.5Å and 4.0Å for alpha and epsilon respectively). The high fluctuations in this distribution are associated with the secondary structural changes; alpha shows a change of loop to helix at K229, while epsilon a helix is being converted to loop at K223. The structural changes in both isoforms, during simulation, were analyzed by comparing the respective initial structure with their corresponding average structures. These fluctuations are very useful for the functioning of the biomolecules, for instance, it may block the passage of water molecules through the active site and fasten the position of loops by forming new salt-bridges (Wang et al., 2005) and allosteric regulation of kinases (McClendon et al., 2014). The coordinated motions of P-loop and L3 and αC-Helix provide flexibility to the ATP binding domain of the kinase whereas that of activation loop, L6 and αG-Helix regulates the opening and closure of binding site for substrate protein, which posses an Asp residue for the proton transfer (Fig. 1). Therefore, we conclude that the binding of ATP and substrate protein depends upon the fluctuations of different loops and helices. RMSF data led us to conclude that the high fluctuations of Cα are either contributed by structural changes or free motions in the main-chain of the protein. These fluctuations are very crucial for the functioning of kinases, as the breathing motions of N- and C- terminal lobes connected via a hinge loop (Fig. 1) regulate the opening and closing of the active site as well as substrate protein binding site (Wang et al., 2005; McClendon et al., 2014; Gosu and Choi, 2014; Huse and Kuriyan, 2002).The covariance matrices for both trajectories were diagonalized, and corresponding eigenvalues were analyzed. The scree plot (Fig. 4), representing the percent contribution to the total variance by top twenty eigenvectors, which constitute over 85% of total concerted motions in each molecule. Moreover, it also depicts that the first PC strongly dominates the overall variance (i.e. the contribution of first PC to total variance is 57% and 52% for alpha and epsilon respectively). A visual inspection of collective motions corresponding to each eigenvector revealed 1st and 3rd PCs are prominently associated with the biologically significant internal motions in both the systems. However, the collective motion in the protein along 2nd PC though has higher mean square fluctuation than that of 3rd PC but internal motions corresponding to the 2nd PC are modest for biological function (i.e. it is merely responsible for trembling of C terminal whereas most of protein remains almost stable).The essential dynamics (ED) partitions conformational spaces into an essential subspace with a few degrees of freedoms in such a way that overall functional motions of the molecule could be described in reduced space. The two dimensional plots of 1st and 3rd PCs (i.e. the PCs with a major contribution to the collective motions) are shown in Fig. 5a. Each distribution of dots in the graph represents the conformational subspaces of several conformations with more of less similar energies (Caves et al., 1998). The ED sampling of alpha and epsilon yield two distinct conformational substates (viz. one conformational substate is constituted up to the 5th ns of simulation time and second conformational substate exists until the end of simulation). Thus, we infer that the conformational change in both kinases is almost similar. Moreover, free energy landscapes along the essential subspaces were also analyzed to validate these conformational changes (Fig. 5b). Further, it is presumed that the binding of high energy molecule (viz.ATP) to them is well separated in the time domain (i.e. the alpha and epsilon have well distinguished conformations during the phosphorylation process). Furthermore, we conclude that, the specific internal motions in the kinases results in large conformational changes empowering them for their biological functions (i.e. bind with their substrates with high specificity) (Stein et al., 2006b; Grant et al., 2010). The two substates during MD simulation of these kinases are surmised as two different conformations that may exist during pre- and post- phosphorylation events.Here we suppose that the conformational substates observed in ED represent the pre- and post- phosphorylated substates of kinases. The prephosphorylated substate is supposed to show strong affinity for ATP whereas the postphosphorylated substate for ADP. The molecular docking, with ATP and ADP, was executed for several conformations obtained from both trajectories. The binding affinities of ATP and ADP with each conformation were computed by AutoDock Vina. Comparative binding affinities, of ATP and ADP with each conformation, are shown in Fig. 6and are discussed below in detail. For alpha, conformations between 6th to 17thns of trajectory shows strong affinity with ADP and those between 2nd to 5thns and after 17thns of trajectory have high affinity with ATP. Whereas, for epsilon the conformations between 2nd to 11th ns show better binding affinity with ADP, thereafter, till end of simulation the conformations shows favorable binding with ATP. This study also shows strong analogy with RMSD analysis for respective trajectories as well as it also reinforce the essential dynamics sampling for conformational analysis. Molecular docking results clearly indicate that the dynamic conformational ensembles (Boehr et al., 2009), pre-existing in equilibrium, are directly related to the phosphorylation process of CK1 isoforms.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
