@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Abundance of intrinsic structural disorder in the histone H1 subtypes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The disorder-promoting amino acids are dominant in the histones H1 sequences.The disordered segments occur in all domains of histone H1 subtypes.The histone H1 subtypes contain MoRFs and ANCHOR binding modules.The histone H1 subtypes have widespread low-complexity regions and high folding rate.The disorder is a permanent structural and functional feature of histone H1 subtypes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Amino acid composition,ANCHOR protein binding regions,Folding rate,Intrinsic structural disorder,Histone H1 subtypes,Molecular recognition features,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The intrinsically disordered proteins consist of partially structured regions linked to the unstructured stretches, which consequently form the transient and dynamic conformational ensembles. They undergo disorder to order transition upon binding their partners. Intrinsic disorder is attributed to histones H1, perceived as assemblers of chromatin structure and the regulators of DNA and proteins activity. In this work, the comparison of intrinsic disorder abundance in the histone H1 subtypes was performed both by the analysis of their amino acid composition and by the prediction of disordered stretches, as well as by identifying molecular recognition features (MoRFs) and ANCHOR protein binding regions (APBR) that are responsible for recognition and binding. Both human and model organisms—animals, plants, fungi and protists—have H1 histone subtypes with the properties typical of disordered state. They possess a significantly higher content of hydrophilic and charged amino acid residues, arranged in the long regions, covering over half of the whole amino acid residues in chain. Almost complete disorder corresponds to histone H1 terminal domains, including MoRFs and ANCHOR. Those motifs were also identified in a more ordered histone H1 globular domain. Compared to the control (globular and fibrous) proteins, H1 histones demonstrate the increased folding rate and a higher proportion of low-complexity segments. The results of this work indicate that intrinsic disorder is an inherent structural property of histone H1 subtypes and it is essential for establishing a protein conformation which defines functional outcomes affecting on DNA- and/or partner protein-dependent cell processes.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Contrary to the canonical view that fixed structure defines protein function, the data gathered over the past decade demonstrate the occurrence of abundantly represented proteins without well-defined conformation. Instead of possessing a stable and rigid structure, they contain unstructured (intrinsically disordered) regions, or they are unstructured as a whole as a result of adopting differently compacted, native-coil or native pre-molten globule, structures (Turoverov et al., 2010; Topma, 2012; Uversky, 2013). A low content of secondary structures and the ability to form labile conformation, characteristic of intrinsic disorder state, corresponds well to the increased flexibility and plasticity facilitating recognition and binding. Therefore, the intrinsically disordered proteins are able to form complexes with various partners due to a high specificity/low affinity, transient and reversible, interactions (Tompa et al., 2005). Interactions with different partners, coupled to transition from disordered to ordered state, are essential for the activity of those disordered proteins which function as assemblers, chaperones, display sites, effectors, entropic chains and scavengers and participate mainly in signaling pathway, cell cycle regulation and the control of gene activity (Tompa, 2005).Transcription factors constituted a large protein group with abundantly disordered regions. They possess amino acids composition characteristic of intrinsically disordered conditions, in which disorder-promoting residues of Asn, Gln, Pro and Ser are highly prevalent. In more than 94% of transcription factors, the disorder-promoting amino acid residues are located in long disordered regions, covering transactivation domains and the DNA-binding domains (Liu et al., 2006). Intrinsic disorder is also correlated with a regulation of gene activity controlled by the proteins that build chromatin structure, which consequently determine their functions. The members of large classes of chromatin proteins, such as HMG and histones, are also considered as intrinsically disordered. A component of HMG family, HMGN, evokes special effects and thus affects local and global chromatin conditions, which leads to fix variant-specific transcriptional profile. One of possible mechanism by which HMGN(s) sets a competence for transcription is their ability to interact with specific regulators, hormone receptors and transcription factors. This interaction is set throughout several disorder-to-order transition regions enriched in the main disorder-promoting amino acid residues. All HMGN variants possess long disordered regions, significantly exceeding an average degree of intrinsic disorder in other proteins, which have a significant impact on their functions (Rochman et al., 2011). A transient binding of HMGN to DNA and to the nucleosome heavily influence chromatin looseness and transcriptional stimulation, run on the competition with histones H1, the proteins widely regarded as the condensers of chromatin structure and the repressors of transcription. The histone H1 strongly influences chromatin action and gene activity, as well as the course of a variety of cell processes, i.e. apoptosis (Garg et al., 2014), differentiation (Zhang et al., 2012), cell growth and proliferation (Happel et al., 2009). In many instances, the histone H1 activity is implemented individually by several ubiquitous subtypes and specialized variants (Kowalski and Pałyga, 2012). Despite the reports indicating structural disorder propensity of histone H1 in relation to amino acid composition promoting disordered state (Hansen et al., 2006; Lu et al., 2009) and in accordance with prediction of disorder conditions in H1/H5 class as one entity (Peng et al., 2012), there is no detailed description characterizing histone H1 subtype-specific structural disorder in case of various organisms.The purpose of this work was to explore the range of intrinsic disorder in the histone H1 subtype sequences for both human and model organisms. The identification of amino acid composition, prediction of a degree of disordered regions in a whole amino acid chains and in the individual domain, as well as evaluation of an abundance and location of molecular recognition features (MoRF) and ANCHOR protein binding regions (APBR) was performed. All of the analyzed histone H1 subtypes proved to be typical intrinsically disordered proteins of amino acid composition enriched in the residues promoting disordered state and forming long disordered regions consisting of over 100 and 200 amino acid residues in somatic and specialized subtypes, respectively. The average level of disorder in histone H1 sequences equals up to 65.42%, whereas up to 100% disordering corresponds to amino acids covering its terminal domains. Uniformly short MoRF segments (5–11 amino acid residues) and varying in length APBR motifs (6–140 amino acid residues), located in both globular domain and in the terminal domains, were detected as overlapping. Moreover, low-complexity regions were found widespread in the H1 histones, with a high rate of folding as characteristic feature. It may be concluded that histone H1 subtypes contain numerous structural elements that are conductive for the intrinsic disorder. Localization of disordered stretches, recognition motifs and the binding sites in all domains, which determine the functioning of histone H1, suggest that a state of intrinsic structural disorder might direct the histone H1 activity governed by specific interactions with DNA and partnering proteins.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
