@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Analysis of sequence repeats of proteins in the PDB

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
PDB-wide analysis of sequence repeats in a non-redundant set of proteins.Use of different bioinformatics tools such as RADAR, PDBeFOLD, PDBsum and Pfam to identify and characterize the sequence repeats in a protein.Sequence identity of the repeats falls in the range of 20–40% and, their superimposed structures of the sequence repeats maintain similar overall folding.Sequence repeats are involved in the function of the protein through functionally important residues in the repeat regions.Sequence repeats in the domains of the proteins show that repeats involved in the function of protein possess conserved sequence motifs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sequence repeats,PDB,Structure,Function,Domain,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Internal repeats in protein sequences play a significant role in the evolution of protein structure and function. Applications of different bioinformatics tools help in the identification and characterization of these repeats. In the present study, we analyzed sequence repeats in a non-redundant set of proteins available in the Protein Data Bank (PDB). We used RADAR for detecting internal repeats in a protein, PDBeFOLD for assessing structural similarity, PDBsum for finding functional involvement and Pfam for domain assignment of the repeats in a protein. Through the analysis of sequence repeats, we found that identity of the sequence repeats falls in the range of 20–40% and, the superimposed structures of the most of the sequence repeats maintain similar overall folding. Analysis sequence repeats at the functional level reveals that most of the sequence repeats are involved in the function of the protein through functionally involved residues in the repeat regions. We also found that sequence repeats in single and two domain proteins often contained conserved sequence motifs for the function of the domain.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Proteins containing repeats of two or more contiguous segments of amino acid residues with identical and similar sequences often correspond to structural or functional units (Sarani et al., 2009). An estimated 25% of eukaryotic proteins contain repeats (Biegert and Sodjing, 2003) suggesting that internal duplication is an important mechanism in the evolution of multi-cellular organisms (Björklund et al., 2006). The length of the sequence repeats vary considerably such as single amino acid repeats (Julien and Kajava, 2010), three to seven residues simple sequence repeats (Fraser and MacRae, 1973) and complex repeat units of lengths ranging from 10 to >100 residues (Luo and Nijveen, 2013). Based on the distance between adjacent units, the repeats in the sequence are classified as tandem repeats that are continuously distributed in the sequence and non tandem repeats that are sequentially interspersed.A number of bioinformatics tools, databases and servers have been developed for the identification of diverged repeats in protein sequences (Heger and Holm, 2000; Szklarczyk and Heringa, 2004; Gruber et al., 2005; Newman and Cooper, 2007; Jorda and Kajava, 2009) as well as in structure of the proteins (Holm and Sander, 1995; Abraham et al., 2008; Sabarinathan et al., 2012). As sequence and structure comparison methods improve, more distantly related protein regions irrespective of their three-dimensional (3D) structures are shown to be homologous (Ponting and Russell, 2002). The analysis of sequence repeats of proteins with known structures provides a unique opportunity to better understand the role of repeats at the structural and functional level. Previous studies have been carried out to analyze proteins containing array of tandem repeats and their array of repeated structure motifs and functions (Katti et al., 2000; Andrade et al., 2001; Kajava, 2012). It has been suggested that sequence patterns in the repeats may be a mechanism to provide regular arrays of spatial and functional groups, useful for structural packing or for interactions with target molecules (Katti et al., 2000). Common structural features and functions of different tandem repeats types such as tetratricopeptide, leucine-rich repeats, ankyrin and armadillo/heat have been reviewed (Andrade et al., 2001). Recent analysis of the repeats of the protein with known structure explores the straightforward relationship between length of the repetitive units and protein architectures (Kajava, 2012).The general trend is that structure and function of the repeats in proteins is often conserved even though sequence repeats possess only weak identities due to extensive divergence (Holm and Sander, 1993). However, repeat regions with the same general fold differ in structure in proportion to the divergence of the amino acid sequences. Thus, it is possible that functional constraints exist on the assembly rather than on the individual repeats (Sarani et al., 2009). The level of sequence conservation in repeats correlates with their propensities to be intrinsically disordered (Hoang et al., 2012). While the relationships between divergence of sequence and structure of homologous proteins have been extensively studied (Chothia and Lesk, 1986; Sander and Scheider, 1991; Wood and Pearson, 1999), the extents of structural divergence in proteins containing internal repeats and their functional involvement have not been characterized.The present study analyzes sequence repeats in proteins of known 3-D structure available in the PDB for sequence and structure similarity and their involvement in the function of the proteins using different bioinformatics tools. We have used the RADAR server (Heger and Holm, 2000) for ab initio detection of different types of repeats in the query sequence. RADAR uses sequence–sequence alignment as well as sequence profiles to find internal repeats in proteins. Subsequently, we examined the conservation of structure in the sequence repeats in terms of RMSD as well as in terms of structure z-scores using PDBeFOLD server (Krissinel and Henrick, 2004), the functional involvement of sequence repeats using PDBsum (Laskowski, 2001), the existence of sequence repeats in single domain and two domains from the same family using Pfam-A domain assignment (Punta et al., 2012). In this study, we are showing that most of the sequence repeats retained same general fold by considering not only common cores but the whole repeat segmented region and involved in the functions of the proteins.The overall work flow is summarized as a flowchart (Fig. 1). First we detect repeats in a non-redundant set of PDB sequences using RADAR and then the sequence and structural similarity of the sequence repeats were identified. The functional role of the sequence repeats was analyzed using PDBsum. Further, we assign domain to protein's containing sequence repeats using Pfam database search and then analyze the functional role of sequence repeats in the domain region.The sequences of proteins with known structures were downloaded from the RCSB server (Henrick et al., 2008). A dataset of 3243 non-redundant sequences that share less than 40% sequence identity and less than 3Å resolution was compiled using PISCES server (Wang and Dunbrack, 2003).The RADAR program was efficient for ab initio detection of approximate gapped repeats of length more than 15 in the query sequence. The RADAR program source code was downloaded from the website address http://sourceforge.net/projects/repeatradar. A perl program was written that incorporates RADAR executable to detect sequence repeats present in all sequences in the dataset in a single run.The sequence repeats similarity of the protein in terms of % identity and z-score was calculated using the Needleman–Wunsch algorithm (Needleman and Wunsch, 1970) implemented in the ggsearch36 program of the FASTA-36.3.5b package (Henikoff and Henikoff, 1992). Needleman–Wunsch alignment scores were calculated using the BLOSUM50 scoring matrix (Pearson, 2000) with a penalty of −12 for gap opening and −2 for gap extension. The statistical significance of sequence repeats similarity scores in terms of z-score was estimated using statistical parameters for the input query sequences from ggsearch36 database search.The structural relatedness of the proteins involves consideration of average Cα root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) and z-score between structures. The structural similarity of the sequence repeats was carried using PDBeFOLD server (Krissinel and Henrick, 2004). The PDB structures of repeat containing proteins were downloaded from RCSB website and the PDB coordinates of the repeat fragments were uploaded to the server for finding structural similarity. PDBeFold structural similarity searches were conducted using WWW interface at http://www.ebi.ac.uk/msd-srv/ssm/. The PDBefold compares two structures by matching the graph built on secondary-structure elements followed by iterative 3D alignment of protein backbone Cα atoms. The statistical significance of a match is evaluated by PDBeFOLD z-score which represents the significance of a structure similarity in terms of Gaussian statistics. The structural z-score and RMSD reported by PDBeFOLD were saved for later analysis.The structure of the protein and their repeat regions were viewed using PyMol viewer. The functionally involved residues of the proteins are identified using PDBsum server (Laskowski, 2001). The PDB id of the repeat containing proteins were given as input to PDBsum and analyzed whether the residues in the repeated regions were involved in ligand/metal binding. The Pfam-A domains assignments of the sequences were found by giving the query sequence as input to Pfam database server (Punta et al., 2012). The Pfam-A domains along with regions were assigned for each sequence in the dataset using Pfam database search.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
