@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Extending IFC to incorporate information of RFID tags attached to building elements

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We discussed the needs for adding definitions of RFID components to a BIM.We investigated scenarios to identify the related attributes of RFID system components.We investigated the relationships of RFID components with the assets/spaces.We proposed an IFC extension to incorporate the new definitions of RFID components.We validated and demonstrated the applicability of the proposed method through a real-world case study.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Building information modeling,Radio frequency identification,Industry foundation classes,Modeling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Building Information Modeling (BIM) is emerging as a method of creating, sharing, exchanging and managing the building information throughout the lifecycle between all stakeholders. Radio Frequency Identification (RFID), on the other hand, has emerged as an automatic data collection and information storage technology, and has been used in different applications in the AEC/FM (Architecture, Engineering, Construction, and Facilities Management) industry. RFID tags are attached to building assets throughout their lifecycle and used to store lifecycle and context aware information taken from a BIM. Consequently, there is a need for a standard and formal definition of RFID technology components in BIM. The goal of this paper is to add the definitions for RFID components to the BIM standard and to map the data to be stored in RFID memory to the associated entries in a BIM database. The paper defines new entities, data types, and properties to be added to the BIM. Furthermore, the paper identifies the relationships between RFID tags and building elements. These predefined relationships facilitate the linkage between BIM data and RFID data. Eventually, the data that are required to be saved on RFID tags can be automatically selected using the defined relationships in a BIM. A real-world case study has been implemented to validate the proposed method using available BIM software.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
There is an evident need for a standard data model to be used as the basis for computer-aided design, planning, construction and maintenance. Building Information Modeling (BIM) is emerging as a method of creating, sharing, exchanging and managing the information throughout the lifecycle to tackle the problems related to interoperability and information integration. The Industry Foundation Classes (IFC) standard developed by Building SMART Alliance (BSA) (formerly known as International Alliance of Interoperability (IAI)), has matured as a standard BIM in supporting and facilitating interoperability across the various phases of a building lifecycle [18]. IFC is an object-oriented, non-proprietary building data model. However, modelling all possible objects related to the building industry is extremely complex. Therefore, the BSA introduced an incremental development of the IFC model by providing an extensible architecture for extending IFC in various domains.Various mechanical/electrical elements have already been added to the current version of the IFC standard (e.g., Sensor, Actuator, and Alarm). However, there are other technologies such as Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) that are being used in the AEC/FM (Architecture, Engineering, Construction, and Facilities Management) industry and are not yet defined in the IFC. Similar to barcodes, RFID is a technology for identifying and tracking objects. The RFID technology introduces several advantages over barcoding in that its operation does not require line-of-sight or clean environments, and the stored data are dynamic and modifiable. RFID has been identified as one of the ten greatest contributory technologies of the 21st century. An increasing number of enterprises are employing RFID to improve their efficiency of operations and to gain a competitive advantage [4]. RFID-based systems have been used in different applications in construction and maintenance, such as asset tracking and locating, inventory management, equipment monitoring, progress management, facilities management, tool tracking, material management, and quality control (e.g., [19,21,28,43,22,39,30]). Furthermore, RFID is one of the main enabling technologies for the Internet-of-Things (IoT) [1]. IoT is emerging and the number of building devices that are equipped with such data storage and communication devices is increasingly growing.Motamedi and Hammad [26] introduced a framework to use RFID memory for facilitating various operations throughout the lifecycle of the building. The framework suggested to permanently attach RFID tags to building elements where the memory of the tags is populated with accumulated lifecycle information of the elements taken from a standard BIM database. This information is used to enhance different processes throughout the lifecycle, such as providing the technicians with the maintenance instruction for assets. Moreover, a facility with RFID-equipped assets can potentially provide users with assets’ location data [28,35]. The motivation behind their research was to make some parts of BIM data available to building occupants/users when there is no data access to the BIM database (e.g., emergency, lack of data connectivity, lack of access permissions) in order to provide location-based services, and to provide BIM data redundancy.Based on the assumption that the RFID tags are permanently attached to building elements, the tags can be considered as elements of the building. Consequently, there is a need to formally define these RFID tags and their associated properties in the building’s data model. The data in the model are essential for tracking and maintaining the RFID components throughout the lifecycle of the building. Moreover, due to the fact that RFID memory is populated with BIM data, defining RFID as an object in the model facilitates the data linkage and management. The data interrelations can be achieved by defining the RFID system components (e.g., tags and readers) as objects in a BIM together with their logical and physical relationships to other objects. Effort in modeling sensors resulted in new standards (i.e., SensorML) or new entities in the BIM (i.e., IfcSensor). However, RFID components cannot be considered as sensors due to their different characteristics and functionalities. Many researchers mentioned the need for adding RFID definitions to the BIM model (e.g., [7,38,37]). However, no extension has yet been proposed. This study is motivated by the above-mentioned needs and aims to provide a solution for current gaps.The objectives of the present paper are: (1) to perform requirements’ gathering in order to define RFID system components, their properties, and their relationships with other building elements; (2) to integrate the definitions and property sets into the IFC standard by either mapping them into existing IFC definitions or defining new entities; and (3) to validate the proposed approach and demonstrate its technical feasibility using a case study by using available IFC-compatible software.According to Associated General Contractors Guide (AGC, 2005), BIM is a data-rich, object-oriented, intelligent and parametric digital representation of facilities. Views and data appropriate to various users’ needs can be extracted and analyzed to generate information that can be used to make decisions and improve the process of delivering a facility.The BIM database is mandated to contain data related to all aspects of the facility (e.g. geometry, mechanical systems, construction scheduling) that are accumulated throughout the lifecycle. Consequently, various types of data that are useful for stakeholders should be defined and added to available standards.The IFC developed by BSA has matured as a standard of BIM in supporting and facilitating interoperability across the various phases of the construction lifecycle [18]. It is now supported by most of the major Computer-Aided Design (CAD) vendors as well as by many other applications [17,20]. The IFC model represents both tangible building elements (e.g. walls, doors, beams) and more abstract concepts (e.g., schedules, activities, spaces, organization, and construction costs) in the form of entities. Each entity can have a number of properties such as name, geometry, materials and relationships [45]. IFC supports a limited number of use cases in the AEC/FM industry and more developments are required to extend IFC for new applications [42,24].IFC follows an object-oriented approach by assigning entities to objects with predefined attributes that can be inherited by all related entities. An IFC model can be described using the EXPRESS data definition language which has the advantage of being compact and well suited to include data validation rules within the data specifications. Additionally, ifcXML is provided as another way to describe the model using an XML schema [3].There are three mechanisms to extend IFC: (1) by defining new entities or types, (2) by using proxy elements, and (3) by using the property sets or types [42]. Ma et al. [24] noted that, among the three alternatives, defining new entities or types is the best way to extend the IFC standard since the newly defined entities and types can then be used in the same way as the existing ones. However, it normally takes at least two years to define new entities by the BSA [42]. For the other two alternatives, additional implementation agreements about the definition of the property sets and proxy elements are required if they are used to share data with other application software. Hence, the other two alternatives are more practical to meet specific local requirements.Several research projects have been conducted to extend the IFC standard to include new objects, entities, and relationships (e.g., [9,10,11,23,24]). For example, Weise et al. [40] proposed an extension for the structural engineering domain which was not supported in the IFC standard at the time. The same group further suggested an IFC extension for structural analysis [41]. However, there is no research aiming to propose an extension to IFC for RFID systems.Sensor Model Language or SensorML represents a standard sensor description language for all aspects of sensor geolocation considering XML format as a description framework. Initially, the SensorML was targeting the geolocation and remote sensing instruments. However, it became more popular and played a key role for describing the capabilities of any sensor. After testing the SensorML through a set of implementation and interoperability experiments, the first technical version of SensorML was approved by OpenGIS Consortium (OGC) in 2006 [2].Additionally, the IFC standard has definitions for sensor entities. Based on the definition provided by BSA data model standard, the term IfcSensor is defined as the following “A sensor is a device that measures a physical quantity and converts it into a signal which can be read by an observer or by an instrument” [17]. Although several modeling efforts have been done for sensor technology (e.g., SensorML and IfcSensor), RFID devices cannot be represented using sensor entities. For example, as RFID itself does not measure any physical quantities, IfcSensor cannot represent RFID elements in the IFC. RFID is a data storage and communication technology and not a sensing technology. However, RFID can be coupled with sensors (e.g., temperature, GPS, humidity, or vibration sensors). In such products, the RFID functionality is used to store the sensor’s readings and transmit them to the readers.Elghamrawy and Boukamp [7] presented a methodology for managing construction document information using RFID-based semantic contexts. In their research, RFID is used for automated component identification to support information retrieval on site using a context ontology. For that purpose, a database is developed to link RFID data to the related context. Their research discussed the necessity to systematically store relationships between RFID tags and associated building components. However, BIM is not utilized to either store the documents or the relationships.Amongst several research projects that suggest linking building elements to the objects in a virtual model using RFID technology (e.g., [26,8]), Sørensen et al. [38] and Sørensen et al. [37] proposed creating a link between virtual models (e.g., BIM) and physical objects in the construction process using available ontologies. In their research, RFID tags are attached to physical objects and their IDs are added to the model. Their research stated that there is a need for modifying the IFC for allowing objects’ information retrieval based on registered RFID tags. They also recommended to model RFID tags not only as ID attributes but as an object or a property set in the IFC model.Generally, there are three types of data storage approaches for RFID systems: storing in a remote database, storing on the tag, and storing using an integrated approach. Using a remote database requires the object ID stored on the RFID tag to have access to the related information of the tag on the remote database [8]. In this method, the tag does not necessarily have large memory capacity since it only needs to carry the object ID. In addition to the remote database, all the required information is stored in the memory of the tag when the “Data-on-Tag” method is chosen for the RFID system. Independent data access is the main advantage of this method and the user only needs to find the tag and read its memory in order to access any related information. However, this method may increase the deployment cost of the RFID system since it needs tags with a high memory capacity and sometimes it may not be feasible to store all of information in the tag’s memory. Therefore, the integrated method, which takes the advantages of the previous two methods, can be used. In this method, the information with the higher priority to access is stored in the memory of the tag while the remaining useful information can be stored in the remote database and is accessible by providing the object ID stored on the RFID tag.Guven and Ergen [12] investigated the factors affecting the selection of data storage approach in RFID applications through a survey research. They concluded their study by introducing the application environment, cost efficiency, multiple number of parties, need for monitoring up-to-date progress data, collecting environmental conditions, industry-related specifications, and reading range requirement as affecting factors. Moreover, they suggested integrating BIM and RFID to enable monitoring the usage of the buildings as future work. Another study done by Motamedi and Hammad [26] proposed a Data-on-Tag storage model while partitioning the memory space of the tag into: (1) ID, (2) specifications, (3) status, (4) process data, (5) history data, and (6) environment data. Furthermore, Saini et al. [33] proposed storing building floor plans using RFID-based distributed storage. In their method, they assumed that the floor plans are organized in the form of an XML document which can be directly saved in the user memory partition of the RFID tags.As explained in Section 1, RFID tags are extensively used in supply chain management and are attached to various building elements. Moreover, several industry and research projects suggested attaching RFID to building elements for lifecycle management and various process improvements, especially during the construction and operation phases of the building’s lifecycle. Consequently, RFID equipment will be available in buildings and tags will accompany the elements throughout their lifecycle.Available RFID systems in the facility may have different types, shapes, sizes and properties. Thus, in order to represent their shapes and properties, as a new type of building elements, there is a need for standard and formal definitions for RFID systems in a BIM. Additionally, RFID tags have distinct relationships with other building elements. For example, tags are physically attached to a certain element or logically assigned to host information related to one or a set of elements. These relationships are considered as the building data and should be kept and maintained throughout the lifecycle. Furthermore, the data about the orientation of RFID antennas, their precise location and their usage history are useful for various operations. Having RFID as a BIM entity provides a standard method to store the above-mentioned information.Fig. 1shows a pump with an RFID tag attached to it. The geometric representation and the properties of the pump are stored in a virtual model. Our method proposes adding the virtual model of the tag, its properties and information about the relationships with the building elements to the BIM model as explained below.Available RFID tags in a facility are used to store data related to building elements. As explained in the survey by Guven and Ergen [12], many researchers proposed using RFID data as lifecycle data storage. Based on the framework proposed by Motamedi and Hammad [26], explained in Section 1, these data are dynamic and taken from a standard BIM file/database. For example, the memory of a tag can contain the maintenance information of the asset such as the condition or the last inspection date. Moreover, the tags memory can contain data related to several elements or spaces. For example, the tag can contain the location coordinates of various assets in a room, or it can have the list of occupants in the room [28]. In order to relate the elements’ data stored in a BIM to their associated tags’ memory, the relationship between the elements and their associated tags should be identified and modeled. Having these relationships defined in a BIM, the process of selecting data to be stored in tag’s memory can be facilitated.Most of the research and industry projects, in which RFID tags are used to store lifecycle data, maintained the relationship between the tags and the components through a separate, complimentary data table (e.g., [7]). Additionally, the selection of data to be stored on the RFID tag has been handled by the developed prototype application. There has not been any formal method suggested to systematically relate the tags’ data with the entries in the BIM database.As RFID tags act as a distributed data store for BIM data, there is a need to maintain data consistency by updating and synchronizing the data on these tags. Data synchronization is very important as the tags are highly distributed and, due to their different readability ranges, are mostly updated irregularly. Synchronization techniques have been studied by many researchers in the field of computer science and database management (e.g., [36,34,25]). The aim is to increase the concurrency and to reduce the chance of data rollback. Methods such as using timestamps or version control are common for this purpose. However, for the case of building information stored on both distributed tags and a central database, it is desirable to have the most updated version of the data in a central BIM at all times to be accessed by all stakeholders. Hence, although the data is stored on RFID tags to be used locally for context awareness, the data should be copied from a BIM [26]. This suggests that even if the data is acquired in the field, the most updated version is always stored on the BIM database and kept synchronized with the tags. This will also allow BIM to keep the history of data changes in the RFID memory. However, there might be instances when the RFID data is more recent (such as sensor readings that are automatically saved on the RFID tag). In such cases, the RFID data is synchronized with BIM using timestamps through pre-defined relationships.Fig. 1 shows an application overview of our approach. It shows the physical pump with an RFID tag attached to it and the BIM model that contains the geometric representation and properties of those elements. The BIM contains the data about the physical attachment relationship as well as the assignment relationship between the two elements. The figure also shows how the subset of BIM data stored on the tag can be accessed in the field by the technician who has the read-only access permission. The data on the tag are updated and synchronized with BIM by a facility management technician who has the read-write access to the data.Two scenarios that describe the process flow to use the IFC database to update/synchronize RFID data are presented in the following subsections. These sample scenarios show how adding the definitions of RFID tags together with their relationships with other objects in the BIM will facilitate the process of data management and synchronization. They also demonstrate the process steps to use the IFC database for updating the data of tags.As explained in Section 1, RFID tags can be used to store information that assists the inspection/maintenance/repair process (e.g. manufacturing date, inspection instruction, inspection dates, and condition). Having the information available on the tags will provide technicians with the asset’s information while they are performing their activities. In order to update the assets data on the tags, a central IFC database is used. Having RFID tags definition in the IFC model, together with their relationships to other elements, will facilitate the process of automatically composing the data file to be saved on tags. Additionally, some information about the field inspection is suggested by many researchers to be saved on the tags (e.g. last inspection date, overall result, and next due date). The detailed inspection data should be saved in the IFC database as the asset’s history to be used by different stakeholders (e.g., for maintenance planning). The process to construct the subset of inspection data to be saved on a tag attached to a certain asset is as follows: (1) The user scans the tag and the software reads its ID; (2) The software queries the ID in the IFC database; (3) Using available relationships in the IFC database, the software identifies the related asset(s); (4) The software reads the related inspection information of each related asset from the IFC database; (5) The software builds a file containing the result of the queries; and (6) The file is merged into the data on the tag.An RFID location tag is a long-range tag whose memory contains location coordinates of several fixed assets in an area copied from a BIM model [28]. These tags are used to provide the users with the location coordinates of assets in an area. Having location coordinates of assets on these tags, the user equipped with a handheld device can read the tag’s memory and query the coordinates of the target asset to be shown on the floor plan. For that purpose, the list of coordinates should be updated on the tags as new assets are installed or moved in the area. The BIM database contains the accurate coordinates of fixed assets. Using the relationships between the assets and the RFID tags, the most updated list of coordinates can be built and transferred to the tags. In order to update the assets’ coordinates on the tags, the following steps are followed: (1) The tag is scanned and its ID is read by the software; (2) The software queries the ID in the IFC database; (3) the software reads the properties of the scanned tag from the IFC database and verifies if the detected tag is a location tag; (4) Using available relationships in the IFC database, the software identifies the related assets; (5) The software reads the location coordinates of each related asset from the IFC database; (6) The software builds the data file containing the queried data; and (7) The data file is merged into the data on the tag.The definitions and data structure of the latest version of available IFC standard (i.e., IFC4) are used as the basis for our proposed IFC extension for RFID. The aim is to define the minimum number of objects and relationships. This will avoid the unnecessary expansion of the model by reusing available relationships and property sets. A detailed example of the information that can be stored on RFID tags will be given in Section 6.In order to add the definitions of RFID system components (i.e., tags, readers and antennas) to IFC, detailed requirements gathering is performed using the following steps: (1) Identifying RFID technology components (explained in Section 5.1.1); (2) Identifying the properties for each RFID component type including Physical properties and specifications such as electrical, radio, enclosure rating and shape; Operation properties such as installation date and the write cycle count; and Data management properties such as encryption type and markup language (explained in Section 5.1.2); and (3) Identifying the relationships with other elements (explained in Section 5.2).Various resources are used for the design phase including RFID manufacturers’ data sheets and specifications (e.g., [15,44,31]), and scenario/case studies in which RFID technology is utilized for lifecycle management of facilities (e.g., [26,8]). In order to identify the relationships between RFID components and building elements, our proposed framework (explained in Section 1) in which RFID tags are assigned or attached to building elements is used.RFID hardware can be grouped in three major categories; (1) RFID tag (transponder), (2) RFID reader (Transceiver), and (3) antenna. Each of these entities and their associated attributes should be defined. An antenna is defined in IFC as an enumeration of IfcCommunicationsApplianceType. Hence, this definition can be used to model the antenna attached to readers and tags.The RFID components are defined under the IFC Electrical Domain schema which forms a part of the Domain Layer of the IFC model [17]. A new type (i.e., RFIDSystemType) is proposed to be defined in IFC with four enumerations: (1) passive tag, (2) active tag, (3) passive reader, and (4) active reader. Fig. 2shows the hierarchy of entities for the new defined object. Other possible types, such as Semi-Active RFID that inherits properties of both active and passive tags, can be identified using a combination of properties related to each of the above major types.Although IfcSensor entity is available in the IFC, it cannot be used to represent data communication and data storage devices such as RFID devices. As shown in Fig. 2, RFIDSystem is defined as a subtype of IfcFlowTerminal. Based on the definition provided by BSA data model standard, “The distribution flow element IfcFlowTerminal defines the occurrence of a permanently attached element that acts as a terminus or beginning of a distribution system. […] A terminal is typically a point at which a system interfaces with an external environment”. Entities such as Audio Visual Appliance, Communications Appliance, and Electric Appliance, Lamp or Outlet are defined under this supertype. It shows that elements that generate energy or data flow can be also included under this supertype. As IfcFlowTerminalType covers both electrical and communication elements, it is the most suitable supertype for the RFID element.As explained in Section 5.1, various resources are used to identify the required property sets of RFID systems’ components. For example, data sheets provided by RFID tags manufacturers were used to identify the required set of electrical and radio property types to be included (e.g., [15,44,31]). A review of available RFID systems is conducted to identify various shapes and casing materials for RFID tags. Moreover, properties related to the operation of RFID components during the lifecycle are added such as: installation date, current battery level and the incremental write cycle count. These data are used to identify the state of RFID usage at any given time. These data can be used to plan for replacement or maintenance of the tags that are reaching their end of lifecycle. The properties related to the data storage of RFID tags should be captured because the RFID memory is used to store data. For example, various standard IDentifiers (IDs) that are assigned, the type of cipher that is used to encrypt the data [27], and the markup language are required to be defined. It is also suggested to add a local copy of the memory content of the tags in the BIM database. Having a local copy of the last updated content of the memory can be used to check for data integrity and synchronization. As explained in Section 2.5, the method introduced by [33] can be adapted to store the IFC-XML documents on RFID user memory spaces.The properties of RFID systems are defined according to property set assignment concept of the IFC. Available property sets are used, such as Electrical Device Common, Condition, Environmental Impact Indicators, Manufacturer (Type and Occurrence), Service Life, and Warranty. IFC standard [17] can be referred for details on abovementioned sets. Table 1shows the existing property sets in the IFC that are reused as shared property sets for the RFID system.IFCMaterialUse definition is used to define the material used for the tag and its casing. Identifying the material for casing of the tag has special importance since the radio communication capability of a tag is highly influenced by the type of its casing when attached to metallic objects. Separate property sets are defined to include type-specific information. For example, the battery life can be only a property of active tags. Table 3 shows the recommended property items for all RFID system entities. Additionally, the sample datasheets for example values in the table are referenced. The property items can be grouped into three categories: (1) General specifications including, radio, electrical, physical, safety and memory properties; (2) Operation properties including the data about the usage of RFID, and (3) Data management properties including the IDs and the memory encoding and markup language. These property items are placed in five Property Sets (PSet) that are: RFID Common PSet (for properties that are shared between all types), Active tag Pset, Passive Tag Pset, Active reader Pset, and Passive reader Pset.The locations of the RFID system entities are modeled using available methods in IFC for representing the location, orientation and placement of items as follows:Absolute or relative placements: The RFID entity placement can be identified in various methods such as: (1) absolute: by an axis placement, relative to the world coordinate system, (2) relative: by an axis placement, relative to the object placement of another product (for example, the element to which the tag is attached to), (3) by grid reference: by the virtual intersection and reference direction given by two axes of a grid. In IFC, this placement can be represented using IfcObjectPlacement and its subtypes IfcLocalPlacement and IfcGridPlacement. IfcLocalPlacement defines the relative placement in relation to the placement of another product or the absolute placement within the geometric representation context of the project. Details related to this placement method can be found in IFC documentation [17].Containment: The RFID system entity is located in a space that is part of a building and a floor. The location of the tag can be identified based on the containment relationship to know the spatial level that the tag is located in. IfcRelContainedInSpatialStructure, is used to assign elements to a certain level of the spatial project structure. Predefined spatial structure elements in IFC to which RFID tags can be assigned are: (1) site, (2) building, (3) stories, and (4) space.Fig. 3shows how an RFID tag (instance of IfcProduct) can have containment relationship with certain building story or space. It shows that in addition to the containment relationship, the tag has its absolute or relative placement definitions using IfcLocalPlacement.The RFID tag/reader is either attached to an asset/building element or is part of it (as a subcomponent). These relationships are physical attachment or decomposition type. Fig. 4shows how an RFID tag or reader has one-to-one physical relationship with an element that it is attached to. Although each tag/reader is attached to only one element, several RFID tags/readers can be physically attached to one element. Section 5 provides an example of an environment in which RFID tags are physically attached to its elements.The decomposition relationship between an RFID tag and the associated building element can be defined using existing IFC relationship definitions. For example, the reader can be an internal part of a communication device, such as a handheld computer or cell phone. In this case, a decomposition relationship can be used to identify such setting. Entities such as IfcRelDecomposes and its subtype IfcRelAggregates are used to realize this relationship between tags and their associated elements. As shown in Fig. 5, these relationships are used when the tag is an internal part of an element.In order to describe the physical connectivity between an RFID tag/reader and a building element, IfcRelConnectsElements together with IfcConnectionGeometry are used. IfcConnectionGeometry is added to describe the geometric constraints of the physical connection of two objects. The physical connection information is given by specifying exactly where at the relating and related element the connection occurs. Additionally, IFC provides the eccentricity subtypes, to describe the connection when there is a distance between the tag and the element. IFC provides the following connection geometry/topology types: (1) point/vertex point, (2) curve/edge curve, and (3) surface/face surface.Furthermore, one or many elements or spaces can be logically assigned to a tag in order to keep data related to them in its memory. The following are different alternatives for object-to-tag assignments: (1) A single element is assigned to a tag (asset tag): The tag contains data about one element. In this scenario, the tag is attached to the same element. (2) A group of elements is assigned to a tag (group asset tag): More than one element is assigned to the tag (for example, the fire extinguisher, fire hose and the first aid box are assigned to a tag). (3) Several spaces and/or elements are assigned to a tag (location tag): The tag contains data about the space (e.g., coordinates, room number and occupants) and data about selected elements in that space. (4) A space is assigned to a tag (area tag): The tag contains data about the space (e.g., floor plan, occupants). (5) A group of spaces is assigned to a tag (zone tag): The tag contains data about a group of spaces (e.g., contains department name). Fig. 4 conceptually shows the relationship of an RFID tag and associated and attached elements and spaces. All of the above-mentioned logical relationships between tags and elements can be described in IFC by using IfcRelAssignsToProduct entity.Ports are defined for different types of RFID System entities such as tags and readers in order to model the connectivity to/between antennas as well as the connection to the power source. IfcRelConnectsPortToElement and IfcRelConnectsPorts are used in order to realize these connections. Table 2shows the defined ports for different RFIDSystem types. The table presents the name of the port, its flow direction, its flow type, and a short description. For example, an active RFID tag receives electrical power from its battery via Power port. Fig. 6shows the sample port connectivity diagram between an RFID active reader and an active tag. In this connectivity diagram, the active reader is equipped with an external antenna which is connected to the reader via a cable. It also receives energy from the battery through its unidirectional power port that is shown in the figure.In order to validate the proposed method, the mechanical room of the Genomics Centre at Concordia University is chosen for the case study. The building is modeled in Autodesk Revit Architecture 2012 [32] and the mechanical elements are added to the model. RFID tags are attached to a selected set of elements to host their related BIM information. In order to add RFID components to the model, active and passive RFID tags are modeled in Revit under the electrical equipment category and added to the BIM model of the building. The modeled passive and active tags are attached to mechanical elements (e.g., pump, chiller) and the walls, respectively.Passive asset tags are attached to a selection of elements, and long-range active location tags are attached to walls near some of the entrances of the mechanical room to provide the maximum readability from the corridor. Fig. 7(a) shows the passive tags that are attached to pumps. The tags are rugged and designed to work well near metallic objects. Fig. 7(a) also shows the assets’ names used in the model and the names of their assigned passive tags. Fig. 7(b) shows a long range active tag attached close to the entrance of a room. The active tags host larger amount of data compared to the passive tags and are readable from longer distances [16].The model of the mechanical rooms is then exported to the IFC format and extra codes are added to the EXPRESS file in order to define new properties and relationships for tags and elements based on the IFC 2×4 standard. The modified IFC model is then viewed by a standard IFC viewer [29] to verify the consistency of the model. The logical relationships are manually added to the model for six mechanical elements. The names of these elements are shown in Fig. 8. Fig. 8 also shows two sample rooms (i.e., Room_1 and Room_2) that are defined in the model using IfcSpace definitions. The active tag contains various data types related to the room and selected elements that are located in the room. Table 4shows the types of data that are saved on passive and active tags. As shown in Table 4, passive asset tags contain only the ID of the tag and the last inspection date of the asset that the tag is attached to, due to the limited memory size of passive tags. The active location tag’s memory contains data related to other elements and spaces in addition to its own ID. For example, it stores the location coordinates of elements in the room. Consequently, the user who is reading the memory of the tag from a distance would be able to identify the locations of elements as well as their room number. The location tag’s memory also contains the information related to the authorized users who have access to the room and the hazardous materials that are stored in the room. These data can be used for procedures related to access security, safety and emergency.Four main relationship types are defined for active location tags: (1) physical relationship (attachment): which is the relationship between the tag and the object it is attached to (i.e., wall). (2) Spatial containment: which is the relationship between the tag and the space that contains the tag (i.e. corridor). (3) Assignment to spaces: which is the logical relationship of the tag and spaces assigned to it (e.g. rooms assigned to the location tag). Fig. 9shows the assignment of Room_1 and Room_2 to the active tag LT1. (4) Assignment to elements: which is a logical relationship to show the relation between specific elements and the tag. In our case study, four elements are assigned to the active location tag (as shown in Fig. 9). Similarly, three main relationships are defined for the passive asset tags: (1) physical relationship (attachment); (2) Spatial containment; and (3) Assignment to elements.After creating the model objects in Revit, various relationships should be defined. The current version of Revit supports only the spatial containment relationship (i.e., IfcRelContainedInSpatialStructure) from the required types of relationships. Hence, the model is exported to IFC format and other relationships are manually added using the EXPRESS language [17]. Fig. 9 shows some of the relationships between various elements including the spaces and assets and their attached tags. As shown in the figure, four mechanical elements and two rooms are assigned to the location tag (i.e., LT1). This location tag is attached to Wall_1 and contains the data types presented in Table 4. The figure also identifies various types of relationships that have been added to the IFC database in order to realize the required relationship definitions for the case study.Table 5shows parts of the modified IFC file describing the following: (1) the definitions of some elements (i.e., the active location tag (LT1), a chiller (Chiller_1), a passive asset tag attached to the chiller (AT_CH1), a room (Room_1), and a corridor (Corridor_1); (2) the coordinates of LT1, AT_CH1, and Chiller_1; (3) various relationships including: the physical relationship between the passive tag and the chiller, logical relationships between the passive tag and the chiller, the logical relationships between the active tag and all assigned elements and spaces, a containment relationship between the corridor and all the elements in it, and a containment relationship between Room_1 and all the elements in it; and (4) a sample property set definition and its values for a sample passive tag (AT_CH1) and a sample asset (Chiller_1). The numbers shown in Fig. 9 correspond to the numbers in the comment column of Table 5. For example, the assignment of several elements and spaces (including Chiller_1 and Room_1) to the location tag is realized with line #373559 in the EXPRESS code.As explained in Section 4, the recorded data and relationships in the IFC database are used to automatically construct the data file to be saved in the tag’s memory. The data types to be saved in tags memory are selected based on the process requirements. Two scenarios explained in Sections 4.1 and 4.2 can be realized in our case study. For the first scenario (i.e., to update the asset’s inspection results on its RFID tag), the data presented in Table 5 can be used. The table contains the definitions of the passive tag (AT_CH1) (#287118) and the chiller unit (Chiller_1) (#139022), the assignment relationship between the chiller and its tag (#373558), condition history of the chiller including inspection date and the inspection results (#373561, #373562), and EPC ID of the tag (#373563). For example, in order to store the inspection date (i.e., AssessmentDate) on the RFID tag attached to Chiller_1, the software application first queries the ID of the tag and finds the related asset (i.e., Chiller_1) using the assignment relationship (#373558). It then updates the chiller’s inspection date (#373561) using a logical relationship (#373573) that relates condition property sets (#373571) to the element (i.e., Chiller_1).Table 5 also includes the sample data to realize the second scenario (i.e., to update the location coordinates of elements on a location tag). It includes the definitions of the active location tag (LT1) (#289712), the definitions of a sample asset (Chiller_1) (#139022) and the room (Room_1) (#384), the coordinates of the chiller (#139014), and the assignment of the chiller to the location tag (#373559). The application that is used to update the tags should have a procedure to lookup the needed entries in the IFC database and create a new file to be merged into the memory of scanned RFID tag.A prototype system has been developed to validate the applicability of the proposed method. The application is designed to facilitate the inspection process using a portable handheld RFID reader and active RFID tags. It allows facility management technicians to access data both on RFID tags and the IFC file, and to update them with the latest inspection results. The definitions for RFID system (explained in Section 5.1) and the spatial and logical relationships between tags and assets (explained in Section 5.2) in a locally stored IFC file are used in the developed software application. The prototype system utilizes a standard BIM database to store and retrieve maintenance/inspection data. Additionally, it synchronizes the BIM data stored on the RFID tags with the main BIM database in order to maintain the most updated version of the data to be shared amongst the stakeholders. Fig. 10shows the process flowchart for the prototype application. Fig. 11shows snapshots of the prototype system.(1) The user scans RFID tags (Fig. 11(a)). The power level of the handheld RFID device can be adjusted to be able to read tags from longer distances. (2) The user chooses an RFID tag from a list of detected tags in the area. The software shows a short description of tags (e.g. the asset that the tag is physically attached to) as well as the Received Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI) value for each detected tag. Fig. 11(b) shows a snapshot of the interface of the prototype application. At this stage, the user can view and edit the data saved on the selected RFID tag (Fig. 11(c)). As shown in the software snapshot, data such as Related Space Name and ID, Authorized users, Hazardous Materials, Related Asset ID, Coordinates, and Last Inspection Date are stored on the RFID tag. (3) The application uses IFC relationships to show a list of related assets to the chosen RFID tag (Fig. 11(d)). (4) The user selects the asset that the inspection should be performed on (Fig. 11(d)). (5) and (6) The application retrieves and displays the IFC data. Data such as Manufacturing Date, Last Inspection Date, Condition, and Next Due Date are retrieved from the IFC file (Fig. 11(e)). Additionally, a URL that refers to a webpage containing the inspection procedure is shown. The user can edit the assets data if required. (7) and (8) The user saves the changes to the IFC file and the RFID tag memory by hitting the Update button (Fig. 11(c) and (e)). The prototype system first saves the changes to the locally stored IFC file and then synchronizes the data with the memory of the RFID tag. The application displays the Update Successful message after synchronization is complete (Fig. 11(f)).In order to validate the prototype system, we evaluated the process time for the Preventive Maintenance (PM) inspection activities done on a collection of building mechanical assets (e.g., pumps and motors). The inspection process using the prototype system is compared with the IT-assisted inspection. The IT-assisted inspection scenario utilizes a commercial mobile application (i.e., DataSplice [5]) and a Computerized Maintenance Management System (CMMS) (i.e., IBM Maximo [14]) to facilitate the inspection process. It should be mentioned that the IT-assisted inspection process requires wireless connectivity of the mobile inspection device to the central BIM database. The inspection process goal is to perform the visual inspection and store the results in a BIM database. In our test, the search time to find assets is not considered as it the same for all scenarios and the average value is building specific. Although RFID-equipped assets have the potential to facilitate their localization, we have not used such capability in our test.The main metric for the evaluation is the process time. Fig. 12shows the process diagram of the IT-assisted inspection scenario using DataSplice and IBM Maximo (Fig. 12(a)), and our prototype system (Fig. 12(b)). A discrete event simulation technique (e.g., [6]) is employed to quantitatively analyze the performance of the scenarios. Two different simulation models were developed for the abovementioned scenarios. The simulation software is fed with the time durations of activities gathered from interviews with Concordia Facilities Management personnel and initial testing of the developed prototype system. Table 6shows the time durations of activities in each scenario. The prototype system could potentially improve two main processes that are shared among the two scenarios (i.e., look up and view history and record inspection results). In addition, the process of exporting the data to the BIM in the IT-assisted method is enhanced by direct update of the BIM using the proposed prototype system.WebCyclone [13] is used to perform the simulation assuming uniform distributions of the time durations of activities and it was run for 500 cycles to generate the results. Table 7shows the average estimated inspection times of both scenarios and their standard deviations as the output of the simulation. The prototype system shows 9% decrease in the process time and 8% decrease in process time variation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The paper elaborated on the needs, motivations and benefits of including standard definitions of RFID systems in the BIM. A model based on requirements’ gathering is developed in order to identify and define the entities, property sets, ports, and relationships for RFID system components. New IFC entities, property sets and ports are defined for the RFID system. In the case study, various IFC-compatible tools are utilized to test the proposed extension of IFC. Furthermore, the modularity and extensibility of the model are taken into account to accommodate the possible future types and properties of RFID systems. A prototype application is developed to demonstrate the benefits of the proposed method in facilitating the inspection and maintenance tasks of assets.The conclusions of this paper are as follows: (1) The proposed BIM extension provided definitions for new entities, relationships, and property sets for the IFC. (2) Using definitions of RFID tags together with their spatial and logical relationships to other elements, the subset of BIM data that is required to be copied on RFID tags can be easily selected. (3) The proposed RFID extension took full advantage of reusing available entities, relationships, and property sets in IFC. Only the necessary and unavailable entities are proposed to be added. (4) The case study showed that although the current BIM tools have some limitations in utilizing existing IFC entities, the scenarios for interrelating BIM and RFID data can be done by manually editing the EXPRESS code. (5) The prototype software application demonstrated the potential of the proposed approach to facilitate data management for inspection and maintenance of assets. The future research includes further testing of the proposed method in other practical applications. Moreover, the same methodology can be used to add the definitions of other types of sensors to BIM.