@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evaluation of the effect of the chiral centers of Taxol on binding to β-tubulin: A docking and molecular dynamics simulation study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Binding properties of Taxol derivatives with β-tubulin have been investigated.Docking and MD simulation studies have been done.MM-GBSA calculations have been carried out.Two of the structures have better affinity toward the β-tubulin.Three of the structures have affinity similar to that of the Taxol.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Taxol,Paclitaxel,β-tubulin,Chiral centers,Molecular docking,Molecular dynamics (MD) simulation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Taxol is one of the most important anti-cancer drugs. The interaction between different variants of Taxol, by altering one of its chiral centers at a time, with β-tubulin protein has been investigated. To achieve such goal, docking and molecular dynamics (MD) simulation studies have been performed. In docking studies, the preferred conformers have been selected to further study by MD method based on the binding energies reported by the AutoDock program. The best result of docking study which shows the highest affinity between ligand and protein has been used as the starting point of the MD simulations. All of the complexes have shown acceptable stability during the simulation process, based on the RMSDs of the backbone of the protein structure. Finally, MM-GBSA calculations have been carried out to select the best ligand, considering the binding energy criteria. The results predict that two of the structures have better affinity toward the mentioned protein, in comparison with Taxol. Three of the structures have affinity similar to that of the Taxol toward the β-tubulin.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Paclitaxel (trade name Taxol®) is playing a great role in cancer chemotherapy (Martello et al., 2001). It was found that the Taxol acting via binding to the β-tubulin (Stiles and Nelson, 2005; Yang et al., 2009). The binding conformation of Taxol in β-tubulin has been investigated by different groups. As an example, Snyder et al. used electron crystallographic density method; they found that the T-shaped Taxol or butterfly structure is optimized within the β-tubulin site (Snyder et al., 2001). Tubulin-bound paclitaxel conformation was used extensively as a model to inspect new drugs for cancer treatment. Geney et al. utilized such a method and their designed and synthesized compounds showed activities similar to Taxol (Geney et al., 2005). Serum proteins are important in effectiveness of drugs because binding of drugs to these proteins affect their activity as well as their disposition. It has been known that the albumin and globulin of the serum accumulate in tumor tissues because of enhanced tumor vascular permeability. Trynda-Lemiesz has investigated the binding of paclitaxel to the human serum albumin (HSA). The result showed that the paclitaxel–HSA interaction results in the helical stability of HSA via changing the conformation of the protein (Trynda-Lemiesz, 2004). Nowadays docking studies are playing a great role to investigate the interaction between ligands and proteins and these methods are extensively in use (da Cunha et al., 2010; Hanessian et al., 2001; Josa et al., 2008; Ligabue-Braun et al., 2012; Seeliger and de Groot, 2010; Taylor et al., 2002). As an example, Paal et al. used docking method to analyze the interaction of the Taxol with HSA. The results showed that the baccatin core of the Taxol and the C13 side chain were playing uniformly to the binding energy (Paal et al., 2007). In another work, the same research group investigated binding of the Taxol to the HSA in the presence of long-chain fatty acid. They reported that the effect of the baccatin core is more than the C13 side chain on the binding energy (Paul and Shkarupin, 2007). Rao et al. employed the photoaffinity labeling method to explore the binding of the Taxol to the β-tubulin. Their results were in good agreement with electron crystallography data (Rao et al., 1999). Xu et al. have performed molecular dynamic (MD) simulation and density functional studies to inspect interaction between the active pocket of the β-tubulin and the Taxol. Their results are indicative of the fact that ten amino acids of the protein play role in the interaction with the Taxol (Xu et al., 2012). Xiao et al. have investigated the mechanism of the microtubule stabilization by the Taxol. Their data suggest that the microtubule depolymerization is inhibited by the Taxol-induced changes in the tubulin conformation (Xiao et al., 2006).Paclitaxel is naturally extracted from the bark of yew trees (Taxus brevifolia) which grows very slowly. Therefore, obtaining paclitaxel from the natural sources is not sufficient; (Fu et al., 2009) consequently different methods for attaining this valuable species have been developed. As an example, isolation of the Taxol from Pestalotiopsis breviseta has been reported by Kathiravan et al. (2012).The total synthesis of Taxol has attracted the attention of different research groups. As an example, Kusama et al. reported the multi-step procedure starting coupling reaction of optically pure A-ring hydroxyl aldehyde with C-ring (Kusama et al., 2000). Danishefsky et al. reported another multi-step approach using Heck reaction as one of the key steps (Danishefsky et al., 1996). To date, different methods have been reported as well (Alcaraz et al., 1995; Borman, 1994a,b; Holton et al., 1994a,b; Nicolaou et al., 1995a,b,c,d,e,e; Rubenstein and Williams, 1995; Zurer and Baum, 1988). Taxol contains 11 chiral centers and four rings which make it a promising target for the total synthesis. Because of the difficulty of total synthesis, semi-synthetic procedure has been developed too (Fu et al., 2009).Different efforts have been applied to examine the effect of side-chains on the anti-cancer properties of paclitaxel. One of the successful studies led to the Taxotere® which is more potent than paclitaxel itself (Bissery, 1991). The other important advantage of this compound is its higher solubility in water which makes it easier to be used as a drug.As mentioned above, the 11 chiral centers of Taxol makes it a very difficult target for the total synthesis. The difficulty of introducing exact chiral centers in appropriate positions leads to loss of total yield of the final product. Our literature survey shows that to date, no study has been attributed to the effect of each of chiral centers of the Taxol on binding to the β-tubulin. Indicating the effect of each chiral center on the binding to the β-tubulin can be used as a guideline to omit some chiral centers from the synthesis procedure and thereby to reduce the complexity and number of steps. This approach can increase the total yield of product in considerable amount. In the present study, the Taxol and related compounds, which have been obtained by changing one of the chiral centers to the opposite one at a time, are studied. The numbering system assigned for various species throughout is based on the numbers used for the chiral centers of Fig. 1while structure 12 is the original Taxol molecule intact. It worth to mention that this is a virtual experiment and these compounds are not synthesized.The β-tubulin has been utilized as a target and initially, docking study has been performed to obtain the appropriate complex between the hypothetic ligand and protein. Subsequently, MD simulation studies, which is one of the best method to study ligand–protein behavior in the presence of solvent, (Bharatham et al., 2008; Costantino et al., 2002; Stiles and Nelson, 2005) have been carried out to achieve the stable conditions. Finally, binding free energies of ligand–protein complexes are obtained via MM-GBSA methods, to evaluate the complexes.The conformational analysis on all of the ligands was performed using Avogadro (1.1.0) (Hanwell et al., 2012) suit of program. Molecular mechanics by Open Babel’s force fields (OBForceFieldMMFF94) used for conformational searches. Random rotor search algorithm, implemented in the program was used for conformational analysis. All of the single bonds were considered free to rotate. Only the branches and not the rings were considered in the conformational analysis. 400 Conformations were obtained. The structure which has been introduced as the most stable one by the program, based on the energy (structure with lowest energy) was selected for future analysis. The most stable conformations were optimized utilizing GAMESS (Schmidt et al., 1993) package in the gas phase at the B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) level of theory. The minimum natures of optimized structures were established by absence of imaginary frequency.Docking of ligands to the protein structure was performed with the AutoDock 4.2 program using the Lamarckian genetic algorithm. Lamarckian Genetic Algorithm (LGA), with a maximum of 2,500,000 energy evaluations has been used in the docking study. Maximum number of generations has been regarded as 27,000; 0.02 has been selected for the rate of gene mutation with the rate of cross over equal to 0.8. The highest amount for the population generation was 2,325,1800. Seventeen active torsions of the Taxol and all of the derivatives have been let to rotate freely. 200 runs have been done for each ligand. The crystal structure of the β-tubulin from the protein with the pdb ID=1TUB after removing the ligands was used as the starting model for investigation. Tubulin heterodimer consists of two subunits, namely Alpha and Beta, with the latter subunit only having interaction with Taxol, therefore only this subunit was used in the study. The position of the Taxol in the crystal structure was used as a guideline to define grid box needed for the docking studies. To reach that goal, the grid box with 60, 60, and 60 points were used for docking in the x, y, and z directions, respectively. The default grid spacing of 0.375Å was applied, as well. The structure of the protein was regarded as rigid and all rotatable bonds of ligands were left relaxed to rotate. All of the hydrogens were added to the protein structure and Gasteiger charges were assigned. Lamarckian Genetic Algorithms was considered for docking. 200 Docking runs were carried out (Schmidt et al., 1993). MD simulations were performed using Gromacs (4.5.5) (Berendsen et al., 1995) program. Amber force field (amber99SB) was utilized for the simulation process (Hornak et al., 2006). General Amber force field (GAFF) (Wang et al., 2004) parameters were applied to the ligands using Antechamber (Wang et al., 2006) set in the AmberTools 12 package (Case et al., 2012). Acpype (da Silva et al., 2012) script was used as interface to apply GAFF parameters to the ligands. VMD (Humphrey et al., 1996) (1.9.1), Chimera (Pettersen et al., 2004) (1.6.1), and LigPlot+ (Laskowski and Swindells, 2011) programs were used as graphical interface to analyze the simulation results. The chimera program was used to apply the partial charges to the ligands, as well. Dodecahedron box of solvent using TIP3P model of water was used to solvate the protein-ligand complex. Sodium cations were added to the system to neutralize it. The complex was kept away from the walls of the box no less than 10Å. Particle Mesh Ewald (PME) method was used to calculate electrostatic interactions. Steepest descent minimization method with maximum 50,000 steps and the maximum force threshold <10.0kJmol−1 criteria were used to remove short contacts. Subsequently, the position restrained simulation while restraining the position of heavy atoms of the system by 1000kJmol−1Å−2 criteria at 300K has been performed for 100ps (NVT condition). Further, another 100ps simulation has been applied to equilibrate the system at 1.0bar pressure with keeping the temperature of the system constant at 300K (NPT conditions). Finally, a 10ns simulation has been done for all of the complexes. MM-GBSA calculations were performed using the AmberTools 12 and Amber 12. Molecular Mechanics/Generalized Born Surface Area (MM/GBSA) method has been introduced to obtain the free energies which are a computationally efficient procedure. Therefore it has been accepted as a versatile procedure to compute free energies. This method uses additive approximation in which the net free energy change has been treated as a sum of a wide-ranging set of individual energy component.In the MM/GBSA method the free energy could be obtained from the following equations:ΔGbind=Gcom−(Grec+Glig) (1)ΔGbind=ΔH−TΔS≈ΔEMM+ΔGsol̶TΔS (2)ΔEMM=ΔEinternal+ΔEelectrostatic+ΔEvdw (3)ΔGsol=ΔGPB/GB+ΔGSA (4)In this method separated trajectories have been regarded for the ligand, receptor, and complex which causes to the more accurate results. In this procedure the conformational changes related to the binding of the free ligand to the unbounded receptor will be considered, which causes to the mentioned higher accuracy (Hou et al., 2011).We have used MM/PBSA.py provided by AmberTools program to obtain MM/GBSA data. MMPBSA.py is a program in Python language which can use both Poisson–Boltzmann and Generalized Born salvation models. Although the mentioned program is able to consider the normal mode or quasi-harmonic analysis, but we have not use this capability in our calculations to reduce the computation time. Five separated 1ns runs have been done (totally 5ns). 2,500,000 snapshots have been used. The final structure of the Gromacs simulation have been used to start the MMGBSA calculation, therefore all of the frames (starting from frame 1, with the interval of 2) have been used in the calculation. Salt concentration equals to the 0.1 was used.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
