@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new heuristic method for approximating the number of local minima in partial RNA energy landscapes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a new pooling procedure and evaluation strategy for sampling data over energy landscapes.The new method is embedded into the general framework devised by Granier and Kallel in 2002.The performance is evaluated on ten partial energy landscapes induced by RNA secondary structures.The average deviation of predictions from the true number of local minima is below 3%.Potential applications include microRNA target predictions and co-transcriptional RNA folding.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
RNA folding landscapes,Energy landscape analysis,Local minima,Gamma distribution,Pooling methods,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The analysis of energy landscapes plays an important role in mathematical modelling, simulation and optimisation. Among the main features of interest are the number and distribution of local minima within the energy landscape. Granier and Kallel proposed in 2002 a new sampling procedure for estimating the number of local minima. In the present paper, we focus on improved heuristic implementations of the general framework devised by Granier and Kallel with regard to run-time behaviour and accuracy of predictions. The new heuristic method is demonstrated for the case of partial energy landscapes induced by RNA secondary structures. While the computation of minimum free energy RNA secondary structures has been studied for a long time, the analysis of folding landscapes has gained momentum over the past years in the context of co-transcriptional folding and deeper insights into cell processes. The new approach has been applied to ten RNA instances of length between 99nt and 504nt and their respective partial energy landscapes defined by secondary structures within an energy offset ΔE above the minimum free energy conformation. The number of local minima within the partial energy landscapes ranges from 1440 to 3441. Our heuristic method produces for the best approximations on average a deviation below 3.0% from the true number of local minima.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The present paper aims at a fast and sufficiently accurate method for the evaluation of data obtained from partial RNA energy landscapes in the context of the approximation of the number of local minima. The partial energy landscapes can be defined by an energy offset above the minimum free energy conformation or by a bounded distance in terms of elementary transition steps from a given conformation within the energy landscape. As a continuation of previous work presented in Sahoo and Albrecht (2012), we consider energy landscapes induced by RNA secondary structures and partial energy landscapes defined by energy offsets. The method can be used, e.g., in a pre-processing step before starting a comprehensive analysis (or complete generation) of local minima in partial energy landscapes for a priori information about the expected number of local minima. Here, we focus on the fast and reliable evaluation of data produced by steepest decent that starts out from samples of secondary structures, whereas for pre-processing steps, such as initial sample size selection and randomised generation of sample sets, we rely on existing tools for RNA secondary structure generation and free energy calculation (tailored methods for pre-processing steps are subject of current and future research).As in Sahoo and Albrecht (2012), we utilise the framework presented by Garnier and Kallel (2002) for approximating the number of local minima in a fitness landscape (induced by an objective function, which is called fitness value): At the initial stage, M elements of the landscape are randomly selected. Each of the elements then ‘moves’ towards a local/global minimum Smbased upon steepest descent (being part of the attraction basin of Sm). This way, local minima ‘collect’ instances originating from the M initial landscape elements, and the number of local minima having ‘collected’ exactly j of the M elements is denoted by βj. The method proposed in Garnier and Kallel (2002) tries to utilise the information about the distribution of βjfor a prediction about the total number of local minima within the landscape. The authors associate with the normalised sizes of attraction basins the Gamma distribution, where an approximation of the crucial parameter γ of the density function can be obtained by using (a) a basic equation established in Garnier and Kallel (2002) for linking the Gamma distribution to expected values βj,γof sampling data βjand (b) the χ2-test with regard to βj,γand βj. The method has been applied in Sahoo and Albrecht (2012) to the approximation of the number of local minima in partial RNA folding landscapes. The application employs a minimisation procedure for the χ2-test over a square grid for two parameters (γ, r), where γ defines the density function and r is an auxiliary parameter that eventually leads to the required approximation. Since the χ2-minimisation is running over a square grid, finding suitable (γ, r) is relatively time-consuming. Moreover, as demonstrated in Sahoo and Albrecht (2012), the quality of approximations is affected by the values of βj,γfor large j (called tail values of βj,γ, where j is close to the maximum j such that βj>0), together with large gaps between non-zero βjfor increasing j. The problem with tail values was observed and highlighted already in Garnier and Kallel (2002), see Section 5.3 therein. In the present paper, both problems, i.e., tail values and χ2-minimisation, are addressed by a new heuristic that utilises a specific pooling procedure for tail values and substitutes the simultaneous χ2-minimisation over a square grid by two linear χ2-tests executed one after another and for γ-approximations only.The new method is presented in the context of RNA folding landscapes, which is an important research area in Structural Biology. Research on RNA structure prediction has a long history, dating back to early work from around 1960 (Fresco et al., 1960) and further progress published in DeLisi and Crothers (1971) and Tinoco et al. (1971). Most of the computational methods related to RNA structure prediction centres around secondary structures, which are simplified models that admit a representation as outer-planar graphs, and the computation of minimum free energy conformations. The application of dynamic programming to secondary structure prediction, as presented in Nussinov et al. (1978) and Waterman and Smith (1978), eventually resulted – with various refinements and adjustments of energy functions – in the design of manageable polynomial time algorithms and powerful tools for folding simulations and associated program packages, such as Mfold by Zuker (1989), Zuker and Sankoff (1984) and RNAfold by Hofacker (2003) and Hofacker et al. (1994). In contrast, tertiary structure prediction, i.e., where RNA structures with so-called pseudoknots are included, has been shown to be NP-complete (Lyngsø and Pedersen, 2000). While, in the present paper, we also focus on secondary structures, we are not only interested in minimum free energy (MFE) conformations, but also in meta-stable structures above MFE conformations. Meta-stable structures have become the subject of recent research due to new insights into co-transcriptional folding and interactions between different types of RNA sequences.The problem of calculating meta-stable RNA secondary structures (local minima) is considered, for example, in Flamm et al. (2002), Lorenz and Clote (2011) and Saffarian et al. (2012). The RNAsubopt tool by Wuchty et al. (1999) together with the barriers program (Flamm et al., 2002) allows the user, in principle, to identify all meta-stable conformations within an energy range ΔE above the MFE conformation. However, due to the rapid increase of conformations with increasing ΔE, the approach is only applicable to short sequences or small values of ΔE.Lorenz and Clote (2011) describe the extension of computing the partition function over the set of locally optimal structures in RNA energy landscapes to the RNAlocopt tool that computes the exact, total number of locally optimal structures and the exact partition function for locally optimal structures, along with the capability of identifying the set of local minima. The underlying energy model is the Turner nearest neighbour model (Xia et al., 1998) without dangles. The algorithm is an extension of McCaskill's algorithm (McCaskill, 1990), where locally optimal structures are accounted for by additional terms in the recursion scheme. Based upon dynamic programming, RNAlocopt computes the total number of locally optimal structures in O(n3) time, and the associated sampling of secondary structures takes O(n2) time, which is comparable to other tools. We note that in the present paper, we target partial RNA landscapes, i.e., the information about the total number of locally optimal structures for a given RNA sequence is not directly applicable. RNAlocopt has been recently modified to support Turner 2004 energy parameters. A detailed and sophisticated combinatorial analysis of the asymptotic behaviour of the number of saturated RNA secondary structures and locally optimal RNA secondary structures is carried out in Clote (2006) and Fusy and Clote (2014) for a variety of energy models and structural constraints.Saffarian et al. (2012) present an algorithm for generating all locally optimal secondary structures assembled from a set of thermodynamically stable helices. The construction of locally optimal structures is divided into two steps: First juxtaposed base pair are processed, followed by nested (within juxtaposed positions) base pairs. The main step of the construction follows a recurrent relation which reminds of dynamic programming, although an estimation of worst case or expected run-time is not provided. Each element of the intermediate set of secondary structures is then further processed in order to generate locally optimal structures. The procedure is extended to the generation of locally optimal secondary structures from a given set of thermodynamically stable helices and computational experiments for six sequences of length up to 405nt are presented.Kucharík et al. (2014) introduce basin hopping graphs as a new connectivity model of attraction basins within energy landscapes. Vertices represent local minima and edges connect vertices if the transition between the corresponding basins is energetically optimal in terms of the associated saddle point height. The authors present the two new tools RNAlocmin and BHGbuilder as basic implements for the approximation of basin hopping graphs. The tool RNAlocmin executes a modified Boltzmann sampling in order to generate sets of local minima. The modification of Boltzmann sampling tries to avoid oversampling of structures close to MFE conformation by using a parameterised thermodynamic temperature in Boltzmann weights. The BHGbuilder tool establishes the basin hopping graph by using a heuristic path-finding algorithm between the local minima identified by RNAlocmin. The authors present various comparisons to RNAlocopt from Lorenz and Clote (2011) regarding the coverage of local minima within a given time frame, which turn out to be in favour of RNAlocmin, partly with large differences in the number of detected local minima. However, one could argue that raising the temperature when running RNAlocopt could have increased the number of distinct locally optimal structures, which could affect the comparison to RNAlocmin. Kucharík et al. (2014) estimate the applicability of the overall approach to a range of RNA sequence lengths bounded by about 300nt.In the present paper, we aim at improved approximations of the number ν of local minima in partial RNA folding spaces. The approximation of ν can then be used for evaluating the outcome of procedures searching for local minima as presented in Kucharík et al. (2014). A priori knowledge about approximations of ν provides information about the distance of the current number of identified local minima to the true number of meta-stable conformations. In the present application, the number of instances as well as energy parameters of partial landscapes above minimum free energy conformations are chosen in such a way that a comparison to data generated by RNAsubopt and barriers is computationally feasible. RNAsubopt and barriers are used to calculate all secondary structures and the true set of local minima, respectively, within the partial energy landscapes. The time complexity of our heuristic method can be estimated byOn2EnDmax{M,ν}, where M is the number of samples (initial secondary structures), Enis the energy evaluation complexity (update of energy values when samples are ‘moving’ within the partial landscape), and D is the maximum number of steps executed in steepest descent (determined by the maximum energy difference between initial sample structures and their corresponding ‘target’ local minima). Our computational experiments suggestM=Oνwith a relatively small constant factor, which implies a run-time estimation ofOn2EnDν. Since we are using RNAlocmin (Kucharík et al., 2014) with energy updates in neighbourhood transitions, we can assumeEn=O1, which leads toOn2Dν. The evaluation procedure itself, which processes the βjvalues obtained by steepest descent and is the main subject of the present paper, is relatively fast and terminates on standard PC desktop equipment in less than one second for all sample numbers M we consider here (including the test case M=30,000). The implementation of the evaluation of data about the number of local minima detected by descent procedure applied to initial samples of secondary structures, along with examples of such energy landscape data, are available at http://kks.inf.kcl.ac.uk/projects/RNAapprox.php.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
With the proposed sampling method we are aiming at reduced computational costs and improved accuracy of approximating the number of meta-stable conformations in partial energy landscapes. On the ten sequences we analysed, the new pooling procedure along with the separation of γa and ra calculations resulted in an average deviation of about 3% from the true number of local minima. The approximation procedure is applicable in a scenario where no a priori knowledge about the number of local minima is available, as discussed, for example, in Kucharík et al. (2014). We plan to incorporate the approach into procedures designed for the analysis of microRNA bindings to meta-stable 3′UTR conformations, which continues our work presented in Day et al. (2014), see also Ragan et al. (2011) and references therein. In particular, we are interested in the impact of SNPs located in miRNA–3′UTR binding regions on miRNA bindings to meta-stable structures. Such an analysis requires knowledge about the accessibility of binding regions in secondary structures representing relatively deep local minima, which applies to wild-type as well as to mutated sequences. We found that due to the vast amount of secondary structures located relatively close to MFE conformations, the application of RNAsubopt, barriers and similar tools is limited to sequences of length up to about 1000nt on standard computing facilities. As a first step, we plan to investigate the stability of procedures (A)–(E) on large M-instances along with gradually increasing the length of RNA sequences under consideration. Although RNAlocmin is relatively fast, we plan to investigate the suitability of βjdata produced by random descent strategies. Furthermore, we plan to devise independent and simplified methods for pre-processing steps, such as estimating the initial value of M and the random selection of the initial sample set from the upper free energy range of the partial energy landscape under consideration.