@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Truncation, modification, and optimization of MIG6segment 2 peptide to target lung cancer-related EGFR

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An integrated in silico-in vitro strategy is described to improve MIG6segment 2 affinity to EGFR.A C-terminal island in MIG6segment 2 is primarily responsible for EGFR–MIG6segment 2 binding.The isolated island only binds weakly to EGFR, but its affinity can be recurred by phosphorylation and mutation.Several derivative versions of the island are deigned computationally and assayed experimentally.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Human epidermal growth factor receptor,MIG6 protein,Peptide,Lung cancer,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Human epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) plays a central role in the pathological progression and metastasis of lung cancer; the development and clinical application of therapeutic agents that target the receptor provide important insights for new lung cancer therapies. The tumor-suppressor protein MIG6 is a negative regulator of EGFR, which can bind at the activation interface of asymmetric dimer of EGFR kinase domains to disrupt dimerization and then inactivate the kinase (Zhang X. et al. Nature 2007, 450: 741–744). The protein adopts two separated segments, i.e. MIG6segment 1 and MIG6segment 2, to directly interact with EGFR. Here, computational modeling and analysis of the intermolecular interaction between EGFR kinase domain and MIG6segment 2 peptide revealed that the peptide is folded into a two-stranded β-sheet composed of β-strand 1 and β-strand 2; only the β-strand 2 can directly interact with EGFR activation loop, while leaving β-strand 1 apart from the kinase. A C-terminal island within the β-strand 2 is primarily responsible for peptide binding, which was truncated from the MIG6segment 2 and exhibited weak affinity to EGFR kinase domain. Structural and energetic analysis suggested that phosphorylation at residues Tyr394 and Tyr395 of truncated peptide can considerably improve EGFR affinity, and mutation of other residues can further optimize the peptide binding capability. Subsequently, three derivative versions of the truncated peptide, including phosphorylated and dephosphorylated peptides as well as a double-point mutant were synthesized and purified, and their affinities to the recombinant protein of human EGFR kinase domain were determined by fluorescence anisotropy titration. As expected theoretically, the dephosphorylated peptide has no observable binding to the kinase, and phosphorylation and mutation can confer low and moderate affinities to the peptide, respectively, suggesting a good consistence between the computational analysis and experimental assay.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) superfamily represents a subgroup of transmembrane protein receptors that are involved in a variety of developmental processes including cell survival, proliferation and motility, and, when unregulated, play prominent roles in cancer (Lemmon and Schlessinger, 2010). The human epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) as an important member of RTK has received particular attention in recent years owing to its strong association with malignant proliferation, which has been shown to play a central role in the development and progression of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) (Bethune et al., 2010). EGFR activation results from the formation of an asymmetric dimer in which the C-terminal lobe of one kinase domain plays a role similar to that of cyclin in activated CDK/cyclin complexes. The CDK/cyclin-like complex formed by two kinase domains thus explains the activation of EGFR-family receptors by homo- or hetero-dimerization (Zhang et al., 2006). EGFR dimerization stimulates its intrinsic intracellular protein-tyrosine kinase activity. As a result, autophosphorylation of several tyrosine residues in the C-terminal domain of EGFR occurs to elicit downstream activation and signaling by several other proteins that associate with the phosphorylated tyrosines through their own phosphotyrosine-binding SH2 domains.The mitogen-inducible gene 6 (MIG6) protein has been reported as an important negative regulator of the EGFR signaling by binding at the activation interface of EGFR kinase domain to disrupt EGFR dimerization (Hackel et al., 2001). Accumulated evidences suggest that the MIG6 plays an essential role in suppressing the development, proliferation and metastasis of NSCLC by inactivating EGFR (Zhang et al., 2007a; Maity et al., 2015; Izumchenko and Sidransky, 2015). Knockout of the MIG6 gene has also been found to strongly associate with a variety of tumors such as breast cancer (Wendt et al., 2015), endometrial cancer (Kim et al., 2014) and skin tumor (Ferby et al., 2006). The crystal structure of EGFR–MIG6 complex revealed that two separated segments in MIG6 protein, called MIG6segment 1 (residues 336–361) and MIG6segment 2 (residues 376–398), interact with the C-lobe of EGFR kinase domain (Fig. 1) (Park et al., 2015). The binding of MIG6segment 1 to EGFR activation interface prevents an asymmetric dimer formation, leading to the inhibition of EGFR activation at micromolar binding affinity level (Moonrin et al., 2015). However, the MIG6segment 1 is only able to inhibit the kinase domain in the context of asymmetric dimer formation, but not directly relevant for shutting down kinase activity. The presence of MIG6segment 2 C-terminal to MIG6segment 1 exhibits ability to bind tightly to activated EGFR, which induces the EGFR conformation change from active to inactive states; MIG6segment 1 alone cannot confer this property, because the kinase residues that interact with it do not change conformation upon activation (Zhang et al., 2007b). Crystallographic analysis revealed that the MIG6segment 2 can interact directly with activation loop as well as the region close to kinase active site (Park et al., 2015).Recently, we have successfully designed and optimized several short peptides to target the EGFR family protein HER2 by grafting and truncation of MIG6segment 1 (Yu et al., 2016). Here, we attempted to systematically investigate the intermolecular interaction between the EGFR kinase domain and MIG6segment 2 peptide. The isolated MIG6segment 2 peptide can bind weakly to EGFR kinase domain, and we herein proposed a molecular design scheme to rationally improve its binding capability to EGFR by terminal truncation, structural modification and sequence optimization. We also demonstrated that the scheme can work fairly well by using fluorescence anisotropy assay, and elucidated the molecular mechanism and biological implication underlying the affinity improvement upon the truncation, modification and optimization of MIG6segment 2 peptide.The EGFR–MIGsegment 2 peptide complexes were investigated dynamically using molecular dynamics (MD) simulations with AMBER03 force field (Duan et al., 2003). Phosphotyrosine parameters were derived from the AMBER parameter database (Steinbrecher et al., 2012). A solvent box filled with TIP3P water molecules (Jorgensen et al., 1983) was added with a 10Å buffer around the complex. Counter-ions were employed to neutralize excessive formal charges in the simulated system. First, the system was heated from 0 to 300K over 100ps. Then, the simulations were performed in NPT ensemble at a constant temperature of 300K and a constant pressure of 1atm. The time step was set to 2fs. The SHAKE method (Ryckaert et al., 1977) was used to constrain all covalent bonds involving hydrogen atoms, the PME algorithm (Darden et al., 1993) was utilized to calculate the full electrostatic energy in a macroscopic lattice of repeating images, and a cut-off distance of 10Å was applied for van der Waals interactions. The whole simulations were carried out for 20ns, and snapshots were saved every 100ps over the last 10-ns simulations, totally yielding 100 snapshots.The molecular mechanics/Poisson–Boltzmann surface area (MM/PBSA) method (Homeyer and Gohlke, 2012) was employed to analyze the 100 snapshots extracted from the last 10-ns MD trajectory, resulting in the total binding free energy ΔGttl of simulated complex, which can be expressed as follows:(1)ΔGttl=ΔEint+ΔDdslvwhere ΔEint is the intermolecular interaction energy between the EGFR and MIGsegment 2 peptide and calculated using force field approach, and ΔDdslv is the desolvation free energy due to peptide binding, which can be computed by numerical solution of nonlinear Poisson–Boltzmann equation and surface area model. Here, entropy effect was not considered due to the high computational demands.Computational alanine scanning (CAS) (Kortemme et al., 2004) has been widely used to identify hot-spot residues at protein–protein/peptide complex interface. Here, we employed CAS to detect the residue importance of MIG6segment 2 peptide binding to EGFR kinase domain. In the procedure, each residue in the peptide was virtually mutated to chemically neutral alanine and then calculated peptide binding free energy change ΔΔG upon the mutation:(2)ΔΔG=ΔGttlmt−ΔGttlwtwhere theΔGttlwtandΔGttlmtare the total binding free energies of wide-type and mutant peptides to EGFR, respectively, which can be calculated using MD simulation and MM/PBSA analysis, as described above.Peptides were synthesized using standard 9-fluorenyl methoxycarbonyl (Fmoc) solid phase chemistry. Phosphotyrosine was directly incorporated as its Nα-fluorenylmethoxycarbonyl-O-phosphate-l-tyrosine derivative. The peptides were then purified by RP-HPLC C18 columns, and were confirmed by mass spectrometry and amino acid analysis. A protocol modified from previous works was used to perform peptide binding assay (Zhang et al., 2007b; Yu et al., 2016). Briefly, fluorescence anisotropy analysis was measured using a PerkinElmer fluorimeter. Fluorescence titration was carried out with unlabeled kinase protein and N-terminally labeled peptide in a buffer (10mM Tris–HCl, 25mM NaCl and 2mM DTT). The titration curves were fitted with MicroCal software package. Each assay was performed for duplicate.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
