@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Computational simulation of ligand docking to L-type pyruvate kinase subunit

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Computational docking revealed binding sites of L-type pyruvate kinase N-domain in domains A and C of the protein.Peptide RRASVA and its phosphor-analogue were used to model the regulatory N-domain.Phosphorylation shifted the peptide binding from domain A to domain C.Shift of N-domain interaction site may explain switching on L-PK cooperativity by phosphorylation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
L-type pyruvate kinase,N-terminal domain docking in protein,Regulatory phosphorylation,Putative N-terminal docking sites,Substrate affinity regulation,Switching in cooperativity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Computational blind docking approach was used for mapping of possible binding sites in L-type pyruvate kinase subunit for peptides, RRASVA and the phosphorylated derivative RRAS(Pi)VA, which model the phosphorylatable N-terminal regulatory domain of the enzyme. In parallel, the same docking analysis was done for both substrates of this enzyme, phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) and adenosine diphosphate (ADP), and for docking of fructose 1,6-bisphosphate (FBP), which is the allosteric activator of the enzyme. The binding properties of the entire surface of the protein were scanned and several possible binding sites were identified in domains A and C of the protein, while domain B revealed no docking sites for peptides or for substrates or the allosteric regulator. It was found that the docking sites of different ligands were partially overlapping, pointing to the possibility that some regulatory effects, observed in the case of L-type pyruvate kinase, may be caused by the competition of different ligands for the same binding sites.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Four pyruvate kinase isozymes, which catalyse ATP synthesis from phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) and ADP:(1)PEP+ADP⟶Pyruvatekinase,Mg2+,K+Pyruvate+ATP,have been described in mammalian tissues and were denoted as L, R, M1 and M2 (Munoz and Ponce, 2003). All these enzymes are homotetramers revealing significant structural homology (Munoz and Ponce, 2003; Valentini et al., 2002). Monomers of these isozymes can be presented by structurally well-characterised domains denoted as A, B and C (see Fig. 1), and also include the N-terminal domain, which spatial structure is not known in L and R isozymes due to its remarkable flexibility even in the crystallised protein.Differently from other known pyruvate kinase isozymes, the activity of the L-type enzyme (L-PK), which has been initially isolated from liver tissue, is regulated through phosphorylation of serine residue in position 12 of this flexible N-terminal domain (El-Maghrabi et al., 1980, 1982; Pilkis et al., 1980; Muirhead et al., 1986; Mattevi et al., 1996; Munoz and Ponce, 2003):(2)MEGPAGYLRR10ASVAQLTQEL20GTAFF.This phosphorylation down regulates the activity of L-PK by decreasing its apparent affinity for PEP and increasing the cooperativity parameter n (Hill coefficient) for this substrate. Discovery of this regulatory phenomenon in the early seventies (Ljungström et al., 1974) has played an important role in the formulation of the principles of the regulatory phosphorylation in general (Engström, 1978). However, the molecular mechanism and structural background of the role of the phosphorylatable N-terminal regulatory domain, located at a considerable distance from the substrate binding sites, have not been established.One reason for this uncertainty is the significant flexibility of the N-terminus of the protein that prevented determination of the spatial positioning of its amino acids by X-ray analysis (Noguchi et al., 1987; Friesen and Ching, 1998; Pendergrass et al., 2006). Moreover, due to the same reason the conventional allostery models, which assume transfer of allosteric signals from the regulatory site to the substrate site by altering interactions between certain sets of amino acids in a trimmed protein structure, cannot be applied in this case, as no such structure exists. Therefore, the transition of the regulatory effect to the active site of L-PK and its targeted manifestation in the case of only one substrate, governed by phosphorylation of the remote regulatory site of the enzyme, seems to demand an alternative mechanism of signal transmission. Most probably, this mechanism should use noticeable flexibility of the regulatory N-domain, as was initially proposed by Bergström et al. (1978), and further discussed proceeding from results of proteolytic truncation experiments (Fenton and Tang, 2009).The truncation experiments revealed that the binding effectiveness of PEP could be decreased not only by N-domain phosphorylation, but also by proteolytic removal of amino acids 7–14 around the phosphorylatable serine residue of the N-terminal domain (2). On the basis of these data it was suggested that the N-terminal domain might interact with the main body of the enzyme molecule and this interaction might be necessary for formation of the active state of the enzyme, and interruption of this interaction by proteolytic truncation should convert the enzyme into the low affinity state against PEP (Fenton and Tang, 2009). Notoriously, the results of probing the L-PK phosphorylation site by mutational analysis agreed with this hypothesis, as modulation of PEP binding effectiveness was achieved through alteration of amino acids surrounding the phosphorylation site at Ser12 (Faustova et al., 2012).In this report we investigated the possibility of formation of this intramolecular complex between the main body of the protein and the N-terminal peptide by mapping its putative binding sites using computational docking analysis. As there was no prior information about the location of these binding sites, the “blind docking” approach was used and the search space encompassed the entire surface of domains A, B and C of a single L-PK subunit. The N-terminal domain of the enzyme was modelled by peptide RRASVA, representing sequence of the amino acids flanking the phosphorylatable serine in position 12, and corresponding to the part of the N-terminal domain, which proteolytic removal affected the enzyme affinity for PEP. This set-up simplified the computational analysis, but was still sufficient for collecting preliminary information about the putative binding sites, while the role of different subunits in the L-PK tetrameric structure should be analysed separately.As a separate part of this analysis, the docking sites for substrates ADP and PEP, as well as for the allosteric regulator FBP were mapped. The purpose of this analysis was determination the presence of additional docking areas for these ligands, and comparison of their location with docking sites for peptides. For this reason the “blind docking” approach was used also in the case of these low-molecular weight ligands.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This computational analysis revealed that several possibilities exist for binding of the flexible N-terminal peptide of L-PK with the main body of the protein in domains A and C. In the case of the non-phosphorylated N-terminal peptide this interaction could take place preferably in domain A, and as the appropriate binding sites are rather close to the active centre, this complex formation could be responsible for the high affinity of the enzyme for PEP. As proteolytic truncation of the N-terminus excludes this complex formation, it is not surprising that the decrease in enzyme affinity takes place.On the other hand, if phosphorylation of the protein shifts the binding site of the N-terminus from domain A to domain C, this also dissolves the internal complex, which putatively promotes PEP binding in the active centre. Therefore, proteolytic truncation and phosphorylation of L-PK should, indeed, have similar effect on PEP binding effectiveness, as was shown by Fenton and Tang (2009). However, if phosphorylation shifts the intramolecular complex of the N-terminus from domain A to domain C, this change may be responsible for switching on cooperativity and allostery of the enzyme (Faustova et al., 2010; Faustova and Järv, 2013), as the putative binding site(s) of the phosphopeptide are close to the FBP binding site. At the same time the enzyme affinity for ADP should be not affected by these intramolecular complexes, as either phosphorylation or truncation of the N-terminal domain have had no effect on binding of this substrate.Taken together, the present computational analysis was made to model the putative interactions between the N-terminal domain of L-PK and domains A and C of the same protein, which could hypothetically govern the enzyme activity and cooperativity. The results of this computational analysis revealed the presence of docking sites, which are needed for formation of these intramolecular complexes, and thus were in agreement with the hypothetical regulation mechanism. However, for further discussion of structural and mechanistic aspects of L-PK regulation by phosphorylation, a more thorough analysis is needed, where the enzyme complex structure and possibilities of inter-subunit interactions within the tetrameric structure of L-PK molecule are considered.Docking modelling was carried out by using the AutoDock Vina software, version 1.0.3 (Trott and Olson, 2010), proceeding from the X-ray structure of the pyruvate kinase R isozyme subunit structure listed in PDB, entry 2VGB. In these calculations torsion rotation around the most flexible bonds was defined for docking procedures. The ligands structure modelling was performed using the Spartan 4.0 software suite (Wavefunction, Inc., USA) and the minimum-energy conformations of the compounds were obtained. Pre-optimisation preparations were made by using molecular mechanics and final conformational searches were done by semi-empirical method AM1. Both peptides were represented as zwitterions for these calculations.The docking compatible structure formats of the protein were prepared by AutoDockTools (ver. 1.5.4) (Sanner, 1999). The partial charges for all atoms in structures of ligands were signed. The fitting box with 0.3Å of grid spacing was defined once and used for all docking calculations. The fitting area covered the whole protein space and the docking poses were obtained and listed following the values of the docking energy. Positioning of centre of ligand in its bound state was calculated and marked by a black dot in the protein model. The graphic software package VMD (ver. 1.9.1) was used for illustration of ligand docking poses on protein surface (Humphrey et al., 1996).