@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Pru du 2S albumin or Pru du vicilin?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The current reported sequence of the almond 2S albumin is a partial 28 aa peptide.The translation into protein of an almond EST sequence matches the partial peptide.The in silico generated aa sequence is a member of the vicilin superfamily.The currently known almond 2S albumin is rather a part of a 7S vicilin like protein.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Almond–2S albumin–vicilin,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A short partial sequence of 28 amino acids is all the information we have so far about the putative allergen 2S albumin from almond. The aim of this work was to analyze this information using mainly bioinformatics tools, in order to verify its rightness.Based on the results reported in the paper describing this allergen from almond, we analyzed the original data of amino acids sequencing through available software.The degree of homology of the almond 12kDa protein with any other known 2S albumin appears to be much lower than the one reported in the paper that firstly described it. In a publicly available cDNA library we discovered an expressed sequence tag which translation generates a protein that perfectly matches both of the sequencing outputs described in the same paper. A further analysis indicated that the latter protein seems to belong to the vicilin superfamily rather than to the prolamin one. The fact that also vicilins are seed storage proteins known to be highly allergenic would explain the IgE reactivity originally observed.Based on our observations we suggest that the IgE reactive 12kDa protein from almond currently known as Pru du 2S albumin is in reality the cleaved N-terminal region of a 7S vicilin like protein.Almond (Prunus dulcis or Amygdalus communis L.) is one of the most commonly consumed nut worldwide. It can be eaten either raw or processed into a wide variety of foods, particularly in sweets like pastry, chocolates, and confectionary products. The consumption of almonds has been associated with nutritional benefits, including cholesterol-lowering effects, protection against diabetes and potential prebiotic properties (Jenkins et al., 2008; Mandalari et al., 2008). Despite these benefits for the health of the consumer, these fruits represent an allergic threat for sensitized individuals. Even though almond is commonly included into the tree nuts group, taxonomically it belongs to the Rosaceae, a family including a number of allergenic fruits, such as peach, apricot, plum, cherry, apple, pear, blackberry and strawberry. Unlike allergies to other foods, such as egg and milk (mostly hitting during childhood and disappearing in adult age), nut-induced allergies are often permanent and particularly severe, with multisystemic or respiratory symptoms in the majority of the cases (Crespo et al., 2006). Although clinical cross-reactivity is reported to be rare between tree nuts, a potential clinical allergy to other Rosaceae should not be overlooked by almond allergic patients (Rodriguez et al., 2000). IgE cross-reactivity has also been reported with allergens from peanut (de Leon et al., 2005; Holden et al., 2008), corn (Lee et al., 2005), and lupine (Holden et al., 2008). Despite their peculiar proximity to so many allergenic fruits (they share both their phenotypic characteristics with several other tree nuts and their genetic patrimony with the Rosaceae members), almonds have never raised a great attention within the food allergy field, and comparatively few studies have been carried out and published in the recent years. Up to date, 8 allergens are present in the Allergome database (www.allergome.org), but only 4 of them have been approved by the Allergen Nomenclature Sub-Committee of the International Union of Immunological Societies (www.allergen.org). These are Pru du 3, a non-specific lipid transfer protein similar to the one from peach, Pru du 4, a profilin causing mild symptoms limited to oral cavity, Pru du 5, a ribosomal protein whose allergenicity is still to be defined, and Pru du 6, the major and best characterized almond allergen, an 11S globulin also called amandin. Other allergens yet to be elucidated are Pru du 1, member of the Bet v 1-homologous family, Pru du 2, a thaumatin like protein, Pru du γ-conglutin and Pru du 2S albumin (Costa et al., 2012).In 2002 Poltronieri’s group reported the identification of two almond IgE-binding proteins, belonging to the albumin fraction. These two proteins, with molecular weights of approximately 12 and 45kDa, respectively, were subjected to purification and N-terminal sequencing. While the 25 amino acids sequence obtained from the 45kDa protein displayed a convincing degree of similarity with the mature form of conglutin γ from white and narrow-leafed blue lupine, the 18 amino acids sequence obtained from 12kDa protein showed a low degree of similarity with a 2S albumin from English walnut. In order to validate the homology with 2S albumin, a new 10 amino acids long sequence was obtained from a smaller peptide of 2kDa, generated in vitro in order to obtain additional internal sequence information. According to the Authors the new sequencing confirmed the first statement, and the whole 12kDa protein was assigned to the 2S albumin family of seed storage proteins. A new putative allergen from almond with a partial 28 amino acids sequence, resulting from the sum of the 18 amino acids peptide and the 10 amino acids one, is currently reported by the Allergome database and called Pru du 2S Albumin (Poltronieri et al., 2002).In order to clarify the real identity of this 12kDa almond protein, we decided to carry out an in silico analysis starting from the 28 amino acids peptide (VTXEEGXYSISDQSKVGEQXIRSPDREM) currently known as Pru du 2S Albumin (UniProt P82944).A schematic representation of the results of our analysis is displayed in Fig. 1. First of all we separated the two original peptides, and we started by analyzing the first 18 aa one. With a sequence identity of 22% and a similarity of 39%, the 2S albumin from English walnut did not seem to match the almond originated peptide. The sequence was therefore submitted to tBLASTn analysis (http://blast.st-va.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi), and we looked in the EST sequence database of Prunus dulcis.Seven EST sequences (GenBank accessions BU574590, BU573888, BU572660, BU574985, BU575072, BU573652 and BU573450) displayed 89% identity with our query, with E-values ranging from 4×10−5 to 9×10−5. All these nucleotide sequences were then in silico translated into proteins using the ExPASy Translate tool (http://web.expasy.org/translate), and the obtained amino acid sequences were subjected to multiple alignment using ClustalW2 (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalw2). As shown in Fig. 2, the 7 sequences were different in length, but they all shared a very high degree of identity. Moreover, both of the peptides originated from the sequencing of the 12kDa protein (Poltronieri et al., 2002) displayed perfect match. By using the ExPASy Compute pI/Mw tool (http://web.expasy.org/cgi-bin/compute_pi/pi_tool) we calculated the theoretical molecular mass of the protein portion spanning from the beginning of the 18 aa peptide to the end of the 10 aa one: the result was 9357.40Da, which is compatible (not larger) with the mass of 12kDa observed after SDS PAGE separation by Poltronieri et al. Finally, when looking at the partial sequence of the protein reported in Fig. 1, and derived from the in silico translation of the corresponding EST sequence, it is interesting to notice that sulphurated amino acids account for the 15% of the total, which is one of the main reason, aside from the similarity degree, why this protein was originally attributed to the sulphydryl-rich 2S albumin family (Poltronieri et al., 2002).In order to investigate the putative role of this new protein, we performed a new BLAST search with the aim of identifying ortholog members in other species: firstly, we analyzed it using the BLASTp suite (search of protein databases using a protein query): although no conserved domains were detected, the result showed a 90% identity with 88% of a vicilin C72-like protein from Prunus mume (GenBank accession XP_008224280), a tree belonging to the same genus as almond and commonly known as either Chinese plum or Japanese apricot. Secondly, we decided to run a search starting from one of the EST sequences and employing the BLASTx suite (search of protein databases using a translated nucleotide query). This time the putative conserved domain of the vicilin superfamily N-terminal region (Fig. 1) was recognized by the CDD tool (Marchler-Bauer et al., 2013). This region is typical of plant seed storage proteins (N-terminal end of the Cupin domain), and it has been shown how in Macadamia integrifolia it is processed into peptides of approximately 50 amino acids, containing a C-X-X-X-C-(10-12)X-C-X-X-X-C motif and exhibiting antimicrobial activity in vitro (Marcus et al., 1999). In Fig. 1 cysteine residues are marked, in order to highlight the presence of the above mentioned motif. This particular motif can be found in the N-terminal region of other known allergens identified as 7S vicilin, such as Ana o 1 from cashew (UniProt Q8L5L5), Ara h 1 from peanut (UniProt B3IXL2), Car i 2 from pecan (UniProt B3STU4), Gly m 5 from soybean (UniProt C6T9L1), Jug r 2 from English walnut (UniProt Q9SEW4), Pis v 3 from pistachio (UniProt B4×640), Ses i 3 from sesame (UniProt Q9AUD0), Sola l vicilin from tomato (UniProt B0JEU3) and Zea m G1 from corn (UniProt Q03865). Vicilin-like proteins are commonly large hydrophobic proteins, with a usual molecular weight of around 60kDa, and they are known allergens present in the seeds of several plants commonly employed for human consumption (Rouge et al., 2011). The C-X-X-X-C-(10-12)X-C-X-X-X-C motif is located in a hydrophilic region proximal to the N-terminus, which is present in some, but not all, 7S globulins (Dure, 1990). Despite a recent study suggested that the IgE epitopes of Ara h 1 are more concentrated in the hydrophobic and less charged areas (Bøgh et al., 2012), an interesting analogy of what could happen in almond exists in buckwheat, where a small reacting protein of around 19kDa and corresponding to the N-terminal region of a 7S vicilin has been recognized as major allergen (Choi et al., 2007).In light of the observations obtained after a brief but detailed in silico analysis, we can conclude that the IgE binding 12kDa almond protein, originally described as a 2S albumin (UniProt P82944), does not belong to the prolamin superfamily, but is more likely to correspond to the N-terminal region of a 7S vicilin. Further investigations will be necessary to characterize and disclose the real allergenic potential of this new putative almond vicilin in sensitized individuals.All the authors declare no conflicts of interest.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
