@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automatic design and planning of scaffolding systems using building information modeling

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Temporary facilities significantly impact construction safety and productivity.A platform for BIM-based automatic temporary facility planning has been developed.Rule-based geometric reasoning and temporary facility design algorithms are shown.Case studies which tested the new scaffolding planning software were presented.Scaffolding location, design, schedule, and bills of materials were identified.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Building information modeling,Design and construction planning,Geometric reasoning for automated modeling,Rules and regulations,Safety,Temporary facilities (scaffolding systems),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Considering their significant impact on construction projects, scaffolding as part of the temporary facilities category in construction must be thoroughly designed, planned, procured, and managed. The current practices in planning and managing scaffolding though is often manual and reactive, especially when a construction project is already underway. Widespread results are code compliance problems, inefficiency, and waste of procuring and managing material for scaffolding systems. We developed a rule-based system that automatically plans scaffolding systems for pro-active management in Building Information Modeling (BIM). The scope of the presented work is limited to traditional pipe and board scaffolding systems. A rule was prepared based on the current practice of planning and installing scaffolding systems. Our computational algorithms automatically recognize geometric and non-geometric conditions in building models and produce a scaffolding system design which a practitioner can use in the field. We implemented our automated scaffolding system for a commercially-available BIM software and tested it in a case study project. The system thoroughly identified the locations in need of scaffolding and generated the corresponding scaffolding design in BIM. Further results show, the proposed approach successfully generated a scaffolding system-loaded BIM model that can be utilized in communication, billing of materials, scheduling simulation, and as a benchmark for accurate field installation and performance measurement.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Temporary facilities such as scaffolding systems, formwork, and shoring systems are structures that assist mainly in the placement of bulk materials. Most construction projects utilize temporary facilities frequently, and construction safety, quality, speed, and profitability are impacted by using temporary facilities [1]. Some aspects of these are elaborated further.Temporary facilities can cause spatial and temporal conflicts between other temporary facilities or activities which can then lead to unsafe conditions and loss of productivity [2]. According to Ratay [3], many construction disasters occur due to the failures of temporary facilities during construction. In addition, the Construction Industry Institute (CII) highlighted in a recent research study that temporary facilities form one of the top four primary cost categories belonging to indirect construction costs [4]. In the author’s opinion, temporary facilities, to which scaffolding systems belong, deserve much more attention due to the impact they have on labor cost and construction schedule.Scaffolding systems have significant impact on successful project delivery. The same research report by CII interviewed 56 owner and contractor companies. Results show that these companies consider scaffolding systems, and its construction and deconstruction, as one of the most challenging and wasteful component among the 16 subcategories of indirect construction cost [4]. In addition, other concerns were identified which matter for project success. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) [5] and Workplace Health and Safety Queensland (WHSQ) [6,7], for example, reported that there exist repeated code-compliance problems related to scaffolding systems. OSHA reported also that 65% of the construction workers are frequently on scaffolding systems. It further states that preventing accidents associated with scaffolding systems exclusively can protect workers from about 4500 injuries and 50 deaths annually and save American employers spending $90 million on lost workdays [8]. Since work site productivity and safety go hand-in-hand, these statistics justify additional efforts towards optimizing design, planning, and utilization of scaffolding systems.Despite the aforementioned issues and the importance of temporary facilities to a construction project, there are currently several problems in planning and managing these in the construction industry. First, most temporary facilities (incl. scaffolding systems) currently lack effective front-end planning and management. Architectural and bid drawings typically do not incorporate temporary facilities except for exceptionally complex temporary facilities such as cofferdams [9,10]. Although some construction plans include important temporary facilities late in the construction planning process, they are often installed at construction sites when needed but without sufficient planning effort. Furthermore, due to the lack of time and understanding, calculations and drawings of scaffolding systems submitted by temporary facility vendors are most often reviewed only to assess their impact on the permanent part of the building [9].Along with the lack of front-end planning and management, current industry practices suffer from heavy reliance on the knowledge and experiences of individual engineers. Even though software programs exist that are specialized in designing temporary facilities (e.g., formwork and scaffolding), the functions of these commercially-available software programs are often limited to rapid generation of temporary facility designs. Only human cognition, based on visual analysis of the building designs or the construction sites, provides the basis for detecting locations where temporary facilities are required. It is today’s human decision makers that determine the proper types of temporary facilities and they typically generate the corresponding detailed designs.Due to the complex nature of construction projects and potentially imperfect human judgment, there are opportunities to reduce or eliminate potentially erroneous temporary facility planning; especially in projects which are planned manually based on visual analysis of the construction site drawings and schedules. Some examples of errors are: necessary temporary facilities can be omitted in a construction plan; improper types of temporary facilities can be selected; temporary facilities design may not reflect the design requirements; and, accordingly, the amount of materials and associated cost for temporary facilities cannot be estimated accurately.Taking into account the impact on the entire construction project and the deficiencies of the current practices in planning and managing temporary facilities, the industry needs to overcome these drawbacks by enabling thorough front-end planning of temporary facilities – and in this case – scaffolding systems.This research addresses the articulated problems by integrating scaffolding systems into BIM-based construction planning. While a growing number of construction projects utilize BIM technology and processes already in order to incorporate temporary facilities into the construction plans, most of such planning is done manually. Taking advantage of the rich information available in BIM models, we attempt to automate most of the processes of: assessing the construction site condition that changes according to the construction schedule, detecting required scaffolding systems and generating the design, visualizing them in the building model and construction simulation, and generating periodical utilization schedules and reports.In order to automate these processes, our research developed an automatic rule checking system for temporary facility planning focusing on traditional pipe and board scaffolding systems. Deciding where scaffolding systems are required and how they can be built satisfying various design and safety requirements are part of the research questions. Automated type or vendor selection of the scaffolding systems was not part of scope of the work. The research first established an initial rule related to scaffolding system installation. Then, the developed rule checking system was used to check the model at an early construction planning stage. The presented results are in the form of building models and construction simulations loaded with scaffolding systems and automatically generated reports.This paper is organized as follows. The background section reviews the current industry practices and technology in support of scaffolding system planning and discusses the need for an automated solution. The section thereafter presents the proposed framework and methodology of the rule-based system for scaffolding system design, planning, and management. The customization of the automated system for scaffolding systems is presented in the following section. The final section shows the implementation of the scaffolding planning system for a realistic building model. The results from the case studies validate the feasibility of the proposed system by creating a realistic construction plan containing scaffolding system. The final section discusses limitations and contributions of this research, and potential future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This work presented the framework, algorithms, and tests for automatically designing and planning scaffolding systems as part of Building Information Models (BIM). Previous efforts led by the construction industry and academia were usually concentrated on providing methods to properly design temporary facilities. However, the developed approach extends the range of automation to the identification of required scaffolding systems, generation of the corresponding designs, and generation of various utilization reports. The major contribution of the presented research is therefore in the automation of the process in design and planning of scaffolding systems. The geometric and non-geometric conditions and construction schedule were interpreted automatically based on pre-defined rules or commonly known and applied best industry practices. Thus, potentially, accurate plans for scaffolding systems can be generated in the future more consistently and assist or reduce the error-prone manual efforts eventually more significantly.The proposed system also visualizes the temporary facilities in existing BIM software – in particular tube-and-board scaffolding systems – as well as the work spaces occupied by it. Such visualization can increase a project stakeholder’s awareness about work tasks and spaces that occur concurrently and are likely to cause time or space conflicts among competing crews. By increasing the project participants’ awareness, planning errors and hazardous situations arising from temporary facility uses can be realized and corrected before such situations take place, particularly during field implementation. In addition, the developed system is able to estimate the required materials for scaffolding systems to aid decision makers by providing more predictable quantity-based takeoffs in BIM. While construction companies and temporary facility vendors and suppliers have their own databases, they typically apply a “rule-of-thumb” approach for estimating quantities and schedules. The presented approach has a potential to provide them with more quantifiable means and methods. Such more accurate quantity-takeoff can potentially lead to project cost savings and as explained, in higher efficiency of work task execution and constructability.There are limitations to the developed approach that must be overcome in order to realize its full potential. First, complex and unexpected project conditions as they often exist on construction sites can – at least with the current version of the developed approach – not be satisfactorily handled. As such, objects or their attributes that are often not represented accurately in the model create problems; for example, irregular ground conditions that are not modeled today. Today’s scaffolding designs derived from a BIM model may further require modifications to fit into the existing site conditions of the construction site.In addition, the proposed framework relies on the assumption that the building model and construction schedule are available. As it is commonly known, building renovation projects often require scaffolding systems, but digital building models are rarely ever available unless drawn for this purpose. For such projects, a building model has to be created first and may require accurate dimensions. Laser scanning and other sensing technology might offer a solution by providing such realistic and accurate as-built conditions to generate a building model.Future research may focus as well on developing more comprehensive rules for detecting required scaffolding systems from complex building geometry. Accordingly, more sophisticated algorithms should be developed to evaluate various geometric conditions and to generate corresponding scaffolding designs. Other potential exists on focusing on scaffolding systems for specific work tasks that often require scaffolds, such as masonry construction and painting. The proposed approach of automating temporary facility planning can further provide such tangible benefits if it is customized for the characteristics of different construction activities.