@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
BIM extension for the sustainability appraisal of conceptual steel design

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Proposed a BIM-based structural sustainability appraisal system.Implemented the system in OOP environment (C#) based on a modelling framework.The framework considers economic and environmental sustainability.Established process models, algorithms and object-based instantiations.The representations are useful for implementing plausible BIM extensions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sustainability,BIM extension,Conceptual design,Feature-based modelling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Contemporary advancements in Information Technology and the efforts from various research initiatives in the AEC industry are showing evidence of progress with the emergence of building information modelling (BIM). BIM presents the opportunity of electronically modelling and managing the vast amount of information embedded in a building project, from its conception to end-of-life. Researchers have been looking at extensions to expand its scope. Sustainability is one such modelling extension that is in need of development. This is becoming pertinent for the structural engineer as recent design criteria have put great emphasis on the sustainability credentials in addition to the traditional criteria of structural integrity, constructability and cost. With the complexity of designs, there are now needs to provide decision support tools to aid in the assessment of the sustainability credentials of design solutions. Such tools would be most beneficial at the conceptual design stage so that sustainability is built into the design solution starting from its inception. The sustainability of buildings is related to life cycle and is measured using indicator-terms such as life cycle costing, ecological footprint and carbon footprint. This paper proposes a modelling framework combining these three indicators in providing sustainability assessments of alternative design solutions based on the economic and environmental sustainability pillars. It employs the principles of feature-based modelling to extract construction-specific information from product models for the purposes of sustainability analysis. A prototype system is implemented using .NET and linked to the BIM enabled software, Revit Structures™. The system appraises alternative design solutions using multi-criteria performance analysis. This work demonstrates that current process and data modelling techniques can be employed to model sustainability related information to inform decisions right from the early stages of structural design. It concludes that the utilized information modelling representations – in the form of a process model, implementation algorithms and object-based instantiations – can capture sustainability related information to inform decisions at the early stages of the structural design process.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The design stage presents the best opportunity to influence cost and sustainability impacts covering the whole life cycle stages of a building [1,2]. This makes targeting the design stage very important for incorporating building performance issues such as sustainability. The situation therefore creates demand on the development of decision support tools to guide designers in the early design stage when changes can easily be accommodated with very minimal consequences. The result is that such demands become additional challenges to the already existing goal of capturing the building product in a single information model. These challenges still exist with the newly emerging BIM, although with improved opportunities for expansion and extension to capture the vast amount of information related to various AEC domains. In the structural engineering domain, sustainability decision support tools for guiding engineers in early design iterations have not been sufficiently explored. This work presents a modelling framework aimed at incorporating sustainability measures to inform the conceptual design process of steel-framed buildings using principles of feature-based modelling. It proposes the use of life cycle approach to explore cost, as well as carbon and ecological footprint. The intention of this work is to provide a BIM integrated system that will aid structural engineers in assessing the sustainability measures of alternative design solutions from the early stages of design. This is new in the structural engineering domain.This paper is presented in five sections; summarized as introduction, background, prototype implementation, implementation features significance and conclusion. It highlights information modelling challenges associated with sustainability assessment and gives a background on existing BIM extensions in modelling aspects of the building. The paper presents the implementation of a proposed prototype system for sustainability appraisal with a discussion of its significance in expanding the scope of building information modelling applications.Uher [3] identified the development of key principles/indicators as one of the main areas of research in sustainable construction. He suggested energy consumption and land used for building as two ideal absolute indicators. This is based on the premise that construction works are highly energy intensive and land is always required for expansion to accommodate construction activities and products. However, the implementation and strategy for employing such indicators in assessing sustainability at the design stage was not addressed and, in the authors’ opinion, remains a challenge. In a more recent report on strategy for BIM adoption and management, whole life cost and carbon performance were identified as the key variables that can influence building sustainability performance significantly [4]. Notwithstanding, the contemporary progress made in the development of tools for building’s environmental performance assessment is worth mentioning despite their inadequacy of being used for sustainability assessment [5]. Quite a number of countries have developed building environmental performance assessment tools tailored to their local conditions. Some of these tools also have the potential of being applied internationally as reviewed in [2,5]. The tools have been classified into three groups: product comparison; decision support and whole building framework. The more widely used tools such as – Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method (BREEAM) and Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED), developed in the UK and USA respectively, belong to the whole building framework category. This category is more comprehensive in application than other two.While recognizing the advances made in developing building environmental performance assessment tools, there have also been some criticism warranting further research. In addition to complexity and regional variations, Ding [2] hinged the development of a sustainability index on the critique that these tools are difficult to apply at the early project phases and largely ignore the economic aspect of sustainability. Haapio and Viitaniemi [5] also pointed out the difficulty with subjectivity in indicator assessment from the user’s point of view – as architects and engineers may consider indicators differently. In the authors’ opinion, this triggers an interesting point: all building professionals ought to be responsible for the information on the sustainability performance of their design specifications as they do for the integrity of their designs. This premise remains a key motivation for this research.Limitations also exist on issues pertaining data used in the assessment of building sustainability. Systems that generate life cycle process of materials are based on different criteria such as boundary conditions and often produce conflicting life cycle analysis results. As such, the quality of secondary data accessible to dependent systems is always an issue to adequately address. Even with the availability of secondary data from existing databases, information are not yet comprehensive enough to cover numerous materials comprising the building artefact. It results in the use of assumptions to ease system limitations as evident in [6] where, among others, an average weight per unit area has been assumed for copper wiring in commercial buildings in carrying out life cycle energy and environmental performance of a new building. Sustainability assessment concerning the environment is hinged on life cycle analysis (LCA) which has been noted to be a source of contention and uncertainties in building assessment. The uncertainties beclouding LCA process have been largely attributed to the lack in the availability of quality data and remain a critical problem requiring special attention [7]. In the proposed, however, the focus is on the relative costing among alternatives. Therefore the effect of uncertainties in the data is much reduced.Besides the challenges associated with defining and quantifying sustainability in the built environment, current sustainability assessments have been based on the completed structure. This apparently compromises the usefulness of sustainability ratings in design-decisions making process. The need is therefore to establish quantitative terms for qualifying sustainability and incorporating it right at the early stages of the project development process to guide decisions as progress is made. Owing to the inherent traditional fragmentation of the industry, it is only logical that various professional platforms think along the lines of their particular responsibilities in the project process. This will create a possibility for collaboratively unifying the different platform-based sustainability ratings at salient project stages. For the structural engineer, tools dedicated to depicting sustainability to inform design-decisions on options are generally lacking. This research work is therefore aimed at using process and data modelling techniques to assess the sustainability of the structural engineer’s building design options. As an initiation, this work is directed at modelling the sustainability of steel-framed buildings to inform engineers during conceptual design activity in contemporary BIM environments. The same approach could be used for other forms of construction.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
