@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Modeling, docking and dynamics simulations of a non-specific lipid transfer protein from Peganum harmala L.

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
PHL-nsLTP belongs to ns-LTP1 family.PHL-nsLTP could accommodate fatty acids ranging from C10 to C18 in size.The hydrophobic cavity of PHL-nsLTP presents important role in its binding activity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Non-specific transfer protein,Structure,Docking,Molecular dynamics simulations,Peganum harmala L.,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Non-specific lipid transfer proteins (ns-LTPs), ubiquitously found in various types of plants, have been well-known to transfer amphiphilic lipids and promote the lipid exchange between mitochondria and microbody. In this study, an in silico analysis was proposed to study ns-LTP in Peganum harmala L., which may belong to ns-LTP1 family, aiming at constructing its three-dimensional structure. Moreover, we adopted MEGA to analyze ns-LTPs and other species phylogenetically, which brought out an initial sequence alignment of ns-LTPs. In addition, we used molecular docking and molecular dynamics simulations to further investigate the affinities and stabilities of ns-LTP with several ligands complexes. Taken together, our results about ns-LTPs and their ligand-binding activities can provide a better understanding of the lipid–protein interactions, indicating some future applications of ns-LTP-mediated transport.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Plant ns-LTPs were first isolated from spinach leaves over 30 years ago, and they possessed the abilities of transferring amphiphilic lipids (e.g., phospholipids, fatty acids and glycolipids) and promoted the lipid exchange between mitochondria and microbody (Gincel et al., 1994; Kader et al., 1984; Pii et al., 2009). Hitherto, ns-LTPs have been discovered in various types of plants, including castor beans, tangerine, corn, rice, tobacco, peach, coffee (Takishima et al., 1988; García-Olmedo et al., 1995; Gomar et al., 1996; Liu et al., 2002; Da-Silva et al., 2006; Pasquato et al., 2006; Zottich et al., 2011), etc. Plant ns-LTPs can be divided into two subfamilies depending on the different molecular mass, namely ns-LTP1 with 9kDa and ns-LTP2 with 7kDa (Douliez et al., 2000; Kader, 1997). The typically structural characteristic of ns-LTP contains an internal hydrophobic cavity that can be stabilized by 8 Cys residues, and such a cavity is able to run through the whole protein to allow the binding of different lipids and hydrophobic compounds in vitro (Douliez et al., 2000; Pons et al., 2003). Therefore, ns-LTPs might play a pivotal role in the formation of protective hydrophobic layers on the surface of the plant aerial organs possibly stimulating the transfer of hydrophobic compounds to the extracellular environment (Trevino and Oconnell, 1998; Lee et al., 2009). All the relevant evidence provided a potential explanation for the ns-LTPs defense against viral, bacterial and fungal pathogens (Buhot et al., 2001; Salcedo et al., 2007). Furthermore, the transfer activity for drug delivery solves the problems involving lipid membrane permeability of drugs, which would be employed in pharmacology or medicine industries (Pato et al., 2001). Also, it could be recognized as plant pan-allergens present in foods and pollens (Salcedo et al., 2004).The tertiary structures of ns-LTP from different origins (e.g., wheat, rice, maize and barley seeds), either in free state or in complex with lipids, have recently been determined by X-ray crystallography or NMR method (Gincel et al., 1994; Gomar et al., 1996; Shin et al., 1995; Charvolin et al., 1999; Han et al., 2001; Heinemann et al., 1996; Lerche et al., 1997; Lee et al., 1998), suggesting the three-dimensional structure of ns-LTP consists four α-helices and a long N-terminal signal sequence, with four disulfide bonds interconnecting the secondary structure (Lee et al., 1998). They are also characterized by a tunnel-like hydrophobic cavity into which a long fatty acyl chain could be inserted. A recent study has revealed that ns-LTP of maize can accommodate various types of saturated or unsaturated fatty acids, ranging in size from C10 to C18 (Han et al., 2001). These above-mentioned results would provide us more insightful clues to further understand the structure–function relationships of ns-LTP.Peganum harmala L., distributed in Uyghur nationality in Xinjiang, China since ancient times, has been regarded as a traditional herb for medicinal or psychoactive therapy in water shortage deserts and grasslands (Ma et al., 2000). Moreover, it has been reported to possess a wide spectrum of pharmacological actions in different kinds of applications, including antibacterial, antifungal, antitumor treatments and effectiveness in treatment of dermatosis (Astulla et al., 2008; Song et al., 2004; Herraiz et al., 2010). To date, structure–function relationships of PHL-nsLTP are still under investigation, and therefore, it is of great significance to investigate its structure and ligand–protein interactions.In the study described here, we reported for the first time that a new lipid transfer protein's nucleotide sequence information which was purified from Peganum harmala L. (PHL-nsLTP) seeds. Meanwhile, Sun and her colleagues demonstrated that this protein exerted lipid binding, antifungal, anticancer and anti-HIV-1 reverse transcriptase activities (Ma et al., 2013). Herein, based upon this nucleotide sequence information, we established an evolutionary relationship between PHL-nsLTP and ns-LTPs in the other species under the guidance of phylogenetic analysis and sequences alignments. Then, we modeled the three-dimensional structure of PHL-nsLTP and assessed its affinities and stabilities in complex with various fatty acids through molecular docking and dynamics simulations, thus concluding that the PHL-nsLTP may belong to ns-LTP1, which could form complex with a wide range of lipid ligands from C10 to C18.In summary, our results demonstrate that ligand binding activities of ns-LTP can develop a better understanding of the biological functions of PHL-nsLTP, as well as the lipid–protein interactions, and thus might shedding light on future pharmacological or medical industrial implications.PHL-nsLTP was isolated by cationic exchange chromatography on Resource S column and gel filtration on Sephadex 75 10/300 GL column (Ooi et al., 2008). Moreover, according to N-terminal amino acid sequence analysis results, degenerate primers were designed and the full length cDNA of PHL-nsLTP was acquired by rapid amplification of cDNA end (RACE) (Zhang and Frohman, 1997).DNAMAN software (http://www.lynnon.com/) was used to translate the nucleotide acid sequences of PHL-nsLTP to the corresponding amino acid sequences. Moreover, PHL-nsLTP amino acid sequence was used to find its homology proteins through BLASTP (protein–protein BLAST) in a non-redundant protein sequences (nr) in the database (Altschul et al., 1990).Then, integrating all the search results, 101 sequences were achieved followed subsequently by, sequences which were not from the ns-LTP family being deleted. Sequences from the same species, but bearing different amino acids composition, were further screened, and the sequence which possessed highest identity was chosen. Finally, 51 ns-LTP sequences were achieved for further study.51 ns-LTPs sequences were aligned through the ClustalX (version 2.1) packages (Higgins and Sharp, 1988), and the corresponding phylogenetic tree was constructed by Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis (MEGA5) software (Tamura et al., 2011) with neighbor-joining method with deafult parameters (Saitou and Nei, 1987). The reliability of each branch was evaluated with bootstrap method (1000 times repeat). Finally, the phylogenetic tree was visualized using TreeView program (Page, 1996).The signal peptide of ns-LTP was predicted by SignalP server (Petersen et al., 2011), while its domain was acquired from Prosite (http://prosite.expasy.org/). Additionally, three-dimensional structure of PHL-nsLTP was constructed using SWISS-MODEL server (http://swissmodel.expasy.org/) with the structure of maize (PDB ID: 1FK5) (Han et al., 2001) as template.10 ligands that might possess the potentials for binding to our ns-LTP were collected from literature (Han et al., 2001) and Protein Data Bank (http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/home/home.do). Detailed information of the ligands was shown in Table 1. The PHL-nsLTP and its ligands were prepared using UCSF chimera, where protein with negative charges was added, while corresponding ligands were added with negative or positive or even zero charge (Pettersen et al., 2004). To improve the accuracy, the binding site was selected within 10.0Å root mean square deviations (RMSD) of the original ligand. The primary docking was performed with grid score to write out the topmost pose. Amber score was then used for rescoring based on the topmost pose. The flexible ligand docking method was adopted in this work, which allowed the ligand to be flexible when it docked to the binding site of the receptors (Lang et al., 2009). The PDB2PQR server was utilized to assign protonation state of PHL-nsLTP with AMBER forcefield, and PROPKA was applied to maintain protonation state at pH=7.0 (Dolinsky et al., 2004, 2007; Miteva et al., 2005; Shi et al., 2013). Regarding amber scores and binding modes, we eventually selected 6 protein–ligand complexes for further molecular dynamics simulations analysis.The GROMACS (version 4.5) package (Van Der Spoel et al., 2005; Hess et al., 2008) was employed to perform molecular dynamics simulations analysis of the dynamic behavior of ns-LTP complexed with different ligands, and the protein topology was constructed by pdb2gmx with GROMOS96 43a1 forcefield while the ligand topology was generated using PRODRG2 server (Schuler et al., 2001; Schüttelkopf and van Aalten, 2004). In this study, we used a cubic periodic box setting a minimal distance of 1.0 between the protein and edge of the box, which was then solvated by adding simple point charge (SPC) water molecules (Klionsky et al., 2012). To make the system neutral, we added Na+ and Cl− to simulate a physiological NaCl concentration of 0.15M. Following a steepest descent energy minimization with particle mesh Ewald (PME) at every step (Darden et al., 1993; Essmann et al., 1995), LTP–lipid complexes were equilibrated 100ps under constant volume (NVT) and constant pressure (NPT) condition, respectively, during which position restraints were simultaneously applied to ns-LTP and ligands. In NVT equilibration, the temperature was maintained at 300K by the Berendsen weak coupling method (Berendsen et al., 1984). In addition, under NPT equilibration, the temperature was controlled by the Berendsen weak coupling method (Berendsen et al., 1984) and the pressure was maintained at 1bar by Parrinello–Rahman barostat method (Parrinello and Rahman, 1981; Nosé and Klein, 1983). Upon completion of the two equilibration phases, production MD simulations were conducted for 1ns after taking away the position restraints. In this data collection phase, the temperature and pressure were maintained by the same methods as in NPT phase, and the coordinates were saved every 0.2ps. For all simulations, LINCS algorithm was applied to constrain all bonds (Berk et al., 1997). The resulting trajectory files were viewed and analyzed using UCSF Chimera (Pettersen et al., 2004).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
