@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Identification of evolutionarily conserved Momordica charantia microRNAs using computational approach and its utility in phylogeny analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Twenty four pre-miRNAs were reported from Momordica charantia developing seed transcriptome.Phylogeny analysis with binary data were unreliable.Identified miRNAs held sequence conservation in mature miRNAs.Phylogeny analysis of pre-miRNA sequences revealed genus specific segregation.Predicted targets revealed role of miRNAs in regulation of developmental process.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
microRNA,Momordica charantia,Phylogeny,Short Read Archive,Plant develolpment,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Momordica charantia (bitter gourd, bitter melon) is a monoecious Cucurbitaceae with anti-oxidant, anti-microbial, anti-viral and anti-diabetic potential. Molecular studies on this economically valuable plant are very essential to understand its phylogeny and evolution. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are conserved, small, non-coding RNA with ability to regulate gene expression by bind the 3′ UTR region of target mRNA and are evolved at different rates in different plant species. In this study we have utilized homology based computational approach and identified 27 mature miRNAs for the first time from this bio-medically important plant. The phylogenetic tree developed from binary data derived from the data on presence/absence of the identified miRNAs were noticed to be uncertain and biased. Most of the identified miRNAs were highly conserved among the plant species and sequence based phylogeny analysis of miRNAs resolved the above difficulties in phylogeny approach using miRNA. Predicted gene targets of the identified miRNAs revealed their importance in regulation of plant developmental process. Reported miRNAs held sequence conservation in mature miRNAs and the detailed phylogeny analysis of pre-miRNA sequences revealed genus specific segregation of clusters.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
MicroRNAs are small non-coding RNAs (19–25nt long) which play a major role in post-transcriptional regulation of protein-coding genes (Sekar et al., 2014) and are important for evolution of developmental processes in plants (Jasinski et al., 2010). In plants the prefect homology between the miRNA and its target gene leads to catalytic degradation of the target mRNA. Inspite of this translation repression of target gene expression have also been noticed from plant miRNA-mRNA interaction as a rare event. Using the above two mechanisms plant miRNA are known to act as most important players in the regulation of plant growth and development, in response to biotic and abiotic stress. In general plants miRNA are transcribed as long primary transcript (pri-miRNA) by RNA polymerase II. The pri-miRNA are further processed by a Dicer-like RNAse III ribonuclease (DCL1), which yields further shorter miRNA precursor (pre-miRNA) with stem loop structure and miRNA:miRNA* duplex. Unlike the animals, the whole process of plant synthesis starting from transcription to miRNA:miRNA* duplex formation takes place in the nucleus and transported to the cytoplasm and methylated. In cytoplasm the methylated mature miRNA is incorporated in the RNA-Induced Silencing Complex (RISC) and recruits the ARGONAUTE1 (AGO1) to silence the target mRNA (Gazzani et al., 2009).The family Cucurbitaceae which comprises of 800 species in 130 genera is well known for the vegetable crops such as melon, cucumber squash and zucchini (Wang et al., 2010). Momordica charantia (bitter gourd, bitter melon) is a monoecious Cucurbitaceae plant and is mainly cultivated in the tropical regions such as subtropical Asia, Africa and South America (Miniraj et al., 1993). Bitter gourd is well known for anti-oxidant, anti-microbial, anti-viral, anti-diabetic activities (Joseph and Jini, 2013). Further considering the origin, it have been described that bitter gourd has been cultivated in India as early as <1590 AD (Decker-Walters, 1999), which indicates the level of an extremely ancient attentiveness about this plant species. More recently Schaefer and Renner (2010) reported the origin of Momordica from tropical Africa and that the Asian species has been dispersed about 19 million years ago. Among the Natural products known with pharmaceutical biology, bitter melon is considered as a good source of biologically active compounds (Islam et al., 2011). Further bitter gourd gains economically important morphological diversity and it varies with size, color, surface texture, and edible maturity trait of mature fruit (Robinson and Decker-Walters, 1999). In addition sex expression (i.e., monoecious and gynoecious sex types) is also considered as an economically important trait of the bitter gourd widely cultivated in the tropical regions (Behera et al., 2006).Different molecular approaches have been applied to document the genetic diversity associated with economically important traits of bitter melon. Gaikwad et al. (2008) performed AFLP based comprehensive diversity assessment of 38 Indian commercial varieties and cultivated landraces originating from different agroecological zones and reported genetic discrimination among the cultivars. Recently 108 AFLP markers and five qualitative trait loci fruit color, fruit luster, fruit surface structure, stigma color, and seed color has been reported from the first genetic map of bitter melon (Kole et al., 2012). Sixteen polymorphic microsatellite loci from 36 individuals of M. charantia were reported using Fast Isolation by AFLP of Sequence COntaining Repeats (FIASCO) (Wang et al., 2010). Guo et al. (2012) reported genetic diversity of Momordica using 10 FIASCO derived SSR marker. Matsumura et al. (2014) identified GTFL-1 as the closest SNP locus to the putative gynoecious locus and suggested GTFl-1 for marker-assisted selection of gynoecy in bitter melon breeding program.Though there are reports on the development of molecular markers for various QTL (Kole et al., 2012) and transcriptomic studies for gene discovery (Yang et al., 2010), up to our knowledge no work has been initiated on discovery of miRNA from this economically valuable plant till date. In this present study we have used the computational approach to identify miRNA from M. charantia by searing the short read archive (SRA) database in NCBI and for the first time we have reported 27 mature miRNA in the bitter melon, M. charantia. Further the phylogenies of the identified miRNAs were compared with the earlier reported miRNAs and the results were discussed in detail.We used short reads archive (SRA) database from NCBI for the identification of miRNAs from M. charantia using computational approach (Fig. 1) as per Thirugnanasambantham et al. (2013). M. charantia SRA sequences (1,05,995 RNA sequences as of reported from developing seeds of bitter melon under the experimental accession SRX330814) were extracted from NCBI using the search term “Momordica charantia”. The pre-miRNA (28,645 as of June 2014) and mature miRNA (35,828 as of June 2014) sequences were retrieved from the miRBase (http://www.mirbase.org/). After eliminating redundant and poor quality sequences, local nucleotide database was created for M. charantia SRA sequences. The created local nucleotide database was searched against the miRNAs dataset for their corresponding homolog sequences.The mature miRNA sequences were used as a query for homology search against our local M. charantia nucleotide sequence database at e-value threshold <0.01 using BLAST 2.2.22+ program with all other parameters as default (Altschul et al., 1990). The candidate miRNA sequences and their corresponding SRA sequence were collected and archived as FASTA formats. The respective precursor and mature miRNA sequence were aligned against the corresponding nucleotide sequence using ClustalW (Thompson et al., 1994) multiple sequence alignment tool. Selected nucleotide sequence with less than four mismatches with precursor and mature miRNA sequence were validated for their non-protein encoding phenomenon using BLASTx programme with default parameter (Altschul et al., 1997). Selected nucleotide sequences were aligned to reference pre-miRNA sequences, the aligned region were extracted and considered as candidate pre-miRNA sequence.The candidate pre-miRNAs extracted as above were validated using Mfold v 3.2 (http://www.mfold.rna.albary.edu/). While selecting a RNA sequence from the nucleotide resource as a candidate miRNA precursor, the criteria as reported by Zhang et al. (2006a) was followed as specified below: (a) the candidate pre-miRNA sequence must fold into an appropriate stem-loop hairpin secondary structure, (b) mature miRNA sequence must be located in one arm of the hairpin structure, (c) the mature miRNAs should <7 mismatches with the opposite miRNA* sequence in the other arm, (d) loop or break in miRNA sequences should not be noticed, (e) the MFEs of predicted secondary structures should be ≤−18kcal/mol and 40–70% A+U contents. Target of the identified M. charantia miRNA were predicted using psRNATarget with the Cucumis sativus transcriptome sequences (Dai and Zhao, 2011). The identified targets were used as query sequences for BLASTx search (Altschul et al., 1997) and functionally annotated using AmiGO Blast and literature survey.Predicted miRNAs were named as per the pattern of miRBase Griffiths-Jones et al. (2003). The mature sequences were designated “miR” and the respective precursor hairpins were labeled as “mir” with the prefix “mch” for Momordica charantia. For phylogenetic analysis the precursor sequences of homolog miRNA’s were identified, collected, and aligned with identified M.charantia miRNA using ClustalW (Thompson et al., 1994). Phylogenetic analysis of the aligned miRNA sequences were performed with MEGA5 (Tamura et al., 2004). The evolutionary distances were computed using the maximum composite likelihood method (Tamura et al., 2007) and are in the units of the number of base substitutions per site.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
