@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Rare variants analysis by risk-based variable-threshold method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a risk-based variable-threshold method in association analysis of rare variants.Existing methods of pooling similar rare variants were based on quantities calculated from control group. Our method pools rare variants with similar relative risk calculated based on the ratio of variant frequencies between cases and controls.Our method effectively provides the global optimal pooling/grouping method among all possible ways of grouping.Simulation results show that our method gains more power than existing methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Genome-wide association study,Rare variants,Pooled association tests,Variable-threshold approach,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Genome-wide association studies, as a powerful approach for detecting common variants associated with diseases, have revealed many disease-associated loci. However, the traditional association analysis methods do not have enough power for detecting the effects of rare variants with limited sample size. As a solution to this problem, pooling rare variants by their functions into a composite variant provides an alternative way for identifying susceptible genes. In this paper, we propose a new pooling method to test the variant–disease association and to identify the functional rare variants related with the disease. Variants with smaller and larger risk measures defined as the ratio of allele frequencies between cases and controls are pooled and a chi-square test of the resultant pooled table is calculated. We vary the threshold of pooling over all possible values and use the maximal chi-square as test statistic. The maximal chi-square is in fact the global maximum over all possible poolings. Our approach is similar to the existing variable-threshold method, but we threshold on the risk measure instead of allele frequencies of controls. Simulation results show that our method performs better in both association testing and variant selection.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Genome-wide association analysis is a powerful tool for investigating the genetic architecture of complex diseases. Many genetic variants have been identified to be associated with complex diseases such as diabetes, hypertension, bipolar, Crohn's disease and others (The Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium, 2007; Barrett et al., 2008; Zeggini et al., 2008; Cooper et al., 2008; Willer et al., 2009; Thomas et al., 2009). However these variants explain at most 5–10% of the heritable components of diseases and the majority of the genetic components are still unexplained. In recent years hypothesis that rare variants may associate with common diseases (CDRV) have been proposed as an addition to the common disease common variant (CDCV) theory. Rare variants are referred to as those that have minor allele frequencies (MAF) less than or equal to 1% and have modest effect within a same functional unit, such as genes, pathways, or ultra conserved regions. Recent studies have shown that rare variants play an important role in dissecting complex diseases (Cohen et al., 2004, 2006; Romeo et al., 2007, 2009; Ahituv et al., 2007; Azzopardi et al., 2008; Ji et al., 2008; Buxbaum, 2009; Knight et al., 2009; Morris et al., 2009; Nejentsev et al., 2009).Because a single rare variant contains little variation information, the traditional single-locus association analysis methods may not have enough power to detect the variant–disease association. Therefore methods to search for accumulative effects of a group of rare variants have been explored, including the simple-sum method (Morris and Zeggini, 2010), the cohort allelic sums test (CAST) (Morgenthaler and Thilly, 2007), the combined multivariate and collapsing method (CMC) (Li and Leal, 2008), the variable-threshold method (Price et al., 2010) and the weighted-sum method (Madsen and Browning, 2009). The simple-sum method pools all rare variants into a super variant and then compares the super variant between cases and controls. The CMC pools variants with MAF less than a given threshold into a single variant and uses this pooled variant with other common variants in multivariate analysis. The weighted-sum method scales the importance of variants by weights calculated from mutant alleles in unaffected individuals and pools the weighted variants together as a super variant. The variable-threshold approach is similar to the CMC method but searches the optimal threshold to overcome the difficulty in selecting a biologically meaningful threshold value.In this paper we propose a risk-based pooling method for rare variants analysis. Our method is similar to the variable-threshold method but uses a different thresholding method. It partitions the rare variants by the magnitudes of risk measures defined as the ratios of allele counts between cases and controls, instead of the allele frequencies in controls as used in the variable-threshold method of Price et al. (2010). We postulate that pooling variants with similar risks may be beneficial in power than pooling those with similar allele frequencies. Partitioning risk factors by ratios between cases and controls had been used in multi-factorial dimensionality reduction method and its various modifications (MDR, Ritchie et al., 2001, 2003; Hua et al., 2010). Hua et al. (2010) proved that the maximal chi-square test statistics obtained by variably thresholding on the risk ratios is in fact the global maximal chi-squares among all possible ways of pooling. Therefore our method provides a global optimal solution to the grouping test. We will show by simulation studies that our approach gains power over existing methods in some situations and has similar power performance in other situations.This paper is organized as follows. We introduce the risk-based variable-threshold method in the next section. Section 3 compares our method with the variable-threshold of Price et al. (2010) and the weighted-sum methods (Madsen and Browning, 2009). Simulation results to illustrate the test efficacy of our method are presented in Section 3.2. Discussion and comparison of our method with other methods are presented in Section 4.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
