@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Model-guided metabolic gene knockout of gnd for enhanced succinate production in Escherichia coli from glucose and glycerol substrates

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Model-guided gnd gene knockout strategy was applied for the first time in Escherichia coli for increased succinate production.The model prediction of increased succinate production after gnd gene knockout was consistent with experimental data.Glucose and glycerol substrates were used for the prediction and the experimental validations.This strategy produced 1.4gl−1 and 0.35gl−1 of succinate from glycerol and glucose substrates respectively.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
E. coli,Metabolic gene knockout,6-Phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (gnd),Pentose phosphate pathway,Glycerol,Glucose,OptFlux software,Succinate,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The metabolic role of 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (gnd) under anaerobic conditions with respect to succinate production in Escherichia coli remained largely unspecified. Herein we report what are to our knowledge the first metabolic gene knockout of gnd to have increased succinic acid production using both glucose and glycerol substrates in E. coli. Guided by a genome scale metabolic model, we engineered the E. coli host metabolism to enhance anaerobic production of succinic acid by deleting the gnd gene, considering its location in the boundary of oxidative and non-oxidative pentose phosphate pathway. This strategy induced either the activation of malic enzyme, causing up-regulation of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (ppc) and down regulation of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (ppck) and/or prevents the decarboxylation of 6 phosphogluconate to increase the pool of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (GAP) that is required for the formation of phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP). This approach produced a mutant strain BMS2 with succinic acid production titers of 0.35gl−1 and 1.40gl−1 from glucose and glycerol substrates respectively. This work further clearly elucidates and informs other studies that the gnd gene, is a novel deletion target for increasing succinate production in E. coli under anaerobic condition using glucose and glycerol carbon sources. The knowledge gained in this study would help in E. coli and other microbial strains development for increasing succinate production and/or other industrial chemicals.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Succinic acid is a platform chemical and four (4) carbon carboxylic acid that can be produced by microbial fermentation. Microbial succinic production is a CO2 fixing fermentation, as such, it is considered as a green technology (Zeikus et al., 1999). It was classified among the 12 top bio-based chemicals by DOE in 2004 and 2010 reports (Choi et al., 2015). It is considered as a platform and/or specialty or commodity chemical with applications in agriculture, food and pharmaceutical industries (Zhang et al., 2009b). It can also be chemically converted into a variety of products, including green solvents, monomers for bio-based polymer syntheses and pharmaceutical products (Choi et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2009b).Escherichia coli is the most known and highly characterized microorganism used for the production of industrial chemicals. These chemicals include succinic acid. With the development in systems metabolic engineering and synthetic biology, the specific genes involved in central metabolic pathways (CMP) and/or other alternative pathways can be deleted and/or manipulated using different strategies intentionally, so that the metabolic network can channel more carbon fluxes towards the production of desired chemicals (Lee et al., 2011, 2012, 2005a,b; Song & Lee, 2006; Yim et al., 2011). A study of metabolic gene knockout strategies for increasing productions of the targeted compound in E. coli using glucose and other cheap alternative carbon source, such as glycerol is necessary. This is because investigation of this sort can predict the changes in metabolism and evaluate the rationality of the specific gene alteration. Several authors have focused on metabolic gene knockouts in relation to glycolytic pathways, cell growth rate and cellular changes in metabolism (Zhao et al., 2004). Global metabolic responses of E. coli to glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PDH) and 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (6PDGH) by metabolic gene knockouts of zwf and gnd genes were evaluated (Zhao et al., 2004). This was conducted primarily to understand the condition-dependent utilization of the CMP for growth and metabolism of the mutant constructed in their study (Zhao et al., 2004). In this study, we employed for the first time, a model-guided and/or systems based metabolic gene knockout of gnd for increasing succinate production in E. coli from both glucose and glycerol substrates.Metabolically engineered E. coli strains for increasing succinate production were previously constructed using different strategies, ranging from metabolic evolution of energy conserving pathways with glucose as carbon source (Zhang et al., 2009a) to conventional experimental trial and error approach, involving the addition of foreign genes (Sanchez et al., 2005; Gokarn et al., 2001; Vemuri et al., 2002; Wang et al., 2006b). In a separate study, Jantama et al. (2008), constructed E. coli strains with deleted competing pathway genes involved in succinate production without the addition of foreign genes. An E. coli strain designated as KJ060, was evolved by combining competing pathway deletion strategies with metabolic evolution, which ultimately increases succinate production from glucose in the strain (Jantama et al., 2008). In addition, systems metabolic engineering for overproduction of succinic acid was applied by combining in silico modelling with MetaFluxNet and comparative genomics of E. coli and Mannheimia succiniciproducens (Lee et al., 2005a). This approach lead to the identification of pyruvate forming enzymes (ptsG, PykF and PykA) as good knockout candidates for enhancing succinate production in E. coli (Lee et al., 2005a). None of these metabolic engineering interventions identified a novel gene deletion target for increasing succinate production at the boundary between the oxidative and non-oxidative pentose phosphate pathway (PPP).In a wild-type E. coli, besides glycolysis, PPP has been considered to be the major routes for intermediary sugar metabolism. Its role in various aspects of cellular metabolism is evident by breaking down carbon sources, the generation of a number of reducing power, such as NADPH and NADH and the syntheses of essential metabolites for cellular functions (Zhao et al., 2004, 2003). The metabolic changes in relation to glycolytic pathways were extensively studied (Zhao et al., 2004, 2003), but little is known about how the substrates (such as glucose and glycerol) are metabolized in the CMP if one of the PPP genes, such as gnd is intentionally deleted. In addition, the contribution of such deletion in increasing succinate production in E. coli still remained not yet fully specified. In a similar study reported by Zhao et al. (2004), their findings revealed that some genes involved in the oxidative PPP such as zwf and gnd are not essential under certain culture conditions, but they could not be able to explicitly indicate how the cell undergoes metabolic shifts to regulate the entire metabolic network to cope with these genes knockout (Zhao et al., 2004). Although, they emphasized on the significance and the central role of the PPP in E. coli metabolism, suggesting that any blockage of the PPP may cause a flux rerouting and activate a compensatory mechanism (Zhao et al., 2004, 2003), from which a beneficial metabolic response following a designated gene knockout can be established. Although Zhao et al. (2003) studied the physiological and metabolic responses to gnd knockout in E. coli K12, where they established that there was local flux rerouting via the Entner–Doudoroff pathway and additional direction reversing via the non-oxidative PPP metabolism in their E. coli mutant strain compared to the wild-type counterpart (Zhao et al., 2003). To the best of our knowledge, a single gnd gene knockout in relation to succinic acid production in E. coli has not yet been elucidated. We used the knowledge created in the aforementioned studies (knowledge-based) to predict metabolic gene knockout of gnd in relation to succinate production in E. coli using both glucose and glycerol substrates. In addition, we confirmed our prediction results by experimental production of succinic acid in mutant BMS2 strainIn this communication, we report the use of a comprehensive E. coli genome-scale metabolic model (Orth et al., 2011) and the Minimization of Metabolic Adjustment (MOMA) (Segre et al., 2002) within the OptFlux software interface (Rocha et al., 2010) to predict and/or guide metabolic gene knockout of gnd in relation to succinic acid production in E. coli. Translating our computational prediction results in the laboratory, we introduced, the actual gnd gene knockout in the E. coli strain designated as BMS2 and evaluated its succinate production potentials. Glucose and glycerol were used as the substrates. The former was used because it is easily metabolized by E. coli, while the latter was selected because it is recently being considered as a low cost alternative carbon source, as it is being generated as byproducts of biodiesel industry (Clomburg and Gonzalez, 2013; Dharmadi et al., 2006; Mattam et al., 2013). The rationale behind the deletion of the gnd gene is knowledge-based, primarily for blocking the efficient functioning of the gene and/or some reactions that connects the oxidative and non-oxidative PPP. We reason that the deletion of the gnd gene could prevent the decarboxylation of 6-phosphogluconate, which its accumulation could increase the formation of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (GAP) and pyruvate (Fig. 1). GAP is a precursor for the formation of phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) (Fig. 1), which is needed for succinate production via phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (ppc) and/or ATP generation for cell maintenance and growth. Our approach in this study produced a mutant strain BMS2, with succinic acid production titer of 0.35gl−1 and 1.4gl−1 from glucose and glycerol substrates respectively. This work further elucidates that a model-guided and/or system based metabolic engineering approach could identify novel gene knockout target (gnd) in the PPP for increasing succinate production in E. coli under anaerobic growth culture conditions from glucose and glycerol carbon sources. The knowledge gained in this study would help in E. coli and other microbial strains development for increasing succinate production and/or other industrial chemicalsE. coli genome scale stoichiometric model iJO1366 (Orth et al., 2011) was employed for the in silico evaluation of gene deletion by using the Minimization of Metabolic Adjustment (MOMA) algorithm (Segre et al., 2002) with OptFlux software platform (http://www.optflux.org) (Rocha et al., 2010). The E. coli iJO1366 model has been tested and proven to be capable of computational predicting growth rates and metabolite excretion rates from a range of substrates and genetic conditions (Feist et al., 2010; McCloskey et al., 2013; Orth et al., 2011). MOMA was described as a flux based analysis technique that employs quadratic programming to search for the nearest point in the feasible solution space of the mutant model in relations to its wild-type optimal point feasible solution space (Segre et al., 2002). Alternative to MOMA is a bi-level optimization algorithm called OptKnock (Burgard et al., 2003). OptKnock was established to be not suitable for an expert knowledge-based gene deletion strategy due to its limitation of deleting sets of reactions instead of the real gene deletion in a genome-scale model (GEM) (Vilaca et al., 2011). The OptFlux software platform is an in silico metabolic engineering (ME) platform that was implemented using the Java programming, which contained MOMA as a simulation algorithm. Flux balance analysis (FBA) was used for all phenotype simulations. All the simulation of the mutant and the wild-type models were performed using the OptFlux software version 3.07Glucose and glycerol were chosen as solitary carbon sources under anaerobic conditions. The substrate uptake rates were constrained to a maximum of 18.5mmolgDW −1h −1 whereas their corresponding oxygen uptake rate was set to zero, as the environmental condition is anaerobic. These values were selected based on closely established experimental observations on aerobic and anaerobic growth in E. coli (Amit Varma and Palsson, 1993; Varma and Palsson, 1994).E. coli JM109 (F¢ (traD36, proAB+ lacIq, D (lacZ) M15) endA1 recA1 hsdR17 (rk−, mk+) mcrA supE44 l- gyrA96 relA1 D (lacproAB) thi-1) was used for maintenance of the pKD4 and pKD46 plasmids. The plasmids were used strictly following the method descried previously (Datsenko and Wanner, 2000). The plasmid pKD4 was extracted from E. coli JM109 using the QIAprep Miniprep kit (QIAGEN) according to the manufacturer’s specifications.E. coli cells used in this study were grown in LB medium containing 0.5% yeast extract (Difco), 0.5% NaCl and 1% Bacto tryptone (Difco) with or without antibiotics at the concentrations of 100μg/ml ampicillin and 30μg/ml of Kanamycin. l-Arabinose, glycerol and glucose were from Sigma–Aldrich. KAPA HiFi Hotstart ReadyMix (2×) was from KAPA BIOSYSTEMS. Agarose was purchased from Sigma–Aldrich.The E. coli gnd gene sequence was used to design forward and reverse primers with pKD4 template plasmid sequence. The primers had 36-nt 5′ extension including the gene initiation codon (H1) and 20-nt sequence (p1) as described previously (Baba et al., 2006; Datsenko and Wanner, 2000). See Table 1for details of the primers used in this study.PCR reactions were carried out in an eppendorf thermo cycler using 25μl reactions containing 12.5μl of KAPA HiFi Hotstart ReadyMix (2×), 1μl of pkD4 template DNA, 1.0μl of each primer. Reactions were performed for 30 cycles: 95°C for 3min, 98°C for 20s, 55°C for 15s, 72°C for 1:30s, 72°C for 60s and cooling at 4°C. PCR products were purified using SV gel and PCR clean up system (Promega, USA), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. PCR products were analyzed by 1% agarose gel-electrophoresis using 1× Tris–acetate buffer.E. coli JM109 harboring the λ-Red helper plasmid pKD46 was grown in 100ml of LB medium with ampicillin and 1mM l-Arabinose at 30°C until an optical density at 600 reached 0.3. Competent cells for electroporation were prepared as described previously (Sharan et al., 2009). A measure of 1μl (400ng) of the PCR fragment was mixed with 50μl of Competent cell in an ice-cold Eppendorf electroporation cuvettes (0.2cm). Electroporation was performed at 2.5kV with 2mF and 600Ω, followed by immediate addition of 1ml of SOC medium which contained (0.5% yeast extract (Difco), 2% Bacto tryptone (Difco), 2.5mM KCl, 10mM NaCl, 10mM MgCl2, 10mM MgSO4, 20mM glucose) with 1mM l-Arabinose. The SOC medium mixed with the electroporated cells were incubated for 2h at 37°C. Selection of kanR transformant was followed immediately by spreading one-tenth portion onto kanamycin agar plate as described by Baba et al. (2006). Correct chromosomal structure was tested, by conducting 20μl PCR verification with kanamycin specific primers K1 and K2 as described previously (Datsenko and Wanner, 2000).Bacterial cells starter culture was made by growing the cells in 10ml LB medium with shaking at 200rpm at a temperature of 37°C. One milliliter of seed culture was used to inoculate a 125ml butyl rubber stoppered serum vial, which contained 100ml of fermentation media as described by Lee et al. (2005a) with slight modification, replacing glucose with glycerol (10gl−1). The fermentation media used contained the following ingredients (per liter): yeast extract=5g; glucose=9g (50mM); NaHCO3=10g; NaH2PO4·H2O=8.5g; K2HPO4=15.5g (pH 7.0). Anaerobic condition was established by filling the headspace with N2 and addition of Na2S·9H20 (final 1mM). Cells were cultivated under anaerobic conditions at 37°C with shaking at 200rpm for 1–3days unless otherwise stated.The concentrations of glucose and/or glycerol, ethanol and organic acids (lactate, formate, and succinate) were quantified by high performance liquid chromatography, Agilent 1260 Infinity (Agilent Technologies, USA). The HPLC Agilent, equipped with an RI detector and a 300×7.88mm Aminex HPX-87H ion-exchange column (Bio-Rad laboratories, USA), was used for these purposes. The culture supernatant was passed through a syringe filter (pore size of 0.2μm) after centrifugation at 10,000×g for 10min and stored at −20°C for analyses. For operating condition to optimize peak separation, the column was eluted isocratically at 42°C with a flow rate of 0.6mlmin−1 using 30mM H2SO4 as the mobile phase, following the description in their original documentations for glycerol substrate (Dharmadi and Gonzalez, 2005; Dharmadi et al., 2006). While the operating conditions for d-glucose substrate, followed strictly the method described by Lee et al. (2005a), where the column was eluted isocratically at 47°C with a flow rate of 0.6mlmin−1 using 0.01N H2SO4 as the mobile phase. The optical density of the cell cultures was measured at 600nm to quantify cell growth, using a GENESYS 105 VIS spectrophotometer (Thermo scientific, USA).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The work outlined here described how expert knowledge-based strategy combined with model-guided metabolic gnd gene knockout for the first time, to have shown increase in succinate production in E. coli that is 0.3gl−1 and 1.4gl−1 from glucose and glycerol substrates respectively. We hypothesized that the deletion of the gnd gene in E. coli could lead to the accumulation of 6-phosgluconate under anaerobic conditions, because the oxidative phase of PPP is inactivated and hence reduced the functioning of the ED pathway. This effect was also hypothesized to increase the formation of GAP, pyruvate, PEP, which ultimately increased succinate production in E. coli from both glucose and glycerol substrates used in this study. The knowledge gained in this study highlights the power of genome-scale metabolic model (GEM) in driving basic novel biological discovery and also clearly pinpoints its potentials in identification and guiding novel metabolic gene deletion target for increasing succinate production in E. coli.No conflict of interest.