@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The modularity and dynamicity of miRNA–mRNA interactions in high-grade serous ovarian carcinomas and the prognostic implication

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We establish a unique landscape of miRNA–mRNA interaction networks in the cells of serous ovarian carcinomas.We find that miRNA–mRNA modules with strong connections are relatively stable in cancer development and progression.We show that network-oriented modeling of miRNA–mRNA interactions can facilitate the identification of robust prognostic biomarkers for ovarian cancer.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Ovarian cancer,mRNAs,miRNAs,Network,Modules,Dynamic interactions,Prognostic signature,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Ovarian carcinoma is the fifth-leading cause of cancer death among women in the United States. Major reasons for this persistent mortality include the poor understanding of the underlying biology and a lack of reliable biomarkers. Previous studies have shown that aberrantly expressed MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are involved in carcinogenesis and tumor progression by post-transcriptionally regulating gene expression. However, the interference of miRNAs in tumorigenesis is quite complicated and far from being fully understood. In this work, by an integrative analysis of mRNA expression, miRNA expression and clinical data published by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), we studied the modularity and dynamicity of miRNA–mRNA interactions and the prognostic implications in high-grade serous ovarian carcinomas. With the top transcriptional correlations (Bonferroni-adjusted p-value<0.01) as inputs, we identified five miRNA–mRNA module pairs (MPs), each of which included one positive-connection (correlation) module and one negative-connection (correlation) module. The number of miRNAs or mRNAs in each module varied from 3 to 7 or from 2 to 873. Among the four major negative-connection modules, three fit well with the widely accepted miRNA-mediated post-transcriptional regulation theory. These modules were enriched with the genes relevant to cell cycle and immune response. Moreover, we proposed two novel algorithms to reveal the group or sample specific dynamic regulations between these two RNA classes. The obtained miRNA–mRNA dynamic network contains 3350 interactions captured across different cancer progression stages or tumor grades. We found that those dynamic interactions tended to concentrate on a few miRNAs (e.g. miRNA-936), and were more likely present on the miRNA–mRNA pairs outside the discovered modules. In addition, we also pinpointed a robust prognostic signature consisting of 56 modular protein-coding genes, whose co-expression patterns were predictive for the survival time of ovarian cancer patients in multiple independent cohorts.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Ovarian cancer is the fifth-leading cause of cancer death among women in the United States (Siegel et al., 2014). The disease is often called a “silent killer” since its occurrence is usually not detected until an advanced stage. About 70% of the deaths occur in patients with advanced-stage, high-grade serous ovarian carcinomas. The mortality rate has not improved significantly in the past three decades (Bast et al., 2009). Except for the detection delay and inaccessible location of the ovaries, major factors accounting for the persistent mortality include the poor understanding of the underlying biology and a lack of reliable biomarkers (Li et al., 2012). As a result, there is a pressing need for the investigation of the mechanisms underlying the development of this disease as well as the identification of robust early biomarkers for diagnosis and prognosis.MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short (∼22nt) non-coding RNAs derived from genome-encoded stem loop precursors. As the crucial post-transcriptional regulators of gene expression in metazoans, miRNAs primarily bind to the 3′ UTR sequences of messenger RNAs (mRNAs), usually resulting in translational repression or mRNA degradation (Filipowicz et al., 2008; Bartel, 2009). About 2000 human miRNAs have been discovered so far, and these miRNAs have collectively been implicated in a wide range of key biological processes, including cell growth, differentiation and proliferation, embryonic development, and apoptosis. Growing evidence has shown that aberrantly expressed miRNAs are likely to contribute to cancerous lesions (Aguda et al., 2008; Visone and Croce, 2009; Wang et al., 2010; Dvinge et al., 2013). Therefore, the use of miRNAs as potential diagnostic tools and therapies has been suggested for the treatment of cancer. Nevertheless, the interference of miRNAs with carcinogenesis is quite complicated and far from being fully understood. A systems- level analysis of the miRNA-mediated regulation in cancer development and progression would enable us to better decipher the roles of miRNAs in tumorigenesis (Bandyopadhyay et al., 2010; O’Day and Lal, 2010; Sumazin et al., 2011; Bisognin et al., 2012).Modularity is a basic characteristic of various biological networks (Newman, 2006; Schwarz et al., 2008; Barabasi et al., 2011). Networks with high modularity have dense connections between the nodes within modules but sparse connections between nodes in different modules. To date, a number of methods have been developed to infer miRNA–mRNA regulation (or correlation) modules using the genome-wide transcription and sequence affinity information (Joung et al., 2007; Tran et al., 2008; Michoel et al., 2009; Peng et al., 2009; Jayaswal et al., 2011). In a previous study (Zhang et al., 2012a), we applied a clustering-based algorithm to the miRNA and mRNA gene expression data of human prostate cancer cells, finding highly-informative modules specific for primary tumors (PPCs). On the other hand, the transcriptional relationship of a miRNA–mRNA pair can be dynamic. That is, the interaction status and strength/direction between these two molecules may vary even with the progression of the same cancer case. For example, in (Zhang et al., 2012a), we found that the modules discovered for PPCs rarely overlapped with those for metastatic prostate cancers (MPCs). Therefore, it would be interesting to explore, as the cancer progresses, in which manner and to what extent the changes in miRNA expression impact gene expression, biological pathways and networks as well as patient prognosis.In this paper, we primarily studied the modularity and dynamicity of miRNA–mRNA interactions in high-grade serous ovarian carcinomas (Ov-HGSCs) with respect to different cancer progression stages or tumor grades. The research was based on an integrative analysis of mRNA expression, miRNA expression and clinical data released by TCGA. Similar to (Zhang et al., 2012a), a clustering-based method was applied to module discovery. Two new algorithms, namely a regression model and a statistical approach driven by nonparametric methods, were proposed for (sample) group and case focused dynamics study. We further investigated the prognostic implications of the major results by identifying a robust prognostic signature. The co- expression patterns of the genes contained in the signature were predictive for the survival time of ovarian cancer patients in multiple independent cohorts. Fig. 1summarizes the scheme of the study flow, and the details of each step are described in Sections 2 and 4.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
