@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Reconstructing gene regulatory networks from knock-out data using Gaussian Noise Model and Pearson Correlation Coefficient

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A method to reconstruct gene regulatory networks from knock-out data is proposed.The proposed method apply Normal Distributions and Pearson Correlation Coefficient.Indirect regulations generate many false positives.Most of the false negatives are mostly due to multiple genes input.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Bioinformatics,Probability and statistics,DREAM,Gene regulatory network,Gaussian model,Pearson Correlation Coefficient,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A gene regulatory network (GRN) is a large and complex network consisting of interacting elements that, over time, affect each other’s state. The dynamics of complex gene regulatory processes are difficult to understand using intuitive approaches alone. To overcome this problem, we propose an algorithm for inferring the regulatory interactions from knock-out data using a Gaussian model combines with Pearson Correlation Coefficient (PCC). There are several problems relating to GRN construction that have been outlined in this paper. We demonstrated the ability of our proposed method to (1) predict the presence of regulatory interactions between genes, (2) their directionality and (3) their states (activation or suppression). The algorithm was applied to network sizes of 10 and 50 genes from DREAM3 datasets and network sizes of 10 from DREAM4 datasets. The predicted networks were evaluated based on AUROC and AUPR. We discovered that high false positive values were generated by our GRN prediction methods because the indirect regulations have been wrongly predicted as true relationships. We achieved satisfactory results as the majority of sub-networks achieved AUROC values above 0.5.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A gene regulatory network (GRN) is a large and complex network consisting of interacting elements such as genes, transcription factors and other molecules that, over time, affect each other’s state. As transcription networks involve many components connected through interconnected positive and negative feedback loops, an intuitive understanding of their dynamics is difficult to attain. Changes of interactions due to perturbations and the stochastic nature of the transcription networks make them more difficult to infer. Consequently, computational methods for the modeling and simulation of transcription networks will be indispensable. Networks inference is an important and active research area with an ever-increasing number of algorithms and publications. The DREAM (Dialogue for Reverse Engineering Assessments and Methods Challenge) challenge has been organized with one of the key aims being the development of community-wide challenges for objective assessment of reverse engineering methods for biological networks (Marbach et al., 2009). Inferring GRNs remain challenging because of several limitations, including (1) the high dimensionality of living cells, where tens of thousands of genes act at different temporal and spatial combinations; (2) one gene or gene product may interact with multiple partners, either directly or indirectly, thus possible relationships are dynamic and non-linear; (3) current high-throughput technologies generate data that involve a substantial amount of noise (Zhang et al., 2013) and (4) the sample size is extremely low compared with the number of genes (Zhang et al., 2010; Xu et al., 2007).In this work, we propose a method to improve the accuracy of GRN inference from gene expression data using noise elimination and relationships strength measuring method by combining the Gaussian Noise Model and the Pearson Correlation Coefficient (PCC). The main novelty of our approach is that the combination of Gaussian with Pearson Correlation Coefficient (PCC) captures the potential regulatory interactions as much possible by widening the acceptable range ofpa→bproduced by Gaussian, without compromising the accuracy of prediction using relationships’ strength filteration process performed by PCC.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
