@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Circular code motifs in transfer RNAs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Identification of circular code motifs in the 5′ and/or 3′ regions of tRNAs.Identification of a gene circular code property in the 3′ regions of tRNAs.Search algorithm of circular code motifs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Circular code motif,Search algorithm,Statistical distribution,Transfer RNA,5′ and 3′ regions of transfer RNA,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In 1996, a trinucleotide circular code X is identified in genes of prokaryotes and eukaryotes (Arquès and Michel, 1996). In 2012, X motifs are identified in the transfer RNA (tRNA) Phe and 16S ribosomal RNA (Michel, 2012). A statistical analysis of X motifs in all available tRNAs of prokaryotes and eukaryotes in the genomic tRNA database (September 2012, http://lowelab.ucsc.edu/GtRNAdb/, Lowe and Eddy, 1997) is carried out here. For this purpose, a search algorithm of X motifs in a DNA sequence is developed. Two definitions allow to determine the occurrence probabilities of X motifs and the circular codes X,X1=P(X)andX2=P2(X)(Pbeing a circular permutation map applied on X) in a population of tRNAs. This approach identifies X motifs in the 5′ and/or 3′ regions of 16 isoaccepting tRNAs (except for the tRNAs Arg, His, Ser and Trp). The statistical analyses are performed on different and large tRNA populations according to the taxonomy (prokaryotes and eukaryotes), tRNA length and tRNA score. Finally, a circular code property observed in genes of prokaryotes and eukaryotes is identified in the 3′ regions of 19 isoaccepting tRNAs of prokaryotes and eukaryotes (except for the tRNA Leu). The identification of X motifs and a gene circular code property in tRNAs strengthens the concept proposed in Michel (2012) of a possible translation (framing) code based on a circular code.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The structure and the function of transfer RNAs (tRNAs) and ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs), molecules which are involved for translating the genetic information into proteins, are detailed, e.g., in a review of Zaher and Green (2009). The ability of all living organisms to efficiently and accurately translate genomic information into functional proteins is a fascinating molecular function. The ribosome must correctly associate, according to the genetic code, the amino-acid attached to the tRNA with the trinucleotide in reading frame (codon) of messenger RNA (mRNA). It must decode only successive codons and not trinucleotides in shifted frames. However, an mRNA lacks punctuation (or comma) which could be used by the transfer and ribosomal RNAs to identify the trinucleotides in reading frame. There are multiple genetic codes, moreover, multiple translational codes, while one of them is the well-known triplet genetic code, and another one could be a circular code.The maintenance of the correct reading frame in genes is believed to be a complex process from a conceptual point of view. I say the opposite from a theoretical point of view. Indeed, there are sets of trinucleotides called circular codes Y which are framing codes, i.e. with the property of reading frame retrieval, synchronization and maintenance. Furthermore, there are trinucleotide circular codes Y which have in addition theCself-complementary property, i.e. the trinucleotides of Y are complementary to each other, i.e.Y=C(Y). Finally, there are self-complementary trinucleotide circular codes Y which have in addition the C3 property, i.e. the permuted trinucleotide setsP(Y)andP2(Y)of Y by one and two nucleotides, respectively, are also trinucleotide circular codes and complementary to each other, i.e.C(Y1)=Y2andC(Y2)=Y1.However, the search for a framing code was a very difficult task. Over 50 years ago, before the discovery of the genetic code, a class of trinucleotide circular codes, called comma-free codes (or codes without commas), was proposed by Crick et al. (1957). However, no trinucleotide comma-free code was identified in genes, theoretically or statistically. The main reason that I propose to explain the successive failures for many years, is related to the fact that almost all developed statistical analyses during several years to understand the genetic code, were based on the reading frame (frame 0). For example, the codon usage, a classical method based on the frequencies of codons (i.e. trinucleotides in frame 0), which is widely used by biostatisticians, bioinformaticians and biologists, can (only) explain the variations of the genetic code, e.g. the differences between the codons coding the same amino acid, the codon differences between species, etc. But it cannot explain the “origin” of the genetic code. The genetic code is associated to the reading frame “space”. To understand the origin of the genetic code, a more general space should be considered, e.g. the three frames of genes. The difficulty of methods for identifying such codes is not concerned, only the choice of the space. By convention here, the reading frame established by a start codon {ATG, GTG, TTG} is the frame 0, and the frames 1 and 2 are the reading frame 0 shifted by one and two nucleotides in the 5′–3′ direction, respectively.In 1996, a statistical analysis of occurrence frequencies of the 64 trinucleotidesA43={AAA,…,TTT}in the three frames 0, 1 and 2 of genes of both prokaryotes and eukaryotes showed that the trinucleotides are not uniformly distributed in these three frames. By excluding the four trinucleotides with identical nucleotides {AAA, CCC, GGG, TTT} and by assigning each trinucleotide to a preferential frame (frame of its highest occurrence frequency), three subsets X, X1 and X2 of 20 trinucleotides are found in the frames 0, 1 and 2, respectively, simultaneously of two large gene populations (protein coding regions): eukaryotes (26,757 sequences, 11,397,678 trinucleotides) and prokaryotes (13,686 sequences, 4,709,758 trinucleotides) (Arquès and Michel, 1996). The set X contains the 20 following trinucleotides(1)X={AAC,AAT,ACC,ATC,ATT,CAG,CTC,CTG,GAA,GAC,GAG,GAT,GCC,GGC,GGT,GTA,GTC,GTT,TAC,TTC}.The two sets X1 and X2, of 20 trinucleotides each, in the frames 1 and 2 of genes can be deduced from X by circular permutation (see below). These three trinucleotide sets present several strong mathematical properties, particularly the fact that they are trinucleotide circular codes (Arquès and Michel, 1996). We have also proved that a comma-free code, a code proposed by Crick et al. (1957), is a particular circular code. Precisely, a hierarchy of circular codes is closed by the strongest ones which are comma-free and the weakest ones which have a large “necklace” (Michel et al., 2008).A circular code Y is a particular set of words which allows the retrieval of the construction (reading frame) of any word generated by Y. Furthermore, this reading frame retrieval can be obtained anywhere in any generated word by Y but with a window of a few letters (see below). Thus, the common trinucleotide circular code X (1) of 20 trinucleotides allows the reading frames in genes to be retrieved locally, i.e. anywhere in genes and in particular without start codon.We briefly recall a few properties of the common trinucleotide circular code X (1) which are involved in this paper.Notation 1The letters (or nucleotides or bases) define the genetic alphabet A4={A, C, G, T}. The set of non-empty words (words resp.) over A4 is denoted byA4+(A4*resp.). The set of the 16 words of length 2 (dinucleotides or diletters) on A4 is denoted byA42={AA,…,TT}. The set of the 64 words of length 3 (trinucleotides or triletters) on A4 is denoted byA43={AAA,…,TTT}. Let x1 ⋯ xnbe the concatenation of the words xifor i=1, …, n. We use here the definitions in coding theory.Code: A set Y of words is a code if, for each x1, …, xn, y1, …, ym∈Y, n, m≥1, the condition x1 ⋯ xn=y1 ⋯ ymimplies n=m and xi=yifor i=1, …, n.The setA43itself is a code. Consequently, its non-empty subsets are codes. In this paper, we call them trinucleotide codes.Trinucleotide circular code: A trinucleotide code Y is circular if, for each x1, …, xn, y1, …, ym∈Y, n, m≥1,r∈A4*,s∈A4+, the conditions sx2 ⋯ xnr=y1 ⋯ ymand x1=rs imply n=m, r=ε (empty word) and xi=yifor i =1, …, n.A set containing a trinucleotide with identical nucleotides, e.g. AAA, cannot be a circular code (details, e.g., in Michel, 2008). Thus, the setA43is not a trinucleotide circular code.A set containing two trinucleotides related to circular permutationP, e.g. AAC andP(AAC)=ACA, cannot be a circular code (details, e.g., in Michel, 2008). Thus, the setA43\{AAA,CCC,GGG,TTT}is also not a trinucleotide circular code.A trinucleotide circular code allows the reading frame in genes to be retrieved. It is a set of words over an alphabet such that any word written on a circle (the next letter after the last letter of the word being the first letter) has a unique decomposition into words of the circular code.Example 1Let the set Y be composed of the six following words: Y={AAT, ATG, CCT, CTA, GCC, GGC} and the word w, be a series of the nine following letters: w=ATGGCCCTA. The word w, written on a circle, can be factorized into words of Y according to two different ways: ATG, GCC, CTA and AAT, GGC, CCT, the commas showing the way of decomposition. Therefore, Y is not a circular code. In contrast, if the set Z obtained by replacing the word GGC of Y by GTC is considered, i.e. Z={AAT, ATG, CCT, CTA, GCC, GTC}, then there never exists an ambiguous word with Z, such as w for Y, and then Z is a circular code (Michel, 2012, Fig. 2 for details).Window of a circular code: The construction frame (reading frame) of a word w generated by any concatenation of words of a circular code Y (shortly a word w of Y) can be retrieved anywhere in the word w after the reading of a certain number of letters. This series of letters is called the window of the circular code Y. Then, the window length to retrieve the construction frame of the word w is the letter length of the longest ambiguous word which can be read in at least two frames, plus one letter. The window length depends on the circular code Y. The classical window length defined for biinfinite words of a circular code Y is described in Michel (2012,Fig. 3 for details).In order to analyze trinucleotide circular code motifs read in only one direction and to investigate the reading frame retrieval of their trinucleotides, in the same way as the trinucleotides (and nucleotides) are read only in one direction in DNA and RNA, i.e. the 5′–3′ direction, we have introduced a new concept based on a window length l for a right infinite word w=l0l1l2l3l4 … of a trinucleotide circular code Y such that l0l1l2∈Y, i.e. w begins with a trinucleotide belonging to Y and ends with either a proper prefix of a trinucleotide of Y or with a trinucleotide of Y (Michel, 2012).Property 1The window length l to retrieve the construction frame for any right infinite word of the common circular code X is the letter length of the longest ambiguous word plus one letter and is equal to l=12 nucleotides. In other words, there is no ambiguous word of the common circular code X when l≥12 nucleotides.Complementarity mapC: The complementarity mapC:A4+→A4+is defined byC(A)=T,C(C)=G,C(G)=C,C(T)=Aand, according to the property of the complementary and antiparallel double helix, byC(uv)=C(v)C(u)for allu,v∈A4+, e.g.C(AAC)=GTT. This map on words is naturally extended to word sets: a complementary trinucleotide set is obtained by applying the complementarity mapCto all its trinucleotides.Circular permutation mapP: The circular permutation mapP:A43→A43permutes circularly each trinucleotide l0l1l2 as followsP(w0)=l1l2l0, e.g.P(AAC)=ACA. The k th iterate ofPis denotedPk, e.g.P2(AAC)=CAA. This map on words is also naturally extended to word sets: a permuted trinucleotide set is obtained by applying the circular permutation mapP(or the k th iterate ofP) to all its trinucleotides.Self-complementary trinucleotide circular code: A trinucleotide circular code Y is self-complementary if, for each y∈Y,C(y)∈Y.Permuted trinucleotide set: A trinucleotide setY1=P(Y)of a trinucleotide circular code Y is permuted if, for each y∈Y,P(y)∈P(Y). The permuted trinucleotide setY2=P2(Y)is defined similarly.C3trinucleotide circular code: A trinucleotide circular code Y is C3 if the permuted trinucleotide setsY1=P(Y)andY2=P2(Y)are trinucleotide circular codes.A trinucleotide circular code Y does not necessarily imply thatY1=P(Y)andY2=P2(Y)are also trinucleotide circular codes.C3self-complementary trinucleotide circular code: A trinucleotide circular code Y is C3 self-complementary if Y,Y1=P(Y)andY2=P2(Y)are trinucleotide circular codes satisfying the following propertiesY=C(Y)(self-complementary),C(Y1)=Y2andC(Y2)=Y1(Y1 and Y2 are complementary).(Arquès and Michel, 1996). The common trinucleotide set X (1) coding the reading frames (frames 0) in eukaryotic and prokaryotic genes is a C3 self-complementary trinucleotide circular code. The circular codeX1=P(X)contains the 20 following trinucleotides.(Gonzalez et al., 2011). A new definition of a statistical function analysing the covering capability of a circular code has recently showed on a gene data set that the common circular code X has, on average, the best covering capability among the whole class of the 216 C3 self-complementary trinucleotide circular codes (Arquès and Michel, 1996; Michel et al., 2008). Furthermore, permutation tests of bases in the codon sites of X also suggest a reading frame synchronization property of X.(Michel, 2012). In 2012, X motifs (motifs of the common trinucleotide circular code X) are identified in transfer and 16S ribosomal RNAs: an almost perfect tRNA–Phe X motif of 26 nucleotides including the anticodon stem-loop and seven 16S rRNA X motifs of length greater or equal to 15 nucleotides. A 3D visualization of X motifs in the ribosome (crystal structure 3I8G, Jenner et al., 2010) shows several spatial configurations involving mRNA X motifs, A-tRNA and E-tRNA X motifs, and four 16S rRNA X motifs. Another identified 16S rRNA X motif is involved in the decoding center which recognizes the codon-anticodon helix in A-tRNA.From a code theory point of view, these identified X motifs and their mathematical properties may constitute a framing code. The aim of this paper is to identify X motifs in transfer RNAs in order to strengthen the concept of a translation code based on a circular code, a concept recently proposed in Michel (2012).The Section 2 presents a search algorithm of X motifs in a DNA sequence. Such an algorithm was never proposed since 1996. Two definitions allow to determine the occurrence probabilities of X motifs and the circular codes X, X1 and X2 in a population of tRNAs. The tRNA data are described and the populations of the 20 isoaccepting tRNAs based on their taxonomy (prokaryotes, eukaryotes), length and score which are analyzed statistically, are characterized. The Section 3 presents the distribution of X motifs in random tRNAs. Then, X motifs are identified in the 5′ and 3′ regions of tRNAs. These results are confirmed by several statistical analyses of different and large tRNA populations. Finally, a circular code property observed in genes of prokaryotes and eukaryotes is identified in the 3′ regions of 19 isoaccepting tRNAs of prokaryotes and eukaryotes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
