@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Cryptic tRNAs in chaetognath mitochondrial genomes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Chaetognath mitogenomes exhibit more than one tRNA-like sequence as previously suggested.16S rRNA genes appear as chaetognath tRNA nurseries.TRNA pairs seem templated by sense-antisense strands as previously suggested for multifunctional ribosomal-like protogenomes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
tRNA,Chaetognatha,Cryptic tRNA,Overlap coding,tRNA misloading,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The chaetognaths constitute a small and enigmatic phylum of little marine invertebrates. Both nuclear and mitochondrial genomes have numerous originalities, some phylum-specific. Until recently, their mitogenomes seemed containing only one tRNA gene (trnMet), but a recent study found in two chaetognath mitogenomes two and four tRNA genes. Moreover, apparently two conspecific mitogenomes have different tRNA gene numbers (one and two). Reanalyses by tRNAscan-SE and ARWEN softwares of the five available complete chaetognath mitogenomes suggest numerous additional tRNA genes from different types. Their total number never reaches the 22 found in most other invertebrates using that genetic code. Predicted error compensation between codon-anticodon mismatch and tRNA misacylation suggests translational activity by tRNAs predicted solely according to secondary structure for tRNAs predicted by tRNAscan-SE, not ARWEN. Numbers of predicted stop-suppressor (antitermination) tRNAs coevolve with predicted overlapping, frameshifted protein coding genes including stop codons. Sequence alignments in secondary structure prediction with non-chaetognath tRNAs suggest that the most likely functional tRNAs are in intergenic regions, as regular mt-tRNAs. Due to usually short intergenic regions, generally tRNA sequences partially overlap with flanking genes. Some tRNA pairs seem templated by sense-antisense strands. Moreover, 16S rRNA genes, but not 12S rRNAs, appear as tRNA nurseries, as previously suggested for multifunctional ribosomal-like protogenomes.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Chaetognaths belong to a small exclusively marine phylum (Casanova et al., 2012). Around 125 species are known with representatives in almost all marine habitats (Thuesen, 2007). Both in number and biomass, they are one of the major components of the zooplankton (Casanova et al., 2012). Chaetognaths are generally considered dominant predators of small zooplankton, but analyses of several aspects of their feeding behavior suggest that they are primarily osmotrophic animals (Casanova et al., 2012). Moreover, chaetognaths were probably widespread and diverse in the earliest Cambrian (Vannier et al., 2007).Chaetognath nuclear genomes have many original features, some shared with other taxa whereas others are, still to date, phylum-specific. Phylogeny evidenced that the cytoplasmic and muscular chaetognath actin paralogs clustered with the cytoplasmic insect actins and muscular vertebrate actins, respectively (Barthélémy et al., 2006). Analogously, both vertebrate and arthropod canonical repeats have been found in chaetognath telomeric-like transcripts (Barthélémy et al., 2008a). As chaetognaths exhibit a mixture of protostome and deuterostome features (Helfenbein et al., 2004), this could suggest that they would have emerged very early, when the separation between protostomes and deuterostomes was not yet clear. The genomes of chaetognaths exhibit both paralogous ribosomal RNA genes (Telford and Holland, 1997; Papillon et al., 2006; Barthélémy et al., 2007a,b, 2008b) and ribosomal protein genes (Barthélémy et al., 2007c; Marlétaz et al., 2008). Conservation of extremely divergent paralogous sequences suggests a low rate of gene conversion (Barthélémy et al., 2006). Generally in nuclear genomes, despite numerous paralogous copies of a rRNA gene type (as 18S), by the action of mechanisms similar to concerted evolution, all rRNA genes exhibit a low level of variation. However, in some taxa, phylogenetic analyses show that sequences of a type of gene is subdivided in two or more distinct groups, named classes (Barthélémy et al., 2007a). Moreover, the rRNA genes belonging to different classes exhibit differential expressions (see Barthélémy et al. (2007a,b, 2008b), first finding in a metazoan, the chaetognath Spadella cephaloptera), suggesting an ubiquitous role of one rRNA class (housekeeping genes) and tissue-specific implications for the other one, or probably two other class(es) (Barthélémy et al., 2008b). The expression of Ribin, a protein involved in the pathway that adapts ribosomal transcription to physiological changes may be coupled to those of a tissue-specific class of rRNA genes (Barthélémy et al., 2010). The high presence of paralogous genes in chaetognath species dispersed throughout the phylum tree suggests that the event responsible for this molecular state may be traced back to the origin of the phylum (Telford and Holland, 1997; Barthélémy et al., 2006; Papillon et al., 2006). This original event can be the result of either several partial genome duplications which occurred early in the lineage (Marlétaz et al., 2008), a whole genome duplication (WGD) (Marlétaz et al., 2008) or an allopolyploidic event (genome combination after species hybridization) which could provide a better explanation for all the gathered evidence (Barthélémy et al., 2006, 2007c), both followed by extensive genomic region losses. Moreover, in S. cephaloptera, a very high level of structural heterogeneity of nuclear regions has been observed which could be mainly caused by the polymorphic insertion of genetic mobile elements, principally retrotransposons s.l. (Marlétaz et al., 2010) whose expression has been evidenced for some of them (Barthélémy et al., 2008a).The chaetognath mitochondrial (mito) genomes exhibit also several molecular singularities. 1. In comparison to the typical gene content of metazoan mitogenomes, both atp6 and atp8 (ATPase subunits 6 and 8) protein-coding genes are absent − among the more than 1000 complete sequences of metazoan mitochondrial genomes that have been compiled to date, only those of the phylum Chaetognatha have lost their atp6 gene (Gissi et al., 2008). 2. Chaetognath mitogenomes are the smallest circular mitochondrial molecules encoding at least two rRNA and 11 proteins known to date (Helfenbein et al., 2004; Papillon et al., 2004; Miyamoto et al., 2010; Marlétaz et al., 2015; Shen et al., 2015). 3. An extreme mitochondrial sequence divergence or mitochondrial nucleotide diversity has been found within natural populations of two chaetognath species, Sagitta elegans and S. cephaloptera, but not in a third species, Sagitta setosa, which is however considered as closely related to S. elegans and sampled at the same location (Marlétaz et al., 2015). This could be the highest intraspecific diversity reported in animals. Moreover, S. elegans mitochondrial lineages not only exhibit extreme molecular divergence, but also gene order rearrangements (Marlétaz et al., 2015); however, several subspecies with fairly significant morphological differences could occur in the catching area (Fraser, 1952). 4. It was admitted that chaetognath mitogenomes bear one tRNA gene (trnMet) (Helfenbein et al., 2004; Faure and Casanova, 2006; Miyamoto et al., 2010) rather than the 22 found in most other invertebrates that employ the same genetic code (Gissi et al., 2008). A recent study invalidated the view that all chaetognath mitogenomes have a single tRNA gene. Indeed, two chaetognath mitogenomes recently sequenced contain two or four tRNA genes (Shen et al., 2015). Moreover, two complete mitogenomes belonging to the same species have been sequenced but mentioned under two different synonymous names (Sagitta nagae,Alvariño, 1967 (Miyamoto et al., 2010) and Zonosagitta nagae,Alvariño, 1967 (Shen et al., 2015)), and interestingly, according to the authors, they do not contain the same number of tRNA genes (one or two respectively). However, they were not sampled in the same area.Regarding the surprising and contradictory data concerning the number of tRNA genes in chaetognath mitogenomes, we reanalysed available chaetognath mitogenomes aiming at detecting tRNA genes based on predicted secondary structure properties, without considering (in a first step) primary sequence homology, in line with analyses suggesting occurrences of previously undetected tRNAs in vertebrate mitogenomes, corresponding to the antisense sequence of sense tRNA genes (Seligmann 2010a,b, 2011a,b). Candidate tRNA genes are then analyzed considering different properties, including primary sequence homology, to confirm the sequence’s tRNA status suggested by secondary structure analysis. These analyses follow principles developed for regular mitochondrial tRNAs, which indicate associations between codon-anticodon mismatches and corresponding tRNA misacylation (Seligmann, 2010c, 2011c, 2012a). This phenomenon minimizes amino acid misinsertions, because codon-anticodon mismatches compensate for tRNA misacylations when the mismatched codon codes for the misacylated amino acid. Observing a similar phenomenon for the predicted cryptic tRNAs in chaetognath mitochondria would indicate that the recognition patterns on the predicted candidate tRNA’s sequence adapted to recognition by tRNA synthetases so as to minimize amino acid misinsertion, despite misacylations, and given codon-anticodon mismatches. Detecting such patterns for candidate mt-tRNAs in chaetognaths would be a good confirmation that these have translational activity. This reanalysis of available chaetognath mitogenomes could be a fruitful contribution for the knowledge of tRNA gene composition of mitogenomes.This study analyses only complete mitogenomes available in GenBank and only one genome per species; hence we excluded one sequence of Sagitta crassa, one of Z. nagae (Accession numbers (acc. n°): FJ236469 and KF051939 respectively) (Shen et al., 2015), five sequences of S. cephaloptera (acc. n° KP899748-KP899752), thirty seven sequences of S. elegans (acc. n° KP899765-KP899801) and twelve sequences of S. setosa (acc. n° KP899753-KP899764) (Marlétaz et al., 2015). Sequences of Z. nagae from Shen et al. (2015) have not been analyzed because one specimen of Z. nagae had been previously sequenced (Miyamoto et al., 2010). Those of S. crassa from Shen et al. (2015) and those from Marlétaz et al. (2015) are not yet available in GenBank.Therefore, analyses concern five mitogenomes belonging to five different species: Paraspadella gotoi (acc. n° NC_006083; Helfenbein et al., 2004), three species formerly grouped within the Sagitta genus, Z. nagae, Decipisagitta decipiens and Sagitta enflata (acc. n° NC_013810, acc. n° NC_013811 and acc. n° NC_013814 respectively; Miyamoto et al., 2010), and S. cephaloptera (acc. n° NC_006386; Papillon et al., 2004). In the first four sequences, only the trnMet gene has been reported by the authors. In S. cephaloptera all the tRNA genes were originally reported as lost (Papillon et al., 2004) and only the trnMet gene was subsequently identified (Faure and Casanova, 2006) but it is not yet annotated in the mitoDNA entry.Mitogenomes templating for tRNAs were detected by tRNAscan-SE 1.21 (Lowe and Eddy, 1997) (http://selab.janelia.org/tRNAscan-SE/) and for comparison by ARWEN (Laslett and Canbaeck, 2008). The tRNAscan-SE software predicts anticodon identities and cloverleaf secondary structure (estimated by the structural component of COVE in tRNAscan-SE outputs, setting the COVE cutoff to −20). We customized the “Cove score cutoff”, to increase the likelihood of detecting tRNAs, considering tRNAs with COVE >−20. This approach is non-standard and explains detection of usually undetected candidate tRNA genes. We used the organellar tRNAs (mitochondrion/chloroplast) prediction model, defining cognate amino acids according to the invertebrate mitochondrial genetic code. Additional extensions to tRNAscan-SE allow detection of unusual tRNA homologues, tRNA-derived repetitive elements and tRNA pseudogenes which is particularly useful in analyses of chaetognath mitogenomes as the tRNA-like sequences could be unconventional. tRNAscan-SE provides scores for the structural component of tRNAs and allows to manually determine the software's sensitivity in tRNA detection. Moreover, other softwares are generally specially designed for mammalian mitochondrial tRNAs (Laslett and Canbaeck, 2008), while tRNAscan-SE (as ARWEN) is not, and therefore does not detect tRNAs lacking the D-arm (such as mitochondrial tRNASer(AGY)). Whatever method is used to detect tRNAs, it is important that all genomes are screened using the same method. Usual analyses based on tRNAscan-SE predict tRNA presence on the base of the COVE score, which is the sum of two likelihood ratios, one based on primary structure, the other on secondary structure (cloverleaf). Our procedure detects numerous candidate tRNAs whose primary structure COVE is very low (hence with apparently low or no homology with known tRNAs), but with positive secondary structure scores, suggesting plausible tRNA translational function. Moreover, the tRNAscan-SE software also predicts the intron-containing tRNA genes and indicates intron positions.Putative tRNA genes have been matched to available DNA sequences by BLASTn searches (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) (Dumontier and Hogue, 2002). This enabled us to find GenBank sequences homologous with chaetognath tRNAs as predicted by tRNAscan-SE. Multiple sequence alignments were made by clustalW software (www.ebi.ac.uk/clustalw) (Thompson et al., 1994); the alignments were manually refined at positions where clear misalignments were produced by the algorithm, i.e., they are verified for the conservation of important features and sites principally in 2D alignment. The tRNA secondary structures for chaetognath sequences and for those issuing from non chaetognaths were predicted using tRNAscan-SE and mitotRNAdb (Jühling et al., 2009; http://trnadb.bioinf.uni-leipzig.de/) softwares respectively.The predictions of candidate tRNAs are solely based on secondary structure properties. We aim at strengthening these predictions based on independent tRNA properties. In that respect, the property that tRNA cognate and non-cognate aminoacylation corresponds with codon-anticodon match/mismatch properties (Seligmann, 2010c) can be evaluated based on bioinformatic analyses and would indicate translational function. We use methods described by Seligmann (2011c, 2012a). Stabilities of codon-anticodon matches and mismatches are estimated using the online software DINAMelt (Markham and Zuker, 2005, 2008), which estimates whether codon-anticodon pairs form duplexes, and if, the free energy of the structure. Tendencies for tRNA amino-acylations by cognate and non-cognate amino acids are estimated by the likelihood ratios output by the software TFAM (http://tfam.ucmerced.edu/, Taquist et al., 2007). This software aligns candidate tRNA sequences with reference compilations of tRNAs with known, experimentally tested cognate. Its output indicates alignment scores between the candidate tRNA and each of the reference tRNA types, assuming that amino-acylation is proportional to the alignment likelihood ratio. TFAM has three reference models, eukaryote, bacterial and archaeal, we use only the bacterial mode here. Error compensation of tRNA misacylation by codon-anticodon mismatch is estimated by two estimates: a) the z-standardized difference between mean TFAM scores for amino acids whose codons form duplexes with the tRNA’s anticodon, and the mean for amino acids whose codons do not hybridize with the tRNA’s anticodon, and b) by the Pearson correlation coefficient r between TFAM scores and free energies of codon anticodon duplexes, matching amino acids and codons-anticodons, only for codons forming duplexes with the tRNA’s anticodon. The more positive z, and the more negative r, respectively, the greater error compensation, an indicator that predicted misacylation of the candidate sequence adapted for translation.The z-standardized difference is original to this study, it relates to the presence/absence of codon-anticodon duplex formations in relation to estimated aminoacylation, while Pearson correlations r detail the association only for amino acids for which at least one of their codons hybridizes with the anticodon of the focal, candidate tRNA sequence, as used previously (Seligmann, 2011c, 2012a).Some mitochondrial tRNAs predicted by methods similar to those used here have predicted anticodons matching stop codons (Seligmann, 2010a). Their presence coevolves with amounts of predicted overlap coding within mitochondrial protein coding genes, whose translation requires amino acid insertions at stops (Seligmann, 2011d, 2012b,c), suggesting that these tRNAs translate overlapping genes after frameshifts (Faure et al., 2011). Overlapping genes are predicted as in previous publications (Seligmann, 2011d, 2012a,b, 2012c): the five presumably non-coding frames of each mitochondrial gene of the five chaetognath mitogenomes are translated and the hypothetical peptides blasted against GenBank proteins. Hits indicate predicted overlapping genes, expected to coevolve with suppressor tRNAs.Re-annotation work has been carried out for the five chaetognath mitogenomes. Each region containing a protein gene with around 200 nucleotides upstream and a downstream sequence until the first stop codon has been translated in the same ORF than the authors of the mtDNA sequence. Both in the upstream and 5′ region of the published protein gene, methionine and isoleucine codons have been identified. Each of the predicted protein sequences were sequentially analyzed by searches using protein BLAST. The deduced protein sequences were re-annotated based on comparisons with homologous protein sequences issuing from (a) other chaetognath mitogenomes and (b) genes from other animal species.Moreover, in order to confirm absences of the usually mitogenome-encoded genes atp6 and atp8 in chaetognath mitogenomes, we designed two BLAST-based approaches. Foremost, the six frames (three for each strand) of the five complete mitogenomes were translated according to the invertebrate mitochondrial genetic code, inserting ‘x’ at stops. This ensures to detect sequences potentially coding for the absent genes undetected by regular analyses because of the presence(s) of stop codons within regions coding for these proteins. The first approach consists in BLAST analyses of these six long hypothetical peptides, versus GenBank’s proteins, restricting the search to two taxonomic groups, chaetognaths, and one of the members of the putative sister group (nematodes) (Shen et al., 2015). Secondly, these results obtained were completed by alignment searches between these 6 long peptides, and a homologue of the protein undetected in chaetognath from a nematode mitogenome (Koerneria sudhausi, accession number: NC_029233).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
