@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Novel features for identifying A-minors in three-dimensional RNA molecules

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present eleven novel features for identifying A-minors in 3D RNA molecules.These features include inter-atomic distances, bond angle and bond types.The features are highly effective when used with machine learning algorithms.This approach will be useful in RNA tertiary motif analysis and applications.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
RNA tertiary interactions,Tertiary motifs,Three-dimensional RNA structure,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
RNA tertiary interactions or tertiary motifs are conserved structural patterns formed by pairwise interactions between nucleotides. They include base-pairing, base-stacking, and base-phosphate interactions. A-minor motifs are the most common tertiary interactions in the large ribosomal subunit. The A-minor motif is a nucleotide triple in which minor groove edges of an adenine base are inserted into the minor groove of neighboring helices, leading to interaction with a stabilizing base pair. We propose here novel features for identifying and predicting A-minor motifs in a given three-dimensional RNA molecule. By utilizing the features together with machine learning algorithms including random forests and support vector machines, we show experimentally that our approach is capable of predicting A-minor motifs in the given RNA molecule effectively, demonstrating the usefulness of the proposed approach. The techniques developed from this work will be useful for molecular biologists and biochemists to analyze RNA tertiary motifs, specifically A-minor interactions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
It is well established that single-stranded RNA molecules fold back on themselves to form short, double-stranded helices that are stabilized primarily by Watson–Crick and wobble base pairs (Lamiable et al., 2012; Shapiro et al., 2007). These base pairs constitute RNA secondary structure. A variety of tertiary interactions or tertiary motifs are present in RNAs, including base-pairing, base-stacking, and base-phosphate interactions in three-dimensional (3D) space (Kim et al., 2010; Leontis et al., 2006; Nasalean et al., 2006). Xin et al. (2008) categorize tertiary motifs into seven groups: coaxial helices, A-minors, pseudoknots, kissing hairpins, ribose zippers, tetraloop–tetraloop receptors, and tRNA D-loop/T-loop motifs. Other motifs have also been studied (Apostolico et al., 2009; Daldrop and Lilley, 2013; Klosterman et al., 2004; Lilley, 2012; Liu et al., 2011; Michel, 2012; Popenda et al., 2010; Sarver et al., 2008; Wadley and Pyle, 2004; Zhong et al., 2010). Some of these motifs are highly recurrent and considered to play an important role in 3D RNA folding (Jonikas et al., 2009; Laing et al., 2012; Lescoute and Westhof, 2006; Ouellet et al., 2010). Their relationship with RNA–protein interactions has also been reported in the literature (Ciriello et al., 2010; Maris et al., 2005; Orr et al., 1998).In this work, we focus on A-minors, an important class of tertiary motifs, which are the most common tertiary interactions in the large ribosomal subunit (Ban et al., 2000; Xin et al., 2008). The A-minor motif is a peculiar one since it is almost never found by itself within an RNA tertiary structure. The motif is often nestled within several other motifs found in RNA tertiary structures. Specifically, an A-minor motif is a nucleotide triple in which minor groove edges of an adenine moiety (A) are inserted into the minor groove of neighboring helices, where they interact with a stabilizing base pair (Xin et al., 2008). Nissen et al. (2001) categorized A-minor motifs into four types that differ with respect to the positions of the O2′ and N3 atoms of the A nucleotide relative to the O2′ atoms of the base pair in the receptor helix. Types I and II are most prevalent, which often involve the A nucleotide interacting with a G-C receptor pair. Types 0 and III often involve the A nucleotide interacting with an A-U base pair.Fig. 1shows an example for each of the four types of A-minors, drawn by PyMOL (Schrodinger, 2010). In the type I A-minor motif, both the O2′ and N3 atoms of the A nucleotide are inside the minor groove of the receptor base pair, thus optimizing the fit of the adenine in the minor groove and maximizing the number of hydrogen bonds that can form. In the type II A-minor motif, the O2′ atom of the A nucleotide is outside the O2′ atom of the near strand whereas the N3 atom of the A nucleotide is inside. The type III A-minor motif is characterized by the positioning of A in which both of its O2′ and N3 atoms are facing the O2′ atom of the near strand in the motif. In the type 0 A-minor motif, which is less frequent, the N3 atom of the A nucleotide is outside the O2′ atom of the far strand.We analyzed diverse A-minor motifs and collected features from them. By utilizing these features together with machine learning algorithms, including random forests (Breiman, 2001) and support vector machines (Cortes and Vapnik, 1995), we were able to identify and predict A-minor motifs in a three-dimensional RNA molecule obtained from the Protein Data Bank (PDB) (Rose et al., 2011). The techniques described in this work will be useful for molecular biologists and biochemists in the analysis of RNA tertiary motifs, specifically A-minor interactions. They will also contribute to our basic understanding of 3D RNA folding and RNA–protein interactions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We investigated features, for the first time, that are suitable for A-minor identification in RNA tertiary structures. This investigation will enable automated discovery of A-minors in three-dimensional RNA structures. In the past, this identification process has been done manually. With the availability of automated A-minor identification methods, analysis of RNA tertiary interactions, specifically A-minor motifs, will be made much faster. In the work reported here, we developed eleven features, and used them together with two machine learning algorithms, random forests and support vector machines, to identify and predict A-minors. Our experimental results showed that both of the algorithms achieve a good F score (>80%), indicating the effectiveness of the proposed approach.Recent studies strengthen the notion that RNA tertiary structure and native dynamics play critical roles in regulating the overall function of RNA molecules, including activities such as catalytic activity and ligand binding (Bida and Maher, 2012). In addition, advances in the in silico design of RNA nanostructures make possible more detailed studies of RNA structure and function (Shapiro et al., 2008). The incorporation of our techniques for prediction of A-minor motifs will contribute to a higher accuracy in modeling 3D RNA structures, as well as the analysis of closely related structural motifs such as kink turns (Daldrop and Lilley, 2013; Lilley, 2012; Schroeder et al., 2012). Within the limitations and error margins of any modeling method, we foresee a direct impact of our A-minor prediction techniques in molecular dynamics and single molecule experiments, in particular, the role that A-minors play in the shaping of highly structured RNA molecules, as well as the interactions of RNAs with their immediate milieu (solvent and ions), the molecular bases for catalytic RNA mechanisms, and the formation of RNA–protein complexes, among other phenomena. A-minor prediction may become a complementary approach to experimental procedures in RNA studies (McDowell et al., 2007).Currently, X-ray crystallography and high resolution NMR are used to determine in vitro structures and molecular dynamics of RNA molecules. While the accuracy of these methods in determining in vitro RNA tertiary structures has long been established (Golden and Kundrot, 2003), it remains to be seen how tertiary motifs predicted from crystalline structures correlate to in vivo RNA molecules. In our study, we used 30 PDB RNA molecules with 260 A-minor motifs whose tertiary structures have been well characterized. We anticipate that as additional A-minor motifs and their RNA molecules are characterized using methods such as high resolution NMR and X-ray crystallography, more training data will be available for our approach. The increase in the training data will result in improved accuracy, with fewer false positives and false negatives.It is worth mentioning that a related tool, FR3D (Sarver et al., 2008), is also able to locate tertiary motifs, including A-minors, in three-dimensional RNA structures. The difference is that our tool, named AminorID, is a specialized predictive tool expressly dedicated to A-minors, whereas FR3D is a general-purpose search engine capable of finding diverse structural motifs. Specifically, AminorID takes a PDB file as input, and automatically predicts the locations of potential A-minors in the PDB file. In contrast, FR3D takes a query motif (e.g. a sample A-minor) as input, and searches for 3D RNA substructures in the PDB that match the query motif (reminiscent of RNA searching methods developed by Firdaus-Raih et al. (2011)). In using FR3D, parameter values for the query motif such as its nucleotide positions need to be specified, and the search results need to be examined manually to identify appropriate structural motifs. The two tools could work in a complementary way; specifically if a motif is returned as a result by both tools, the user has more confidence to consider the result to be a true A-minor. In addition, AminorID could be used as a pre-processing tool, where the A-minors predicted by our tool are used as the query motifs of FR3D to obtain refined results.In future work, we plan to extend the proposed approach, with the aid of other tools (Jossinet and Westhof, 2005; Yang et al., 2003) as well as coevolution and covariation analysis of base pairs (Cheng et al., 2012; Shang et al., 2012), to identify more complex composite motifs that contain, for example, both A-minors and coaxial helices (Laing et al., 2012). The work is expected to make further contributions to the analysis of RNA tertiary motifs, as well as to the basic understanding of 3D RNA folding, RNA–protein interactions, and RNA–RNA interactions (e.g. wobble base pair), as they are important components of the protein biosynthesis process.