@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
From NGS assembly challenges to instability of fungal mitochondrial genomes: A case study in genome complexity

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Fungal mitochondrial genomes can have complex repeat systems.Repeats in mitochondrial genomes can mislead short-read assembly programs.Repeats can also lead to illegitimate intrachromosomal recombination and large-scale deletions.Where persistent repeats are stably present, their locations can indicate functional or structural importance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Next generation sequencing,Repetitive DNA,Fungal mitochondria,Genome assembly,DNA secondary structure,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The presence of repetitive or non-unique DNA persisting over sizable regions of a eukaryotic genome can hinder the genome's successful de novo assembly from short reads: ambiguities in assigning genome locations to the non-unique subsequences can result in premature termination of contigs and thus overfragmented assemblies. Fungal mitochondrial (mtDNA) genomes are compact (typically less than 100kb), yet often contain short non-unique sequences that can be shown to impede their successful de novo assembly in silico. Such repeats can also confuse processes in the cell in vivo. A well-studied example is ectopic (out-of-register, illegitimate) recombination associated with repeat pairs, which can lead to deletion of functionally important genes that are located between the repeats. Repeats that remain conserved over micro- or macroevolutionary timescales despite such risks may indicate functionally or structurally (e.g., for replication) important regions. This principle could form the basis of a mining strategy for accelerating discovery of function in genome sequences. We present here our screening of a sample of 11 fully sequenced fungal mitochondrial genomes by observing where exact k-mer repeats occurred several times; initial analyses motivated us to focus on 17-mers occurring more than three times. Based on the diverse repeats we observe, we propose that such screening may serve as an efficient expedient for gaining a rapid but representative first insight into the repeat landscapes of sparsely characterized mitochondrial chromosomes. Our matching of the flagged repeats to previously reported regions of interest supports the idea that systems of persisting, non-trivial repeats in genomes can often highlight features meriting further attention.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Repeats along a chromosome of a eukaryotic genome can severely inhibit the success of de novo or reference assemblies of the chromosome's sequence from short reads in silico, i.e., the stability of the assembly process. This problem is especially pronounced in next-generation sequencing (NGS) pipelines when the short (currently ≤300bp) reads obtained are then piped through a de Bruijn graph-based de novo assembly program (Compeau et al., 2011). Such programs consider in a first instance the NGS reads’ subsequences of a fixed length k (k-mers, words of length k), and use them to build up and analyze a quasi-flow on a de Bruijn or de Bruijn-like graph. Concurrently or in a second instance, such programs may then also integrate the information of the full read sequences per se and/or, where the reads are paired-end, the pairing information.A good example of a genome or chromosome that illustrates the repeat assembly problem is a familiar and long-studied mitochondrial genome of a unicellular fungus, the S288C strain of baker's yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae. In a previous study (Muñoz et al., 2014), we fed subsequences of this completely sequenced mitochondrial genome, i.e., ideal, short, paired in silico-generated subsequences of read length 100bp, without any sequencing errors and without any competing nuclear genomic DNA, to a widely used NGS assembly program. We confirmed what is perhaps already obvious on fundamental grounds: over a large range of k value choices ranging up to 63bp, repeated sequences from the eight ori (origin of replication) regions consistently prevented full assembly: the ori's were precisely the positions where the contigs or scaffolds could no longer be extended. In addition to fundamental (i.e., assembler-independent) limits that repeats can impose on the assembly process, there are also assembler-specific problems or complexities that can cause unexpected profiles of the assembly variation as one changes the k value (Gallo et al., 2014).Persistent repeats preventing full de novo assembly, i.e., presenting limits to the contiguity of scaffolds/contigs that can be achieved using typical NGS pipelines, can be interpreted as compromising the stability of the assembly process in silico. The same repeats that can prevent a satisfactory assembly, such as the ori repeats in the mitochondrial genome of baker's yeast, can also compromise the stability of the genome itself in vivo or in vitro, i.e., they can destabilize processes within the cell and affect the structural stability of the genome (Bernardi, 2005). Just as a de novo short-read assembly program can get confused if it encounters a sequence of moderate length that is repeated (i.e., not unique), and may then terminate contig extension because it is not clear where the sequence continues, so a process of the cell such as recombination can apparently get confused at the same places in a mitochondrial genome because of ambiguity, and then create a deletion mutant in which DNA located between the two repeats is lost (such as in the well-studied petite-colony mutants in baker's yeast; Marotta et al. (1982)). In the human mitochondrial genome, a particularly common block deletion that entails clinical consequences, called the common deletion, deletes almost 5kb. This may be a result of two copies of a 13-bp sequence at the ends of the deleted segment (Samuels et al., 2004), or the cause may be secondary structures co-localizing with those two copies rather than the copies’ sequences themselves, as has been proposed based on deletional spectra (Guo et al., 2010).In the present study, we focused on mitochondrial genomes of 11 unicellular fungi that appear to have been completely and reliably sequenced. We used a simple strategy, namely a search for recurring oligonucleotides (w-mers) of a fixed length, to screen for presence of possibly longer sequences that are repeated many times within the genome; an ultimate goal, towards which this study can offer only a first start, would be to understand the repeats and repeat systems in those and other mitochondrial genomes in the light of their possible function and evolution.The working hypothesis motivating our study was that precisely the risks taken by a mitochondrion that continues to maintain sizable repeats, persisting in numerous copies that are interspersed around its relatively small genome, could often be a clue signaling functionally and/or structurally important sequence features at or flanking the repeats’ genomic locations. Indeed, in the absence of any benefit, one might expect that natural selection will tend to eliminate variants exhibiting risky repetition, and to favor variants exhibiting no or only benign repetition. Such a principle, if consolidated by testing, could then be applied to efficiently ‘mine for meaning’, in a high throughput fashion, across mitochondrial or even nuclear genomes. As a start, we went through the steps of systematically screening our 11 chosen fungal mitochondrial genomes.In this study we use the term “mitochondrial genome” as synonymous with “mitochondrial DNA genome” or “mtDNA genome”. Most genome reports use this definition. However, some authors include also nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes in the definition. Thus, Wallace (2013) defines the mitochondrial genome via the role, not the physical location, of the DNA and its genes, so that the “mitochondrial genome consists of thousands of copies of the maternally inherited mtDNA plus between 1000 and 2000 nDNA genes”.An objective of the present study was to gain a first insight into the presence and types of repeats in fungal mitochondrial genomes that can be highlighted using a simple strategy, namely a search for persistently recurring oligonucleotides of a fixed length. For reasons given below, we focused primarily on 17-mers. Since repeats can be the most difficult sequences to assemble from reads, we took care to select only fungi represented by a complete mitochondrial genome sequence that appeared reliable, with no obvious gaps that might correspond to unsequenced repeats. We therefore did not include partially sequenced/assembled genomes, in order to avoid mistaking ‘absence of evidence’ for ‘evidence of absence’ of repeats.We sampled transversally across fungi associated with animals and well-studied model fungi, but did not include, for example, non-model fungi associated exclusively with plants, and our list of 11 mtDNA sequences does not include all complete mitochondrial genome sequences of such fungi now available (see, e.g., van de Sande, 2012; Joardar et al., 2012).BLASTN searches showed that a short segment of the mitochondrial genome sequence of Paracoccidioides brasiliensis Pb18 was of non-fungal origin, and it was removed.For the study conducted here, unless otherwise mentioned, we chose a pilot criterion that considers persistent repeats to be those sequences of length at least 17bp that are repeated at least 4 times in a given mitochondrial genome. Fourfold repeats of sequences longer than 17bp always correspond to two or more overlapping 17-bp repeats and are therefore also represented.We justify our choice of 17bp by our interest in (a) risk of genome-destabilizing ectopic recombination,11We note that the mitochondrial processes that typically interest us here do not involve routine crossovers between two homologous chromosomes during meiosis, so it is not clear if borrowed terms such as ‘ectopic’, ‘illegitimate’, or ‘out-of-register’ recombination really make sense for intra-chromosomal recombination of (haploid) mitochondrial DNA. It is not evident what a corresponding ‘non-ectopic’ or ‘in-register’ recombination would be in such a context, as there is no expected, natural, routine or programmed ‘in-register’ mtDNA recombination event in the mitochondrion's life cycle to which one could refer as an obvious standard. We will however still borrow traditional metaphors such as ‘ectopic’ to refer to intra- or inter-chromosomal recombination between non-overlapping regions that have high sequence similarity.(b) risk of assembly-destabilizing repetition, and (c) secondary structures possibly associated with repeats. In these contexts, we note that (a) experimental, quantitative recombination studies consistently suggest that a perfectly repeated 17-mer should generally pose a risk of ectopic recombination, when the repeats occur within short distances similar to those found within a circular fungal mitochondrial genome; (b) some NGS short read assembly programs, such as SOAPdenovo2, offer k-mer size choices starting at around 17bp; and (c) 17bp is approximately the size of a conceivable, minimal compact stemloop/hairpin with flanks (e.g., flank 2bp+stem 5bp+loop 3bp+stem 5bp+flank 2bp; see also Forsdyke (1995) and related oligonucleotide symmetry searches in (Bultrini et al., 2003; Baisnee et al., 2002)). We also note that a recent analysis of frequently repeated words in the human nuclear genome focused on words of a similar length, 15–16bp (Zahradnik et al., 2014).Our cutoff at 4 copies was chosen to pick up only clear signals. We were interested where the 17-nt repeats’ perseverance is unlikely to be transient, to be retained just by chance, or to have arisen via independent convergent mutations, as might conceivably be the case if only two copies of a 17-mer are present in the mitochondrial genome. In other words, our pilot criterion for fungi was chosen to screen for ‘provocative’ repetition in fungal mitochondrial genomes. It avoids false positives at the expense of missing repeats that could be relevant, e..g., our criterion misses the clinically important 13-bp repeat pair associated with the ‘common’ deletion in human (Samuels et al., 2004; Chen et al., 2011).When counting repeats, we did not distinguish among possible relative orientations, e.g., between direct and inverted repeats.We deliberately focused almost exclusively on exact (100% identical) repetition of short (e.g., ≤40bp) sequences, and not on less stringent (<100% identity) repeats as is customary in some other contexts. This was in order to keep the criteria and the analyses simple, and to avoid ‘curses of dimensionality’ when one simultaneously allows several freely variable parameters (number of mismatches allowed, gap creation and extension penalties, levels of similarity for mismatches, etc.). Other contexts require more relaxed stringency, e.g., when one explores distributions of (possibly degraded) transposons or other families of interspersed repeats in nuclear genomes.In the initial pre-scanning of genomes we considered different possible minimum lengthswfor the exact repeats. Afterwards, we usedw=17bp throughout, for our ‘proof of principle’. We did not explore the question of optimizingwfor a given purpose in a given genome. We refer to (Li and Freudenberg, 2014b) for quantitative studies of the variation ofw(or D) for the human nuclear genome, and a (possibly fundamental) duality between them and copy-number (C) variation analyses such as we present here.Following Li et al. (2014), we used DSK (Rizk et al., 2013), and as an independent technical check also RepeatScout's pre-processing module build_lmer_table with the -tandem 0 option (Price et al., 2005). These programs were used to extract, from each of the chosen mitochondrial genome sequences, all 17-mers (types) together with the number of times each of them were found in the sequence (number of tokens). We verified that both programs correctly manage reverse complements, i.e., that they correctly identify a token such as ACGTACGTACGTACGTA with its reverse complement TACGTACGTACGTACGT and count the two sequences together as belonging to one double-stranded 17-mer type (labelled by one of the two strands’ sequences).In contrast to RepeatScout's pre-processing module build_lmer_table, which tabulates k-mers and their frequencies and always gave correct results, the main part of RepeatScout uses additional criteria to then extend overlapping repeats. This second part of the RepeatScout program may not have been intended or optimized for the kind of maximal extension tasks (≳30bp) and short initial repeat lengths (≳17bp) that interested us. Indeed, RepeatScout often did not assemble the overlapping 17-mers to their actual maximal repeat sequence or extension. We therefore complemented exploratory use of RepeatScout with extension by eye and re-running of the build_lmer_table module for larger repeat sizes (from 18bp to over 30bp).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
1The degree of sequence repetition within mitochondrial genomes of fungi spans a wide range, from only trivial or no repeats to rich, complex repeat systems with clear propensity to form secondary structures. A good example of a fungus with such rich, complex repeat systems is baker's yeast (Scer).Ectopic intrachromosomal recombining or pairing entails risks of segmental deletions and genome instability, but these risks may be compensated by a (possibly unknown) benefit of a particular repeat, repeat system, or repeat-pairing product. Persistence can be indicative of functional importance.We have illustrated the potential of the above principle, for mitochondrial sequence mining, by screening 11 complete fungal mitochondrial genomes for repeated words of at least 17bp occurring at least 4 times, and then using those occurrences to identify elements of repeat landscapes and possible structure/shape vocabularies in the genomes. Many such elements were part of genome features that had previously attracted interest, but some were novel.In the 11 complete mitochondrial genomes we analyzed, we used a simple ‘layer-peeling’ strategy for exhaustively analyzing and interpreting the set of persistently repetitive 17-mers; this proved to be effective, and a similar strategy should also be useful for otherw-mer sizes close to 17. Briefly, the strategy is to successively remove first thew-mer repeats that consist of only A and T (up to perhaps one instance of another base), and then thosew-mer repeats that decompose into much smaller subrepeats. For thew-mers that remain, we apply methods such as: screening for intrinsically likely secondary structures by calculating ΔG of the thew-mers themselves and looking for strongly negative values; local assembly to larger repeated sequences; and recognition of highly repetitive core sequences within thew-mers. For the fungi we studied this was a tractable protocol.Some complexity measures, when applied to DNA sequences, will assign low complexities when repeats are frequent. From a semantic or a task viewpoint, however, the same repeat systems and/or their associated structures would increase structural or functional complexity. This reasoning suggests the need for a new notion, repeat-associated complexity.