@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Targeting the Akt1 allosteric site to identify novel scaffolds through virtual screening

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A first time virtual screening study targeting allosteric cavity of Akt1.Both structure based and ligand based approaches were applied.The interface between PH and kinase domains of Akt1 was targeted for inhibition.Proposed molecules are potential leads for allosteric inhibition of Akt.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Virtual screening,Molecular docking,Induced fit docking,Pharmacophore,Allosteric Akt inhibitor,Allosteric kinase inhibitor,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Preclinical data and tumor specimen studies report that AKT kinases are related to many human cancers. Therefore, identification and development of small molecule inhibitors targeting AKT and its signaling pathway can be therapeutic in treatment of cancer. Numerous studies report inhibitors that target the ATP-binding pocket in the kinase domains, but the similarity of this site, within the kinase family makes selectivity a major problem. The sequence identity amongst PH domains is significantly lower than that in kinase domains and developing more selective inhibitors is possible if PH domain is targeted. This in silico screening study is the first time report toward the identification of potential allosteric inhibitors expected to bind the cavity between kinase and PH domains of Akt1. Structural information of Akt1 was used to develop structure-based pharmacophore models comprising hydrophobic, acceptor, donor and ring features. The 3D structural information of previously identified allosteric Akt inhibitors obtained from literature was employed to develop a ligand-based pharmacophore model. Database was generated with drug like subset of ZINC and screening was performed based on 3D similarity to the selected pharmacophore hypotheses. Binding modes and affinities of the ligands were predicted by Glide software. Top scoring hits were further analyzed considering 2D similarity between the compounds, interactions with Akt1, fitness to pharmacophore models, ADME, druglikeness criteria and Induced-Fit docking. Using virtual screening methodologies, derivatives of 3-methyl-xanthine, quinoline-4-carboxamide and 2-[4-(cyclohexa-1,3-dien-1-yl)-1H-pyrazol-3-yl]phenol were proposed as potential leads for allosteric inhibition of Akt1.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The AGC kinase group constitutes 12% of the human kinome and is one of the most evolutionarily conserved groups (Arencibia et al., 2013). Each family of AGC kinases has a physiological role and is involved in human diseases, therefore is a potential drug target. Akt (also named as protein kinase B, PKB), a phospholipid binding-serine/threonine kinase, belongs to AGC superfamily of human kinome and is a key mediator of the PI3K cell survival signaling pathway (Calleja et al., 2009a). Activation through deregulation, amplification and rearrangement of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt pathway occur frequently in many human cancers and is associated with tumor growth, increased metastasis, and resistance to therapy (Hennessy et al., 2005). Consequently, mutations of its components make either itself or its major mediators such as Akt appealing as a therapeutic target for cancer researchers (Liu et al., 2009). The three isozymes of human Akt (Akt1, Akt2, and Akt3) share >85% homology however, several studies have shown that they are functionally distinct (Lindsley et al., 2005; Breitenlechner et al., 2004). Many cellular processes such as cell survival and insulin signaling are affected by Akt (Green et al., 2008; Garofalo et al., 2003). Various cancer types involving leukemia, breast, pancreatic, ovarian and prostate are caused by activation of Akt due to genetic mutations of its own and/or its interrelated upstream and downstream proteins (PTEN, PI3K) (Saini et al., 2013; Hahne et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2013; Blake et al., 2012). Thus, a large number of small molecule inhibitors targeting Akt have been developed for suppressing its activation or overexpression (Hers et al., 2011; Lindsley, 2010).Structural studies on Akt isoforms in the apo (Milburn et al., 2003; Yang et al., 2002) or inhibitor bound forms (Bencsik et al., 2010; Kallan et al., 2011) reveal that Akt consist of three conserved domains, an N-terminal pleckstrin homology (PH) domain (residues 1–133), a central kinase catalytic (CAT) domain (149–408) and a C-terminal extension (EXT) domain (residues 449–480) (Calleja et al., 2009b). The interaction of PH and kinase domains keeps Akt1 at inactive conformation in basal conditions (PH-in). Upon stimulation, interaction of PH-domain and phosphoinositides at the plasma membrane triggers conformation change (PH-out) resulting in phosphorylation of Thr 308. Phosphorylation of both Thr 308 on the activation loop of kinase domain and Ser 473 on the hydrophobic motif of the C-terminal part results in full activation of Akt1 (Calleja et al., 2009a).Inhibitors against Akt differ in the target sites on the protein (Lindsley, 2010). The inhibitors have been found to bind to ATP binding pocket in the catalytic domain (Blake et al., 2012; Freeman-Cook et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2011), to the PH domain (Moses et al., 2009; Hartnett et al., 2008), or to the region between PH and kinase domains (Calleja et al., 2009a, 2009b; Wu et al., 2010). To date, most of the inhibitors against Akt have targeted the ATP binding site in the catalytic kinase domain (Garuti et al., 2010). However, due to the high degree of homology (over 50% sequence identity) between the kinase catalytic domains of serine/threonine kinases, selectivity remains a major issue (Rhodes et al., 2008; Luo et al., 2005). Therefore, targeting the PH domain, which shares about 30% identity with other serine/threonine kinases, is an attractive alternative in the development of more selective inhibitors (Barnett et al., 2005; Cherrin et al., 2010). Several studies have been reported focusing on identification of allosteric inhibitors for Akt by computational or experimental techniques (Lindsley et al., 2005; Wu et al., 2008a, 2010; Du-Cuny et al., 2009; Mahadevan et al., 2008). Molecular docking has been used to identify compounds that would selectively bind the PH domain of Akt1 (Du-Cuny et al., 2009; Mahadevan et al., 2008). High throughput screening has also been used by Lindsley et al. (2005), to select allosteric Akt inhibitors that display no inhibition against Akt1 mutants lacking the PH domain, suggesting inhibition of Akt through an allosteric site and resulting in development of Akt1 selective allosteric inhibitor 16h, which is later called Inhibitor VIII (Lindsley et al., 2005). Calleja et al. (2009b) focused on the catalytic-PH domain interface and used modeling, biochemical assays, FRET to elucidate the mechanism of this allosteric inhibition by compound 16h of Lindsley's. Crystallographic structure determination of the complex between Akt and Inhibitor VIII revealed that binding of the inhibitor to the catalytic-PH domain interface ‘locks’ Akt1 in the inactive PH-in conformation by interacting with Trp 80 of the PH domain (Wu et al., 2010). In a recent study of Ashwell et al. (2012), a set of small molecule Akt1 inhibitors which target the same allosteric site with Inhibitor VIII has been determined and optimized by biochemical and biophysical screening strategy followed by crystallization of the complex. In vitro pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic studies were followed by identification and crystallization of an allosteric Akt inhibitor that can inhibit intracellular Akt activation (PDB: 4EJN).Here, we build on the recent work on allosteric Akt1 inhibitor development to find novel allosteric Akt1 inhibitors targeting the cavity between kinase and PH domains by combining database filtering with ligand and structure based pharmacophore models and docking. The similarity amongst the hits was considered to obtain a set of compounds. Considering interactions with Akt1, fitness to pharmacophore hypothesis, drug-likeness and ADME properties, derivatives of 3-methyl-xanthine, quinoline-4-carboxamide and 2-[4-(cyclohexa-1,3-dien-1-yl)-1H-pyrazol-3-yl]phenol were proposed as lead scaffolds. This study is the first time application of virtual screening methodologies for identification of allosteric inhibitors targeting the cavity between kinase and PH domains of Akt1.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
