@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Exploring the relationship between hub proteins and drug targets based on GO and intrinsic disorder

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The relationship between hubs and drug targets was investigated.Intrinsic disorder and semantic similarity were used for PPI representation.Only 8-dimensional features fully characterize the PPI information.The model gives a good performance in predicting PPIs and identifying drug targets.We prove that both hubs and intrinsic disorder proteins are potential drug targets.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Protein–protein interactions (PPIs),Gene ontology (GO) terms,Intrinsic disorder,Drug target,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Protein–protein interactions (PPIs) play essential roles in many biological processes. In protein–protein interaction networks, hubs involve in numbers of PPIs and may constitute an important source of drug targets. The intrinsic disorder proteins (IDPs) with unstable structures can promote the promiscuity of hubs and also involve in many disease pathways, so they also could serve as potential drug targets. Moreover, proteins with similar functions measured by semantic similarity of gene ontology (GO) terms tend to interact with each other. Here, the relationship between hub proteins and drug targets based on GO terms and intrinsic disorder was explored. The semantic similarities of GO terms and genes between two proteins, and the rate of intrinsic disorder residues of each protein were extracted as features to characterize the functional similarity between two interacting proteins. Only using 8 feature variables, prediction models by support vector machine (SVM) were constructed to predict PPIs. The accuracy of the model on the PPI data from human hub proteins is as high as 83.72%, which is very promising compared with other PPI prediction models with hundreds or even thousands of features. Then, 118 of 142 PPIs between hubs are correctly predicted that the two interacting proteins are targets of the same drugs. The results indicate that only 8 functional features are fully efficient for representing PPIs. In order to identify new targets from IDP dataset, the PPIs between hubs and IDPs are predicted by the SVM model and the model yields a prediction accuracy of 75.84%. Further research proves that 3 of 5 PPIs between hubs and IDPs are correctly predicted that the two interacting proteins are targets of the same drugs. All results demonstrate that the model with only 8-dimensional features from GO terms and intrinsic disorder still gives a good performance in predicting PPIs and further identifying drug targets.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Proteins are significantly essential for almost all functions in the cells and they work together with others by forming a huge network of protein–protein interactions (PPIs) (Gavin et al., 2002). Nowadays PPIs have become a hotspot in the field of biochemistry and bioinformatics, so computational prediction of PPIs is of great practical significance. In the past decades, there were many descriptors and machine learning methods for prediction of PPIs. For example, domain-based random forest of decision trees (Chen and Liu, 2005), sequence similarity and the conservation of the proteins’ functions (Kotelnikova et al., 2007), sequences correlation coefficient transformation based support vector machine method (Shi et al., 2010), ensemble extreme learning machine model using the information of protein sequences (You et al., 2013). With the help of the effective descriptors and machine learning methods, researchers could identify new PPIs. Biochemical experiments are informative but it is time-consuming and cannot provide a global perspective to further research on interactions between proteins (Patil et al., 2010a). So many computational methods were developed to predict PPIs based on large numbers of PPIs verified by experiments. From the aspect of feature extraction, almost all the existing methods rely on the sequence and structure information of the proteins in PPIs (Sprinzak et al., 2006; Guo et al., 2008; Roy et al., 2009; Valente et al., 2013). They analyzed PPIs by measuring various sequence attributes of each interacting pair and the accuracy can reach 88.09% (Guo et al., 2008). Other researchers provided methods to predict PPIs by using structural information (Tuncbag et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2012; Baspinar et al., 2014). In addition, some researchers also used the functional information to find new PPIs, e.g., Zhang et al. (2012) provided an algorithm, PrePPI to predict PPIs with functional clues. Although these methods have achieved promising results, the number of features proposed by them is always as high as several hundreds even thousands. With so high dimensional feature vector, models by the machine learning methods, such as random forest (RF), Bayes and support vector machine (SVM) might give over-fitting results and so many features make the explanation of results very difficult on the functions of two interacting proteins, especially there are diverse PPIs, such as physical interaction, co-complex relationship and pathway co-membership (Qi et al., 2006). Identifying PPIs correctly is helpful to explore molecular mechanism and biological function of organizations. According to the previous studies, the PPIs could also be potential drug targets (Wang et al., 2011).In PPI networks, hub proteins, defined as those that interact with more than 10 partners are clearly more disordered than end proteins that interact with just one partner (Haynes et al., 2006). It has been proven that intrinsic disorder is a general characteristic of hub proteins and the disorder might determine proteins’ interactivities (Haynes et al., 2006). Shimizu and Toh (2009) have classified PPIs into three types: interactions between disorder proteins, interactions between structure proteins and interactions between disorder proteins and structure proteins. Compared to interactions between structure proteins, they proved that the occurrence of interactions between IDPs was significantly frequent. Obviously, intrinsic disorder could promote hubs to interact with partners as many as possible. Besides, it has been shown that intrinsic disorder regions are abundant in proteins associated with signaling, regulation, cancer and other diseases, so they are desirable targets for inhibition (Metallo, 2010). Since hubs were central to the functions of PPI network, hubs are involved in many diseases and they may also constitute an important source of potential drug targets (Wang et al., 2011; Hsing et al., 2008).In our work, we selected hubs from human PPI networks and IDPs as basic datasets. In order to predict PPIs and further identify drug targets, only the 8 variables were computed to characterize the functions of proteins, including 6 semantic similarities of gene ontology (GO) terms and genes, and two that are the rates of disorder residues the two interacting proteins. As a result, the support vector machine (SVM) model yielded accuracy, sensitivity and specificity of 83.72%, 75.73% and 89.05% respectively in predicting interactions between target hubs, and 75.84%, 70.32% and 75.87% respectively in predicting interactions between target hubs and IDPs. Moreover, 118 of 142 PPIs between hubs and 3 of 5 PPIs between target hubs and IDPs were successfully predicted that both the interacting proteins were targets of the same drugs. Different from the general methods that usually use physical and chemical properties to produce hundreds even thousands of features to train the model, our method just used 8 features based on the functional similarity and also yielded a good performance in predicting PPIs and identifying drug targets.Protein interaction data used in our work were obtained from the Human Protein Reference Database (HPRD) (Release9_062910), containing 39,240 experimentally determined PPIs. In human PPI network, nodes represent proteins and edges represent PPIs. We calculated the degrees of all nodes (Pavlopoulos et al., 2011) and only considered proteins with their degrees ≥10 as hubs (Haynes et al., 2006). Then a part of hubs have been proved to be drug targets through DrugBank (Version 3.0), KEGG DRUG (Release 63.0) and Therapeutic Targets Database (TTD, Version 4.3.02) (Zhu et al., 2012). They were selected as target hubs, so 661 target hubs were finally extracted. For model building, the training data of PPIs were 2953 PPIs among the target hubs from HPRD. However, the non-PPIs of training data are not currently available, so they were generated according to the subcellular location based on the hypothesis that two proteins in two different subcellular locations usually not interact with each other (Guo et al., 2008). The subcellular localization information of the 661 target hubs was extracted from UniProtKB (http://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/). After removing proteins without subcellular location information, the remaining proteins were grouped into eight subsets based on the eight main types of subcellular localizations, including cytoplasm, nucleus, mitochondrion, endoplasmic reticulum, golgi apparatus, peroxisome, vacuole, cytoplasm and nucleus (Guo et al., 2008). The non-interacting pairs were generated by pairing proteins with different subcellular locations and thus 4430 non-interacting pairs were used as the negative samples in the training set according to the ratio of 1:1.5 for the positives VS negatives.For external evaluation, from DisProt (Release 6.01), we chose 165 human IDPs that were not included from target hubs and 41 of them were drug targets. Then 438 PPIs between 249 target hubs and 68 IDPs were obtained from HPRD. In order to test the specificity of the model, the non-PPIs between target hubs and human IDPs were also extracted. Considering all possible protein pairs of the target hubs and IDPs, after eliminating the positive samples, the remaining 71,886 protein pairs were considered as the negative samples. Table 1shows the number of samples in training and testing sets respectively.Most of PPI networks are proved to be scale-free (Goh et al., 2002; Jeong et al., 2000; Barabási and Albert, 1999), which means that few hubs possess tens even hundreds of interactions and most of proteins only has one link. Meanwhile, the intrinsic disorder is a distinctive feature of hubs and promotes hubs to interact with partners as many as possible in PPI networks. Firstly, intrinsic disorder can serve as the structural basis for hubs interacting with other proteins. Then intrinsic disorder can provide flexible linkers between partners and enables to enhance the ability of hub proteins to participate in multiple signaling pathways. At last, many IDPs can bind to a structured hub (Uversky, 2011; Dunker et al., 2005; Dosztanyi et al., 2005). In addition, the high specificity and low affinity (Zhou, 2012) in the IDPs are controlled by the rate of association and dissociation (Prakash, 2011) and further allow their PPIs to be reversible (Yura and Hayward, 2009; Bertolazzi et al., 2012), which has an important effect on the functions of proteins. So, IDPs and part of hubs are common in eukaryotes, existing as dynamic ensembles and resembling “protein clouds” (Uversky, 2011; Uversky and Dunker, 2010). IDPs were significantly enriched in disorder-promoting amino acids of Ala-Arg-Gly-Gln-Ser-Glu and Lys but substantially depleted in Pro and in so-called order-promoting amino acids such as Ile-Leu-Val-Trp-Tyr-Phe-Cys and Asn. The current researches mostly focus on the number of intrinsic disorder distribution in the PPIs (Haynes et al., 2006; Shimizu and Toh, 2009; Kim et al., 2008; Patil et al., 2010b). The functions of intrinsic disorder in the PPIs play essential roles in regulation of signal and path ways (Metallo, 2010; Dunker et al., 2008; Singh et al., 2007). Now several tools have been developed for predicting intrinsically disorder of proteins, such as FoldIndex predictor (Prilusky et al., 2005), MeDor predictor (Lieutaud et al., 2008) and Spritz (Vullo et al., 2006). In this work, we employed Spritz to predict the intrinsically disorder of target hubs from sequences. The intrinsic disorder information of IDPs was obtained from DisProt. Thus, every protein was characterized as a value representing the percentage of disorder residues in each protein sequences. So the disorder characteristic of a PPI was expressed as a two-dimensional vector composed by the two disorder percentages of its’ two interacting proteins.GO is an ontology used for annotating gene products, such as RNAs and proteins. It focuses on the investigation of semantic similarity in molecular biology and has been widely adopted in life sciences. The semantic similarity is defined to reflect the closeness in meaning between the two entities annotated by GO terms. Thus, the semantic similarity between two GO terms or two GO term sets provides a measure of their functional similarity based on the GO annotations of gene products (Pesquita et al., 2009). Many researchers have measured the functional similarity of genes or proteins based on their GO annotations (Pesaranghader et al., 2014). It has been reported that if two genes are involved in the same biological process, the corresponding two proteins perform the same molecular functions and are located in the same cellular components, so they are more likely to interact with each other. It might be found a list of GO terms which frequently exist in pairs in the context of protein interactions (Wang et al., 2010). Generally, the higher the semantic similarity of two genes is, the more common biological functions they share and more possibly their proteins interact with each other. When lacking of other information for identifying PPIs, semantic similarity can be used as an indirect means to judge PPIs (Montañez and Cho, 2012). So we can conclude that for the two interacting proteins, the more semantically similar their gene function annotations are, the more physiologically relevant their interaction is, which mean that highly similar sequences should be highly semantically similar and interacting proteins have similar sequences and high semantic similarity (Lord et al., 2003). Consequently, we extracted the semantic similarity of GO terms and gene annotations between two proteins as features to characterize their PPI information.The GO terms represent three aspects of biology, including molecular functions (MF), biological processes (BP) and cellular components (CC). Two types of relationships, ‘is-a’ and ‘part-of’, are used to represent the complicated correlation between GO terms (The Gene Ontology Consortium, 2010). The GO terms and the two relationships are presented as directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) in which nodes represent terms and edges represent the two kinds of semantic relationships (‘is-a’ and ‘part-of’) (Wang et al., 2007). Several methods have been developed to compute the semantic similarity of GO terms and the similarity of genes. For example, the most specific common ancestor method based on path length (Guo et al., 2006), the information content-based method (Resnik, 1995), indirect Term Overlap method (Mistry and Pavlidis, 2008) and a hybrid method (Wang et al., 2007). In this paper, we employed the hybrid method to measure the semantic similarity of GO terms and the functional similarity of genes. Given two gene IDs and two GO term IDs, the semantic similarity was calculated with the tool of GOSemSim (Yu et al., 2010) (Version 1.6.8) by R package (Version 3.0.1). The GO term IDs of target hubs and IDPs were downloaded from the gene ontology (http://www.geneontology.org/). The gene IDs were obtained through mapping from UniProtKB ID to EntreZ Gene (Gene ID). Protein semantic similarity scores were calculated from the term similarity measures using three combination approaches: maximum, average and best-match average (Couto et al., 2007). For each pair of proteins, we could get three values for the global semantic similarity for molecular functions, biological processes and cellular components by averaging the semantic similarities of each pair of GO terms of the two proteins, because every protein has many GO terms for the three biological processes. Since every protein only has one gene ID for the gene annotation, we could directly achieve three values for the semantic similarity of gene annotations from molecular functions, biological processes and cellular components. So, 6 features were used to represent the semantic similarity for each pair of proteins.SVM provided by Vapnik (1998) is one of the most popular learning-machine algorithms to deal with several thousands of training samples and solve classification problems. Here, we used the commonly used software LIBSVM 3.17 (Chang and Lin, 2011; Fan et al., 2005) to construct the PPI prediction model by downloading this tool from http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/∼cjlin/libsvm. A radial basis function (RBF) was chosen as the kernel function. Two parameters, the regularization parameter C and the kernel width parameter γ were optimized using a grid search approach within in limited range of 2(−5:5).In statistical prediction, sub-sampling test is still a good validation method for the large dataset and it is commonly used to verify the stability of the model and estimate accuracy (Kohavi, 1995). Considering the numerous training samples used in this work, 5-fold cross-validation was used to investigate the training set. In the 5-fold cross validation, the training set including 2953 positive samples and 4430 negative samples was randomly partitioned into 5 equal size subsets with 591 positive samples and 886 negative samples in each subset. In every case, each of the 5 subsets was used as testing set and the remaining were used for training. The process of model training and testing was repeated 5 times.For two-class classification problem, three parameters, sensitivity, specificity and accuracy were used as performance measures for predictors. They are defined as following:(1)Accuracy=TP+TNTP+TN+FP+FN(2)Sensitivity=TPTP+FN(3)Specificity=TNTN+FPwhere TP, TN, FP and FN represent true positive, true negative, false positive and false negative, respectively.Besides, the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve can effectively assess the model. An ROC graphs are two-dimensional graphs in which the proportion of true positives in total positives is plotted on the Y-axis and the proportion of false positive in total negatives is plotted on the X-axis, and an ROC graph depicts relative tradeoffs between benefits (true positives) and costs (false positives) (Fawcett, 2006). The area under the ROC curve (AUC) is used as a reliable indicator of predictive model (Bradley, 1997). The minimum and maximum value of AUC is 0 and 1.0, respectively. Generally, the larger the value of AUC is, the better prediction we get.To train the SVM model, we used 5-fold cross validation to make the training result more meaningful and reliable (François et al., 2007). Table 2lists the result of 5-fold cross validation on the training set and the optimal C and γ are 0.5 and 8 respectively. The results indicate that the model performs well and gives the high average accuracy of 83.72%. But compared to the high specificity of 89.05%, the sensitivity is relatively low (only 75.73%). One reason may be that though two proteins with high semantic similarity are consequently more likely to interact with each other, some researches still indicate that the relationship between semantic and sequence similarity is not linear (Pesquita et al., 2008), meaning that proteins with high semantic similarity may not have similar sequences and they can not interact with each other. Another reason might be that hubs with more disorder residues may interact with non-hubs, which will lead to misclassification. However, on average, our method still give a good performance on the prediction of PPIs based on GO terms and intrinsically disorder. The standard deviations of accuracy, sensitivity and specificity are lower than 5%, indicating a good robustness of our model. In order to visualize and organize classifier performance without regard to class distributions or error costs (Fawcett, 2006), the ROC curve of the model was also given based on the training set and 5-fold cross validation (the blue curve in Fig. 1), because it could more accurately represent the performance of the method. We calculated the AUC and it is as high as 0.9495, so we could see a good performance of our method.The GO terms represented three aspects of biology, including MF, BP and CC. Since semantic similarity to predict protein interactions is generally a accepted methodology (Montañez and Cho 2012; Hsing et al., 2008). The semantic similarity of CC for a negative PPI of two proteins from different subcellular locations may be very low. So in order to avoid the prediction bias cause by the low semantic similarities, we selected 4430 negative samples with the semantic similarities of CC from the large amount of original negative dataset including 14,904 samples. When we used subcellular location to collect negative samples, some differences was shown between positive samples and the selected 4430 negative samples on the average of the semantic similarity of GO terms and genes of CC, compared to MF and BP (Supplementary Table S1).Here we collected the negative samples based on the subcellular locations according to the work by Guo et al. (2008) since it has demonstrated that using subcellular locations to construct the negative dataset is better than other two methods including random pairing and shuffling sequence-based method. From Supplementary Table S1, we can see that the difference of semantic similarity of GO terms of CC between positive samples and negative samples was a little larger than the semantic similarity of BP and MF. So a performance bias could be caused by the difference of semantic similarity of CC between positive samples and negative samples. To verify this bias by the semantic similarity of CC, a model was also built without the semantic similarity of CC based on the training set and 5-fold cross validation (Table S2). From Table S2, we could see that the model without the semantic similarity of GO terms of CC gives an average accuracy, sensitivity and specificity of 76.18%, 59.29% and 87.39% respectively. Table 2 lists the performance of the model with the semantic similarity of CC and the average accuracy, sensitivity and specificity are 83.72%, 75.73% and 89.05%, respectively. We could see that accuracy of the model without CC is lower than the model with CC, indicating that CC contribute to the performance of the method and it is important for representing PPI information. However, a decrease of 7% could not verify a large bias of CC. So in our method, we still used the semantic similarity of GO terms of BP, MF and CC.Since the semantic similarities of GO and genes have been used to predict PPIs, no researches have been reported that the disorder information can also characterize PPIs. So in this work, in order to evaluate the contribution of disorder information in terms of prediction of PPIs, another SVM model was also construed only using 6 semantic similarities and without 2 disorder features. Using the training set and 5-fold cross validation, the performance comparison results between two SVM models constructed based on with and without disorder information are shown in Supplementary Table S3. From Table S3, we can see that the model without disorder information gives an average accuracy, sensitivity and specificity of 77.73%, 64.54% and 86.21% respectively, which is significantly lower than those of the model with disorder information with the average accuracy, sensitivity and specificity of 83.72%, 75.73% and 89.05% respectively. So, the comparison results on the training set indicate that disorder information does make a great contribution for the prediction of PPIs and it is an important feature for representing PPI information.To test the availability of our method in deep, we compared the results between our method and the previously PPI prediction method by Guo et al. (2008) both on our data set. From Supplementary Table S4, we could see that the model using the method of Guo et al. (2008) gives an average accuracy, sensitivity and specificity of 67.23%, 55.38% and 72.03% respectively, which is significantly lower than our model with the average accuracy, sensitivity and specificity of 83.72%, 75.73% and 89.05% respectively (Table 2). Moreover, the deviations among 5 subsets are large and that of the specificity is up to 11.02%. It can demonstrate to some extent that our method is a better alternative to existing PPI prediction methods.In recent years, researches have been reported that PPIs could be drug targets. For example, three linear regression models relating drug therapeutic similarity, chemical similarity and their combination have been developed to predict PPI targets (Zhao and Li, 2010). Zhang et al. (2012) predicted a genome-scale PPI network by integrating various genomic features of proteins/genes using a machine learning-based approach to find drug targets. Since PPIs are a potential source for drug targets (Midic et al., 2009), understanding PPIs at a deeper level may help to find the potential drug targets. It has been supposed that the two proteins might be similar not only in sequences but also in functions if they interact with each other. Accordingly, we deduced that the PPI might be targeted by a drug if the two interacting proteins were the same drug targets. Also it can be inferred that if one of the proteins in a PPI was a target of a drug, the other protein might be a potential drug target of the same drug because of their similar function. In addition, intrinsic disorder is one of the most important characteristics of the hubs by affecting its function and stability. As we all know, hubs participated in significant numbers of protein interactions and played critical roles in the organization and function of cellular protein interaction networks (Barabasi and Oltvai, 2004; Albert, 2005). Because of the characteristic of intrinsic disorder, hubs’ flexible structure allowed them to bind to different targets and affects their function. So, hubs are momentous to the normal function and stable in the PPI network in organisms. In addition, it has been demonstrated that highly connecting proteins tend to share certain relevant functional properties which can be reflected in their GO annotations. Several well-known and extensively studied proteins are implicated in diseases are hubs (Patil et al., 2010a), such as p53, p21, p27 and BRCA that play central roles in various cellular mechanisms.In this work, we gathered 2953 PPIs between 661 hubs as the positive samples of training set. The 661 hubs were drug targets verified by DrugBank, KEGG DRUG and TTD. We found that among the 2953 PPIs, 142 PPIs were drug targets for both of their nodes. According to our model, 118 of 142 target PPIs were correctly predicted in the 5-fold cross validation on the training set. We counted the number of the PPIs as targets in each subset and Table 3shows the prediction result. From the training results, we could see that our method developed for predicting PPIs based on semantic similarity and intrinsic disorder were effective.In order to evaluate the practical prediction ability of the final prediction model, the new testing dataset was constructed. The testing set consisted of 438 positive samples and 71,886 negative samples. Through our model, 308 positive samples were correctly predicted and 54,540 negative samples were predicted correctly. So, the accuracy, sensitivity and specificity were 75.84%, 70.32% and 75.87%, respectively. Besides, the ROC curve of the testing set can been seen in Fig. 1 (the red curve). With so unbalanced numbers of positive and negative samples in the testing set, our method still achieved a high AUC of 0.8518. Moreover, all of the evaluation parameters are comparable to those on the training set and further demonstrate the stability and reliability of this method. From the predicting accuracy of negative samples, among the 71,886 randomly paired PPIs, about 25% were predicted as interacting PPIs, which is reasonable, because in our human whole PPI network, the ratio of true PPIs is about 25–30%. In addition, those testing samples were also predicted with the SVM model constructed based on 6 features (without disorder information). Supplementary Table S5 lists the comparison results between two models with and without disorder information on the testing set respectively. We can see that the model without disorder information gives a much lower accuracy of only 57.51%, which further demonstrates the contribution of disorder information for the prediction of PPIs.IDPs do not have stable secondary or tertiary structures and they exist as an ensemble of rapid inter-converting state. Many IDPs become structured upon binding to a partner (Dyson and Wright, 2005). While binding to a small molecule, intrinsic disorder regions make proteins to generate an adaptable, specific interface for small-molecule binding (Metallo, 2010). For folding and binding to partners, the IDPs involve in the important functions, such as transcription, regulation, signal and diseases (Midic et al., 2009). So IDPs and intrinsic disorder regions are considered as very promising targets for therapeutic drugs because of their importance and over-representation in signaling and major disease pathways. The interactions between IDPs have a high specificity and low affinity, which indicates that targeting small molecules to the IDPs or the intrinsic disorder regions of proteins should enable the development of more effective drug discovery techniques based on their high natural prevalence, enormous biological importance and frequent involvement into pathogenesis of various diseases (Uversky, 2011). For the reason that the number of human proteins that proved to be disorder proteins is very limited, we only found 237 human disorder proteins in the DisProt database and 165 of them were left for further testing, except 72 of them that were included in the nodes of PPIs in the training dataset. In order to test whether the IDPs could be drug targets, we just used UniProtKB IDs to check whether the proteins were drug targets via DrugBank, KEGG DRUG and TTD. We finally collected 41 of 165 human disorder proteins were drug targets. Though the number of target IDPs is small, however, previous researches have proven that IDPs could be the potential drug targets by means of theory and practice.For further validation, using 438 PPIs between target hubs and IDPs in the testing set, we constructed a sub-network (Fig. 2). In Fig. 2, pink circulars represent target hubs, yellow squares are human disorder proteins, and green squares are the targets from IDPs. As we can see, there are only 22 PPIs that both the proteins are targets in the sub-network. On one hand, only small part of IDPs have been proved to be drug targets by biological experiments, though disorder proteins have the potential to be targets. On the other hand, a number of PPIs had been excluded from HPRD because we only discuss the PPIs between hubs and disorder proteins. So, the degrees of some hubs are less than ten in the sub-network. Even so, some IDPs are shown to be new hubs in the sub-network for that they interact with more than ten partners. The reason might be that the disorder characteristic can serve as the structural basis for proteins interacting with other proteins and intrinsic disorder can provide flexible linkers between partners. Among the 22 PPIs, 5 PPIs were drug targets that the two interacting proteins are targets of the same drug verified by DrugBank, KEGG DRUG and TTD. Using our model, 3 of the 5 PPIs were truly predicted (Table 4). Using the very limited samples, we also barely did a statistically validation. Since the number of PPIs of human disorder proteins is limited currently, the prediction results are only for the current data. However, in the future, if more human disorder proteins are identified and more drug targets of them are found, the prediction results of our method on these new data will be of higher statistical confidence.In addition, combined with the result of 5-fold validation on training data, the good performance of the method on identifying the drug targets mostly rely on the semantic similarity and intrinsically disorder which can well characterize the functional relationship between two interacting proteins.Semantic similarity between GO terms is mainly based on the co-occurrence of terms in annotation, information content or the ontology graph structure (Pesquita et al., 2009). In turn, semantic similarity between diseases could be assessed by computing the similarity between the sets of associated GO terms (Sachin and Deendayal, 2012). Thus the semantic similarity of GO terms can represent the similarity of diseases to a certain extent. Additionally, some studies have analyzed the semantic similarity of genes in the HPRD network comprehensively and they showed that gene pairs tend to have higher semantic similarity scores if the corresponding proteins are closer to each other in the HPRD network, because genes associated with a disease should have similar functions (Jiang et al., 2011). So the semantic similarity of genes also expresses the similarity of diseases. From our statistical results, though the numbers of hubs and IDPs that could be targets are small, they are still potential resources of targets for the hubs’ importance in PPI networks and IDPs’ particular characteristics and participation in signal and diseases. For example, α-synuclein (Dev et al., 2003) is a typical IDP that links various synucleinopathies. It is a typical disordered hub and is shown to interact with many ligands and other proteins. A recent proteomic analysis identified 587 proteins involved in the formation of complexes with α-synuclein in the dopaminergic cells, with 141 proteins displaying significant changes in their relative abundance after these cells were treated with rotenone (Jin et al., 2007).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
For the great importance of IDPs and semantic similarity on the PPIs and diseases, we took full advantage of semantic similarity and intrinsically disorder of proteins as features to predict the PPIs and identify drug targets with SVM method. From the cross-validation result and performance on the testing set, our method not only well predict PPIs but also can be an effective tool for identifying drug targets through PPI prediction model. Compared with many common methods using huge number of features for representing the PPI information, we only used 8 features for characterizing the functional relationship between two interacting proteins and the prediction results show that these features could effectively reflect the PPI information. On one hand, intrinsically disorder was considered as feature to predict PPIs rather than the simple statistical analysis of disorder in PPIs. On the other hand, semantic similarity conducts low-dimensional vector to distinguish PPIs and targets. Though IDPs and hubs trend to be targets, the number of IDPs and hubs being targets verified by experiments was limited in fact. It can be expected that if more target information of IDPs and hubs will be discovered in the future, our method can be further validated using more data.