@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Unintended consequences? Water molecules at biological and crystallographic protein–protein interfaces

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Waters play similar roles at biological and non-biological protein–protein interfaces.Biological interfaces are more hydrophobic but have better organized hydrogen bonding.Biological interfaces more frequently water-mediate interactions with backbone atoms.Aromatic/planar residues are more observed in biological water-mediated interactions.Because of its charge and sweep volume lysine opportunistically forms interactions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Protein–protein interactions,Water,Crystallographic lattice contacts,HINT,Hydropathic interactions,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The importance of protein–protein interactions (PPIs) is becoming increasingly appreciated, as these interactions lie at the core of virtually every biological process. Small molecule modulators that target PPIs are under exploration as new therapies. One of the greatest obstacles faced in crystallographically determining the 3D structures of proteins is coaxing the proteins to form “artificial” PPIs that lead to uniform crystals suitable for X-ray diffraction. This work compares interactions formed naturally, i.e., “biological”, with those artificially formed under crystallization conditions or “non-biological”. In particular, a detailed analysis of water molecules at the interfaces of high-resolution (≤2.30Å) X-ray crystal structures of protein–protein complexes, where 140 are biological protein–protein complex structures and 112 include non-biological protein–protein interfaces, was carried out using modeling tools based on the HINT forcefield. Surprisingly few and relatively subtle differences were observed between the two types of interfaces: (i) non-biological interfaces are more polar than biological interfaces, yet there is better organized hydrogen bonding at the latter; (ii) biological associations rely more on water-mediated interactions with backbone atoms compared to non-biological associations; (iii) aromatic/planar residues play a larger role in biological associations with respect to water, and (iv) Lys has a particularly large role at non-biological interfaces. A support vector machines (SVMs) classifier using descriptors from this study was devised that was able to correctly classify 84% of the two interface types.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Unraveling of the underlying principles governing protein association is central to the understanding of protein networks that define cell biology (Edwards et al., 2002; Aloy et al., 2004). Protein–protein associations found in extant structural data can be broadly categorized into two major categories: biological and non-biological. Biological associations are those that occur in nature, i.e., under more or less normal conditions, while non-biological associations are those that result from scientific intervention, e.g., under crystallization conditions with specific buffers and relatively high concentrations of only the protein of interest, and do not otherwise occur – at least lastingly – in nature.According to Thornton, biological interfaces can be further classified based on their composition, affinity and/or lifetimes (Nooren and Thornton, 2003). Based on composition, protein–protein interfaces can be classified into homo-oligomeric and hetero-oligomeric complexes. Homo-oligomeric complexes are formed between two or more identical polypeptide chains and are usually symmetric, whereas hetero-oligomeric complexes are formed between polypeptide chains of different sequences (Goodsell and Olson, 2000). Another way of categorizing biological protein–protein interfaces is whether they are obligate or non-obligate. Obligate complexes are those where the protomers forming the complex are not found as stable structures on their own in vivo. Another definition is that, in obligate complexes, the involved protomers fold together to form the final complex, while in non-obligate complexes the protomers pre-fold before association.Based on their lifetimes, non-obligate protein–protein complexes can be further classified into transient and permanent. In contrast to a transient interaction, which constantly associates and dissociates in vivo, a permanent interaction is usually very stable and the involved protomers only exist in their complexed form. Since the stability of any complex depends on the surrounding environment, a continuum exists between transient and permanent interactions. For example, an interaction that is mainly transient in vivo might become permanent under certain cellular conditions (Nooren and Thornton, 2003), e.g., ligand or cofactor association. Of importance for this report, this observation also can be construed to suggest that non-biological interactions are transient – only stabilized by crystallization.It has been of great interest over the past two decades to examine and understand the differences between these various protein–protein interfaces. They have been subjected, thus, to many structural and computational analyses (e.g., Phizicky and Fields, 1995; Jeon et al., 2012; Grosdidier and Fernández-Recio, 2012). X-ray crystallography has been the tool of choice for most structural studies, as the size of protein–protein complexes is usually larger than what can be handled by NMR, although cryo-electron microscopy is also playing an increasingly important experimental role in understanding protein–protein interactions (Förster and Villa, 2010; Ritchie, 2008; Jones and Thronton, 1996; Keskin et al., 2008; Tuncbag et al., 2008). Even with this array of experimental methods, it is especially challenging to experimentally detect and characterize ephemeral biological transient complexes (Ozbabacan et al., 2011). Without adequate experimental data for design and training of computational methods, tools for prediction are, as a consequence, far from robust enough to predict protein–protein structures for these transient complexes. Indeed, a paramount goal of computational studies is to gain the requisite understanding of protein–protein structures of all classes so that predictive algorithms can be designed and implemented (Janin et al., 1988; Jones and Thronton, 1995; Conte et al., 1998; Mintz et al., 2005; Jones, 2012).At the most basic level, analysis of the stability of discrete monomers extracted from complexes can give clues whether the resulting protein–protein complex is permanent or transient (Gunasekaran et al., 2004). However, other classifications of protein–protein interface types can be made with computational analyses that have focused on what can be learned from the sequences and folding of the interacting proteins. Using only the amino acid composition of a protein–protein complex, Ofran and Rost (2003) were able to statistically predict interface classes correctly in a high fraction of the studied cases. In fact, tools using only protein expression information have been shown to predict complex type even in the absence of a 3D structure (Jansen et al., 2002; Tirosh and Barakai, 2005; Zanivan et al., 2007).There are differences in secondary structure between obligate and non-obligate complexes, including increased overall flexibility and fewer β-sheets in the latter, but more cysteine–cysteine disulphide bonds in the former (De et al., 2005). Salt-bridges and hydrogen bonds are more frequently found, and thus stabilize, transient complexes (Ozbabacan et al., 2011), while the contact area of interfaces in non-transient complexes is larger and they are more hydrophobic (Ozbabacan et al., 2011; De et al., 2005). The relative mobility of surface amino acids between bound and unbound states can be correlated with the interface type, size and obligate nature of the complex (Zen et al., 2010). Interacting protein subunits with similar surface roughness are more likely to form obligate complexes with better geometric complementarity between protomers (Bera and Ray, 2009). It is also possible, as shown by Garma et al. (2012), to identify quaternary fold families and categorize protein–protein interfaces on that basis.Machine learning approaches have also been applied to this classification problem. Zhu et al. (2006) showed that biological interactions can be differentiated from non-biological (crystal lattice) contacts and that obligate can be differentiated from non-obligate interactions with support vector machine (SVM) classification with the NOXclass algorithm that utilizes six different attributes: (i) interface area, (ii) ratio of interface area to protein surface area, (iii) amino acid composition of the interface, (iv) correlation between amino acid compositions of the interface and of the overall protein surface, (v) interface shape complementarity and (vi) conservation of the interface. Other SVM-based classifiers purported to predict protein–protein interface types have fared more poorly (Ding et al., 2011), but using linear dimensionality reduction in conjunction with SVMs has had recent successes in these classifications (Aziz et al., 2011; Maleki and Rueda, 2011; Banerjee et al., 2012; Vasudev and Rueda, 2012). Lastly, atomic contact vectors representing the physicochemical characteristics of protein–protein interfaces have been used as metrics in machine learning algorithms to differentiate between transient recognition complexes and permanent oligomeric complexes (Mintseris and Weng, 2003).All structure regimes, from primary (sequence) to quaternary, encode valuable information regarding the association of proteins to form protein–protein complexes, whether they are transient or permanent. Computational tools to analyze these structures, particularly those derived from X-ray crystallographic structure models, have been reasonably successful in retrospectively classifying interface types. However, all of the aforementioned studies have virtually ignored a key component of the reaction between protomers: the solvent. Just as exploiting water as a component in designing inhibitors for a single protein or enzyme target has become a consistent theme in structure-based drug design, proper understanding of the roles of water molecules in protein–protein complexes may lead to improved design of small molecule interaction inhibitors or modulators of these complexes, which is a burgeoning field (Robineau et al., 2000; Ravelli et al., 2004; Vassilev et al., 2004; Kar et al., 2012; Bienstock, 2012; Carry and Garcia-Echeverria, 2013; Walter et al., 2013; Azzarito et al., 2013; Szilágyi et al., 2013). Limited research to date has been devoted to studying the importance of water molecules in the function and association of protein–protein complexes. Of note, Baker has designed protein–protein interfaces incorporating explicit water molecules (Joachimiak et al., 2006; Meenan et al., 2010; Jiang et al., 2008), and Janin has analyzed hydration (Janin, 1999; Dey et al., 2010; Rodier et al., 2005) in protein–protein structure and interactions. Exploitation of water has been suggested to be an alternative strategy used by proteins to achieve optimum association (Keskin et al., 2005; Keskin and Nussinov, 2007). A number of studies by Pisabarro and colleagues have begun to illustrate the roles played by solvent at protein–protein interfaces (Samsonov et al., 2008, 2009; Teyra and Pisabarro, 2007). While approaches for including water explicitly and implicitly in protein–ligand docking protocols (Jiang et al., 2005; van Dijk and Bonvin, 2006; Li and Lazaridis, 2007; Graaf et al., 2005; Jackson et al., 1998; Zuo et al., 2010) and in predicting positions of waters in protein systems (Young et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2011; Goodford, 1985) have been reported, only very tentative steps for inclusion of water in protein–protein docking have been reported (Samsonov et al., 2011; van Dijk and Bonvin, 2006).Hydropathy, i.e., the polarity/lipophilicity of biological molecules, is the major factor that stabilizes protein–protein association; thus, surface complementarity plays a selective role in defining which proteins may associate (Larsen et al., 1998). Not surprisingly, water – the key player in hydropathy – has significant and varied contributions to protein–protein binding mechanisms (Antonyuk et al., 2013). The most basic and obvious role is to bridge polar interactions that are either too distant or energetically unfavorable. But, because of entropy, water molecules are also important even when they are displaced! Water molecules were also found to be crucial in predicting hot spots (residues accounting for disproportionate binding free energy) in protein–protein complexes due to their displacement, which is a consequence of the hydrophobic effect (Oshima et al., 2011). Similarly, a recent review of polyproline recognition by protein–protein interaction domains showed that combining hydrophobic interactions with strong networks of water-mediated hydrogen bonds is a mechanism that has often been exploited to favor the adaptability and plasticity of different families of proteins (Zafra-Ruano and Luque, 2012).In a recent study from our laboratory (Ahmed et al., 2011), a dataset of 179 high-resolution (<2.30Å) X-ray crystal structures composed of mainly biological hetero-protein–protein complexes with all hydrogens in optimized orientations, we reported that, of the 4741 interfacial water molecules: (a) 21% were involved in (bridging) interactions favorable with both proteins, (b) 53% were favorably interacting with only one protein, and (c) 26% had no favorable interactions with either protein. This trend was independent of crystallographic resolution, which supports the assertion that the majority of even the water molecules unfavorable with respect to both proteins are not crystallographic assignment errors or artifacts. It was also shown that the interactions of water molecules with residue backbones are consistent for all classes, accounting for 21.5% of all interactions, and that interactions with polar residues are significantly more common for bridging waters while interactions with non-polar residues dominate the last group. Water molecules that interact favorably with both proteins stabilize, on average, the protein–protein interaction by −0.46kcalmol−1, but overall, the average contribution of a single water molecule to the protein–protein interaction energy is negligible (+0.03kcalmol−1). Perhaps most interestingly, analysis of the waters without favorable interactions with either protein suggests that this is a conserved phenomenon: 42% of these waters have SASA ≤10Å2 and are thus largely buried within the protein–protein interface, and 69% of these are within predominantly hydrophobic environments or what we term “hydrophobic bubbles”. Such water molecules may have an important biological purpose in mediating and/or lubricating protein–protein interactions as previously suggested (Jones and Thronton, 1996).These results were so fundamental and intriguing that we have expanded the investigation to a larger and more themed dataset in order to better understand roles of water molecules in forming the interfaces of, in this report, the two main classes of protein–protein complexes: biological and non-biological. This work describes a detailed analysis of interfacial water molecules found in 252 X-ray crystal structures of protein–protein complexes extracted from the RCSB Protein Data Bank (Keskin et al., 2008). Of the 252 structures, 140 are from biological homo-protein–protein complexes, while the remaining structures are from non-biological protein–protein interfaces, i.e., protein–protein interaction surfaces that are likely formed as a result of crystallization.From a global perspective, we are comparing the exquisite “engineering” of Nature with man-made constructs. As motivation, Janin suggests that understanding and being able to predict non-biological associations could be key to discriminating inappropriate protein–protein binding that leads to disease (Bahadur et al., 2004). The surface structures of proteins were designed to achieve multiple goals such as giving them appropriate solubility, as well as providing recognition sites and surfaces for interaction. Does this set of properties give rise to unintended consequences when proteins associate in non-biological ways? In these contexts, our investigations of the role of water with respect to biological vs. non-biological protein–protein interactions should prove valuable.The protein–protein complex dataset was obtained from the RSCB Protein Data Bank (Keskin et al., 2008) by applying search filters for several structural criteria. First, the structures were required to have only two separate identical protein entities in the asymmetric unit, where each contained at least 100 amino acids. Structures with either DNA or RNA were excluded, as were structures with sequence identity similarity >50% to another protein complex in the set. The dataset was restricted to structures with resolutions 2.3Å and better. This set of PDB structures consisted of protein complexes with both biological and non-biological interfacial interactions. Further screening of the structure description coded in the coordinate files isolated candidate protein–protein complexes for individual inspection; in particular, biological complexes were separated from non-biological complexes based on REMARK 350. Finally, 252 structures were randomly selected from this set for the present analysis. See Supporting Information, Tables S1 and S2, for the list of the protein structures used in this study.Then, using SYBYL-X 2.0 (Tripos LP, 2013, www.tripos.com, St. Louis, MO, USA), hydrogen atoms were added and minimized (Tripos forcefield, with Gasteiger–Hückel charges and distance-dependent dielectric) to a gradient of 0.01kcalmol−1Å−1, while the positions of the non-hydrogen atoms were held fixed. Water molecules that were within 4.0Å from atoms on both of the interacting proteins were retained from each protein–protein complex as the water dataset of interest, which contains 4913 unique water molecules.The surface composition analysis was performed with MOLCAD (in SYBYL-X 2.0). For the determination of interfaces’ atom composition, a MOLCAD separating surface was created between the two protomers of each protein–protein complex. Atoms within the Van der Waals radius (rvdW) of this surface were considered interfacial atoms and any amino acid with at least one atom within rvdWof this surface was considered an interfacial amino acid. Interface areas were computed as the areas of the MOLCAD separating surfaces.Each model contains two proteins and an array of solvents, and was analyzed with HINT (Kellogg and Abraham, 2000; Sarkar and Kellogg, 2010) by computing intermolecular scores between the proteins and the interfacial solvent arrays. The HINT score (HTOTAL) is a double sum over all atom-atom pairs of the product (bij) of the hydrophobic atom constants (ai, partial logPoctanol/water) and atom solvent accessible surface areas (Si) for the interacting atoms, mediated by a function of the distance between the atoms:(1)HTOTAL=∑i∑jbij=∑i∑j(aiSiajSjTijRij+rij)where Rijis a simple exponential function, e−r(Kellogg and Abraham, 2000), rijis an adaptation of the Lennard–Jones function (Levitt, 1983; Levitt and Perutz, 1988), and Tijis a logic function assuming +1 or −1 values, depending on the polar (Lewis acid or base) nature of interacting atoms. HINT parameters and controls were as in previous studies (Spyrakis et al., 2007; Marabotti et al., 2008; Amadasi et al., 2006): partition calculations were performed with the “dictionary” method for the proteins with “essential” hydrogens, where polar hydrogens are treated explicitly and non-polar hydrogens are “united” with their parent non-polar heavy atom; the HINT option that corrects the Siterms for backbone amide nitrogens by adding 30Å2 was used in this study to improve the relative energetics of inter- and intramolecular hydrogen bonds involving these nitrogens. Water molecules are partitioned as a “solvent set” with analogous HINT parameters. Previous work (Cozzini et al., 2004; Burnett et al., 2001) has indicated that approximately 500 HINT score units correspond to −1.0kcalmol−1 of free energy.Each crystallographically observed water's orientation was optimized by an exhaustive protocol (Kellogg and Chen, 2004) that maximizes the HINT score with respect to its surrounding environment by evaluating its interactions with a “receptor” created from atoms within 6.0Å. For water molecules, this optimization rewards hydrogen bond and acid/base interactions while penalizing acid/acid and base/base interactions and those with hydrophobic entities on either of the two protein surfaces. Hydropathic interaction analysis was then performed with HINT for each of the optimized water molecules with respect to the two proteins with which it interacts. Tables S3 and S4 in Supporting Information list each water molecule and its thus optimized score. The resulting data were tabulated by frequency and strength of interactions with each amino acid residue type. In cases where a water molecule had significant interactions (>|10| HINT score units, approximately |0.02|kcalmol−1) with more than one residue on a protein, that water's count was fractionally distributed to interacting residues based on the absolute values of the relative HINT scores for those residues that interact with it. Thus, the weighted counts (W) or frequency of observation for each residue type (i) are given by:(2)Wi=∑n|Aic|∑i|Ai|whereAicare the interaction HINT scores by residue type interacting with water n. Similarly, the fractions of interactions with interfacial water molecules arising from backbone and sidechain atoms were calculated by weighted counts, withAicrepresenting the interaction HINT scores by i, separated into c=sidechain or c=backbone subsets. Heat maps for frequency and interaction scores and map clustering were calculated and drawn with the gplots package (Warnes, 2013) in R (R Core Team, 2013, www.R-project.org). We used complete-linkage agglomerative clustering with the “Euclidian” distance type.Rank represents the weighted number of potential hydrogen bonds for each water molecule with respect to a pseudo-receptor of atoms from the target molecule(s) surrounding the water. Rank is calculated as:(3)Rank=∑n2.80Årn+∑mcos(ϑTd−ϑnm)6where rnis the distance between the water's oxygen and the target's heavy atom n (n is the number of interaction hydrogen bond donor/acceptor (doneptor) targets up to a maximum of 4). This is scaled relative to 2.8Å, the presumed ideal hydrogen bond length. θTdis the optimum tetrahedral angle (109.5°) and θnmis the angle between targets n and m (m=n to number of valid targets). The algorithm thus allows a maximum number of 4 doneptor targets (≤2 donors and ≤2 acceptors, i.e., like H2O). To properly weight the geometrical quality of hydrogen bonds, targets that have an angle less than 60° with respect to other (higher quality) targets are rejected (Kellogg and Chen, 2004) (See Tables S3 and S4.)Relevance is a pseudo-Bayesian synthesis of HINT score and Rank (Amadasi et al., 2008). Specifically,(4)Relevance=PR(|WR|+1)2+PH(|WH|+1)2(|WR|+1)2+(|WH|+1)2where PRis the percent probability for water conservation based on Rank and PHthe probability based on HINT score. WRand WHare the weights for these probabilities, respectively. The values for PR, PH, WRand WHare as shown in Fig. 2 of Amadasi et al. (2008). This relationship was derived for protein-ligand complexes with the expectation that water molecules with Relevance ≥0.5 would be conserved and those with Relevance <0.5 would be non-conserved because the waters analyzed in developing the training set were, by their nature, binary – either conserved and present in the ligand-bound complex or non-conserved and absent in the complex (See Tables S3 and S4.)To see if a predictive model for interface class could be constructed from metrics within our analyses, the dataset was processed with the Waikato Environment for Knowledge Analysis (WEKA, v. 3.6.5), which is a comprehensive collection of machine learning algorithms and data preprocessing tools including several algorithms for classification (Hall et al., 2009). All attributes that we collected were filtered using the “CfsSubsetEval” evaluator to estimate the value of an attribute subset by considering the individual predictive ability of each attribute along with its redundancy, and selected using the “BestFirst” attribute search method–a greedy hill climbing algorithm with augmented backtracking. All available WEKA classification methods were tested on our dataset. The Support Vector Machine (SVM) classifier (Cortes and Vapnik, 1995) was found to perform best. Another round of attribute selection, optimized for SVM, using “ClassifierSubsetEval” with default options was performed. Attributes from the automated selection process were normalized and the SVM classifier was trained by an implementation of John Platt's sequential minimal optimization algorithm (Platt, 1998), which generates a soft-margin model. The following parameters were used for training: the C parameter was 1 and not optimized, the “Polynomial” kernel was used with an exponent of 1, and the epsilon for round-off error was 10−12.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This analysis of water molecules at biological and non-biological protein–protein interfaces has revealed new information about the structure of these interfaces. Our analysis was anchored by the HINT free energy forcefield and the Relevance metric. The former characterizes the types and qualities of interactions between the interface waters and proteins, while the latter is a simple parameter that was previously shown to identify water molecules conserved/non-conserved in ligand binding sites (Amadasi et al., 2008). This work on homodimer complexes, differentiating between biological (largely obligate) and non-biological interfaces, extended a previous study (Ahmed et al., 2011) of heterodimer complexes that were generally transiently formed.First, from the perspective of water, there are surprisingly few differences between the earlier heterodimer and the present homodimer datasets. The broadest classification scheme we employed, by Relevance, showed the same distribution of waters (within 1%) amongst the Relevance Zero, One and Two classes. This was somewhat surprising, as we expected that homodimer formation would be using bridging waters more profitably than heterodimers. Clearly, water is more than ubiquitous in protein–protein systems: it is pervasive. Second, even the differences between biological interfaces and crystallographic (non-biological) interfaces are relatively modest at the Relevance class level: there are 5% more Relevance Zero waters at the non-biological interfaces, resulting in 3% and 2% fewer Relevance One and Zero waters, respectively, at non-biological interfaces. Again, this is somewhat surprising, as we expected a significantly larger fraction of Relevance Zero waters for the artificial constructs of crystallographic contacts, and a much larger fraction of Relevance Two waters for the obligate/biological interfaces where folding and association are more or less simultaneous, i.e., engineered by Nature. Third, looking much deeper into the differences by analyzing the roles of different residues at these interfaces revealed a few notable observations: (i) non-biological interfaces are more polar than biological interfaces, yet there is better organized hydrogen bonding at the latter; (ii) biological associations rely more on water-mediated interactions with backbone atoms compared to non-biological associations; (iii) aromatic/planar residues play a larger role in biological associations with respect to water because these residues would not normally be found on the surface unless there was a planned role for them; and (iv) Lys has a peculiar role: it is often found on protein surfaces with its main role apparently solvating the protein, but because of its flexibility and reach, plays an out-sized role in forming non-biological interfaces as it can often find a direct or water-mediated hydrogen-bonding partner.The Relevance Zero waters remain fascinating: we showed in our previous analysis of transient protein–protein complexes that these water molecules are fairly commonly found (7.4%) in “hydrophobic bubbles” (Ahmed et al., 2011), and proposed that such conserved waters may have a role in lubricating or aggravating interfaces that Nature did not intend to be permanent. In the case of biological interfaces 7.95% of Relevance zero waters were found in “hydrophobic bubbles” while in the case of non-biological interfaces 7.98% were found in “hydrophobic bubbles”. Certainly, hydrophobic bubbles may contribute to instability of non-biological complexes and prevent them from forming complexes under non-crystallographic conditions. However, the role for these waters in biological interfaces, in this set of obligate complexes, is more difficult to ascertain. Perhaps they are lubricants for the folding process or contribute to the formation of gaps between protein partners to keep them at optimal distance for their intended biological function.Biological protein–protein interfaces were engineered in a well-ordered manner to serve a large number of biological purposes. We, by optimizing crystallization conditions, etc. have fashioned new protein–protein interfaces that were not intended by Nature. However, they are in many regards amazingly similar. From the perspective of the interfacial water they have only modest distinguishing characteristics. As the science of protein engineering continues to advance, the engineering of protein–protein complexes that rationally utilize water molecules as nano-scale crystallization enhancers, while taking advantage of site-directed mutagenesis of surface residues that support water-mediated association, may become an emerging strategy. Similarly, expanding our knowledge about the roles of water molecules at protein–protein interfaces may be exploitable in developing inhibitors for protein–protein complexes. In this regard, special attention should be paid to displacing Relevance Two waters since their binding sites are very well suited for hydrogen bonding, acid/base and/or Coulombic interactions with small molecules that would interfere with binding of the protomers.Our long-term overarching goal is to develop tools for estimating the energetics of protein–protein associations and de novo predict their structure. This work represents a small piece of that effort. Another consideration for accurately modeling and energetically evaluating protein–protein interfaces is proper assignment of ionization states for acidic and basic residues, both wet and dry, at or near the interface. Clearly, such ionizable residues are major players in these interfaces. To this end, we are adapting our Computational Titration procedure (Bayden et al., 2009), a tool originally designed for modeling (e.g., Spyrakis et al., 2004) and virtual screening of protein–ligand systems. In practice, Computational Titration exhaustively models each set of ionization states (protonated or deprotonated, nominally dependent on pH and pKa for isolated residues) for the ensemble of considered residues, i.e., all Arg, Asp, Glu, His, Lys and possibly Cys and Tyr. While this is practicable for small systems, the number of such residues at an interface is much too large for exhaustive sampling and we are installing a genetic algorithm front end to rationally sample the many potential ionization state ensembles present. We pointed out earlier (Ahmed et al., 2011) that water has unique properties as a nano-buffer in that it can maintain water-mediated interactions under pH stress, i.e., by simply rotating, a water can change from a hydrogen bond donor to an acceptor. Thus, these two effects – accounting for water mediation and ionization state optimization – are intimately linked. We are also interested in examining in more detail other types of interfaces, e.g., obligate, non-obligate and transient with respect to their energetics – with and without water mediation. In this regard, once we have ionization-state optimized models for protein–protein interfaces, and can confidently evaluate direct residue-residue interactions, we are envisioning a more robust interface classifier that can differentiate amongst this full range of interface types, by including descriptors that represent the direct as well as indirect (water-mediated) contributions to protein–protein interactions.