@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Identification of potential Tpx inhibitors against pathogen-host interactions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Eight ligands from different chemotypes potentially inhibit Tpx.Asp 57, Glu 156, Ile 153, Phe 89, Ser 55, Thr 154 are the key residues in binding.RMSD values of each ligand pose from IFD explain stable interaction mode in Tpx.MD simulation shows that binding occurs in the region close to the dimer interface.Final ligands are also selective for Tpx, no tendency in hERG and Cytochrome P450.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Tpx,Virtual screening,Molecular docking,Efficiency index,Substructure search,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Yersinia organisms cause many infectious diseases by invading human cells and delivering their virulence factors via the type three secretion system (T3SS). One alternative strategy in the fight against these pathogenic organisms is to interfere with their T3SS. Previous studies demonstrated that thiol peroxidase, Tpx is functional in the assembly of T3SS and its inhibition by salicylidene acylhydrazides prevents the secretion of pathogenic effectors. In this study, the aim was to identify potential inhibitors of Tpx using an integrated approach starting with high throughput virtual screening and ending with molecular dynamics simulations of selected ligands. Virtual screening of ZINC database of 500,000 compounds via ligand-based and structure-based pharmacophore models retrieved 10,000 hits. The structure-based pharmacophore model was validated using high-throughput virtual screening (HTVS). After multistep docking (SP and XP), common scaffolds were used to find common substructures and the ligand binding poses were optimized using induced fit docking. The stability of the protein–ligand complex was examined with molecular dynamics simulations and the binding free energy of the complex was calculated. As a final outcome eight compounds with different chemotypes were proposed as potential inhibitors for Tpx. The eight ligands identified by a detailed virtual screening protocol can serve as leads in future drug design efforts against the destructive actions of pathogenic bacteria.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Yersinia species, known to be facultative parasites, cause infectious diseases such as Yersiniosis (Smego et al., 1999) and plague, and autoimmune diseases like reactive arthritis and Crohn’s disease (Malekzadeh et al., 2009; Nikkari et al., 1992). These pathogenic organisms utilize the type III secretion system (T3SS) to transmit their powerful effectors into the host cytoplasm. These effectors inhibit the cellular signaling mechanism and prevent the defensive response in the host cell (Edgren et al., 2012). Therefore, disruption of the secretion effectors is an attractive alternative to the currently used antimicrobials and discovery of T3SS inhibitors is an area of increasing research interest (Nordfelth et al., 2005). After the discovery of salicylidene acylhydrazides as T3SS inhibitors (Nordfelth et al., 2005), the potential targets of this group of compounds were identified to be Tpx WrbA and FolX (Wang et al., 2011). The binding of one member to thiol peroxidase, Tpx in Yersinia pseudotuberculosis was then demonstrated by NMR (Gabrielsen et al., 2012) suggesting that the mechanism of action for acylhydrazides may be via inhibition of Tpx. Tpx which belongs to the Thioredoxin superfamily, Peroxiredoxin family and Atypical 2-cysteine subfamily, regulates expression of T3SS and it enhances the bacterial defense system against reactive oxygen species by utilizing reducing forms of thioredoxin (Trx1) and thioredoxin reductase (TrxR) to reduce alkyl hydroperoxides. It also plays a key role in activation of transcription factors and signaling (Flohe et al., 2011). Two cysteine residues, C61 (resolving) and C95 (peroxidatic), form the redox active disulphide bond in Tpx. Tpx is a dimer in solution as shown by sedimentation equilibrium (SE) data (Gabrielsen et al., 2012). The active site residues that contribute to ligand binding have been determined by NMR (Gabrielsen et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2011). The crystal structure of Tpx (Fig. 1) suggests that the binding pocket is mostly hydrophobic (Gabrielsen et al., 2012).The aim of this study was to design novel and potent Tpx inhibitors via structure-based and ligand-based pharmacophore modeling followed by molecular docking approach. The selected hypothesis in the structure-based pharmacophore modeling was verified with high-throughput virtual screening (HTVS). The pharmacophore hypothesis was used to screen 500,000 compounds from the ZINC database. The selected molecules were docked by SP followed by XP mode by taking ligand flexibility into account. The compounds with high docking scores, low strain energy and favorable ADME properties were used in induced fit docking, and molecular dynamics simulations. The interactions of the compounds with the protein were analyzed in detail. As a final outcome, eight compounds from different chemotypes including n-benzylformamide, 1,2-dimethoxybenzene and phenoxyethanol were proposed as potential Tpx inhibitors.All virtual screening applications for the discovery of potential Tpx inhibitors were carried out using Maestro interface of Schrodinger’s Small Drug Discovery Suite 2013 (Schrödinger, 2013) and the workflow of the proposed study is displayed in Fig. 2.In computer-aided drug design, combination of the results of multiple virtual screening protocols gives rise to high-quality lead compounds against a target protein (Tanrikulu et al., 2013; Wilson and Lill, 2011; Zander et al., 2010). In the current study, two different pharmacophore models were applied to obtain different chemotypes of inhibitors for Tpx.Structure-based pharmacophore modeling involves an analysis of the chemical features of the active site and their relationships and a subsequent pharmacophore model assembly with selected features. In our study, a crystal structure (PDB code: 3ZRD) of oxidized Tpx receptor was used to generate a structure-based pharmacophore model, using the E-pharmacophores script. Protein structure was prepared via Protein Preparation Wizard (PPW) module. Missing hydrogens were added to heavy atoms and missing loops and side chains were filled (chain A residues: 4, 17, 141, 167, chain B residues: 17, 24, 26, 33, 67, 124, 167). No water molecules were included because there was no mention of important water mediated contacts in the literature. Hydrogen-bonding network was optimized by reorienting hydroxyl and thiol groups, amide groups of asparagines and glutamines, and imidazole ring of histidines. The energy was minimized by setting the maximum heavy atom RMSD to 0.30Å using the OPLS_2005 (Optimized Potentials for Liquid Simulations) force field. Grid box was generated using Glide (Halgren et al., 2004) such that the center of the grid box was at the center of the Tpx active binding site including Leu 35 and Phe 89 residues of chain A and Phe 7, Phe 53, Pro 54, Thr 58, Cys 61, Val 65, Phe 94, Leu 127, Arg 133, Ile 153 and Thr 154 residues of chain B (Gabrielsen et al., 2012). A positional constraint with Isoleucine 153 residue which plays a significant role in the active binding site (Gabrielsen et al., 2012) was also added to the specified grid. After completing protein preparation and grid generation, a fragment library (Halgren et al., 2004), which includes 667 conformers of 441 unique fragments, was docked to Tpx using extra precision (XP) mode of Glide. Common features of the docked fragments were obtained by Phase and the E-pharmacophore script. Seven possible pharmacophore sites were ranked based on their energies as H1489, R2265, H1450, R1807, H1401, A577 and R2170 (hydrogen bond acceptor (A), hydrophobic (H), aromatic ring (R)). H1489, R2265 and H1401 sites were selected as HRH pharmacophore hypothesis by taking into account the distance between pharmacophore sites (Fig. 2 and Table S1).HTVS of 500,000 molecules from the ZINC database was carried out to validate the selected hypothesis in structure-based pharmacophore modeling. Using positional constraint with Ile 153 residue, common features of the compounds were created. Seven pharmacophore sites were ranked as R1013, H597, R998, R1017, H637, P777 and H600 (positively charged group (P)). After evaluation of the distances between pharmacophore sites (Table S2), HRH hypothesis was selected using H597, R1013 and H600 sites.27 active salicylidene acylhydrazide derivatives (9 compounds from (Nordfelth et al., 2005) and 18 molecules from (Dahlgren et al., 2010) which were previously shown to inhibit Tpx and display at least 40% inhibition at 50μ M ligand concentration were utilized for hypothesis generation via Phase (Dixon et al., 2006). LigPrep (Chen and Foloppe, 2010) was used to generate low-energy 3D structures of these ligands. All possible ionization states of ligands were generated at neutral pH and maximum 32 stereoisomers were generated for each ligand. The energy of the structures was minimized with ConfGen (Watts et al., 2010) and maximum 100 conformers per ligand were selected. Pharmacophore sites were generated by Phase. In this study, maximum five points were used to generate a ligand-based hypothesis because use of more points decreased the likelihood of finding common pharmacophores. Overall quality of each hypothesis was measured from its survival score which is a combination of alignment (site) score, vector score and volume score. Alignment (site) score is the root-mean squared deviation (RMSD) in the site-point positions. Vector score is the average cosine of the angles formed by corresponding pairs of vector features as acceptors, donors and aromatic rings in the structure. Volume score is the overlap of van der Waals spheres of the non-hydrogen atoms in each pair. Based on these evaluations, the hypothesis AADDR was chosen for virtual screening operations.In our study, the pharmacophore hypotheses based on the Tpx structure or the 27 experimentally identified ligands (Nordfelth et al., 2005; Dahlgren et al., 2010) were utilized to screen 500,000 drug-like compounds, selected by Lipinski’s rule of five, from the ZINC database (Irwin et al., 2012). The compounds were sorted based on their fitness to selected hypothesis. Finally, 10,000 compounds with minimum fitness of 1.90 to HRH model and 10,000 compounds with minimum fitness of 1.25 to AADDR model were chosen for docking.The 10,000 filtered molecules of each hypothesis were docked onto the Tpx structure using standard precision (SP) and extra precision (XP) of Glide 6.0 consecutively. Tpx dimer structure (PDB code: 3ZRD) was prepared and the grid was generated such that the active site residues mentioned in Section 2.1.1 were included. Maximum ten poses per compound were generated in both docking modes. Ligand poses were ranked based on GlideGscore, which is based on ChemScore (Friesner et al., 2004) and only best scoring hit was kept in final list. Top 10% of the docked ligands according to SP Gscore were docked using XP mode (1000 compounds). The threshold GlideGscore value for the ligands, which were then used in post-docking, was selected based on the distribution of the GlideGscores.After docking, the high-ranking poses were analyzed based on efficiency indices, ligand strain, ADME properties and protein-ligand interactions. Ligands with high strain values due to rigid receptor docking were identified via ligand strain calculations of Strain-Rescore script. The ligands that had higher than 4kcal/mol energy difference between bound and free conformations received penalties and quarter of this energy difference was added to the GScore, resulting in corrected Gscore values. The ligands were further evaluated by calculations of the ligand efficiency index (LEI), which is the gibbs free energy per the number of non-hydrogen atoms in the compound, surface efficiency index (SEI), which monitors the potency gains as related to the increase in polar surface area (PSA) normalized by 100Å2 and binding efficiency index (BEI), which relates potency values to molecular weight on a per kilodalton scale, and by comparison with the reference values of BEI and SEI in literature (Metz and Abad-Zapatero, 2005; Abad-Zapatero, 2007; Perisic et al., 2010; Hopkins et al., 2014). The pharmacokinetic properties for absorption, distribution, excretion and metabolism (ADME) (Milic et al., 2014) were evaluated using QikProp module (Ioakimidis et al., 2008). The residues that interact with the ligands were identified.To identify a diverse set of chemical scaffolds as potential inhibitors, the similarity between compounds with docking scores higher than −7kcal/mol, while the GlideGscores of 1000 compounds were between −9.7kcal/mol and −1.2kcal/mol, was determined using hierarchical clustering and scaffold decomposition in the Canvas module (Duan et al., 2010; Sastry et al., 2010). The common scaffolds of the ligands with favorable BEI values were picked out and the ZINC database was screened with that scaffold again in order to obtain additional high scoring ligands which were missed in the pharmacophore filtering stage (Xu et al., 2012).After identification of a set of compounds, their binding mode was further examined by IFD. Initially, Glide XP docking of chosen hits to the rigid receptor was performed. Prime was used to generate maximum 20 poses for each ligand and the residues within 5Å of 20 poses. Receptor side chain flexibility was introduced while the coordinates of other residues and the backbone remained fixed. Finally, the ligands were rigorously redocked in Glide XP mode into the lowest energy induced fit receptor structure with no scaling (vdW scaling of 1) and their final scores were obtained.Relative binding affinities of ligands to the Tpx were computed based on the interaction and desolvation of components using Prime MM-GBSA (Molecular Mechanics—Generalized Born Solvent Accessible Surface Area) panel (Hayes et al., 2011). Binding free energy in the MM-GBSA formulation is calculated by subtracting the free energy of the Tpx-ligand complex from the sum of the free energy values for Tpx and the ligand. The free energy of each molecular system includes total molecular mechanics energy in the gas phase, solvation free energy and entropy terms. Total molecular mechanics energy is the sum of the internal (bonded), and electrostatic and van der Waals energies (non-bonded). The solvation free energy contains polar and non-polar contributions. The polar interactions are derived from Poisson–Boltzmann model and the non-polar interactions are related to the solvent-accessible surface area.Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations were performed on the protein-ligand complex using Desmond module and the OPLS 2005 force field. The simulation system included the protein, ligand, explicit solvent and counter ions. The ligand was immersed in an orthorhombic box (417715Å3) of TIP3P water model (solvent) including 11234 water molecules. Nine Na+ ions were added to neutralize the overall charge of the simulated system. Sodium chloride was also added at a concentration of 0.15M. At the beginning of the simulation process, the system energy was minimized. Then, at 10K, two consecutive relaxation processes, one with the NVT ensemble and the other with the NPT ensemble at 1atm, were performed followed by equilibration using NPT ensemble at 300K and 1atm for a 48ps run. A cutoff radius of 9Å and an integration time step of 2fs were applied for the long-range electrostatic interactions and the bonds including hydrogen atoms, respectively. After the relaxation protocol, simulation of the protein-ligand complex was carried out in a 50ns run.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
An integrated workflow starting with pharmacophore modeling, molecular docking followed by substructure search of ZINC database with the common scaffolds obtained after docking was applied to identify potential Tpx inhibitors. Two kinds of pharmacophore models, structure-based, HRH which is validated by HTVS, based on the information of the active binding site, and ligand-based, AADDR, based on the previously identified Tpx inhibitors, were built to screen novel Tpx inhibitors. After molecular docking, 103 compounds in total were identified as putative inhibitors. In addition, substructure search of common scaffolds of clusters including n-benzylformamide (Itou et al., 2003), 1,2-dimethoxybenzene (a sedative and commonly known as veratrol (Mori et al., 2006)) and phenoxyethanol (a preservative in cosmetics, vaccines and pharmaceuticals (Spaulding et al., 2013)) was used to retrieve additional novel ligands, ZINC55099370 (Table S5), and ZINC12298678 (Table S6), which had 1.35 and 1.30 fitness to HRH hypothesis and ZINC13810798 (Table S11), which had 1.23 fitness to AADDR hypothesis. Thus, the substructure search based on the scaffolds identified after docking revealed new compounds which did not fall into the first sets of 10 000 compounds retrieved from database searches. As a final outcome, a total of 31 compounds based on high docking score, favorable fitness value to pharmacophore model, low molecular weight, high BEI and% HOA values were obtained. Out of 31 molecules, eight ligands from different chemotypes which had high docking score, fitness and BEI value were proposed as potential inhibitors for Tpx. Induced fit docking was performed to find favorable binding conformations for selected eight ligands. The most significant movements were observed for Ile 153, Glu 156 and Phe 53 residues. Throughout the MD simulation, the ligand binds to Tpx in the region close to the dimer interface. The similarity between proposed ligands and 27 previously identified inhibitors were lower than 0.3 suggesting that a new class of chemotypes for Tpx inhibition have been obtained. Out of these eight ligands, 4 is an trypanothione (parasite analog of glutathione) reductase inhibitor (Horvath, 1997). Our results provide a new set of compounds for in vitro and in vivo experiments. If the efficacy of these compounds can be experimentally verified, these lead compounds will guide drug design efforts in fighting with pathogenic bacteria.