@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The optimization of running time for a maximum common substructure-based algorithm and its application in drug design

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We optimize the running time of the MCS-based algorithm.15–30s is a reasonable range for selecting a candidate time threshold.We evaluate the statistical relationship between an MCS coefficient and functional similarity.The potential biological activity of small molecules with unknown functions can be predicted using our methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Running time,MCS,Optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In the field of drug discovery, it is particularly important to discover bioactive compounds through high-throughput virtual screening. The maximum common substructure-based (MCS) algorithm is a promising method for the virtual screening of drug candidates. However, in practical applications, there is always a trade-off between efficiency and accuracy. In this paper, we optimized this method by running time evaluation using essential drugs defined by WHO and FDA-approved small-molecule drugs. The amount of running time allocated to the MCS-based virtual screening was varied, and statistical analysis was conducted to study the impact of computation running time on the screening results. It was determined that the running time efficiency can be improved without compromising accuracy by setting proper running time thresholds. In addition, the similarity of compound structures and its relevance to biological activity are analyzed quantitatively, which highlight the applicability of the MCS-based methods in predicting functions of small molecules. 15–30s was established as a reasonable range for selecting a candidate running time threshold. The effect of CPU speed is considered and the conclusion is generalized. The potential biological activity of small molecules with unknown functions can be predicted by the MCS-based methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Drug discovery is a highly complex and multidisciplinary process whose goal is to identify new drugs. Furthermore, it is time consuming and costly to search for new biologically active compounds using traditional high-throughput screening (Carnero, 2006). With the development of organic synthesis in recent years, more and more compounds have been synthesized and traditional high-throughput screening can no longer meet the needs of novel drug discovery (Dobson, 2004). Therefore, it is in urgent need of developing the quantity of drug-like compounds through computer-based predictive methods, such as similarity study and cluster analysis used in identification of drug-like compounds, and druggability prediction of small molecules using computational filtration technology and models (Bender and Glen, 2004; Cheng et al., 2007). Computer-Aided Drug Design (CADD) has become an integral part of drug discovery and development since 1980s (Marshall, 1987; Richards, 1994). Currently, high-throughput screening methods have been developed into integrated approaches that combine both computer-based in-silico and traditional in vitro screening to reduce the time of R&D and increase the success rate of drug discovery projects (Engels and Venkatarangan, 2001; Shen et al., 2003; Sirois et al., 2005).There are a number of computational methods for comparing the similarity of two chemical structures (Cao et al., 2008; Quintus et al., 2009). Methods based on substructure and superstructure relationships are commonly used in structure similarity studies of CADD. These types of methods use substructure related to a particular biological activity as the keyword to search an existing database, and the resulting compounds that contain the substructure may share similar activities. However, this comparison strategy is too strict, and does not provide quantitative scores, which leaves the problem of meaningful ordering of the computational results unaddressed.An alternative type of approach, based on structural descriptors, is also commonly used in structural similarity search and activity prediction. Using these methods, structure descriptors are used to represent chemical structures and generate a quantitative measure of structural similarity. It is worth noting that not structure alignment, but rather comparison of structure descriptors, is used to calculate the similarity score. Examples of the commonly used structural descriptor-based methods include fingerprint, atom pair, etc. (Carhart et al., 1985; Chen and Reynolds, 2002). Although in practice this type of approach is simple and effective, one of the major drawbacks is that they cannot directly reflect the overall structural similarity between two compounds.Maximum common substructure (MCS) refers to the largest substructure shared by two compounds. First, MCS of drug structures is very likely to be the key structural element related to their activity. Second, this method allows the common part of a pair of chemical structures to be easily visualized. In addition, it avoids the disadvantages of many traditional methods, such as an overly strict comparison strategy or being limited to global similarity.There have been a number of theoretical studies on MCS. Despite the fact that it has long been seen as a promising method in comparing structural similarity between compounds, MCS has drawn far less attention than others, mostly due to the high intrinsic complexity of MCS computation (Conte et al., 2004). Searching for MCS is a very computationally intensive task, and the running time complexity increases exponentially with the number of atoms in the structure of the two molecules. Therefore, for molecules with large structures, the running time that is required to compute the MCS structure can be prohibitively long.The MCS toolkit developed by Cao et al. is an effective and easy-to-use implementation of an efficient MCS algorithm, and it provides a new avenue for the prediction of bioactive compounds (Cao et al., 2008). In Cao's MCS toolkit, a time-based cap can be applied to the MCS computation, and when the cap is reached and the optimal MCS has not been found, the computation is terminated and the best result searched is returned. In practice, there has always been a trade-off between computational speed and the accuracy of the result. What should be the optimal running time threshold? In this paper we will perform running time evaluation on this MCS algorithm to optimize this method.All ligand-based activity-prediction methods are built on a commonly accepted principle: the similar property principle (Johnson, 1990), which is based on the experimental observation that structurally similar compounds often exhibit similar physical and chemical properties and biological activities. Based on this principle, many quantitative similarity measures have been proposed to effectively represent the similarity between the compound structures and to predict their potential biological activities. In our study, a structural score of MCS will be characterized and its relationship to biological functions will be explored.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study focuses on how to optimally apply an MCS-based algorithm for drug design. Although the required processing can be time-consuming, the computational efficiency of the MCS-based algorithm could be greatly improved by setting the proper running time threshold. For choosing running time thresholds, one needs to consider the required accuracy level of the result and the average complexity of structures in the dataset. Based on our calculation, 15–30s is a reasonable range for selecting a candidate running time threshold. In this range, even for large molecules whose computation is terminated before an optimum can be found, and the difference between the returned result and the actual optimum is already small. The effect of CPU speed is evaluated and our conclusion is generalized.The MCS-based method can be used in many applications including database searching, high-throughput screening and functional prediction of small molecules (Song et al., 2009). Setting a proper running time threshold can alleviate the disadvantage of large running time complexity. By evaluating the statistical relationship between an MCS coefficient and functional similarity, the potential biological activity of small molecules with unknown functions can be predicted.