@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
In silico study of potential autoimmune threats from rotavirus infection

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Rotaviral outer capsid protein VP6 shares two eight amino acid regions with ryanodine receptor 2, a target in myasthenia gravis, a neurodegenerative disorder.These two regions remain conserved among most circulating rotavirus strains isolated from all over the world.These regions are potential B cell with considerable relative surface availability and antigenecity.These regions are potential T cell epitope with respect to HLA subtypes associated with myasthenia gravis.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Rota virus,Molecular mimicry,Myasthenia gravis,Autoimmunity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Rotavirus, the major cause of infantile nonbacterial diarrhea, was found to be associated with development of diabetes-associated auto-antibodies. In our study we tried to find out further potential autoimmune threats of this virus using bioinformatics approach.We took rotaviral proteins to study similarity with Homo sapiens proteome and found most conserved structural protein VP6 matches at two regions with ryanodine receptor, an autoimmune target associated with myasthenia gravis. Myasthenia gravis, a chronic neurodegenerative autoimmune disorder with no typical known reason, is characterized by fluctuating muscle weakness which is typically enhanced during muscular effort. Affected patients generate auto antibodies against mainly acetyl choline receptor and sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium-release channel protein ryanodine receptor. Further, we observed that two regions which matched with ryanodine receptor remain conserved in all circulating rotaviral strains and showed significant antigenecity with respect to myasthenia gravis associated HLA haplotypes.Overall, our study detected rotaviral VP6 as a potential threat for myasthenia gravis and enlighten an area of virus associated autoimmune research.Myasthenia gravisAcetylcholine receptorRyanodine receptorInusulinoma antigen 2Glutamic acid decarboxylaseImmune Epitope Database and Analysis ResourceMajor histocompatibility complexArtificial neural networkStabilized matrix method

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Autoimmune disease is a state of over reactive immune system. It is triggered due to the deterioration of immunologic tolerance to auto-reactive immune cells resulting in attack on self molecules. Myasthenia gravis, a chronic neuromuscular disorder, can lead to various degrees of neurologic dysfunction characterized by fluctuating, fatigable weakness of muscles under voluntary control (Thanvi and Lo, 2004). Although the basis of the disorder is not known, the involvement of immune responses in its pathogenesis is well established. Normally myasthenia gravis (MG) patients are found to produce antibodies against acetylcholine receptor (AChR), but some have antibodies against skeletal muscle antigens in addition (Meriggioli and Sanders, 2012). One major antigen for non-AchR antibodies in MG are the Ca2+ release channel of the sarcoplasmic reticulum, the ryanodine receptor (RyR) (Skeie et al., 2006). RyR antibodies are developed by mainly thymoma MG patients and a few late-onset MG patients and correlate with severe MG disease (Shelton et al., 2001). MG and other multiple human autoimmune diseases are also induced through various mechanisms such as molecular mimicry, epitope spreading, direct bystander activation, and release of cryptic epitopes (Olson et al., 2001).Molecular mimicry is defined as sharing of similar linear amino acids stretch or conformational fit between two different protein molecules of two different origins. During microbial infection, if the organism shares cross-reactive epitopes with the host, then the immune response to the infecting agent will also recognize and attack host protein, which become worsen with second, third, or repeated infection(s) that potentiate the autoimmune assault (Oldstone, 2005).Among the potential micro-organisms particularly viruses have been proposed as a cause of several autoimmune diseases in humans (von Herrath et al., 2003). For example, human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV1) has been implicated in various autoimmune arthropathies (Nishioka et al., 1993); herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) are linked with keratitis (Zhao et al., 1998); hepatitis C virus has been proposed as a initiator of various rheumatoid diseases (Romero Portales et al., 1997; McMurray and Elbourne, 1997) and Epstein–Barr virus has been associated with systemic lupus erythematosus (Parks et al., 2005). Coxsackieviruses and rubella virus have been proposed as causative agents of Type 1 diabetes (Atkinson et al., 1994; Yoon et al., 1989) and many viruses have been proposed as the ‘cause’ of multiple sclerosis (Monteyne et al., 1998). Myasthenia gravis, our subject of study, also reported to have viral connection. Molecular mimicry of herpes simplex virus (HSV) type 1 glycoprotein (Gp) D (amino acid residues 286–293) with a chain of human (Hu) AChR (amino acid residues 160–167) was suggested as a probable cause of myasthenia gravis initiation (Schwimmbeck et al., 1989)Rotavirus, a non-enveloped double stranded RNA virus belonging to the family reoviridae, is the major cause of severe gastroenteritis in children under age of 5 years (Gray et al., 2008; Kawai et al., 2012; Bhowmick et al., 2012) and causes two million hospitalizations and four hundred fifty thousand deaths per year worldwide (Kawai et al., 2012; Bhowmick et al., 2012). Although recent reports confirmed rotavirus infection may accelerate the progression of genetically-predisposed children to type 1 diabetes (Pane et al., 2014) but direct involvement of rotavirus with autoimmune diseases such as type 1 diabetes and celiac disease is contradictory (Honeyman et al., 2000; Blomqvist et al., 2002; Stene et al., 2006). In our study we have explored potential autoimmune threats to humans from rotavirus by analyzing presence of molecular mimicry in viral proteins with host proteome. In previous reports rotaviral structural protein VP7 was found to have molecular mimicry with IA2 and GAD 65, involved with type 1 diabetes. This study initiated with search of sequence similarity of viral proteins with human proteome and found no significant matches with host proteins other than in VP6 protein sequence. VP6 is a structural protein and form the second outer layer of the virus. It was found to possess two immunogenetically active epitope regions which share high similarity with ryanodine receptor 2, a target in myasthenia gravis. Other than relatively non-variability of VP6 protein sequences it is the most immunogenic among all the structural protein which substantiates the potentiality of our finding (Tang et al., 1997; Esteban et al., 2013).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
