@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Network-based ranking methods for prediction of novel disease associated microRNAs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
MicroRNA functional similarity networks are small-worldness and scale-free.Performance on the integrated miRNA network was better than that on individual ones.RWR, PRINCE, PRP and KSM perform comparably and are stable with change of parameters.Six novel breast cancer-associated miRNAs were predicted.Network-based ranking methods can be used effectively for disease miRNA prediction.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Network-based ranking algorithm,Prediction of novel disease-associated microRNAs,Breast cancer,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundMany studies have shown roles of microRNAs on human disease and a number of computational methods have been proposed to predict such associations by ranking candidate microRNAs according to their relevance to a disease. Among them, machine learning-based methods usually have a limitation in specifying non-disease microRNAs as negative training samples. Meanwhile, network-based methods are becoming dominant since they well exploit a “disease module” principle in microRNA functional similarity networks. Of which, random walk with restart (RWR) algorithm-based method is currently state-of-the-art. The use of this algorithm was inspired from its success in predicting disease gene because the “disease module” principle also exists in protein interaction networks. Besides, many algorithms designed for webpage ranking have been successfully applied in ranking disease candidate genes because web networks share topological properties with protein interaction networks. However, these algorithms have not yet been utilized for disease microRNA prediction.MethodsWe constructed microRNA functional similarity networks based on shared targets of microRNAs, and then we integrated them with a microRNA functional synergistic network, which was recently identified. After analyzing topological properties of these networks, in addition to RWR, we assessed the performance of (i) PRINCE (PRIoritizatioN and Complex Elucidation), which was proposed for disease gene prediction; (ii) PageRank with Priors (PRP) and K-Step Markov (KSM), which were used for studying web networks; and (iii) a neighborhood-based algorithm.ResultsAnalyses on topological properties showed that all microRNA functional similarity networks are small-worldness and scale-free. The performance of each algorithm was assessed based on average AUC values on 35 disease phenotypes and average rankings of newly discovered disease microRNAs. As a result, the performance on the integrated network was better than that on individual ones. In addition, the performance of PRINCE, PRP and KSM was comparable with that of RWR, whereas it was worst for the neighborhood-based algorithm. Moreover, all the algorithms were stable with the change of parameters. Final, using the integrated network, we predicted six novel miRNAs (i.e., hsa-miR-101, hsa-miR-181d, hsa-miR-192, hsa-miR-423-3p, hsa-miR-484 and hsa-miR-98) associated with breast cancer.ConclusionsNetwork-based ranking algorithms, which were successfully applied for either disease gene prediction or for studying social/web networks, can be also used effectively for disease microRNA prediction.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The identification of novel disease-associated miRNAs is an important task in biomedical research. This drives future personalized medicine research (Jones, 2007) toward not only gene-based (Kay, 2011) but also on RNA-based (Melnikova, 2007; van Rooij et al., 2008; Davidson and McCray, 2011; Lundstrom, 2011) therapies by controlling miRNA regulation in diseases (Fan et al., 2012). In this study, in addition to RWR algorithm, which was presented in our previous study, we introduced four network-based ranking methods to predict novel disease-associated miRNAs based on the constructed miRNA functional similarity networks. Similarly to RWR algorithm, the use of PRINCE was inspired from its success in predicting disease-associated genes since “disease module” principle is found in both gene/protein interaction networks and miRNA functional similarity networks. In addition, global topological properties such as small-worldness and scale-free properties shared with social/web networks has inspired the use of network-based ranking algorithms such as PRP and KSM used to study social/web networks for ranking disease candidate miRNAs on the miRNA functional similarity networks. Experiment results showed that the performance of PRINCE, PRP and KSM was comparable with that of RWR, which was considered as a state-of-the-art method for disease miRNA prediction, and they were all better than that of NWR, which yields local similarity measure. In addition, the performance of the integrated miRNA functional similarity network was also better than that of individual miRNA functional similarity/synergistic networks for all the five algorithms. This result was conserved with our previous study about such improvement for only RWR algorithm. This also indicated that disease miRNAs are more disease-oriented modularized in the integrated miRNA functional similarity network. In other words, the integration of individual miRNA functional similarity network helps connect disease miRNAs closer. Moreover, all the algorithms were stable with the change of their parameters. Final, using the integrated miRNA functional similarity network, we predicted six novel miRNAs including hsa-miR-101, hsa-miR-181d, hsa-miR-192, hsa-miR-423-3p, hsa-miR-484 and hsa-miR-98 associated to breast cancer which are not yet recorded in the most updated disease-miRNA association HMDD (Li et al., 2014).The author declares that there is no conflict of interests regarding the publication of this article.DHL conceived of the study, wrote the program code, and wrote the manuscript.