@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Extended modeling procedure based on the projected sample for forecasting short-term electricity consumption

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Forecasting electricity consumption plays a vital role for policy makers.Short-term predictions using new limited data for managers are important.The proposed modeling procedure can extract hidden information for knowledge learning.The proposed method is an appropriate tool for forecasting short-term consumption.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Forecasting,Small data set,Latent information,Electricity consumption,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Effectively forecasting the overall electricity consumption is vital for policy makers in rapidly developing countries. It can provide guidelines for planning electricity systems. However, common forecasting techniques based on large historical data sets are not applicable to these countries because their economic growth is high and unsteady; therefore, an accurate forecasting technique using limited samples is crucial. To solve this problem, this study proposes a novel modeling procedure. First, the latent information function is adopted to analyze data features and acquire hidden information from collected observations. Next, the projected sample generation is developed to extend the original data set for improving the forecasting performance of back propagation neural networks. The effectiveness of the proposed approach is estimated using three cases. The experimental results show that the proposed modeling procedure can provide valuable information for constructing a robust model, which yields precise predictions with the limited time series data. The proposed modeling procedure is useful for small time series forecasting.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Energy is a vital strategic resource that affects the national economy and social development [1]. Economic growth and industrialization rapidly increase energy consumption and production. Therefore, a nation’s energy policy is crucial, because it not only guides the development of a country but also affects the operating environment of various industries [2]. Electricity is a form of energy that is arduous to store [3], and considerable evidence supports a causal relationship between economic growth and electricity consumption [4].Because of the large amount of capital investment and lengthy construction time required in electricity systems expansion planning, an incorrect direction of development causes a dramatic effect. To advance the economic growth and fulfill future power requirements, forecasting electricity consumption effectively is essential. However, effective forecasting has become a challenge to overcome. Therefore, forecasting the future electricity consumption correctly and scientifically to manage power systems is crucial [5].Several methods have been used to forecast electricity consumption over the last few decades [6–10]. These forecasting methods can be approximately classified into three categories: causal models, time series analysis, and artificial intelligence approaches. Causal models probe the relationships among multiple variables and assume that the variations in dependent variables can be explained by independent variables; specifically, historical data are used to establish a multivariate model for dependent variable forecasting [11]. The forecasting accuracy of a causal model depends on the selection of independent variables. If the selected independent variables cannot effectively explain the variation in the dependent variables, an inaccurate forecast is produced.Time series models include linear regression and autoregressive integrated moving average analysis. Time series models require only historical observations to construct a model for forecasting the development of data trends [12] and are commonly used in forecasting energy demand. However, they require high quantities of samples for accurate forecasting.Artificial intelligence approaches include data mining techniques, artificial neural networks, and heuristic algorithms. They are often used to solve forecasting problems and attain extremely high forecasting performance [13]. However, the forecasting results depend on the number of training samples and their representativeness; these modeling restrictions must to be overcome.In all the aforementioned methods, the sample size is a key element that affects the forecasting performance and limits the applicability of the forecasting approach to certain situations; forecasting the energy demand in rapidly developing countries is a positive example of it. Although it can collect a large amount of historical observations, they usually deviate considerably from the real increasing trend in electricity consumption. Because electricity consumption typically exhibits an exponential trend, common forecasting methods using large quantities of historical data, such as basic time series approaches, are unsuitable [14]. Therefore, it is beneficial to develop a new modeling procedure by using small data sets for forecasting the electricity consumption.The difficulty of small-data-set learning tasks is due to the limited samples being unable to completely reflect all characteristics of a population [15]. To overcome this particular forecasting problem, some studies have adopted virtual sample generation (VSG) techniques to enhance the learning stability for constructing robust and exact models [16–20]. These VSG approaches have been used in many fields, such as manufacturing, engineering, and medicine [21–24]. However, the process of generating artificial samples usually does not consider the relationship among dependent attributes, limiting its usefulness. Time series data constitute one typical example of dependent attribute data. In such data, correlations exist between the developing trends of observations and the order of observations. Hence, VSG is not applicable to time series data; the generated virtual samples cannot effectively improve the modeling performance because the relationship between a datum and time is not considered.For solving this learning problem, this study proposes a procedure that involves first employing the latent information (LI) function proposed by Chang et al. [25] for analyzing data to extract the concealed information. Next, we develop the projected sample generation for combining the LI values and original data to extend the data set and thus enhance the forecasting accuracy of a back propagation neural network (BPNN).The main purpose of the projected samples is to provide additional information for enhancing the learning stability. VSG techniques improve the learning performance by extending the sample size. Their similarity between the projected samples and VSG is that they increase the information input in the learning process; however, the difference is the type of information input. The sample pattern generated using VSG is the same as that of the original sample, whereas that of the projected sample is different. To increase the information input, the projected sample generation changes the dimension of the independent variable.To verify the effectiveness of the proposed approach, this study first used electricity consumption data collected from the Asia–Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) energy database. Moreover, two additional cases, data on the wafer-level packaging (WLP) process and monthly demand for thin film transistor liquid crystal display (TFT-LCD) panels, were examined to further verify the performance of the proposed approach. The experimental results showed that the proposed modeling procedure based on the LI function is an appropriate technique for small-data-set forecasts because of its ability to provide valuable information and precise forecasts with limited time series data.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The LI function, projected sample generation, and modeling procedure are introduced in Section 2. Section 3 provides comparisons among forecasting methods. Finally, the conclusion is presented in Section 4.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Determining future electricity consumption requires accurately forecasting the amount of electricity. If the electricity demand cannot be determined correctly, the electricity supply cannot be ensured, potentially resulting in an energy deficit. Therefore, future energy demand estimation is vital for effective energy system planning. However, historical observations tend to deviate from the current situation under the condition of rapid economic growth. This phenomenon poses a modeling challenge for commonly used forecasting techniques; therefore, forecasting the electricity consumption with limited samples is beneficial. Thus, the specific purpose of this study was to construct a suitable model for short-term forecasting by using small data sets.In this study, the forecasting performance of the BPNN model was improved using a procedure called projected sample generation. Both the number of training samples and amount of information obtained from the data set, which are crucial factors for constructing a robust model, were extended to enhance the accuracy of the BPNN model. The results proved that the revised BPNN model was superior to the original BPNN model because of the usage of the LI function in the projected sample generation. We conclude that the BPNN model with projected samples can be successfully used as a tool for small time series forecasts.Few studies have conducted short-term forecasting by using small data sets, and more comprehensive theories for obtaining higher accuracy can be derived in the future. Specifically, the effect of the sample size on small-data-set learning can be analyzed. In addition, projected samples can be used to implement midterm electricity consumption forecasting based on limited samples in the future. Finally, projected sample generation should be applied to other practical fields, such as financial, transportation, and industry fields, to further confirm its effectiveness.