@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Cation−π interactions in high resolution protein−RNA complex crystal structures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We have analyzed the cation–π interactions of protein–RNA complexes.We employed conservation pattern, structural motif, and binding energy calculation.The distribution of interacting residues and geometry of interactions are also be elucidated.Results from this study will provide valuable insight into rational drug design.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cation–π interactions,Proteins,RNA,Interfaces,Stabilization centers,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this work, we have analyzed the influence of cation–π interactions to the stability of 59 high resolution protein–RNA complex crystal structures. The total number of Lys and Arg are similar in the dataset as well as the number of their interactions. On the other hand, the aromatic chains of purines are exhibiting more cation–π interactions than pyrimidines. 35% of the total interactions in the dataset are involved in the formation of multiple cation–π interactions. The multiple cation–π interactions have been conserved more than the single interactions. The analysis of the geometry of the cation–π interactions has revealed that the average distance (d) value falls into distinct ranges corresponding to the multiple (4.28Å) and single (5.50Å) cation–π interactions. The G–Arg pair has the strongest interaction energy of −3.68kcalmol−1 among all the possible pairs of amino acids and bases. Further, we found that the cation–π interactions due to five-membered rings of A and G are stronger than that with the atoms in six-membered rings. 8.7% stabilizing residues are involved in building cation–π interactions with the nucleic bases. There are three types of structural motifs significantly over-represented in protein–RNA interfaces: beta-turn-ir, niche-4r and st-staple. Tetraloops and kink-turns are the most abundant RNA motifs in protein–RNA interfaces. Amino acids deployed in the protein–RNA interfaces are deposited in helices, sheets and coils. Arg and Lys, involved in cation–π interactions, prefer to be in the solvent exposed surface. The results from this study might be used for structure–based prediction and as scaffolds for future protein–RNA complex design.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Protein–RNA interactions have diverse functions within the living cells and form the basis for several regulatory mechanisms including RNA splicing, transport, replication, translation, posttranscriptional control (Glisovic et al., 2008) and association (Zhou et al., 2009). Understanding these complexes is a pivotal goal in structural biology, because it underpins many fundamental areas of molecular biology from viral replication to cell differentiation. Defects in protein–RNA interactions have been described for a number of diseases, ranging from neurological disorders to cancer (Cooper et al., 2009; Lukong et al., 2008). Protein–RNA interactions are ranked high on the list of unsolved problems and the precise mechanisms of interactions are not fully understood (Ellis et al., 2007; Tjong and Zhou, 2007). For this reason, there have been many intense interests in experimental and statistical analyses of atomic contacts at protein–RNA interfaces, and a large portion of these studies has focused on biological, chemical and physical aspects of these interactions (Lewis et al., 2011; Morozova et al., 2006; Reddy et al., 2008; Treger and Westhof, 2001). The published works on structural analyses of protein–RNA complexes mainly concentrated on identification and calculation of various nonbonding interactions across the protein–RNA binding interfaces, such as H-bonding, electrostatic interaction, and van der Waals contact (Ahmad and Sarai, 2011; Ellis et al., 2007; Kim et al., 2003; Morozova et al., 2006). These interactions rely on proteins and target RNA molecules. Thus, identifying protein–RNA interactions and key residues in proteins are crucial for illustrating the function of proteins and understanding the mechanism of various biological processes, such as posttranscriptional control, protein synthesis and viruses infection (Glisovic et al., 2008; Hall, 2002; Tuschl, 2003).Cation–π interactions are unique biomolecular binding forces that occur between electron-rich aromatic rings and organic or inorganic (metallic) cations. This type of noncovalent interaction can be very strong, as has been confirmed by solid-state studies of small-molecule crystal structures (Kumpf and Dougherty, 1993; Zhu et al., 2004) and by theoretical and experimental analyses in the gas phase and in aqueous media (Salonen et al., 2011; Zhu et al., 2004). The strength of cation–π interactions ranges between 10 and 150kcalmol−1 (Priyakumar et al., 2004), which is comparable to the three other major types of molecular interactions: hydrogen bonds, van der Waals interactions, and electrostatic interactions. Cation–π interactions are therefore considered to be an essential force in generating tertiary and quaternary protein structures induced by oligomerization and protein folding (Brocchieri and Karlin, 1994). While cation–π interaction is arguably the strongest of the nonbonded interactions, its strength critically depends on the nature of aromatic system and charge of cation (Ma et al., 1997). Ever since the study of cation–π interaction has gained prominence, the interplay of theory and experiments to see the manifestation of this reasonably strong interaction in chemistry and biology has become inevitable. In a series of pioneering papers Dougherty and co-workers have explored the role, relevance and range of the cation–π interaction between aromatic amino acids and side chains of arginine and lysine (Gallivan and Dougherty, 1999). Parallel to this, a series of experimental studies carried out by Rodgers and co-workers to explore the cation–π interaction involving alkali and alkaline metal ions reveal their quantitative strengths (Amunugama and Rodgers, 2003; Huang and Rodgers, 2002). Computations have played an important role in studying the cation–π interaction in aromatic, heteroaromatic, polycyclic aromatic compounds and biomacromolecules (Anbarasu et al., 2009; Lavanya et al., 2013; Li et al., 2009; Singh et al., 2009; Vijay and Sastry, 2008). While complexes with a dication have a strength comparable to covalent bonds, monocationic complexes have much smaller binding energies. A strong cooperativity between cation–π, π–π and hydrogen bonding interactions has also been observed (Reddy et al., 2006; Vijay et al., 2008).Though there are several reports, on the intra-protein interactions in protein–RNA complexes (Anbarasu and Sethumadhavan, 2007; Anbarasu et al., 2007a,b, 2008) there are not many studies which explores the cation–π interactions between amino acid residues (Lys, Arg) in the protein and the π-ring in nucleotide bases of RNA. Hence, we attempted this research. We have focused our study at the protein–RNA interface and hence the cation–π interactions within a protein or RNA are not considered. Results from this study might be used for structure–based prediction and as scaffolds for future protein–RNA complex design and engineering.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have systematically analyzed the influence of cation–π interactions to the stability of protein–DNA complexes. Further, the characteristic features of residues involved in cation–π interactions have been evaluated in terms of the distribution of cation–π interactions, interaction geometry, conservation score, energetic contribution, stabilizing centers, structural motifs, secondary structure, and solvent accessibility.We conclude that the total number of Lys and Arg are similar in the dataset as well as the number of their interactions. On the other hand, purines play a dominant role in establishing cation–π interactions. Further, A–Lys, G–Arg and G–Lys are the most frequent pairs involved in cation–π interactions. The analysis shows that about 35% of the total interactions in the dataset are involved in the formation of multiple cation–π interactions. The furcation level of multiple cation–π interactions is much higher than that of single cation–π interactions in protein–RNA complexes. Analysis of conservation patterns of cation–π interactions have shown that the multiple interactions have been conserved more than the single interactions. The comparison of cation–π interaction energy due to five- and six-membered rings of purines shows that the five-membered rings are forming stronger cation–π interactions than six-membered rings. Considering the whole data set of 653 stabilizing residues were found to have one or more stabilization centers, 57 (8.7%) are involved in building cation–π interactions with the nucleic bases. We discovered three types of structural motifs significantly over-represented in protein–RNA interfaces: beta-turn-ir, niche-4r and st-staple. It has been shown that these small structural motifs could be involved in protein functions such as determining the conformation of enzyme active sites or binding sites. The high presence of RNA motifs in protein–RNA interfaces is given by tetraloops and kink-turns. These loops contribute to the functionality as well as the overall tertiary folding of the nucleic acid. The secondary structure and solvent accessibility of residues in protein–RNA complexes reveal that Lys preferred to be in sheet and Arg favored coil and helix conformation. It is found that in the protein–RNA complexes, the positively charged amino acids, Arg and Lys, involved in cation–π interactions, prefer to be in the solvent exposed surface.In conclusion, observations obtained in this study identify cation–π interactions and structural motifs that contribute to the stabilization of the protein–RNA complexes, relevant to the understanding of structure–function relationships, and useful to the efforts made to design and engineering protein–RNA complexes.