@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Mutually exclusive binding of APPLPH to BAR domain and Reptin regulates β-catenin dependent transcriptional events

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study the structural basis of APPL and Reptin binding in context with APPL1/APPL2 dimerization.We perform a detailed in silico analysis using the knowledge of APPL1/2 heterodimerization and infer that binding of APPLPH to BAR domain and Reptin is mutually exclusive which may facilitate Reptin in nucleocytoplasmic shuttling.We report new insights into the distinctive characterization of APPL-β-catenin-Reptin-HDACs ternary complex in terms of target gene regulation and transcriptional mechanisms.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Reptin,APPL,PH domain,BAR domain,β-Catenin,Molecular docking,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Reptin functions in a wide range of biological processes including chromatin remodelling, nucleolar organization and transcriptional regulation of WNT signalling. As β-catenin dependent transcriptional repression and activation events involve binding of Reptin and histone deacetylase 1 to APPL endocytic proteins, this complex has become an important target to identify molecules governing endocytic processes and WNT signalling. Here, we describe the structural basis of APPL binding to Reptin to explore their mode of binding in context with APPL1/APPL2 dimerization. There is an evidence that both PH and BAR domains of APPL proteins exhibit alternately conserved regions involved in hetero-dimerization process and our in-silico data also corroborate this fact. Moreover, APPL2PH domain binds to the BAR domain region encompassing a nuclear localization signal. We conclude that APPLPH binding to BAR domain and Reptin is mutually exclusive which regulates the nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of Reptin. Furthermore, Reptin is unable to bind with membrane-associated APPL proteins. These observations were further expanded by experimental approaches where we identified a novel point mutation D316N lying in the APPL1PH domain which resulted in a significantly reduced binding with Reptin. By luciferase assays, we observed that overexpression of APPL1D316N and APPL1WT stimulated β-catenin/TCF dependent transcriptional activity in a similar manner which suggested that binding of Reptin to APPL1 is not necessary for β-catenin dependent target gene expression. Overall, our data attempt to highlight a comparative role of APPL proteins in controlling β-catenin dependent transcription mechanism which may improve our understanding of gene regulation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
APPL (Adaptor protein containing PH domain, PTB domain, and Leucine zipper motif) proteins are multifunctional adaptors and effectors of small GTPase Rab5 (Miaczynska et al., 2004). Being capable of nucleo-cytoplasmic shuttling, these proteins act as novel activators of β-catenin/TCF-mediated transcription (Jonsson et al., 2004). APPL proteins directly interact with Reptin via PH domain and overexpression of either APPL1 or APPL2 protein reduces Reptin-mediated transcriptional repression which correlates with the reduced amounts of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and β-catenin associated with Reptin. Thus APPL proteins exert their stimulatory effects on β-catenin/TCF dependent transcription by reducing the activity of a Reptin-containing repressive complex (Rashid et al., 2009). Reptin belongs to the AAA+ (ATPases Associated with diverse cellular Activities) family and required for the structural integrity and catalytic activity of several chromatin remodelling complexes (Torreira et al., 2008). This protein has a general role in the assembly and regulation of several protein complexes like telomerase (Boulon et al., 2008) and those which are involved in small nucleolar ribonucleoprotein assembly (Gallant, 2007). Moreover, it is involved in diverse cellular processes including DNA replication, DNA recombination, DNA repair, protein folding, growth regulation, transcriptional regulation, histone H2A/H4 acetylation and control of gene expression (Ikura et al., 2000; Blanc et al., 2005; Kim et al., 2006; Jha et al., 2008; Huber et al., 2008).Recently, overexpression of Reptin (RuvBL2, TIP49b, and TIP48) has been reported in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) (Rousseau et al., 2007). In another study, microarray data analysis revealed a deregulated expression of this protein in bladder cancer and melanoma (Blanc et al., 2005). Intriguingly, a potential role of this protein in reverting cancer phenotype has also been reported, where its reduced expression resulted in decrease of tumour cell growth due to a high rate of apoptosis in vitro (Carter, 1986). Thus this protein may qualify as a potential therapeutic target for oncologists.To gain a deep insight into the functional implication of APPL proteins and Reptin binding, we performed a detailed in silico analysis using the knowledge of APPL1/2 heterodimerization and inferred that binding of APPLPH to BAR domain and Reptin is mutually exclusive which may facilitate Reptin in nucleocytoplasmic shuttling. Taken together our data provides new insights into the distinctive characterization of APPL-β-catenin-Reptin-HDACs ternary complex in terms of target gene regulation and transcriptional mechanisms which would provide the basis for novel therapeutic approaches.In the absence of a well-defined or experimentally determined structure, comparative modelling is one of the most accurate computational approaches to generate reliable tertiary protein structure through sequence information (Tramontano, 1998). Primary sequence of Reptin (463 AA) was retrieved through Ensembl genome browser (ID: ENSP00000473127) and subjected to similarity search against PDB database (www.pdb.org) (Bernstein et al., 1977). Pontin (PDB ID: 2C9O, resolution: 2.20Å) (Matias et al., 2006), being a close homolog of Reptin was selected as the best template for homology modelling (Lambert et al., 2002). Missing residues were incorporated by de novo prediction methods (http://robetta.bakerlab.org/) (Kim et al., 2004). The RMSD between the minimized target and template protein structures was found to be 1.4Å.3D structures of APPL1BAR-PH domain and APPL2BAR-PH domains were retrieved from PDB database with PDB IDs: 2Q13 and 4H8S, respectively. Missing residues were modelled by homology modelling using Modeller 9.10 (Eswar et al., 2006). For mutated structure, Asp316 was replaced by Asn followed by remodelling with calculated RMSD value of 0.52Å between wild type and mutated APPL1PH. In this study, normal and mutated PH domains were designated as PHWT and PHD316N, respectively. Remodelled structure of Reptin and PH were validated using PROCHECK (Laskowski et al., 1993), ERRAT (Colovos and Yeates, 1993), VERIFY-3D (Eisenberg et al., 1997), and WHAT-IF tools (Vriend and Graph, 1990) (Table S1 and Figs. S1 and S2). The root mean square deviation (RMSD) values derived from the C-alpha/backbone of the predicted models and corresponding templates were calculated by superimposing the respective structures. Furthermore, PROSA (Sippl, 1993; Wiederstein and Sippl, 2007) test was applied to the final models to check energy criteria against the potential of mean force derived from a large set of known protein structures.Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, athttp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2013.05.005In step 2 sequence–structure alignments of BAR-PH domains of APPL1 and APPL2 were carried out for their comparative analysis to assess the conservation of significant structural folds across BAR-PH domain family.Molecular docking assays for individual PH domains (APPL1-PHWT and APPL1-PHD316N and APPL2-PH) against Reptin were carried out using AutoDock4.0 tool (Morris et al., 2009) on OpenSUSE 11.2 containing Intel(R) Core (TM) i5-2300 CPU system. Removal of water molecules and addition of solvation parameters were performed using the corresponding modules in AutoDock tools. To prepare the receptor and ligand, polar hydrogens were added and Kollman united atom partial charges were assigned. The empirical free energy function and Lamarckian genetic algorithm (LGA) were applied with the following parameters: population of 50 randomly placed individuals, a maximum number of 27,000 generations, a mutation rate of 0.02, a crossover rate of 0.80, and number of energy evaluations were 2.5×106. 100 independent docking runs were carried out for each ligand with a grid spacing of 0.675Å. AutoDock uses pre-computed affinity grid maps for each atom type to score the conformations of the ligand found during the genetic algorithm.Subsequently, results were clustered according to the RMSD criterion and the best docked conformations of ligands were selected on the basis of binding free energy values to evaluate the Reptin-APPL1-PHWT, Reptin-APPL1-PHD316N and Reptin-APPL2-PHWT bindings. The ranked docked complexes were isolated from the pool of docking solutions and were subjected to manual editing. Individual chain IDs were assigned to the candidate proteins of respective complexes. Reptin-APPL1-PHWT, Reptin-APPL1-PHD316N and Reptin-APPL2-PHWT complexes were then analyzed in parallel to monitor the differences in binding by PyMol (Warren, 2002) and Chimaera 1.5.2 (Pettersen et al., 2004). The surface residues of all the complexes were investigated by InterproSurf (Negi et al., 2007). Finally, hydrogen bonding, hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions were monitored by Dimplot (Wallace et al., 1995). Furthermore, hydrophobic and electrostatic maps were generated by AutoDock 4.0 (Morris et al., 2009).By site directed mutagenesis (Carter, 1986), Aspartic acid at 316 position of APPL1 was substituted by Asparagine, referred as APPL1-PHD316N. N-terminal fragments for both normal and mutated GST (Glutathione S-transferase)tagged APPL1 (1–428 AA) proteins were expressed and purified according to the manufacturer's instructions (GE Healthcare). GST tag consists of 220 amino acid residues which helps in solubility and purification of tagged protein. In brief, Isopropyl-1-thio-β-d-galactopyranoside (Sigma) at a concentration of 0.5mM was used to induce the expression. The purified GST-APPL1 proteins bound to the glutathione-Sepharose beads were incubated overnight at 4°C with lysates of HA-Reptin transfected HEK293 cells. After washing with 150mM NaCl, 10mM Tris, pH 8.0, 5mM EDTA, 5mM dithiothreitol and 0.1% Triton X-100, the beads were collected and tested for the bound proteins by immunoblotting with anti-HA-specific antibodies.In vitro translation reactions were carried out in a TNT-coupled reticulocyte lysate, using the Transcend non-radioactive translation detection system (Promega) according to the manufacturer's recommendations. Ni2+-nitrilotriacetic acid (NTA) pull-down was performed as described. Briefly, 2–5μg of purified His6-Reptin or His6-β-catenin proteins were incubated with 4μl in vitro translated proteins including APPL1-PHWT, APPL1-PHD316N, myc-APPL1- PHWT and myc-APPL1-PHD316N, plasmids in 300μl of binding buffer 2 (20mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 20mM imidazole, 120mM potassium acetate, and 0.1% Triton X-100) and incubated for 1h at 4°C. Beads were washed three times, and bound proteins were eluted by Laemmli sample buffer. Products were separated by SDS-PAGE, transferred to nitrocellulose membranes, and blotted with specific antibodies. The following antibodies were used: anti-Reptin (Abcam), anti HDAC1 (Abcam), anti- β-catenin (BD Bioscience), anti-APPL (Abcam).Luciferase assays were performed in 50% confluent HEK293 cells transiently transfected with SuperFOPflash (0.1μg), SuperTOPflash reporter (0.1μg), Renilla luciferase (0.1μg), β-catenin (0.3μg), Reptin (0.5μg), APPL1-PHWT and APPL1-PHD316N (0.5μg and 1μg) plasmids as indicated. Transfections of plasmids were made using Lipofectamaine2000 according to the manufacturer's instructions (Invitrogen). In all assays, amounts of DNA transfected were kept constant by empty pcDNA3.1 plasmid. Values are mean ±S.D. from three independent transfections performed in parallel and are representative of three experiments. Data are normalized to the luciferase activity stimulated by β-catenin alone, which was arbitrarily set to 1 unit of relative activity. After 48h, the transfected cells were lysed and the lysates were subjected to luciferase activity assay.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
