@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A combined systems and structural modeling approach repositions antibiotics for Mycoplasma genitalium

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We combined systems and structural modeling to repurpose antibiotics for new hosts.We applied our novel approach to the infectious bacterium Mycoplasma genitalium.Our method suggests that thymidylate kinase is a good potential drug target.Our method suggests that piperidinylthymines are good potential lead compounds.Combined systems and structural modeling is a powerful tool for drug repositioning.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Systems biology,Metabolic modeling,Homology modeling,Drug repositioning,Mycoplasma genitalium,Thymidylate kinase,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Bacteria are increasingly resistant to existing antibiotics, which target a narrow range of pathways. New methods are needed to identify targets, including repositioning targets among distantly related species. We developed a novel combination of systems and structural modeling and bioinformatics to reposition known antibiotics and targets to new species. We applied this approach to Mycoplasma genitalium, a common cause of urethritis. First, we used quantitative metabolic modeling to identify enzymes whose expression affects the cellular growth rate. Second, we searched the literature for inhibitors of homologs of the most fragile enzymes. Next, we used sequence alignment to assess that the binding site is shared by M. genitalium, but not by humans. Lastly, we used molecular docking to verify that the reported inhibitors preferentially interact with M. genitalium proteins over their human homologs. Thymidylate kinase was the top predicted target and piperidinylthymines were the top compounds. Further work is needed to experimentally validate piperidinylthymines. In summary, combined systems and structural modeling is a powerful tool for drug repositioning.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Mycoplasma genitalium is a gram-positive bacterium and an important sexually transmitted pathogen (Weinstein and Stiles, 2012; Cazanave et al., 2012; Citti and Blanchard, 2013; Manhart, 2013; Taylor-Robinson, 2014). It infects 1–3% of all individuals, is the second most common cause of non-gonococcal urethritis in men, and is an increasingly common cause of cervicitis, endometritis, and pelvic inflammatory disease in women (Manhart, 2013). M. genitalium infection has also been associated with adverse sequelae including infertility, ectopic pregnancy, preterm birth, and cancer (Manhart, 2013; Zarei et al., 2013).M. genitalium infection is typically treated with macrolides such as azithromycin, fluoroquinolones such as moxifloxacin, and tetracyclines such as doxycycline (Taylor-Robinson, 2014). However, clinicians have recently reported resistance as high as 40% in some regions (Salado-Rasmussen and Jensen, 2014). This has been attributed to target mutation and gene transfer (Taylor-Robinson, 2014). Macrolide and fluoroquinolone resistance has primarily been attributed to mutations to the central loop of the 23S rRNA V domain (Jensen et al., 2008) and to DNA topoisomerase genes gyrA and parC (Shimada et al., 2010), respectively. Tetracycline resistance in the closely related species Mycoplasma hominis has been shown to be due to acquisition of tetM, which dissociates tetracycline from ribosomes (Dégrange et al., 2008; Dönhöfer et al., 2012). However, the mechanism of M. genitalium tetracycline resistance has not yet been determined (Cazanave et al., 2012).New anti-Mycoplasma targets and drugs are urgently needed to combat the emerging resistance. Unfortunately, few pharmaceutical companies are engaged in antibacterial development (Cole, 2014; Nambiar et al., 2014; Harbarth et al., 2015) and the development rate of new molecular entities has declined by 20% in recent years (Pammolli et al., 2011; Khanna, 2012). One promising way to develop new anti-Mycoplasma drugs is to reposition existing antibiotics which have already been proven effective against other distantly related bacteria. This repositioning strategy takes advantage of prior knowledge and human toxicity studies. New computational methods are needed to identify potential repositioning candidates to increase the productivity of the drug development pipeline (Rosales-Hernández and Correa-Basurto, 2015).Systems models which explicitly represent individual drug targets have great potential to improve drug target identification (Chan et al., 2010; Duran-Frigola et al., 2013) including repositioning targets from distantly related species. Chavali et al. (2012) have extensively reviewed the existing systems modeling approaches to drug discovery. Previously, Raman et al. (2008) combined qualitative metabolic modeling with structural modeling to identify potential new druggable Mycobacterium tuberculosis targets. Shen et al. (2010) expanded this method to include virtual drug screening and applied their methodology to Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus. Kim et al. (2011) and Folger et al. (2011) have used the same metabolic modeling methodology to suggest new Vibrio vulnificus and anti-cancer targets, respectively.These systems modeling approaches have not been broadly adopted for drug discovery in part because it has not been possible to build comprehensive quantitative systems models. Recently, systems biologists have developed several new integrative modeling methods, which have enabled unprecedented new models including the first whole-cell model of M. genitalium, which accounts for the function of every annotated gene product (Karr et al., 2012). These new systems modeling approaches have not yet been used to reposition drugs.Our goal was to identify potential new anti-Mycoplasma therapeutics by repositioning existing drugs from related species. Toward this goal, we developed a novel combination of quantitative systems modeling, structural modeling, and bioinformatics to reposition established antibiotics and targets to new species based on the rationale that effective drug targets are fragile nodes which are unique to bacteria and selectively inhibited by small molecules. First, we used a quantitative systems metabolic model which incorporates kinetic constraints to predict the effect of inhibiting each M. genitalium protein. Second, we performed a literature search to identify selective inhibitors of homologs of the most fragile enzymes. Third, we used multiple sequence alignment to preliminarily assess that M. genitalium shares the reported inhibitor binding sites, but humans do not. Fourth, we used structural modeling to verify that the reported inhibitors preferentially bind M. genitalium proteins over their human homologs. Our approach improves over prior combined systems and structural modeling approaches to drug discovery by focusing on repositioning and by using a quantitative metabolic model which incorporates kinetic constraints. This enabled us to identify the most fragile enzymes and allowed us to focus our subsequent bioinformatic and structural analyses on high quality targets, thereby minimizing the computational cost of virtual drug screening.We developed a novel combination of systems modeling, bioinformatics, and structural modeling to identify potential new M. genitalium targets and drugs by repositioning established antibiotics and targets from distantly related bacteria. Our approach was based on the rationale that effective drug targets are fragile nodes which are not shared with humans and selectively inhibited by small inhibitors (Fig. 1). First, we used systems modeling to identify fragile nodes. Second, we used literature searches to identify fragile nodes whose homologs have known inhibitors. Lastly, we used sequence analysis and structural modeling to identify fragile nodes with conserved inhibitor binding sites.We used a kinetically constrained FBA model of M. genitalium metabolism to identify the metabolic enzymes which have the most control over the cellular growth rate. We chose to use a kinetically-constrained FBA model because kinetic constraints have been shown to improve the accuracy of metabolic flux and growth rate predictions across experimental conditions (Adadi et al., 2012). The model was originally developed as the metabolic sub-model of a more comprehensive whole-cell model (Karr et al., 2012).The model is a flux balance analysis (FBA) model (Orth et al., 2010) with additional flux constraints equal to the product of the enzyme copy numbers and enzyme turnover rates. The protein copy numbers were predicted from the observed mRNA expression (Weiner et al., 2003), total protein mass (Morowitz et al., 1962), and the N-end rule (Bachmair et al., 1986) as described in Karr et al. (2012). The turnover rates were curated from the BRENDA (Chang et al., 2015) and SABIO-RK (Wittig et al., 2012) databases and several primary research articles (see Karr et al., 2012 Table S3O). The kinetic constraints are similar to those of MOMENT (Adadi et al., 2012), except that the protein expression values are not free variables, but rather are derived from RNA expression measurements and sub-models of translation and protein degradation.The metabolic model represents 146 of 525 genes, 104 enzymes, 568 metabolites, and 645 reactions including 57, 67, and 102 kinetically constrained enzymes, genes, and reactions, respectively. We used the metabolic sub-model of version 1.1 of the M. genitalium whole-cell model (Karr et al., 2015).For each gene, we used the metabolic model to calculate the expression level at which the predicted growth rate is 50% of that of the wild type strain (EC50; Code S1–2; Table S1). We used this analysis to narrow our drug target search to the top scoring genes. We chose to focus on fractional rather than full growth inhibition, which has been used by many previous metabolic modeling drug discovery studies (Raman et al., 2008; Shen et al., 2010; Kim et al., 2011; Suthers et al., 2009), for several reasons. First, we wanted to use a metric which could reduce the number of targets subjected to further bioinformatics and structural analyses. The majority of M. genitalium’s metabolic genes are already known to be essential from both experimental (Glass et al., 2006) and computational (Karr et al., 2012) studies. Consequently, filtering out non-essential genes would not significantly narrow the search for effective drug candidates and, furthermore, it could reject good targets whose expression is critical to fast growth. In contrast, a partial inhibition metric could reduce the list of potential drug targets. Second, focusing on partial inhibition enables us to quantitatively rather than qualitatively assess the impact of each metabolic gene on growth. It enables us to assess the degree to which each protein must be inhibited to achieve the same effect on the growth rate. This analysis provides more information than essentiality and can be used to both filter and rank drug targets. Third, we believe that focusing on partial inhibition could lead to more robust antibiotics because this partial inhibition analysis recognizes the fact that growth is a non-linear function of protein activity. Specifically, this partial inhibition analysis identifies targets whose inhibition will significantly decrease the growth rate even at minimal drug levels. In contrast, focusing only on essentiality could suggest targets which must be fully inhibited to significantly reduce the growth rate. Fourth, focusing on partial inhibition leads to targets which can be inhibited by small drug concentrations, minimizing potential off target deleterious effects.We performed literature searches for selective inhibitors of homologs of the top scoring genes using PubMed (National Center for Biotechnology Information, 2015) and Google Scholar (Google, 2015). We used this literature analysis to further narrow our drug target search.We increased our confidence in our candidate drugs and targets by verifying that the reported inhibitor binding sites are conserved among bacteria and divergent with humans. This was based on the rationale that conserved sites among bacteria suggest that the inhibitor would likely inhibit the M. genitalium protein and that conserved binding sites with humans could cause adverse effects on human tissue. We obtained the reported inhibitor binding sites from the previously described literature search. We then performed multiple sequence alignment of the candidate M. genitalium drug targets, their bacterial homologs with known inhibitors, and their human homologs. We performed this using T-Coffee version 11.00.8cbe486 (Magis et al., 2014) with the default settings. We inspected the sequence alignment to verify that the reported binding sites are conserved among bacteria and divergent with humans.We performed structural modeling to verify that the inhibitor binding sites are conserved between M. genitalium and the other species in which the inhibitors were reported. We used BLASTp to identify template structures from the PDB for each M. genitalium protein and its bacterial and human homologs. We then used MODELLER (Webb and Sali, 2014) to perform homology modeling to construct structural models of each protein. We assessed the quality of the predicted structures by inspecting the predicted dihedral angle distributions. We then superimposed the structures of the candidate M. genitalium targets and their bacterial homologs and inspected the conservation of the reported inhibitor binding sites. We also used AutoDock Vina (Trott and Olson, 2010) to perform molecular docking between the M. genitalium proteins and their human homologs and the reported inhibitors to predict the free energies of the protein-inhibitor interactions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
