@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel quantitative model of cell cycle progression based on cyclin-dependent kinases activity and population balances

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel model of cell cycle progression is proposed in this work.The model is based on a population balance (PB) approach.Cell phase transition is simulated by means of a suitable biochemical model.Examples are discussed to illustrate the ability of the proposed model.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Population balance,Cell cycle,Modeling,Bioreactions,Kinetic parameters,Tissue cell culture,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Cell cycle regulates proliferative cell capacity under normal or pathologic conditions, and in general it governs all in vivo/in vitro cell growth and proliferation processes. Mathematical simulation by means of reliable and predictive models represents an important tool to interpret experiment results, to facilitate the definition of the optimal operating conditions for in vitro cultivation, or to predict the effect of a specific drug in normal/pathologic mammalian cells. Along these lines, a novel model of cell cycle progression is proposed in this work. Specifically, it is based on a population balance (PB) approach that allows one to quantitatively describe cell cycle progression through the different phases experienced by each cell of the entire population during its own life. The transition between two consecutive cell cycle phases is simulated by taking advantage of the biochemical kinetic model developed by Gérard and Goldbeter (2009) which involves cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) whose regulation is achieved through a variety of mechanisms that include association with cyclins and protein inhibitors, phosphorylation–dephosphorylation, and cyclin synthesis or degradation. This biochemical model properly describes the entire cell cycle of mammalian cells by maintaining a sufficient level of detail useful to identify check point for transition and to estimate phase duration required by PB. Specific examples are discussed to illustrate the ability of the proposed model to simulate the effect of drugs for in vitro trials of interest in oncology, regenerative medicine and tissue engineering.Superficial area in the Petri dish effectively available for adhesion of proliferating cells at time t, μm2Superficial area in the Petri dish available for adhesion of proliferating cells at time t, μm2Superficial area in the Petri dish roofed by proliferating adherent cells at time t, μm2Superficial area in the Petri dish roofed by proliferating adherent cells in G1 at time t, μm2Superficial area in the Petri dish, μm2Division probability density function, 1/μm3Proportionality constant in the expression of the rate rv(Eq. (20)), 1/hNumber of total cell, dimensionlessNumber of initial total cell, dimensionlessNumber of total cell for the generic P phase, dimensionless2D number density distribution of cells for the generic P phase, μm−31D number density distribution of cells for the generic P phase in the volume variable v, μm−31D number density distribution of cells for the generic P phase in the age variable, ξ, dimensionlessGeneric phase, G1, G0, S, G2, MPartitioning function, μm−3Coefficient appearing in the symmetric beta function, dimensionlessTime rate of change of v, μm3h−1Time rate of change of ξ, h−1Time, hSingle cell volume, μm3Mother cell volume, μm3Maximum value for cell volume, μm3Minimum value for cell volume, μm3Shape factor of the Weibull distribution function, dimensionlessConstant parameter appearing in the definition of AEF, dimensionlessSymmetric beta function, dimensionlessGamma function, dimensionlessRate of transition G1 → G0, h−1Scale factor of the Weibull distribution function, μm3Mean of bivariate normal Gaussian distribution for v variable, μm3Mean of bivariate normal Gaussian distribution for ξ variable, dimensionlessAge, dimensionlessPhase maturation time for transition P→P+1, hGeometric limiting factor, dimensionlessStandard deviation of bivariate normal Gaussian distribution for v variable, μm3Standard deviation of bivariate normal Gaussian distribution for ξ variable, dimensionless

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A comprehensive understanding of the mechanisms involved in cell cycle of mammalian cells is a scientific challenge of fundamental interest and practical consequence (Nurse, 2000; Morgan, 2007). In a typical schematization of the cell cycle (cf. Fig. 1), a post-mitotic cell starts from a G1 phase, during which it grows due to biosynthetic activities and cytoplasmic organelles are replicated. Subsequently, when the G1 phase is completed, the cell enters S phase where DNA is duplicated. At the end of this process cell reaches the second phase (G2) where proteins and other cellular components needed for cell division are synthesized. Finally, cell enters M phase (mitosis) where it divides into two daughter cells. If a cell, for any reason, leaves the cell cycle, it becomes quiescent/senescent, thus reaching a resting phase called G0. Studies and findings on cell cycle mechanism, undoubtedly, have an important impact in medical science and clinical practice. A deep knowledge of cell cycle and its complex biochemical pathway may give rise to interesting investigations in oncology, toxicology, gene therapy and regenerative medicine. In addition, cell cycle is the crucial process that regulates cell growth and its proliferation during in vitro cell cultivation. Mammalian cells are usually cultured to produce high-value biopharmaceutical products such as monoclonal antibodies and vaccines (Sidoli et al., 2006; Liu et al., 2007; Karra et al., 2010) and to synthesize ex vivo biological tissues through stem cells differentiation for regenerative medicine (Lanza et al., 1996), as well as to expand specialized cells for tissue engineering (Horch, 2006). For all these reasons, the cell division cycle is one of the most intensively studied biological processes, while, on the other hand, in spite of such a great effort, many questions still remain open (Tyers, 2004). As far as eukaryotic cells are concerned, several biochemical mechanisms, which regulate the cell cycle, have been identified and discussed in the literature (Stern and Nurse, 1996; Morgan, 1997; Loog and Morgan, 2005). It is well-known that cell cycle is an ordered series of events required for the faithful duplication of one mother cell into two daughter ones. The major role in the regulation of such events is played by specific proteins, namely cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs). Their activity is governed by a complex network of regulatory subunits and phosphorylation/dephosphorylation events, whose precise effects on CDK conformation have been revealed by crystallographic studies (Morgan, 1997). CDKs, whose concentration levels remain almost constant throughout the cell cycle (Morgan, 2007), are small protein kinases that require association with a cyclin subunit for their activation. Cell phase progression and transition is regulated by the expression and destruction of cyclins, activating and inhibitory phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of the CDKs, as well as expression and destruction of inhibitory proteins that associate with CDKs or cyclin/CDK complexes. In the case of mammalian cells four active complexes cyclin-CDKs have been identified (Morgan, 1995, 1997, 2007; Gérard and Goldbeter, 2009), i.e., D/Ckd4-6, E/Cdk2, A/Cdk2 and B/Cdk1, as reported in Fig. 1. Cell cycle is indeed a complex phenomenon, specific for each type of cells, and requires further investigations to elucidate all mechanisms which oversee the regulation of cell life and its division (Bouchoux and Uhlmann, 2011; Wittemberg, 2012). Mathematical modeling of cell cycle had a significant boost over the past two decades. In particular, two different types of the corresponding kinetic models have been developed, namely stochastic and deterministic ones. In the first approach, the mathematical models are developed to capture the fluctuations of species that characterize cellular processes. Deterministic models are instead formulated by considering suitable material balances where classical or Michaelis–Menten kinetics are accounted for. Following the stochastic approach, Tyson (1991) proposed a model for fertilized frog eggs cell cycle consisting of an alternation between S (synthesis) and M (mitosis) phase and accounting for the effect of a dimer of the protein kinase cdc2 and cyclin. The same research group, on the basis of experimental observations on yeast cell cycle, developed a more comprehensive model of eukaryotic cell cycle by considering detailed biochemistry and genetic interactions (Chen et al., 2000). This model was extended by accounting for the mitotic exit some years later (Chen et al., 2004). By means of a deterministic approach, Ciliberto et al. (2003) proposed a model to identify checkpoints that control the progression of cell cycle for budding yeast, while some years later Csikasz-Nagy et al. (2006) developed a generic model of the eukaryotic cell cycle focusing on the entire reaction network rather than on an individual phase. Gérard and Goldbeter (2009), on the basis of a deterministic approach, proposed a comprehensive biochemical kinetic model to describe the cell cycle of mammalian cells. In comparison with other models presented in the literature for this type of cells (Aguda and Tang, 1999; Qu et al., 2003; Novak and Tyson, 2004), the one proposed by Gérard and Goldbeter (2009) appears to be more detailed and complete. Results show that this approach is capable to properly simulate the behavior of the entire cell cycle and the typical oscillation experienced by cyclins and the corresponding complexes cyclin-CDK. Similar comprehensive models have been reported in the literature albeit for different type of cells (for example, Chen et al., 2004; focused on yeast cells). It is worth noting that coupling suitable cell cycle kinetic models with a mathematical tool capable of simulating cells replication and their distribution during in vitro cultivation may be helpful for the proper design, optimization and control of the system and in general to reduce number and costs of experiments. Models based on population balance (PB) are recognized to represent a very important theoretical tool for describing the proliferation of cells, as widely demonstrated by the growing literature addressing this topic (Liou et al., 1997; Fredrickson and Mantzaris, 2002; Pisu et al., 2003, 2004, 2006, 2007, 2008; Fadda et al., 2012a,b). PB approach, combined with proper cell cycle kinetics, may represent a potentially powerful instrument to describe, quantitatively, the evolution of an entire population during in vitro/in vivo cell reproduction, thus overcoming the limits of the phenomenological equations (as exponential growth, logistic, and gompertzian functions) traditionally adopted to describe the classic growth profile (sigmoidal) of total cell counts (Fadda et al., 2012a). In classic PB models the cells are seen as maturing individuals, continuously traveling along their life cycle at a specific growth rate till mitosis, which occurs at a specific transition rate (Fadda et al., 2012a). Cells in a growing population may be discriminated in terms of their own age (Faraday et al., 2001; Sherer et al., 2008) and/or size (mass or volume) (Mantzaris et al., 1999; Pisu et al., 2003, 2004, 2006, 2007, 2008) which increase along cell life cycle. In order to simplify the mathematical complexity of the model and to facilitate its experimental validation, the description of cell metabolism and its interaction with the extracellular medium may be neglected (Fadda et al., 2012a; Mancuso et al., 2009, 2010). In any case, the numerical solution of integro-partial differential equations involved in PB, remains very complex (Mantzaris et al., 1999; Ramkrishna, 2000). Furthermore, the development of classic PB models raises in general several doubts and uncertainties related to the specific selection of the proper functions needed to describe cell phase transition and growth rates. Significant changes of model output in terms of cell distributions result from different selections of such functions, being the corresponding total cell count not altered (Ramkrishna, 2000). Florian and Parker (2005) proposed an age distributed cell-cycle PB model to simulate tumor growth in the presence of chemo-therapeutic drug. Cell phases G1 and G0 were lumped into an unique “G” phase, and the same was done for G2 and M ones which have been lumped into the phase “M”. Phase transition and division functions, which depend on the drug concentration for the phase S and “M”, were developed as a function of a critical age which is specific for each phase. Subsequently, Liu et al. (2007) proposed a mathematical model based on a multi-staged (volume and DNA content) population balance for the simulation of in vitro expansion of a population of cells distributed along their cycle phases. More recently, along these lines, Fadda et al. (2012a,b); Fadda et al. (2012a,b) developed a mathematical model based on multi-staged PB with volume and DNA as internal coordinates, where different functions to describe the G1→S and G2/M→G1 transition rates have been taken into account and a fully deterministic criterion on cell DNA content to simulate the S→G2/M transition has been considered.In the present work, we propose a novel approach where the dynamic behavior of cell cycle phase is suitably linked to PB to simulate cellular growth and proliferation during in vitro cultivation occurring in a batch system (i.e., monolayer adherent cells on Petri dish). In particular, in the proposed model, the transition between two consecutive cell cycle phases is assumed to be governed by the biochemical kinetics that regulates the cell cycle. Specifically, time of each phase duration (age limit of the cell in a specific phase), appearing in PB model parameters, is estimated by considering the evolution of specific biochemical reactions until check point for transition is reached. With respect to other models appearing in the literature in the present work we propose an original method to connect PB to cell cycle kinetics. Specific examples have been selected to test the ability of the proposed model to simulate the effect of a cytostatic drug and of a growth factor added during in vitro cell cultivation for applications in oncology or regenerative medicine/tissue engineering, respectively.The mathematical model proposed in this work simulates cellular growth and proliferation during in vitro monolayer cultivation by addressing the dynamic behavior of sub-population of cells belonging to each phase of the cell cycle. The model consists of two parts. In the first one, the model developed by Gérard and Goldbeter (2009), which describes a complex network of biochemical reactions involved in the cell cycle, is accounted for. In the second part, by means of suitable PB, the distribution of cells belonging to each cell cycle phase is described in terms of size (volume) and dimensionless maturation age for transition.The present work relies on the comprehensive kinetic model developed by Gérard and Goldbeter (2009) and characterized by 44 variables. Such model, which is focused on mammalian cells, describes a complex network of biochemical reactions involved in the cell cycle and schematically shown in Fig. 2a. The reaction network is divided into four modules each of which centered around a specific cyclin/CDK complex whose action is crucial for the progression of cell cycle (Morgan, 1995; Hochegger et al., 2008). It is apparent that cyclin D/Cdk4-6 and cyclin E/Cdk2 permit progression in G1 and elicit the G1/S transition, while cyclin A/Cdk2 ensures progression in S and the S/G2 transition, being cyclin B/Cdk1 the trigger for the G2/M transition. The growth factor (GF) activates the synthesis of cyclin D which starts the cell cycle (Gérard and Goldbeter, 2009). The model for the CDK network also incorporates regulation by the CDK inhibitor p21 (or p27) as well as the antagonistic effects of the transcription factor E2F and the tumor suppressor pRB. E2F promotes cell cycle progression by activating the synthesis of cyclins, which is repressed by pRB. Finally, the model incorporates the ATR/Chk1 DNA replication checkpoint, as shown in Fig. 2b. Cyclin E/Cdk2 activates by phosphorylation the anchor factor Cdc45, which allows DNA polymerase α to initiate replication. The kinase ATR is activated upon binding the RNA primer synthesized by DNA polymerase α. Then ATR phosphorylates, and thereby activates, the kinase Chk1 which, in turn, phosphorylates and inhibits the Cdc25 phosphatases, thus preventing the activation of Cdk2 and Cdk1, as long as DNA replication proceeds. Such a comprehensive kinetic model can properly describe cell cycle phases duration. The transition G1→S may occur after the overcoming of G1 restriction point when the complex E/Cdk2 becomes active. The expression of DNA polymerase α indicates the exit from G1 and the starting of S-phase (maximum value of the variable DNA polymerase α). When DNA replication is completed the concentration of the enzyme DNA polymerase α rapidly diminishes and cell may exit S phase entering the next one, G2. The peak of the active complex B/Cdk1 indicates the occurrence of mitotic phase M. After cell division the concentration of complexes E/Cdk1 and A/Cdk2 drops to zero and a new cell cycle can be initiated. In the model proposed by Gérard and Goldbeter (2009), reaction rate are assumed to follow zero-th, first or second order reaction and Michaelis–Menten kinetics. For the sake of brevity all model equations, taken from the original work by Gérard and Goldbeter (2009), are not reported in this paper. The model consists of a system of 44 ordinary differential equations which is integrated as an initial value problem by means of standard numerical libraries (Gear method, IMSL). The solution of such a system provides the time duration (age) of each cell-phase necessary for transition to the next one.In this work we propose a mathematical model, based on PB approach, which describes cell growth and expansion by mitosis occurring in a batch system (Petri dish) while accounting for the dynamic behavior of cells belonging to the four progression stages, i.e., G0, G1, S and G2/M, respectively. The latter one is a typical representation of the cell cycle where G2 and M phases are lumped together. It should be noted in passing that in principle, from a mathematical point of view, the proposed model could be easily extended to consider five phases, thus maintaining the G2 and M ones separated. With the present approach two internal coordinates are considered, namely the cell volume, v and the dimensionless age, ξ. The first one, v, theoretically ranges from zero to ∞, since cells of any positive volume may exist. Of course, this upper limit is not tractable by numerical analysis, while a zero volume should be avoided because meaningless. Actually, finite values for the lower and upper limits of cell volume (vmin and vmax, respectively) may be safely chosen. The second internal coordinate, ξ, which represents a sort of age maturation index for cell in a certain phase, is particularly useful to describe the transition between two consecutive phases of the cell cycle, i.e., G1→S, S→G2/M, and G2/M→G1, respectively. ξ ranges between 0 (sub-population of cells new born in the generic phase P) and 1 (sub-population of cells that reach the check point for transition in the next generic phase P+1).Finally, by considering the cells spatially distributed evenly on the Petri dish and assuming negligible cell death terms, the following PB equations can be written:(1)∂nG1(v,ξ,t)∂t+∂[rvG1(v)nG1(v,ξ,t)]∂v+∂[rξG1nG1(v,ξ,t)]∂ξ=−[1−Φ(t)]nG1(v,ξ,t)ΓvG1(v)(2)∂n¯G0(v,t)∂t=[1−Φ(t)]ΓvG1(v)n¯G1(v,t)(3)∂nS(v,ξ,t)∂t+∂[rvS(v)nS(v,ξ,t)]∂v+∂[rξSnS(v,ξ,t)]∂ξ=0(4)∂nG2/M(v,ξ,t)∂t+∂[rvG2/MnG2/M(v,ξ,t)]∂v+∂[rξG2/MnG2/M(v,ξ,t)]∂ξ=0along with the corresponding initial and boundary conditions(5)nG1(v,ξ,t)=n0G1(v,ξ)fort=0∀v,ξ(6)n¯G0(v,t)=n¯0G0(v)fort=0∀v(7)nS(v,ξ,t)=n0S(v,ξ)fort=0∀v,ξ(8)nG2/M(v,ξ,t)=n0G2/M(v,ξ)fort=0∀v,ξ(9)nG1(v,ξ,t)=0forv=vmin⁡and∀ξ,t>0(10)rξG1nG1(v,ξ,t)=2∫v∞rξG2MnG2/M(v,1,t)p(v,v′)dv′forξ=0and∀v,t>0(11)n¯G0(v,t)=0forv=vmin⁡and∀t>0(12)nS(v,ξ,t)=0forv=vminand∀ξ,t>0(13)rξSnS(v,ξ,t)=rξG1nG1(v,1,t)forξ=0and∀v,t>0(14)nG2/M(v,ξ,t)=0forv=vmin⁡and∀ξ,t>0(15)rξG2/MnG2/M(v,ξ,t)=rξSnS(v,1,t)forξ=0and∀v,t>0where nP(v,ξ,t) with P=G1, S, G2/M, represents the 2D number density distribution of cells,n¯G0(v,t)is the 1D number density distribution of cell in G0 phase,andrξP, with P=G1, S, G2/M, represent the time rate of change of the internal variable v and ξ, respectively,ΓvG1(v)is rate of transition G1 → G0, while Φ(t) represents the geometric limiting factor to describe cell contact inhibition (Fadda et al., 2012a). Since in the present work the transition G1 → G0 is assumed to be irreversible, it is not necessary to describe cell distribution in terms of age when considering the resting phase G0. Thus, the cells belonging to the resting phase G0 are represented by the 1D distributionn¯G0(v,t)where the volume v in this case is the only distributed property. In Eq. (1), which represents the PB for cells in G1, the three terms of the left-hand-side describe the accumulation, the cell volume and age growth, respectively. The right-hand-side of Eq. (1) represents the removal of cells that leave the stage G1 entering the G0 phase depending on the level of confluence reached so far. Eq. (2) represents the PB for quiescent cells and describes their accumulation in phase G0 as arising from G1 cells that, due to contact inhibition, cannot cycle further to S phase. The 2D distribution for phase G1, nG1 is properly transformed in 1D (n¯G1appearing in Eq. (2)) through a simple integration over the variable ξ:(16)n¯G1(v,t)=∫01nG1(v,ξ,t)dξThe PB for cells in S phase is reported in Eq. (3), where along with the accumulation term, two advection terms are considered in order to take into account the simultaneous growth of size (volume) and age. Analogously, the PB for cells in G2/M phase is reported in Eq. (4). The advection term containing the derivative with respect to ξ variable (last term in the right hand side of Eqs. (1)–(3) at ξ=1, intrinsically accounts for the loss of cells due to the transition to the next phase.For each phase P, corresponding to G1, S, and G2/M, respectively, the time (age) to reach the check point for transition to the next phase P+1 is represented byτP, which corresponds to the case when ξ=1 of the distributed property. In the proposed model, the transition of cells between two consecutive phases of the cell cycle is accounted for in the appropriate boundary conditions (at ξ=0, Eqs. (10), (13) and (15), for G2/M→G1, G1 → S and S → G2/M, respectively). It is worth noting that the mitotic term, appearing in the boundary condition (10), is expressed in terms of unequal partitioning function since, in general, two daughter cells, obtained by a dividing mother cells, may have different dimension. The unequal partitioning distribution of mother cell into daughters, p(v,v′), proposed by Hatzis et al. (1995), is therefore taken into account:(17)p(v,v′)=1β(q,q)1v′(vv′)q−1(1−vv′)q−1where β(q,q) is the symmetrical beta function:(18)β(q,q)=(Γ(q))2Γ(2q)and Γ(q) is the gamma function:(19)Γ(q)=∫0+∞sq−1e−sds.The volume growth rates,rvP(v)appearing in Eqs. (1)–(4) may be assumed to be linear on the basis of the references available in the literature (Tzur et al., 2009; Fadda et al., 2012a):(20)rvP(v)=dvdt=kvvfor P=G1,S,G2/M.Along these lines, it is worth noting that, the containment condition of PBs (i.e.,rv=0P=0), discussed by Fredrickson and Mantzaris (2002), is automatically verified. On the other hand, the boundary conditions on vmin (Eqs. (9), (11), (12) and (14) result from the choice of a linear volume growth rate in order to satisfy the regularity condition (Fredrickson and Mantzaris, 2002; Fadda et al., 2012a) when vmin>0. From the theoretical point of view, it is apparent that also the cell volume variation can be related to the cell cycle kinetics, metabolism and external stimuli. However, this important and difficult task is beyond the scope of this work and could be the subject of future investigations.According to the proposed model, the time rate of changerξPof variable ξ should be expressed as:(21)rξP=dξdt=1τPfor P=G1,S,G2/M.Consequently, the related advection terms in the PB above assume the classical form of age structured population balance (Himmelblau and Bischoff, 1968; Ramkrishna, 2000). Finally, the rate of transitionΓvG1(v)between G1 and G0 phase is expressed as follows:(22)ΓvG1(v)=rvG1(v)f(v)1−∫0vf(v′)dv′where the function f(v) may be represented by a probability density function of transition volume v like the Weibull distribution, characterized by two adjustable parameters, namely w and λ (Hatzis et al., 1995):(23)f(v)=wλwvw−1exp(−(vλ)w)Due to space limitations, the population of adherent cells growing in a monolayer may reach the full confluence when the limited surface area of a Petri dish is completely occupied, while proliferation stops because of contact inhibition (Fadda et al., 2012a). This phenomenon is represented by the continuous transition of cycling cells into G0 phase. Specifically, as the available surface reduces due to proliferation and size growth, a fraction of cells may leave the cycle from the stage G1 to enter the resting phase G0, where cell size growth does not occur. In the present work, although it is theoretically possible, we do not account for the back-transition G0 → G1, so that all quiescent cells remain in the resting state G0. In order to simulate contact inhibition, which progressively slows down culture expansion before reaching complete confluence in the Petri dish, a limiting factor Φ(t) appearing in the transitions G1 → G0 is introduced (Fadda et al., 2012a). Such factor is naturally related to the available superficial area between cells on the Petri dish surface, assuming that cells tend to distribute themselves on a monolayer. Specifically, if during cell cultivation, sufficient, residual surface area is still available, this limiting factor is assumed to maintain a value equal to one and irreversible transition from G1 to the resting phase G0 does not occur. On the other hand, when the free surface on the Petri dish is no more sufficient, Φ(t) is assumed to have a value less than one, so that, the transition G1 → G0 will proceed proportionally to a factor [1−Φ(t)]. In this way not all the cells may complete the phase G1 (thus, reaching the value ξ=1) to enter the next phase S. The limiting factor Φ(t) is calculated as proposed by Fadda et al. (2012a):(24)Φ(t)={1ifAEF(t)≥ACG1(t)[AEF(t)ACG1(t)]if0<AEF(t)<ACG1(t)0ifAEF(t)≤0where(25)AEF(t)=AP(t)−αAC(t)(26)AC(t)=(π)1/3(34)2/3∫vmin⁡∞v⁡2/3[n¯G1(v,t)+n¯G0(v,t)+n¯S(v,t)+n¯G2/M(v,t)]dv(27)ACG1(t)=(π)1/3(34)2/3∫vmin⁡∞v⁡2/3n¯G1(v,t)dvwith(28)n¯S(v,t)=∫01nS(v,ξ,t)dξ(29)n¯G2/M(v,t)=∫01nG2/M(v,ξ,t)dξAEF in Eq. (25) represents the effectively free surface area, AP the Petri dish cultivation area and α a geometric shape constant. AC, defined in Eq. (26), is the area occupied by all cells calculated as the bi-dimensional projection of a monolayer culture of spherical cells. Analogously, ACG1 represents the area occupied by cells belonging only to G1 phase. For details of inhibition contact modeling the interested reader should refer to Fadda et al. (2012a). It is worth noting that the contact inhibition effect plays an important role only during in vitro cell cultivation when confluence is approached. For in vivo applications this effect can be neglected.Finally, the total cell count, N(t), and the number of cells belonging to a specific phase of the cell cycle, namely NG1(t), NG0(t), NS(t) and NG2/M(t), respectively, can be expressed as follows:(30)N(t)=NG1(t)+NG0(t)+NS(t)+NG2/M(t)(31)NP(t)=∫vmin∞∫01nP(v,ξ,t)dvdξ,with P=G1,S,G2/M(32)NG0(t)=∫vmin⁡∞n¯G0(v,t)dvEqs. (1), (3), and (4) are partial differential equations in the independent variable t (time) and internal coordinates v and ξ, while Eq. (2), beside the variable t, is characterized by only one distributed variable, v. In this work we took advantage of the method of lines (Schiesser, 1991) which is a powerful tool for solving partial differential equations. Once their finite limits are chosen, v and ξ domains are divided using constant step size meshes, and only the partial derivatives with respect to such variables are discretized by backward finite differences. Thus, the partial differential Eqs. (1)–(4) are transformed into a system of ordinary differential equations in time, which is integrated as an initial value problem by means of standard numerical libraries (Gear method, IMSL). To numerically solve the model, 100 and 300 grid points in the v and the ξ domain, respectively are adopted. According to Sidoli et al. (2006), such a choice represents a sufficient resolution to track cell distributions when numerically solving a PB model through the method of lines. A typical computational run, performed on HP Dual CPU Intel E5440 (Quad Core) at 2800GHz, by considering 100×300 grid points, may require more than 2h. Actually, finer grids have been tested in this work, but they did not provide significant improvements in accuracy, while prohibitively increasing the computational time. All integrals appearing in the model equation are numerically evaluated by means of trapezoidal rule.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
