@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Assessment of high-confidence protein–protein interactome in yeast

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The databases of interacting protein pairs for yeast are assembled.A huge protein interaction dataset comprising of 135154 interactions is obtained.An unsupervised statistical method to reduce the noise in interactome is proposed.The superiority of the proposed method over previous scoring schemes is showed.A highly reliable protein interaction network of yeast is reconstructed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Protein interaction network,Protein–protein interactions,High-confidence,Saccharomyces cerevisiae,Yeast,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The identification of protein–protein interactions (PPIs) and their networks is vitally important to systemically define and understand the roles of proteins in biological systems. In spite of development of numerous experimental systems to detect PPIs and diverse research on assessment of the quality of the obtained data, a consensus – highly reliable, almost complete – interactome of Saccharomyces cerevisiae is not presented yet. In this work, we proposed an unsupervised statistical approach to create a high-confidence yeast PPI network. For this, we assembled databases of interacting protein pairs for yeast and obtained an extremely large PPI dataset which comprises of 135154 non-redundant interactions between 6191 yeast proteins. A scoring scheme considering eight heterogeneous biological features resulted with a broad score distribution and a highly reliable network consisting of 29046 physical interactions with scores higher than the threshold value of 0.85, for which sensitivity, specificity and coverage were 86%, 68%, and 72%, respectively. We evaluated our method by comparing it with other scoring schemes and showed that reducing the noise inherent in experimental PPIs via our scoring scheme further increased the accuracy. Current study is expected to increase the efficiency of the methodologies in biological research which make use of protein interaction networks.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Proteins interact with each other in a highly specific manner that these interactions play key roles in biological systems such as signal transduction pathways and regulation of biological processes. Therefore, comprehensive identification and characterization of protein–protein interactions (PPIs) and their networks is essential in order to systematically define and understand the information transfer within and between biological processes. As a result of the accumulation of genome sequence information and development of different genomic and proteomic experimental technologies for identification of PPIs (Zhu and Snyder, 2003), enormous amounts of data have been generated and databases storing the experimentally achieved protein–protein interactions (Aranda et al., 2010; Ceol et al., 2010; Güldener et al., 2006; Salwinski et al., 2004; Stark et al., 2011 and Szklarczyk et al., 2011) have expanded significantly during the last decade. Unfortunately, the accuracy of these data is often criticized, since PPI data obtained from high-throughput experiments is thought to have a large number of false positives, i.e. the interactions that are spurious and do not occur in the cell (Mrowka et al., 2001 and von Mering et al., 2002). Especially the large amount of data produced by the high-throughput experimental methods need to be analyzed and verified before employment in biological research, otherwise these false positives will lead to spurious discoveries that can be potentially costly, e.g. wrong signaling routes, or wrong drug targets for diseases (Arga et al., 2007 and Tekir et al., 2009). Validation of PPI data is a difficult task.A number of approaches have been proposed to assess the probability that an interaction is a biologically relevant true positive (von Mering et al., 2002; Iossifov et al., 2004; Chen et al., 2002; Deane et al., 2002; Deng et al., 2003; Edwards et al., 2002; Ewing et al., 2007; Giot et al., 2003; Jansen et al., 2002; Krogan et al., 2006; Kuchaiev et al., 2009; Parrish et al., 2007; Patil and Nakamura, 2005; Qi et al., 2005; Saito et al., 2003; Sambourg and Mieg, 2010; Scott and Barton, 2007; Sharan et al., 2005; Sprinzak et al., 2003; Titz et al., 2008; von Mering et al., 2005; Yamanishi et al., 2004 and Yu and Finley, 2009). First attempts were on designing methods taking into account an individual biological feature. The expression profile reliability method was based on the observation that interacting proteins are co-expressed (Deane et al., 2002). Two distributions of expression distances were predefined for non-interacting and reliably interacting protein sets. The distribution of expression distances for a protein dataset of interest was assumed to be a linear combination of two predefined distributions and the linearity coefficient was used in characterization of the accuracy of a given dataset. However, this method was useful for only datasets of proteins and is not applicable for individual interactions. A paralogues verification method by use of sequence homology information was also proposed. An interaction was judged to be true if the concerned proteins had paralogues that interact as well. But their results were limited by the number of proteins that have known paralogues. The structural information of proteins was also employed to assess the quality of interactions (Edwards et al., 2002). Although this method has a high reliability, it is strictly limited by the number of 3-D protein structures available in databanks. von Mering and co-workers (von Mering et al., 2002) identified the interactions that are observed in more than one high-throughput experiment and used them to estimate the fraction of true positives in the datasets. They hypothesized that if an interaction is supported by several methods, it should be more likely to be true. However, this idea results in ignoring true interactions that are only supported by one technique, e.g. transient and rare interactions. In addition, the overlaps between data-sets were surprisingly small to come with a conclusion. Protein localization method was also proposed (Sprinzak et al., 2003), which defined true positives as interacting proteins that are localized in the same cellular compartment and/or interacting proteins that are annotated to have a common cellular role. Their results showed that the accuracy of the data strongly depends on the experimental technique. In the following years, network topology was also used in identification of true interactions (Iossifov et al., 2004; Chen et al., 2002 and Saito et al., 2003). Although these methods have low false positive rates, they also have low true positive rate, due to the scale-free topology of protein interaction networks, i.e. the number of proteins with more than one interaction partners is relatively few. Since the performance of studies integrating individual genomic features with protein interaction data were not satisfactory, it has been shown that the use of a combination of genomic features, such as sequence, structure and functional annotation information, within a Bayesian network (Jansen et al., 2002 and Patil and Nakamura, 2005) or logistic regression modeling framework (Yu and Finley, 2009) results in a more accurate prediction of the true interactions in high throughput datasets. Moreover, MINT (Ceol et al., 2010), STRING (Szklarczyk et al., 2011), and HitPredict (Patil et al., 2011) databases provide scores that were calculated by using several biological features.A disadvantage of most of the reported scoring schemes is that they work within a dataset obtained from a single type of experimentation or database. The scores designed for different datasets are mostly not comparable to each other, and for the interactions provided at other databases, a score assignment is not possible. Another disadvantage of these scoring approaches is that they use training data that consists of interactions that are only assumed to be true. Since these datasets are constructed based on simple assumptions, the approaches may produce training sets that are biased. A major disadvantage of all reported scoring approaches is that the high confidence data-sets resulting from these scoring schemes are poor in terms of coverage and completeness, i.e. these data-sets do not represent an interacting network, but represent numerous clusters of interacting proteins.In spite of various studies on assessing the quality of protein–protein interaction data, a consensus – highly reliable, almost complete – PPI network of yeast is not presented yet. A dataset of high accuracy will not be very useful in biological research if its coverage is low. The main objective of the present study was to fill up this gap by integrating multiple heterogeneous biological features and linking them onto a huge set of PPIs obtained from assembling of different publicly available databases.Five public databases, IntAct (Aranda et al., 2010), MINT (Ceol et al., 2010), MIPS (Güldener et al., 2006), DIP (Salwinski et al., 2004), and BioGRID (Stark et al., 2011), use the results of high-throughput experiments, and collect experimentally or computationally determined PPIs from the literature as well. We have assembled databases of physically interacting protein pairs for Saccharomyces cerevisiae from these public databases as available on April 5, 2011. To eliminate the uncertainties originated from the use of different identifiers in databases, yeast systematic names were used as reference. Totally 135154 pairwise interactions between 6191 proteins were acquired after elimination of the overlaps and self-interactions.A total of eight heterogeneous genomic and proteomic features were used to quantify the probability that an interaction is a biologically relevant true positive: (1) The number of databases reporting the interaction, (2) The frequency of detection by different experimental systems, (3) The number of published papers reporting the interaction, (4) Functional coherence, (5) Biological process coherence, (6) Co-localization, (7) Structural conformity, and (8) Gene expression correlation between interacting proteins.The information on experimental system used in the detection of PPIs and the publication data (i.e. the PubMed identifiers) were taken directly from its source, i.e. the databases (Aranda et al., 2010; Ceol et al., 2010; Güldener et al., 2006; Salwinski et al., 2004 and Stark et al., 2011). Totally 6230 PubMed identifiers and 75 different experimental systems were employed. In case of uncertainty, the experimental technique used in detection of the PPI was manually checked from their publications by use of PubMed identifiers.Functional coherence, biological process coherence and co-localization analyses were determined based on Gene Ontology (GO) terminology. The GO terms of yeast proteins were obtained from the consortium website as available on April 5, 2011.To analyze structural conformity of interacting pairs, the protein–domain relationship for yeast proteins were obtained from PFAM (Bateman et al., 2000) and the domain–domain interaction data was directly taken from a previous study (Deng et al., 2002).In determination of the correlation between the gene expression levels of interacting proteins, a large gene expression dataset was obtained from the SPELL tool (Hibbs et al., 2007) of Saccharomyces Genome Database (Cherry et al., 2012). The Pearson correlation coefficient for each protein pair, which ranges from −1.0 to 1.0, was used to enumerate the correlation.Considering the assembled dataset of PPIs, the association scores, Si, of four features, i.e. the number of databases reporting the interaction, the frequency of detection by different experimental systems, the number of published papers reporting the interaction, and structural conformity, were calculated independently using a 4-step methodology. In Fig. 1, this methodology is illustrated by calculation of the association scores for one of the biological features (i.e. the number of databases reporting the interaction) as an example. Initially, the frequency distribution that represents the number of feature value associated with the full set of interaction pairs was obtained (Fig. 1A). For example, 95261 PPIs (70.48%) were reported in a single database, whereas 544 PPIs (0.40%) were reported in all of the databases considered in the study. In the next step, via nonlinear regression, an exponential model was fitted, which represent the probability that a randomly chosen interaction pair has the corresponding feature value, i.e. the probability that a randomly chosen protein–protein interaction is reported in a certain number of databases (Fig. 1B). Since the reliability increases with increasing feature value, the preliminary score distribution was considered as the complement of the probability distribution (Fig. 1C), and the score distribution was normalized to ensure that the minimal value of the feature gives a zero score, i.e. no contribution to confidence (Fig. 1D).The association scores for three biological features, i.e. functional coherence, biological process coherence and co-localization, were determined based on GO semantic similarity analysis (Yu et al., 2010) which computes the similarity of the GO terms annotated to interacting genes/proteins. This method takes into account the overall structure of the GO graph to assess the specificity of shared annotations and computes scores between 0 and 1. In addition, the value of Pearson correlation coefficient was directly used as the score of gene expression correlation.Naïve Bayesian approach is employed to calculate confidence score, CS, for any interacting pair of proteins so it is a function of the individual association scores:(1)CS=1−∏(1−Si)Note that, the confidence scores obtained by Eq. (1) are always greater than the corresponding association scores, which signify increased confidence when an interaction is supported by various types of evidence.We evaluated our scoring results under sensitivity–specificity–coverage trade-off. Sensitivity and specificity is the ability to identify a true positive and true negative in a data set, respectively. Coverage indicates the completeness of the network in terms of the fraction of yeast proteins covered by the network. For this purpose, previously reconstructed gold-standard datasets of PPIs (Arga et al., 2007) were updated and employed (Supplementary Table S1): The gold standard positive dataset of 2530 interactions was composed of (i) physical interactions with very high confidence score (>0.999) in STRING (Szklarczyk et al., 2011), (ii) MIPS dataset consisting of interactions obtained by small-scale experimentation (Güldener et al., 2006), and (iii) core network of DIP (Salwinski et al., 2004). The gold standard negative dataset consisted of 2994 interactions obtained from protein co-localization data in yeast (Jansen and Gerstein, 2004) under the assumption that if the proteins do not exist in the same sub-cellular compartment, they cannot be interacting (Arga et al., 2007 and Jansen and Gerstein, 2004).In comparison of the proposed scoring scheme with the other PPI scoring methods to illustrate the predictive power of the scoring scheme, the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve was used. ROC curve is a graphical representation used to assess the discriminatory ability of a dichotomous classifier by showing the tradeoffs between sensitivity and specificity (Lin et al., 2004). The predictive power of the classifiers, i.e. the scoring methods, was quantified by calculation of the area under curve (AUC) metric.To statistically describe and analysis of confidence score distributions within biological features, box-plot representation was employed. Each box represents the 25–75% range of the confidence score distribution. The median are demonstrated by horizontal lines in the boxes. The lowest and highest data without outliers are shown by “Whiskers” and the stars express mild and extreme outliers. Since the score distributions do not follow the normality assumption, statistical analyses for the differences between the medians were performed by the Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney test for pairwise comparisons and the Kruskal–Wallis ANOVA test for multiple comparisons.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
