@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#


@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
TCRCs are used to evaluate the cytotoxicity.The CI can reflect the cell number, cell viability and morphological change, etc.k2 measures substance toxicity (killing effect or cell survival).KC50 can be used for cytotoxicity assessment.KC50 combined with RTCA HT assay can achieve a high-throughput screening.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Regression analysis,Time-dependent cellular response profile (TCRP),In vitro cytotoxicity assessment,High-throughput screening (HTS),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Technological advances in cytotoxicity analysis have now made it possible to obtain real time data on changes in cell growth, morphology and cell death. This type of testing has a great potential for reducing and refining traditional in vivo toxicology tests. By monitoring the dynamic response profile of living cells via the xCELLigence real-time cell analyzer for high-throughput (RTCA HT) system, cellular changes including cell number (cell index, CI) are recorded and analyzed. A special scaled index defined as normalized cell index (NCI) is used in the analysis which reduces the influence of inter-experimental variations. To assess the extent of exposure of the tested chemicals, a two-exponent model is presented to describe rate of cell growth and death. This model is embodied in the time and concentration-dependent cellular response curves, and the parameters k1 and k2 in this model are used to describe the rate of cell growth and death. Based on calculated k2 values and the corresponding concentrations, a concentration–response curve is fitted. As a result, a cytotoxicity assessment named KC50 is calculated. The validation of the proposed method is demonstrated by exposing six cell lines to 14 chemical compounds. Our findings suggest that the proposed KC50-based toxicity assay can be an alternative to the traditional single time-point assay such as LC50 (the concentration at which 50% of the cells are killed). The proposed index has a potential for routine evaluation of cytotoxicities. Another advantage of the proposed index is that it extracts cytotoxicity information when CI fails to detect the low toxicity.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
To assess the safety or hazards of industrial chemicals, consumer products, pharmaceuticals and environmental contaminants etc., the animal toxicity studies are generally adopted by the Globally Harmonized System (GHS) classification and human health risk assessments (GHS, 2005; WHO, 2010). Most of the current toxicity tests require the use of laboratory animals, involve exposure by various routes and monitor whether animals die or exhibit any clinical signs of toxicity. Increasing societal concerns about animal use have led to the development of alternative in vitro test methods that can significantly reduce and even replace the use of mammalians for acute systemic toxicity testing (ICCVAM, 2010). The emerging in vitro cell-based assays endeavor to provide some information about the mode or mechanism of action that causes cytotoxicity in cell dynamics (Xing et al., 2006, 2011; Huang and Xing, 2006). The in vitro testing can be used to address potential chemical toxicity, metabolic degradation or impaired permeability. Furthermore, such information can be used to develop a prediction model to estimate the starting doses for in vivo studies in order to further reduce animal use. The significance of the in vitro assay is strongly supported by recently published strategies for the future of toxicology testing (National Research Council, 2007; USEPA, 2009).The real-time cell analyzer (RTCA) is a system that enables dynamic monitoring of changes in cell population such as cell proliferation and death induced by toxicant (Xing et al., 2006, 2011). As the measurement is non-invasive and label free, the system can continuously monitor the cells from the time when they are seeded. More importantly, unlike end-point assays, cellular responses from minutes to days after the addition of chemical compound are recorded. This ensures no meaningful time points are missed for analysis.To measure the cytotoxicity, LC50/IC50 (the concentration at which 50% of cells are killed compared to untreated controls) is widely used as the toxicity indices (Cer et al., 2011; Kothawad et al., 2012). However, these toxicity indices are largely dependent on the incubation time. For example, the LC50 for a 24-h incubation period would be different from 48-h incubation (Kurve et al., 2010). This influence of incubation time can lead to questions about which time point provides the most scientifically valid results. Furthermore, it also makes the end-point dependent toxicity indices much less reliable than generally anticipated. To utilize the abundant information in the obtained response profile and avoid the shortcoming in time-dependent cytotoxicity assessment, KC50 index is used in this paper (Zhang et al., 2006, 2007). A regression analysis is used in the computation of KC50 to capture the trend of the cellular response (growth inhibition/killing) as opposed to the use of the single point. Therefore this index can evaluate the cytotoxicity effect over the whole exposure period. The KC50 index has the following two main advantages:(1)The value of KC50 index presents a cytotoxicity measure for identifying and analyzing the level of toxicity effect of a chemical compound.KC50 index provides an accurate degree of cytotoxicity and is prone to less variation amongst all the cytotoxicity indices.To demonstrate the proposed cytotoxicity measurement, a cell line panel (including six kinds of cell lines) exposed to 14 chemicals are investigated. First, a denoising algorithm is proposed to remove the outliers which are caused by the disturbance during the chemical injection. Then, the curve selection is carried out to estimate the parameters based on the selected curve. Further, KC50 is computed to determine the level of toxicity. Based on the calculated KC50 value, the registry of cytotoxicity (RC) predictive model is developed. As a result, the correlation between the predicted values and the corresponding LD50 (the lethal dose at which 50% of the population if killed in a given period of time) in rats rodents is analyzed.Six human cell lines purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) were used to perform the assessment (shown in Table 1). All cell lines were grown in 37°C incubators with 5% CO2.Fourteen chemicals tested in this study are listed in Table 2, which were obtained from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO, USA). These chemicals are the potentially toxic chemicals, which do not react with the cell culture medium (Tanneberger et al., 2010; MSDS, 2009; ICCVAM, 2010).Stock solutions of the chemical were prepared in water (H2O) or dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), and stored in amber vials at −20°C. The stock solutions were 1:3 serially diluted to make 11 working concentrations.The xCELLigence RTCA HT system consists of four 384 well E-Plates (E-Plates 384) engaged on four HT Stations where the cell index (CI) reading is recorded simultaneously. The system is integrated with the Biomek® Fx system and Cytomat 2C incubator. The cells were seeded into the E-plates 384, and initial attachment and growth were continuously monitored for approximately 24h. Eleven concentrations of each chemical were then added to the wells and responses were continuously recorded for approximately additional 75h. Each concentration in each chemical was repeated in quadruplicate in order to increase the reliability of biological experiment data. The median value of each quadruplicate is used in the following analysis. The CI reading frequency was once per hour until completion of experiment. The experiment is conducted for 72h.To get the same baseline, normalized CI (NCI) is used in this paper. The NCI has been defined as the ratio of CI value to the initial CI value immediately after injecting a chemical solution to the well (Pan et al., 2013), i.e.(1)NCI(j)=CI(j)CI(0),j=1,2,…,Jwhere CI(0) is the cell index at the time of exposure.To remove the noise effectively while preserving the original curve characteristics, we propose a new denoising algorithm. The central idea is to study the normal rate of growth and killing of the cells induced by various compounds. In order to do this, we define ‘velocity of cell population change’ as in Eq. (2). Whenever the abnormal velocity (that is, abnormal rate of change in population such as sharp increase in growth) is observed, this behavior is considered as noise and its effect is negated by using interpolation. The detailed algorithm is described as follows:Algorithm 1Algorithm for denoising the dataLet j=1, 2, …, J denotes the time index vector corresponding to the NCI(j) curves and t(j) is the actual sampling time.Step 1: For each time instant and for each TCRP, the velocity of cell population change is denoted as ΔNCI(j) and defined as(2)ΔNCI(j)=NCI(j+1)−NCI(j),j=1,2,…,J−1The value is the indication of the velocity of change of cells population at each time instant. Given a time instant, the larger value of the velocity implies quicker growth/death of cells. However, the cell population does not show very sharp changes in a very short time.Step 2: Calculate the mean and standard deviation of ΔNCI(j) in each TCRP.(3)μ=1J−1∑j=1J−1ΔNCI(j)σ=1J−1∑j=1J−1(ΔNCI(j)−μ)2Step 3: Get the index of ΔNCI(j) which is out of the range of μ±nσ (see the Fig. 1(b)), defined as(4)O={j||ΔNCI(j)−μ|>nσ}whereOis the set of time indices j corresponding to outliers. n is the magnitude of denonising algorithm; n=2 is suggested in this paper.Step 4: For a givenjˆ∈O, find the nearest pair (j1, j2) such thatj1<jˆ<j2. Replace originalNCI(jˆ)by the interpolated value using the linear interpolation as shown in Eq. (5).(5)NCIˆ(jˆ)=NCI(j1)+NCI(j2)−NCI(j1)t(j2)−t(j1)(t(jˆ)−t(j1))The red curve in Fig. 1(a) demonstrates the result of TCRP denoising. It can be seen that four outliers in TCRP of cadmium chloride (#6) at the concentration of 2mM are removed. Fig. 1(b) shows the corresponding distribution of ΔCI(j). Most of ΔCI are located within the region of μ±2σ. Fig. 1(c) and (d) also show the eleven original and denoised TCRPs of A549 exposed to cadmium chloride (#6) respectively.From Fig. 1(d), it can be seen that the cellular response profile can be classified into two groups as follows:(1)cells that undergo cell death;cells that continue to grow after recovery.To describe the trend of TCRPs, the two-exponent model and method suggested by Zhang et al. (2007) are used to model the cell proliferation/death:(6)NCI(j)=k2×exp(d2×t(j))+k1×exp(−d1×t(j))where NCI(j) is the cell index at time t(j); t(j) is the measured time; k1 is the NCI in the 1st population cells (affected cells) at time t(j)=0; k2 is the NCI in the 2nd population cells (non-affected cells) at time t(j)=0, directly related to the substance concentration. k2 measures substance toxicity (killing effect or cell survival) and has a sigmoidal relationship with the concentration of test substance. exp(−d1×t(j)) is a cellular exponential death factor which measures the rate of cell growth; exp(d2×t(j)) is a cellular exponential proliferating factor which measures the rate of cell death.The modeling procedure can be outlined as follows:Algorithm 2KC50 calculationStep 1: Determine k1 and d1 by using observed data from high concentrations via a single-term exponential model:(7)NCI(j)=k1×exp(−d1×t(j))The non-linear regression problem in (7) can be converted into an equivalent linear regression problem where time t(j) is an independent variable and log(NCI(j)) is the dependent variable. The estimation of slope was used as the initial values in fitting model (7) to determine parameter k1 and d1. That is(8)log(NCI(j))=log(k1)−d1×t(j)Then, using the least squares estimator to get the initial value ofkˆ1anddˆ1:(9)[log(kˆ1);−dˆ1]=(XTX)−1(XTY)s.t.Y=[log(NCI(1)),…,log(NCI(J))]TX=[[1;t(1)],[1;t(2)],…,[1;t(J)]]Twhere NCI in the vector Y is the averages NCI of the two high concentrations. The function “lsqcurvefit” in MATLAB (©2011b, Mathworks, Natick, MA, USA) is used to achieve the regression analysis.It can be seen that Eq. (7) is a nonlinear regression problem without constrains. If d1 is negative value, it means that the TCRP with high concentration also shows the growth inhibition and has the similar trend to the TCRP with low concentration. The details are given in the discussion part.Step 2: Determine k2 and d2 by using observed data from low concentrations via a single-term exponential model:(10)NCI(j)=k2×exp(d2×t(j))Same as the previous nonlinear fitting procedure, averages of the two low concentrations are used to determine k2 and d2. The initial values of Eq. (10) are also calculated by linear regression similar to Eqs. (8) and (9).Step 3: As d1 and d2 are constants, fit 11 TCRPs to determine the values of k1 and k2 in Eq. (6) for each concentration level. It should be noted that the modeling of Eq. (6) for each concentration is a nonlinear regression problem. The first order Taylor series expansion for the exponential function is used to get the initial value for the nonlinear regression, i.e.(11)NCI(j)=k2×(1+d2×t(j))+k1×(1−d1×t(j))=γ1+γ2×t(j)where γ1=k1+k2 and γ2=k2d2−k1d1. Then, the least squares estimator similar to Eq. (9) is used to calculate γ1 and γ2 of each concentration level, and the correspondingk1ˆandk2ˆcan also be calculated as follows:(12)k1ˆ=γ1d2−γ2d1+d2k2ˆ=γ1−k1ˆStep 4: Plot all k1 and k2 values against logarithmic value of the concentrations.Step 5: The values of k2 directly measure the toxicity. Thus, the obtained k2 values and the corresponding concentrations are used to fit the sigmoidal model, i.e.(13)k2(xi)=p11+p2×exp(p3×log(xi))ork2(xi)=p11+p2×xip3where xidenotes ith concentration of a chemical, i=1, 2, …, 11.The modeling of Eq. (13) is also a nonlinear regression problem. To get a more consistent result as an approximation of Eq. (13), second order Taylor series expansion is used as follows:(14)1k2(xi)=1p1+p2p1×exp(p3×log(xi))=1p1+p2p1+p2p3p1×log(xi)+p2p322!p1(log(xi))2=β1+β2×log(xi)+β3(log(xi))2where β1=(1/p1)+(p2/p1), β2=((p2p3)/p1),β3=((p2p32)/2!p1). Then, the parameters β1, β2 and β3 in Eq. (14) are calculated by the least square method as follows:(15)β=(XTX)−1(XTY)s.t.Y=1k2(x1),1k2(x2),…,1k2(x11)TX=[1,log(xi),(log(xi))2i=111]Tβ=[β1,β2,β3]T=1p1+p2p1,p2p3p1,p2p322!p1TAs a result, the initial values of Eq. (13) are calculated:(16)p3ˆ=2×β3β2p1ˆ=1β1−β2/p3ˆp2ˆ=β1×p1ˆ−1Step 6: Using the determined p2, p3 to calculate KC50 (Zhang et al., 2007):(17)KC50=exp1p3×log1p2where KC50 is the toxicant concentration which is lethal to 50% of parameter k2 from untreated cell population (proliferating fraction).Analogously, the KC50 can be generalized as KCnby using the following equation:(18)KCn=exp1p3×logn/(100−n)p2where KCnis the concentration which is lethal to (100−n)% of the k2 value in untreated cells, where n is any number between 0 and 100.Data including 14 chemicals tested in six cell lines were selected to validate the proposed method. In each experiment, each cellular response was repeated at least in quadruplicate to increase the reliability of biological experiment readings. The median value was calculated from the quadruplicate readings to perform the toxicity assessment.In order to demonstrate the algorithm, the A549 exposed to cadmium chloride (#6) with 11 concentration was taken as an illustration. The effects of different chemical concentrations on cells are shown in Fig. 1(c). It can be seen that increasing concentration leads to decreasing CI, which reflects mainly the dynamic evolution of cell population. The normalized cell index NCI was adopted to keep the same assays baseline. The smoothed TCRPs were obtained by using the Algorithm 1 and shown in Fig. 1(d). Using the multi-concentration TCRPs, the k2 values from all concentrations of cadmium chloride (#6) were calculated by Algorithm 2 and the results are shown in Table 3. These data fitted well to the model as described by Eq. (13), and the corresponding concentration–curve is shown in Fig. 2as the solid line. Then, the value of KC50 was determined to be 135.17μM by using Eq. (17).To further explain and compare the proposed approach to the traditional approach to evaluate the toxic effect, traditional indices were calculated using (Boyd et al., 1992):(19)GIi(j)=100×NCIi(j)−NCIi(0)NCIc(j)−NCIc(0)ifNCIi(j)≥NCIc(0)LCi(j)=100×NCIi(j)−NCIi(0)NCIc(0)ifNCIi(j)<NCIc(0)where NCIi(j) is the cell index at the jth sampling instant after adding the test substance, NCIi(0)=NCIc(0) is the cell index at the 1st sampling instant after adding the substance, NCIc(k) is the corresponding cell index of the control line, and GIi(j) and LCi(j) are the cell growth inhibition index and the cell lethal growth inhibition index at the jth sampling instant after exposure to concentration xi, respectively.Based on these calculated traditional toxic effect indices, the concentration–effect curves of cadmium chloride (#6) were routinely presented at three time points: 24, 48 and 72h as shown in Fig. 3and Table 3. Using Fig. 3, LC50 values for 24, 48 and 72h were determined to be 709.25μM, 19.71μM and 15.62μM. It can be seen that the LC50 method not only depends on the chemical concentration and the cellular response, but also depends on the incubation time. Compared to the LC50, the KC50 presents the relationship between chemical concentration and cellular response, thereby avoiding the issue of time dependency.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
