@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Molecular dynamics simulations of lectin domain of FimH and immunoinformatics for the design of potential vaccine candidates

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
MD simulations were carried out for the FimH lectin domain from UPEC J96.The high affinity state lectin domain was found to be largely rigid and stable.Two sequence motifs were designed around a functionally important region.Immunoinformatics was used to predict epitopes for the FimH lectin domain of UPEC J96.MD simulation data was used to assess the accessibility of the epitopes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
FimH adhesin,Molecular dynamics simulation,Rigidity,Motif,Immunoinformatics,Vaccine,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Adhesion of uropathogenic E. coli (UPEC) to uroepithelial cell receptors is facilitated through the lectin domain of FimH adhesin. In the current study, Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations were performed for the lectin domain of FimH from UPEC J96. The high affinity state lectin domain was found to be stable and rigid during the simulations. Further, based on conserved subsequences around one of the disulfide forming cysteines, two sequence motifs were designed. An immunoinformatics approach was utilized to identify linear and discontinuous epitopes for the lectin domain of FimH. We propose that the accessibility of predicted epitopes should also be assessed in a dynamic aqueous environment to evaluate the potential of vaccine candidates. Since MD simulation data enables assessing the accessibility in a dynamic environment, we evaluated the accessibility of the top ranked discontinuous and linear epitopes using structures obtained at every nanosecond (ns) in the 1–20ns MD simulation timeframe. Knowledge gained in this study has a potential utility in the design of vaccine candidates for Urinary Tract Infection (UTI).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Bacterial adhesins are virulence factors important for pathogenesis. Urinary Tract Infection (UTI) is a disease more commonly seen in women. They have a 50% chance of an infection during their lifetime (Bouckaert et al., 2006). Uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC) are implicated in 90% of UTI. 95% of UTI causing E. coli possess type1 fimbriae (Tchesnokova et al., 2011).Adhesion of UPEC to the high mannose glycoprotein uroplakin Ia receptor in the bladder epithelium is mediated by FimH of the filamentous type I pilus system (Zhou et al., 2001). The type I pilus of UPEC has four structural subunits FimA, FimF, FimG and FimH. Each structural subunit of the pilus has a single pilin domain while FimH has an additional lectin domain through which it attaches to the mannose based receptors of the host. The pilus rod is able to stretch and unwind under mechanical stress without dissociating from the host cell receptors (Puorger et al., 2011). UPEC has to withstand the shear stress while establishing an infection.Although UTI can be treated with antibiotics, recurrence is a major problem. This is compounded with the emergence of multidrug resistant UTI causing strains. Invasion of bladder epithelial cells by E. coli is also mediated by FimH (Martinez et al., 2000). When UPEC gets into the host cytosol, it can grow and form intracellular bacterial communities (IBC) (Anderson et al., 2003).The FimH lectin domain is an elongated 11 stranded beta barrel with an immunoglobulin fold (Bouckaert et al., 2005). FimH forms mechanical force enhanced catch bonds due to an interdomain allosteric regulation wherein it switches over to a high affinity state which shows stronger binding to mannose (Yakovenko et al., 2008). Experimental and Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulation studies have addressed FimH adhesin (Thomas et al., 2002; Nilsson et al., 2007; Aprikian et al., 2011). Steered Molecular Dynamics (SMD) simulation of the lectin domain of FimH was performed wherein shear induced force was simulated (Thomas et al., 2002). The importance of cysteine bond of FimH in the adaptation to bind surfaces under increased shear stress was also evaluated through experiments and MD simulations (Nilsson et al., 2007). Single molecule force spectroscopy experiments show that the fimbrial tip mediates shear dependent adhesion of bacteria to uroepithelial cells and the force enhances interaction with mannose (Aprikian et al., 2011). Further, MD simulations of the quaternary structure of the fimbrial tip was used to evaluate inter domain flexibility in the presence and absence of force and a hook chain model was proposed for the fimbrial tip complex (Aprikian et al., 2011). Crystal structures of FimH show an allosteric conformational change, but in order to assess if all the other observed structural differences (beta bulge, alpha switch and pocket zipper) between the two states are also part of the allosteric mechanism, Rodriguez et al. used experimental and computational strategies. Using crystal structures of low and high affinity states of FimH, they predicted 10 point mutations in four regions that could stabilize one of the two states: high or low affinity states. Further, using experimental techniques, they validated that these regions have a role in the allosteric pathway. They also identified low affinity state FimH variants (Rodriguez et al., 2013).In the current study, an extended conformation of FimH lectin domain from a pathogenic strain UPEC J96 has been used for MD simulations with the objective of finding the stability and flexibility of the high affinity elongated conformation of the lectin domain and for design of potential vaccine candidates. The availability of immune related experimental data and development of bioinformatics tools and techniques have made an impact on immunology research (Brusic and Petrovsky, 2005). Immunoinformatics deals with in silico analysis and modeling of immunological data (Patronov and Doytchinova, 2013). It offers several tools for computational identification of epitopes. It more specifically deals with algorithms for mapping B and T cell epitopes which aids in vaccine research. MD simulations have been used in the past to study MHC protein – peptide complexes, for testing immunogenicity of peptide vaccine candidates amongst others (Rognan et al., 1994; Oomen et al., 2003; Flower et al., 2010). Most epitope prediction strategies are data driven. MD simulations have an advantage in the context of epitope prediction as they are not data driven and they can also account for explicit solvation and intrinsic flexibility of the receptor and ligand (Flower et al., 2010). In the current study, we have used an immunoinformatics technique for identifying epitopes and further assessed their accessibility using MD simulations. It is essential to know if the epitopes predicted through the crystal structures are still accessible in a dynamic system. Our approach of following the accessibility of the epitopes from structures obtained at different timeframes of the simulation in an aqueous environment facilitates this.The crystal structure (PDB ID: 1UWF) of the lectin domain of FimH adhesin from UPEC J96 was obtained from Protein Data Bank (PDB) (Berman et al., 2000). We chose this crystal structure since it is a good resolution (1.7Å) PDB structure from a pathogenic strain UPEC J96, a causative organism for UTI. GROMACS software (Berendsen et al., 1995; Lindahl et al., 2001) was used for MD simulations. The ligand in the crystal structure was removed before performing the simulation. The protein was solvated with an explicit solvent: SPC water, in a cubic box which left 2.5nm space around the solute. Total number of water molecules was 45,868. One Na+ counter ion was added for neutralizing the charge. Steepest descents method was used for energy minimization. The system was weakly coupled to an external bath using Berendsen’s method. The reference temperature was fixed at 300K. All bonds were constrained with LINCS (Miyamoto and Kollman, 1992; Hess et al., 1997). G43a1 force field in GROMACS was used for energy calculations. Periodic boundary conditions were imposed. During the simulation, grid type neighbor searching was done and long range electrostatics was handled using PME (Essmann et al., 1995). The energy minimized structure was subjected to position restrained MD simulation for 50ps. This was followed by full all atom MD simulation for 20ns. A time step of 2fs was used. Coordinates were written every 0.5ps to the trajectory. GROMACS built in tools were used to compute Root Mean Square Deviation (RMSD), residue wise fluctuations: Root Mean Square Fluctuations (RMSF) and distances between residues. Xmgrace (http://www.plasma-gate.weizmann.ac.il/Grace/) was used to visualize all the graphs. Residues with RMSF of 0.2nm and above were considered to be mobile. 3D structural alignment was performed using PDBeFold (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/msd-srv/ssm/cgi-bin/ssmserver) (Krissinel and Henrick, 2005). Interatomic distances from PDB structures obtained at every ns interval were calculated using UCSF Chimera (Pettersen et al., 2004).For the sequence analysis and motif generation, we have included representative sequences of FimH from various E. coli strains, E. coli K12, enteroaggregative E. coli (EAEC), enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC), enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC), Diarrheal E. coli (DEC), a multidrug resistant environmental isolate SMS 3–5 SECEC, Avian Pathogenic E. coli (APEC) and shiga toxin producing E. coli (STEC). Representative sequences of FimH from different E. coli strains bearing UniProt IDs P08191 (E. coli K12), E7H828 (EPECa14), B1LDQ6 (SMS 3–5 SECEC), H4VQ48 (DEC6C), A1AJI7 (APEC), D3GSD8 (EAEC), D5D2M2 (ExPEC), B5Z3Q8 (EHEC) and G1ZYI1 (STEC_94C) were obtained from UniprotKB (release 2014_01) (The UniProt Consortium, 2014). Sequence motifs were generated around Cys44 by performing multiple sequence alignment using ClustalX software (Thompson et al., 2002). The motifs were validated using ScanProsite tool (De Castro et al., 2006) by scanning against UniProtKB/TrEMBL databases (release 2014_01) (Boeckmann et al., 2003). From the ScanProsite results, corresponding UniProt protein entries matching the motif were retrieved and their Pfam (Punta et al., 2012) domain and InterPro (Hunter et al., 2012) domain annotation noted. Linear and discontinuous epitopes were predicted using ElliPro server (Ponomarenko et al., 2008).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
MD simulation of the high affinity conformation of FimH shows that the entire lectin domain is largely rigid with very few regions showing mobility. The rigidity of the protein with selective movement of regions in the vicinity of the mannose binding pocket and the hydrophobic ridge perhaps helps the protein in attaching to the mannose based receptors while staying stable under shear stress. Linear and DEs were predicted for the lectin domain of FimH of UPEC J96 and their accessibility was assessed with structures obtained from the MD simulation studies.Muthukumar Singaravelu and Anitha Selvan contributed equally to the work and may be considered as joint first authors.