@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multiple ligand simultaneous docking (MLSD): A novel approach to study the effect of inhibitors on substrate binding to PPO

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Concurrent interactions between the substrate and inhibitors with the enzyme polyphenol oxidase were studied.Variation in binding dynamics of the substrate with polyphenoloxidase was compared in the presence and absence of an inhibitor.The present work is an extension of our previous work entitled Characterization of poly phenol oxidase in two in vitro regenerated cultivars of Mucuna: Mucuna pruriens L. and Mucuna prurita H.The results of in-silico studies are in support with the results of in-vitro studies.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
In silico studies,MLSD,LGA,Polyphenoloxidase,ADME-T,Inhibitors,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Multiple ligand simultaneous docking, a computational approach is used to study the concurrent interactions between substrate and the macromolecule binding together in the presence of an inhibitor. The present investigation deals with the study of the effect of different inhibitors on binding of substrate to the protein Polyphenoloxidase (PPO). The protein was isolated from Mucuna pruriens and confirmed as tyrosinases involved in l-DOPA production. The activity was measured using different inhibitors at different concentrations taking catechol as substrate. A high-throughput binding study was conducted to compare the binding orientations of individual ligands and multiple ligands employing Autodock 4.2. The results of single substrate docking showed a better binding of urea with the binding energy of −3.48kJmol−1 and inter molecular energy of −3.48kJmol−1 while the results of MLSD revealed that ascorbic acid combined with the substrate showed better inhibition with a decreased binding energy of −2.37kJmol−1.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In this post-genomic era, progressively more research is focused on proteomics. Experimental and computational efforts are devoted to large-scale generation and analysis of information derived from 3D structures and dynamics of proteins, with the goal of scientific and commercial break-through in drug discovery. This raises the necessity for new and fast computational approaches alternative to wet-lab high-throughput screens for drug discovery (Maggio and Ramnaraya, 2001; Abagyan and Totrov, 2001; Klebe, 2000; Moitessier et al., 2008; Cheng et al., 2012; Halperin et al., 2002). A necessary prerequisite for successful differentiation between active and non-active ligands in the accurate prediction of their binding affinities to the complex is by use of docking score functions (Atkovska et al., 2014). In this regard, molecular docking has been extensively applied in effective screening of small molecule libraries for lead identification and optimization.Polyphenoloxidases are copper containing metalloproteins that catalyzes the hydroxylation of o-monophenols to o-diphenols (E.C. 1.14.18.1; monophenolmono oxygenase, tyrosinase, cresolase) and the oxidation of o-dihydroxyphenols to o-quinones (E.C. 1.10.3.2; diphenol oxygen oxidoreductase, diphenol oxidase, or catecholase). The structure of the active site of the enzyme, in which copper is bound by six or seven histidine residues and a single cysteine residue is highly conserved. The enzyme seems to be of almost universal distribution in animals, plants, fungi and bacteria. PPO-mediated browning damage is one of the main causes of quality loss in fresh fruit and processed food (Chi et al., 2014). The importance of PPO in browning reactions continues to occupy many researchers and many subsequent publications describe browning reactions in a variety of species and their tissues. The consequent non-enzymatic polymerization of the quinines leads to formation of brown pigments that are the cause of post-harvest deterioration and loss of quality in many economically important crops (Mayer, 2006).In the present study, an attempt was made on multiple ligand simultaneous docking (MLSD) on Polyphenol oxidase to mimic the real molecular recognition processes better. Docking multiple substrates simultaneously at the enzymatic sites of PPO would reflect the real biochemical process, gaining mechanistic insights of the concerted action of multiple substrates/cofactors when they approach the binding pockets. Binding dynamics, including possible intermediates and transition states, could even be revealed energetically (Li and Li, 2010).The protocol for extraction, assay and characterizations of PPO were driven from our earlier work (Raghavendra et al., 2011) for which the same is discussed in brief. Polyphenol oxidase (PPO EC 1.14.18.1) was isolated from Mucuna pruriens and confirmed as tyrosinases involved in l-DOPA production. The purified enzyme was confirmed as PPO by activity staining, and SDS-PAGE analysis. Substrate specificity experiments were carried out with catechol, l-DOPA, l-tyrosine, and p-cresol. Of these, catechol was evaluated as the most suitable substrate (Table 1). PPO activity was measured using different inhibitors at different concentrations (20mM to 100mM in a 0.1M phosphate buffer with a pH of 7.0) using catechol as the substrate. In addition to these concentrations, the substances which showed better inhibition were further tested at 0.05mM, 1mM, and 2mM concentrations (Table 2). Based on the results, L-ascorbic acid, citric acid, l-cysteine, and urea were selected for in silico studies.Structures of drug molecules were drawn and analyzed using ChemDraw Ultra V6.0. The energy minimization was done using chemsketch v12.01. 3D coordinates were prepared using openbabel. The protein structural file (PDB ID: 2P3X) was fetched out from PDB (www.rcsb.org/pdb). Protein–ligand interactive visualization and analysis was carried out in Pymol viewer 1.5.4. ADME-T properties of molecules were identified using Organic chemistry portal (http://www.organic-chemistry.org/prog), a web-basedapplication for predicting in-silico ADME-T property. Molecular docking was performed using AutoDock v4.2 on Windows 7 plat form (64-bit) with Lenovo G570 machine (Intel Core i5-560M Processor 2.66GHz, 4 GB memory).Structure of the substrate and inhibitor molecules were drawn in ChemDraw Ultra 6.0 assigned with proper 2D orientation (ChemOffice package) and the structure of each molecule was analyzed using Chem-3D Ultra 6.0 (ChemOffice package). 3-D geometrical optimization was done using Chemsketch v12.01 (ACD/labs). Openbabel, a standalone tool was used to obtain 3D coordinates of respective molecules.Organic chemistry portal (http://www.organic-chemistry.org/prog), a web-based application was used for prediction of ADME-T properties. The selected molecules were assessed for Pharmacodynamic parameters like mutagenicity, tumerogenicity, reproductive effect and ocular & skin irritancy and pharmacokinetic properties like solubility, human intestinal absorption and blood brain barrier permeability. Based on the results, each ligand was assigned with respective drug-likeness and drug score.Polyphenol oxidase (tyrosinase) (TY) is a bifunctional, copper-containing oxidase having both catecholase and cresolaseactivity. The crystal structure of polyphenol oxidase (Fig. 1) was isolated using Cu2O as ligand molecule (Malstrom and Ryden, 1968). The protein structure file (PDB ID: 2P3X) was retrieved from PDB (www.rcsb.org/pdb) and is edited by removing the hetero atoms like metal ions, water and ligand molecule. Later it was added with C-terminal oxygen, polar hydrogen, and Gasteiger charges.Automated docking was used to study the binding of different drug molecules to the active pocket of polyphenol oxidase. AutoDock uses a semi-empirical free energy force field as the scoring function to evaluate the docked conformation solution (Morris et al., 1998). The scoring function includes the pair-wise evaluations and entropy change upon binding (Huey et al., 2007). A genetic algorithm method implemented in the AutoDock 4.2 was employed to study appropriate binding modes of the ligand in different conformations. For the ligand molecules, Gasteigere–Marsili partial charges were assigned and non-polar hydrogen atoms were merged (Gasteiger and Marsili, 1980). All torsions were allowed to rotate during docking. The structure of the active pocket was predicted using ligplot (Fig. 2) and grid map was set around the residues forming the active pocket (His87, His108, Phe113, His117, His239, His243, Phe259, His273, Asp276) (Kuntz et al., 1982). Grid log was generated using AutoGrid program (Fig. 3). Lamarckian genetic algorithm and the pseudo-Solis and Wets methods were applied for energy minimization using default parameters.MLSD method simulates the interaction of multiple ligands in docking to protein. The multiple ligands can be a mixture of substrates, cofactors, or metal ions (Li and Li, 2010). The present implementation of MLSD adopts the algorithms and scoring function of AutoDock4 and helps in analyzing the interaction between multiple ligands with the target protein.Inhibitor molecules were read separately using Autodock tools (ADT) and saved with appropriate torsions and charges as .PDBQT files. Mean while the protein molecule was also read and dock parameter file (.dpf) was generated. With individual dock parameter files of the inhibitor molecules, substrate’s dpf was merged into one single file to run MLSD simulation. Once ready with the merged dock parameter file, docking starts with the random initialization of the population. MLSD stands separate from single ligand docking where different conformations of multiple ligands can be run simultaneously. To achieve this, the program loads the PDBQT files of both substrate as well as inhibitor to perform simulation. Each ligand will be randomly initialized with its own set of state variables attaining specific configuration, ligand center, torsion tree, and a group of atomic coordinates. Standard LGA procedure and the pseudo-Solis and Wets methods were applied for energy minimization. After each generation of genetic operations, MLSD program maps the genotype of a ligand back to phenotype so that each ligand has its own phenotype and coordinates (Li and Li, 2010).The selected molecules were examined for their in-silico ADME T properties. The results of pharmacodynamics studies revealed that ascorbic acid, citric acid and cystine have normal level of mutagenic, tumurogenic, eye and skin irritation and reproductive effects except citric acid which has high irritation effects. Urea, on the other side has high level of mutagenic, tumurogenic, eye and skin irritation and reproductive effects. Based on Pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics properties ascorbic acid has got a highest drug score of 0.74, while citric acid and cysteine have got a moderate drug score of 0.58 and 0.48 respectively and urea with a least drug score of 0.08 among the studied molecules. The results are shown in Table 3.In the present work, automated docking was used to assess the orientation of drugs binding in the active pockets of polyphenol oxidase. AutoDock 4.2, a script driven, flexible automated and random search docking technique was used which operates by altering the ligand with several rotatable bonds to predict the binding interaction between target receptor (Paramesha et al., 2014). The result of single substrate docking revealed that among the four inhibitors studied, urea with the binding energy of −3.48kJmol−1 and inter molecular energy of −3.48kJmol−1 is closer to the binding energy of the substrate molecule (−3.50kJmol−1). This possibly will indicates a competitive binding be expected among the two molecules. Further, ascorbic acid showed the binding energy of −2.91kJmol−1 and inter molecular energy of −4.7kJmol−1 while cysteine and citric acid showed least binding affinity with the binding energies of −0.63kJmol−1 and −0.07kJmol−1 and inter molecular energy of −3.92kJmol−1 and −2.76kJmol−1, respectively. The results are shown in Table 4and the interactions are shown in Fig. 4.The results of multiple ligand simultaneous docking revealed that a decrease in the binding affinity of ascorbic acid+catechol with the binding energy of −2.37kJmol−1 and inter molecular energy of −4.16kJmol−1 when compared with their individual binding energies. While the binding affinity increased to −3.99kJmol−1, −0.87kJmol−1 and −1.27kJmol−1 in urea+catechol, cysteine+catechol and citric acid+catechol respectively. This can be compared with the individual binding energies of respective molecules. The results are shown in Table 5and the interactions are shown in Fig. 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
