@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An integrated neuro-genetic approach incorporating the Taguchi method for product design

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An integrated engineering design procedure is proposed for product development.A neuro-genetic approach is applied to search for more precise design solution.The concept of fractal theory is applied in the product form generation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Product design,Neural network,Genetic algorithm,Quality engineering,Fractals,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Product design is a multidisciplinary activity that requires the integration of concurrent engineering approaches into a design process that secures competitive advantages in product quality. In concurrent engineering, the Taguchi method has demonstrated an efficient design approach for product quality improvement. However, the Taguchi method intuitively uses parameters and levels in measuring the optimum combination of design parameter values, which might not guarantee that the final solution is the most optimal. This work proposes an integrated procedure that involves neural network training and genetic algorithm simulation within the Taguchi quality design process to aid in searching for the optimum solution with more precise design parameter values for improving the product development. The concept of fractals in computer graphics is also considered in the generation of product form alternatives to demonstrate its application in product design. The stages in the general approach of the proposed procedures include: (1) use of the Taguchi experimental design procedure, (2) analysis of the neural network and genetic algorithm process, and (3) generation of design alternatives. An electric fan design is used as an example to describe the development and explore the applicability of the proposed procedures. The results indicate that the proposed procedures could enhance the efficiency of product design efforts by approximately 7.8%. It is also expected that the proposed design procedure will provide designers with a more effective approach to product development.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The advancement of computer and information technologies has successfully influenced many industries to adopt computer-integrated design and manufacturing approaches intended to shorten their design stages and improve manufacturing efficiency and ultimately enhance the competitiveness of their products in the global market. In general, the product quality often depends on the design quality. Currently, quality improvements in product design and manufacturing are especially emphasized. Certain application technologies used for improving the stability of product quality, efficacy, and variety include concurrent engineering, quality engineering, quality design, value analysis, innovation, and failure mode and effect analysis, among others [1-3]. For mass production quality, the designer must consider each aspect of the manufacturing processes. A designer not only acts as a “bridge” between producers and consumers but is also responsible for ensuring good product quality. A remarkable observation is that the division of labor is becoming increasingly detailed in global production technology, and a current trend is for enterprises to incorporate the original equipment manufacturer (OEM) into the integrated design and manufacturing system. During the design process, the accuracy of design information can greatly influence the quality of design decisions. Therefore, the concept of robust decision-making has grown in importance [4]. In quality-oriented design, a crucial topic at the moment is the approach used by the designer to control various types of production technology to obtain better efficiency and product quality. Taguchi [5] noted that quality could be viewed as the loss of social cost after delivery of products to the customers instead of the loss caused by product function. In other words, the criteria used to evaluate the quality of products are based on the functional variation of the products and the total social loss caused by the products. In the general quality concept, the quality of a product is considered good only if its specifications conform to the customer request (within the range of permitted error) when dispatched from the factory. As such, the purpose of quality planning is to provide quality design with the same product functions that can be used even under extreme circumstances. In other words, the characteristic function of the products should not vary due to a different use environment. Scibilia et al. [6] applied the parameter design of the Taguchi method to estimation of the influence of the control factors on the effects of noise factors to increase the amount of useful information. Huffman [7] stressed that the Taguchi method greatly improves design efficiency. Generally speaking, the Taguchi method is used to simplify the experimental design process in quality engineering. In the Taguchi method, the experimental result is directly converted to a signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio in decibel units (dB) and is reduced to the optimum terms in the output via multiple signal-to-noise analyses. By confirming the design parameters and choosing the optimum parameter combination, the Taguchi method provides designers with an effective design alternative to improve product quality. Chen and Chuang [8] presented a robust design approach incorporating gray relational analysis and the Taguchi method to obtain the optimal combination of design form elements. Yıldız [9] further developed a new optimization approach based on the integration of an immune algorithm and Taguchi’s robust design method to solve shape design optimization problems. However, the experimental factors in the Taguchi method are subjectively established in two or three levels, and the settlement of the value of each level is usually near the original level ±20% [10]. In the Taguchi method, the estimation of the potential optimum levels of all factors is relatively incomprehensive due to the inclusion of the signal-to-noise ratio, and the quality of product design can be affected. In addition, the optimum parameter levels generated using the Taguchi method are confined to the currently established level, but the best parameter level is likely to be established by the existing levels or between the existing levels. As a result, further studies are required to determine whether such an experimental result can provide a better quality product design.We note that determination of the optimum parameter levels for the most suitable combination of quality design is related to optimization problems. In recent years, the concepts of neural networks (NN) and genetic algorithms (GA) have been introduced to aid in finding the optimized solution for engineering problems. Hirasawa et al. [11] introduced universal learning networks for various parameters to imitate the computing ability of the neural networks in living beings. Chen et al. [12] proposed a back-propagation neural-network-based quality prediction system for a plastic injection molding process that can aid engineers in determining the most suitable parameter settings. Gologlu and Zeyveli [13] applied the genetic algorithm to a parallel-axis two-stage helical gear train problem to minimize the volume of the gear trains for gear drive design. The applications of NN and GA have gradually turned towards the product design improvement. Hsiao et al. [14] combined the genetic algorithm and Kansei engineering methods to assess the styles of product forms. Jung and Yum [15] developed an artificial-neural-network-based dynamic parameter design approach to solve dynamic parameter design problems for optimal settings of the design parameters. Chen and Martinez [16] introduced a heuristic product family planning method based on the genetic algorithm to search for proper tradeoffs in the commonality of the baseline products that satisfy the customer needs. Tang et al. [17] further proposed a parametric approach that used a three-layered perceptron ANN model incorporated with a genetic algorithm and the technique of generalized super-ellipse fitting for product aesthetic design. The above-mentioned NN and GA applications have enabled the improvement of the Taguchi method in determining more precise settings for the parameter values. This improvement will greatly enhance the quality of product design, especially from the aspect of component design. Therefore, it may be possible to more effectively develop “better” product designs by providing the product designer with an integrated approach that can generate more suitable design alternatives for evaluation.To test the optimization of product quality and the product parameter values for an optimum design, the objective of this research is to apply the Taguchi experimental design process in the identification of critical design parameters and levels and subsequently apply an integrated neuro-genetic approach to the determination of optimum design parameter levels such that the designer will generate more suitable products for enhancement of competitive advantage in the global market. A design problem, i.e., the design of an electric fan, will be used to describe the development of the proposed approach and to test the new design procedures. The concept of fractal geometry is also applied in the generation of electric fan design alternatives.In most product design efforts, the designer must clearly define the true nature of specific problems or requirements such that he or she can direct the design effort toward an appropriate design solution. Typically, the design problem is first be presented to the designer in a rather vague form, and the designer must consider both the internal aspects of the product and the external aspects of the environment in which the product will be used. The internal aspects of the design problem are the properties of the product itself. The external environment aspects include interrelated considerations, i.e., consumer opinions, economic limitations, law, technology, human behavior, and product trends. Both the internal and external aspects in the design problem should be carefully considered and restructured to explore their relationships and to ensure that the recommended design meets all of the design requirements. The stages and steps for development of the integrated neuro-genetic approach are briefly discussed as follows:Stage 1. Use of the Taguchi experimental design procedureThe Taguchi method is used to construct an orthogonal array for the matrix experiment. According to the concept of the Taguchi method, there are five general steps for constructing the matrix experiment:Step 1. Choice of a targeted product and identification of important or critical design characteristics:The choice of a targeted product is based on the consideration of the form that specifies the appearance of a product, the product’s component patterns, and the functions that determine the product structure. An electric fan design will be used as an example to explore the applicability of the proposed approach in this research. The important or critical design characteristics can be identified from design deficiencies, poor design solutions, market potential, and need for a better solution.Step 2. Determination of a suitable quality loss function for use as an objective function:An appropriate quality performance measurement is considered based on the characteristics of the product to be designed. According to the Taguchi method, certain frequently occurring situations in the characteristic quality loss function include the smaller-the-better type, larger-the-better type, and nominal-the-best type; these types can be used as an objective function and directed towards quality performance measurement. Note that instead of using the characteristic quality loss function as an objective function, the Taguchi method transforms the function into an expression of the signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio η (dB).Step 3. Identification of the appropriate design parameters and values for the experiment:In the process of parameter design strategy, the Taguchi method identifies specific control factors and the corresponding levels required to perform the design of the experiment. This research uses design parameters to refer to the control factors and uses the design parameter values as levels. Identification of design parameters and values is based on consideration of the effects of the product components on the product performance. In general, the identified design parameters and values should be independent of each other to meet the design principles [18]; otherwise, a process of combination or decomposition of the dependent design parameters or values is required to ensure no interaction effects occur among the identified design parameters and values. Let XDP denote the set of design parameters that identify the labels or names XDP={Xi|i=1,2,…,n}. Let Uidenote the set of Aialternative design parameter values corresponding to design parameter Xi, i=1,2,…,n. Thus, Ui={Ui,ji|ji=1,2,…,Ai, and i=1,2,…,n}. Next, let X denote the concatenation of the design parameters identifiers XDP and design parameter values Ui. Hence, X={(Xi, Ui)|i=1,2,…,n}. In the Taguchi method, the identification of design parameters and values must consider the appropriate numbers of design parameters and values such that a suitable orthogonal array can be produced.Step 4. Development of a suitable orthogonal array and design parameter value assignment:Once the design parameters and values are identified, the designer can proceed to construction of a suitable orthogonal array. A suitable orthogonal array also can be generated using the statistical software SPSS V.14. Let L be a j×i orthogonal array with typical element Lj,i, where Lj,i=1,2,…,orn, j=1,2,…,N. Note that N represents the number of experiments.Step 5. Conduction of the matrix experiment to obtain the data for the signal-to-noise (S/N) ratios:Once an orthogonal array is constructed, the designer can begin the matrix experiment. Each row of the orthogonal array represents an experiment for a specific design alternative with a defined set of design parameter values. The designer must develop products for each specific set of design parameter values and set up an experimental environment for functional performance measurements. The averaged data collected from each row of experiments are transformed into signal-to-noise (S/N) ratios (dB).Stage 2. Analysis of the neural network and genetic algorithm processThe concepts of neural networks and genetic algorithms are used to find an optimal set of design parameter values. The general approach steps for the employment of neural networks and genetic algorithms are stated as follows:Step 1. Use of the data in the matrix experiment for neural network training:The S/N ratios of design parameter values obtained in the designed orthogonal array of Stage 1 are considered as initial values of the input layer, and the performance measures of the matrix experiment in Stage 1 are considered as targeted values.Step 2. Selection of a suitable type of neuron model:A neuron model is selected to train the neural networks and find an optimum output performance measure. Note that the back-propagation algorithm in neural networks is used in this work due to its popular applications in multilayer networks. A two-layer (a hidden layer and an output layer) network structure is considered to simplify the design process. Additionally, a transfer function is chosen to perform an approximation process for producing an optimum output response.Step 3. Normalization of the inputs of design parameter values:In the neural network training, the homogeneity of the inputs of the design parameter values should be considered to avoid significant differences in the relative weights among neurons. This work proceeds with a normalization process to set the normalized values of design parameter values between 0 and 1. Let Videnote the set of normalized values corresponding to design parameter values Ui, i=1,2,…,n. Vi={Vi,ji|ji=1,2,…,Ai, and i=1,2,…,n}.Vi,ji=Ui,jiMaxUi.ji|ji=1,2,…,Ai. The normalized values of design the parameter values are assigned to the corresponding orthogonal array. Let L′ be a j×i orthogonal array with typical element L′j,icorresponding to the element Lj,i, where L′j,i=Vi,ji, i=1,2,…,orn, ji=1,2,…,Ai, and j=1,2,…,N.Step 4. Implementation of the neural network training:The Neural Network Toolbox in the MATLAB V7.0 (R14) computer software is used to process the neural network training. In the MATLAB window of the network/data manager, we input the normalized values of L′ corresponding to each row of experiments as the inputs of the parameter values, and the S/N ratios obtained for the corresponding row of experiments are considered as the targets of the output responses. After the values of the inputs and targets are included, the designer creates a new network with an assigned network name and chooses “Feed-forward backprop” as the network type. We note that the training function, adaption function, performance function, number of layers, number of neurons, and transfer function also must be specified so that the neural network training can proceed. Simulation of the neural network training will be terminated when the training performance approaches the goal value of 0. The output performance values obtained from the neural network training will be considered as targeted output performance values and forwarded to the genetic algorithm process to find the optimal output performance values and the corresponding combinations of design parameter values for further product design.Step 5. Transformation of the design parameter values into binary digit code strings:In conducting the genetic algorithm process, the values of n design parameters in the input layer of neural network training will be divided into M portions and transformed into genetic 0/1 binary strings. Note that the range of M portions for each design parameter is set between 0 and max {Ui,ji|ji=1,2,…,Ai}, i=1,2,…,n, and the number of binary digit strings is set to s, where s is a positive integer, depending on the value of M. As such, Mncandidate combinations of solutions will be evaluated and run in the genetic algorithm process.Step 6. Simulation of a genetic algorithm:The genetic algorithm is used to simulate the neural network system and to search for the optimum design parameter values based on the optimum output response obtained from Step 2.Stage 3. Generation of design alternativesThe optimum combination of design parameter values derived from Step 6 of the genetic search process will be forwarded to the process of design alternative generation. The process of design alternative generation begins with the forms and generation for each of the recommended design parameter values and subsequently integrates the respective forms into a completed design alternative. We note that certain design parameter values might refer to the internal structure of a component or may be represented as a form that will not be considered in the form generation. In Stage 3, the concepts of computer graphics and fractals are applied in the generation of design alternatives.As mentioned previously, the Taguchi method is a design approach from a product quality point of view. In this design approach, statistical experimental design is applied to reduce the external, internal, and unit-to-unit errors in the product. A good product is thus defined as one that causes few losses in terms of product intrinsic functions and harmful effects to society. The five general steps of the Taguchi method for the matrix experiment are described in the following sections.To explain how the proposed approach is developed, the design of an electric fan will be used as an example to illustrate the steps of the approach. The reason for choosing the design of an electric fan is because this product is familiar in daily life, and many new styles of electric fan are introduced to the competitive market each year. We also note that a local electric fan manufacturer, Nan-Long Electric Company, provided valuable support for this research, including aiding in the redesign of electric fan components, conducting experiments, and collecting data. The components of the typical electric fan are illustrated in Fig. 1. Airflow is one of the major functions for an electric fan, and most electric fan makers use this output as a quality test index. Therefore, for this research, the airflow is chosen as a critical characteristic that will be observed and measured in the experiments.Because the airflow is a quality characteristic, the objective in designing an electric fan is to ensure that the airflow from the fan will be larger for better performance. In other words, the quality loss will be smaller if the performance of the airflow is greater. As such, the objective function for an electric fan design is defined by choosing a quality loss function with the characteristic of larger-the-better. According the concept of Taguchi method, the quality loss function for a larger-the-better type characteristic can be defined as [10]:(1)LSNj=-10log1VAFj2where LSNjdenotes the quality loss of a product quality characteristic as the signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio η (dB) for a specific experiment j, j=1,2,…,N, and VAFjdenotes the volume measure of airflow for a specific experiment j, j=1,2,…,N.Based on the property of airflow, five design parameters were identified for the experiments using the characteristics of an electric fan illustrated in Fig. 1. These characteristics are: (1) shape of the fan blades, (2) rotational speed of the motor, (3) weight of the fan blades, (4) type of front protection net and (5) radius ratio of front protection net plaque to front motor cover. To fit a suitable orthogonal array that also meets the requirements of the electric fan design case, three design parameter values were selected for each design parameter. Table 1illustrates the identified design parameters and the corresponding design parameter values. Note that the three types of design parameter values for the corresponding design parameter X1 are identified based on the fillets of the fan blade, as shown in Fig. 2. The design parameter X2 is measured using a speed-measuring device that uses vision persistence, and the corresponding design parameter values are set according to the average of the current products. An accurate electronic scale is used to find the distribution of the blade weight and to determine the values for design parameter X3. The density of the front protection net for design parameter X4 is obtained by calculating the number of straight protecting wires. For the radius ratio of the front protection net plaque to the front motor cover for design parameter X5, this value is determined by measuring the radius of both the front protection net plaque and the front motor cover.After the design parameters associated with the parameter values are determined, these data are input to the statistical software SPSS V14 to search for a suitable orthogonal array for further experiments. According to the proposed five design parameters associated with three design parameter values, the L18 orthogonal array with eight columns of factor assignments and eighteen rows of experiments is recommended for the matrix experiment.To conduct the matrix experiment using the Taguchi method, this research group cooperated with Nan Jeon Electric (Tainan, Taiwan) Co. Ltd. The Nan Jeon Electric Company primarily manufactures and exports electric fans overseas. Because the company owns selected traditional efficiency measurement equipment for testing and improvement of electric fans, the experiments in this research were implemented under the company’s advice and assistance. The to-be-measured fans were placed on an adjustable platform, as shown in Fig. 3. The axis of the fan blade and the axis of the wind gauge were placed on the same straight line. On the centerline of the axis, a point C was selected at a distance three times the length of the diameter of the fan blade. The measuring points for the wind speed were all located on the horizontal line that passes through point C and located vertical to the centerline of the axis. The first two measuring points were 2.5cm from point C (one on the left side and the other on the right side of C). Next, the next two measuring points were set 5cm from these earlier points and so forth until no wind was detected. Fig. 4illustrates the setup of the experiment.Because different measuring distances have different wind speeds, the averaged wind speed value Vk(left side points), k=1,2,…,m or Vk′ (right side points), k′=1′,2′,…,m′ from each measured point k or k′ was multiplied by a ratio constant K to result in an airflow volume Qkor Qk′ and Qk=K×Vkor Qk′=K×Vk′. The ratio constants Ks for specific measured points are illustrated in Table 2. The total airflow volume VAFjof each experiment j, j=1,2,…,N is thus the sum of Qkand Qk′, k=1,2,…, m; k′=1′, 2′,…,m′. Since the airflow volume at either left or right side of point 8 is close on 0, this research set the values of m and m′ to 8 and 8′, respectively.(2)VAFj=∑k=1mQj,k+∑k′=1mQj,k′,j=1,2,…,N;k=1,2,…,m;k′=1′,2′,…,m′The data of the total airflow volume VAFjcollected from the experiments are forwarded to Eq. (1) for estimation of parameter effects, and the corresponding summary statistics η (S/N ratios) are illustrated in Table 3. According to the column assignment of the L18 orthogonal array illustrated in Table 3, columns 1, 5, and 8 are left empty. The values for η in Table 3 can be used to analyze the influences from the relevant design parameters and values. The summarized table of fan design parameters is constructed by calculating the sum of the S/N ratio of the design parameter value on corresponding design parameter Xi. We take design parameter value 1 of design parameter X1 as an example, and the experiments, i.e., No. 1, 2, 3, 10, 11, and 12, that included design parameter value 1 of design parameter X1 give converted S/N ratios of 28.73, 25.26, 29.06, 32.8, 26.29, and 21.95, respectively. The sum of the converted S/N ratio is 164.09dB, i.e., the value of design parameter value 1 of design parameter X1 in the fan design parameters is 164.09dB. The other values can be calculated using the same method, as illustrated in Table 4. The values of the S/N ratios illustrated in Table 4 show that the optimum combination of design parameter values for the design of electric fans is X1,3X2,1X3,3X4,3X5,3. In other words, to give an optimum output of airflow we use design parameter values with a radius of 14cm for the shape of the fan blade, 1200rpm for the rotational speed of the motor, 165g for the weight of the fan blades, 108 wires for the type of front protection net, and a 1.12 radius ratio of the front protection net plaque to the front motor cover in the design of an electric fan.Although the matrix experiment for an orthogonal array in the Taguchi method will result in an optimum combination of design parameter values for design reference, this research proceeds with the neural network and genetic algorithm process to search for a more accurate or precisely optimum combination. Note that the computer software MATLAB V.7.0 (R14) is used to calculate the weight values and the weight values between the neurons from the matrix experiment of the orthogonal array, whereas the genetic algorithm is applied in searching for the optimum combination of design parameter values.In performing neural network training, this research uses the identified design parameters and values illustrated in Table 1 as input values for the proposed neural network. The values of the S/N ratio illustrated in Table 3 are considered as output values of the proposed neural network. The above data will be used as the initial inputs and the desired output in the neural network training.According to the characteristics of the design parameters and values of the electric fan design, a three-layer back-propagation neural network with multiple-input neurons is selected, as illustrated in Fig. 5[19,20]. In Fig. 5, the neuron model selected for the experiments is a 5–3–1 type of network, which means that there are five input signals in the input layer, three actual outputs of neurons in the hidden layer, and one actual output of neuron in the output layer. Note that the concept of binary code transformation for genetic algorithms shown in Fig. 5 is incorporated with the neural network learning and simulation. To derive the law of back-propagation neural network learning, the design parameters X1, X2, X3, X4, and X5 are used as the initial input signals and are propagated through the network. The weights Wi,prepresent the weights between neuron i in the input layer and neuron p in the hidden layer, whereas the weights Wp,4 represent the weights between neuron p in the hidden layer and neuron 4 in the output layer. The indices are i=1,2,…,5 and p=1,2,3 in this research. Followed by the theory of the neural network perceptron learning, the activation functions ACFpfor the hidden layer can be expressed as [20]:(3)ACF1=W11∗X1+W21∗X2+W31∗X3+W41∗X4+W51∗X5-θ1(4)ACF2=W12∗X1+W22∗X2+W32∗X3+W42∗X4+W52∗X5-θ2(5)ACF3=W13∗X1+W23∗X2+W33∗X3+W43∗X4+W53∗X5-θ3Note that θ1, θ2, and θ3 in Eqs. (3)–(5) are the thresholds applied to the corresponding neuron in the hidden layer, respectively. The actual outputs y1, y2, and y3 of neurons in the hidden layer are expressed as:(6)y1=1/(1+exp(-ACF1))(7)y2=1/(1+exp(-ACF2))(8)y3=1/(1+exp(-ACF3))Similarly, the actual function ACF4 for the output layer can be expressed as:(9)ACF4=W14∗y1+W24∗y2+W34∗y3-θ4The actual output y4 of the neuron in the output layer can be expressed as:(10)y4=1/(1+exp(-ACF4))Before conducting neural network training, the process of normalization is carried out on the inputs of the design parameter values for the electric fan design case to transform the corresponding values into values between 0 and 1. The process of normalization is expected to maintain homogeneity among the design parameter values and reduce bias in the neural network training and simulation. Table 5illustrates the normalized values of the design parameter values for the electric fan design example.In the artificial neural network construction, the weight values acquired from the Matlab operation are shown in Fig. 6. A total of 4435 iterations were required to train the proposed network. In Fig. 6, the weights and threshold values for the design of electric fan are set as follows:W11=59.8061, W21=−22.0286, W31=−75.319, W41=−14.7722, W51=−21.2949, W12=13.3536, W22=8.3664, W32=4.879, W42=−6.3974, W52=−0.7371, W13=−174.7095, W23=39.4297, W33=−183.8625, W43=114.1919, W53=158.0662, θ1=−38.5771, θ2=−27.4852, θ3=1.7009, W14=7.7417, W24=32.2743, W34=8.8174, and θ4=14.6774.The above weights and threshold values will be forwarded to the Matlab platform for the process of running the genetic algorithm.The use of the genetic algorithm in neural network training will aid in searching for an optimum combination of design parameter values from the many feasible combinations of design alternatives. Because the back-propagation neural networks use a method similar to nonlinear regression to find the optimum weights and threshold values, this work uses the maximum and minimum design parameter values as an interval range to find an optimum interval solution. For example, we examine the values of design parameter X2: The rotational speeds of the motor in the design of the electric fan are 1200rpm, 1000rpm, and 800rpm, and the interval solution for the genetic algorithm will be set at [1200,800]. It is noted that the choice of the mentioned interval range involves the existing product characteristics, and the predicted solution should have a high degree of confidence. Similarly, considering the homogeneity, the transformation of the design parameter values into a binary digit code string for the genetic algorithm will be based on the normalized values, i.e., the inputted parameters such that the values of all design parameters are between 0 and 1. Furthermore, in constructing the platform for the genetic algorithm, the values of the design parameters are divided by 1000 (note: all variables together or individually), i.e., 1,0.999,0.998,0.997,…,0, and the values of the five design parameters are entered in sequence into the established artificial neuron equations. Table 6illustrates the transformation of the binary codes and the corresponding interval values for the design parameter values of the electric fan design. In Table 6, the values for each design parameter are divided into 1000 intervals and are represented by a 10-digit genetic binary string. A possible solution will consist of five binary digit strings selected from the corresponding design parameters.The largest output value (i.e., the largest S/N ratio) is used as the target to be obtained using the genetic rules. The procedure for simulation of a genetic algorithm is carried out in seven sequential steps [20,21]: (1) random generation of 1000 chromosomes and calculation of fitness functions derived from the neural network training, as shown in Eqs. (6), 7, 8 and (10); (2) selection of a pair of chromosomes for mating from the current chromosomes to find the optimum design parameter values; (3) crossover of two parent chromosomes with two new offspring chromosomes based on a crossover probability of 0.8; (4) mutation of a random selection of a gene from the chromosome with a mutation probability of 0.15 to avoid generating locally optimal solutions; (5) reporting of each run of the numerical calculations in a txt file; (6) evaluation of the size of the new chromosome to decide whether to run a new chromosome or to stop the simulation; and (7) choice of a new elitist chromosome instead of the current chromosome.For the numerical calculation component of the genetic algorithm, the change of generation is repeated until the final values of the design parameters and the optimum value of the fitness function are presented at the end of the file. Note that the optimum value can be obtained by a back trace. The ranges of the feasible solution within the region and the design parameters obtained from the calculation of the genetic algorithm are presented for the construction component of the platform. In addition, at the platform terminal, the obtained optimum values of the design parameters are transformed into the actual experimental units. The interface terminal of the platform is presented in Fig. 7. The transformation of the obtained design parameter values into the solutions of the actual units is illustrated in Table 7.The construction of a computer-aided graphics platform for the generation of electric fan design alternatives is based on the values of the design parameters, as illustrated in Table 7. Five major design parameters are used as a design reference. Because the design parameters X2 of the rotational speed of the motor and X3 of the weight of the fan blades are issues of engineering technique and it is difficult to represent their characteristics in a product form, this research will not consider these two design parameters in detail during the process of generation of design alternatives. As such, the construction interface of the platform-terminal will be divided into three components: (1) the shape of the fan blades, (2) the type of front protection net, and (3) the radius ratio of the front protection net plaque to the front motor cover. Note that the concept of fractal graphics will be applied in the generation of front protection nets.For the shape construction of the electric fan blades, two key variables are considered: (1) the radius of the curvature of the fan blades and (2) the radius of the fan blades. The experiments in this work address a three-blade type of fan as the design case and use the concept of a composite Bezier curve for fan blade form generation [22,23]. In general, each segment of a Bezier curve will require at least four control points. Continuous multiple Bezier segments can be used to generate composite curves, i.e., adding a new segment of Bezier curve will require to add at least three control points. For example, a curve that is constructed from two segments of Bezier curve will require at least seven control points. According to the general information on the electric fan blades, this work uses 13 Bezier control points to develop the shape of each fan blade [22,23]. A scrollbar in the program interface is used to modify the size of the radius. The graphic representation of the shape of the electric fan blades is generated as illustrated in Fig. 8.To generate the forms of the front protection nets, the designer must consider the radius of the fan frame contour and the number of wires on the protection nets. In general, the radius of the fan frame contour is defined by the designers based on the marketed sizes of the electric fans. For the radius ratio of the front protection net plaque to the front motor cover, the research adopts a range of allowable sizes in this step to avoid restricting the generation of the front protection nets. According to the result from the simulation of the neural network training and genetic algorithm, the recommended number of wires is 94. Once the radius of the fan frame contour is determined, the size of the fan blades is defined as the fan frame contour radius minus 20mm for safety reasons. For example, if the radius of the fan frame contour is 175mm, then the radius of the fan blades will be 155mm. Fig. 9illustrates a conceptual representation of the form generation of the front and rear protection nets. Based on the characteristics of the front protection net, the concept of fractals could be helpful if applied to the generation of type of front protection nets [24]. This research used the concept of continuous curve revolution to generate a variety of front protection nets. The computer software Microsoft Visual Basic 6.0 is used to develop the computer graphic programs. Because a change in the essential data for certain variables will generate quite different forms, the research attempts to modify several variables and their numeric data to generate several similar front protection nets for use by the designers. Fig. 10illustrates three conceptual alternatives of the front protection net generated from the fractal computer program [24] that are recommended by the research team and forwarded to the refinement process for detailed design.According to the fractal conceptual alternatives shown in Fig. 10, selected characteristics of these conceptual ideas are adopted to construct the front protection nets. In developing the forms of the front protection nets, we determine the radius of the basic circle from the radius of the fan blades minus the radius of the center protection net plaque. Next, we let the basic circle revolve around the small circle at the center of the protection net plaque. The number of basic circles revolved in this work is 47, a number based on the earlier finding that the optimum number of wires for the fan grill is 94. Fig. 11illustrates the generation of the types of front protection nets.Considering the radius of the front protection net plaque, this component is primarily used as a decorative panel to hide the interior components of the electric fan, especially the motor. In general, there are no regulations the size of the front protection net plaque. Therefore, the radius of the front protection net plaque can be determined based on the radius of the front view of the motor. Because the average front radius of the regular motors in currently marketed electric fans is approximately 63mm and the recommended radius ratio of the front protection net plaque to front motor cover is 0.97664, we set the radius of the front protection net plaque to 61.5mm. The radius of the rear cover of the motor is therefore defined as the radius of the motor’s front cover minus 20mm, which is 43mm as a result. For the distance between the center of the blades and the front protection net plaque, we determine the convex curvature of the front and the rear protection net, which provides a certain amount of flexibility for the design of the electric fan. Fig. 12illustrates the representation of front protection net plaque and motor covers as well as the corresponding position of the fan blades.After setting up the design parameter values for the major characteristics of an electric fan, the 3D software Pro-Engineer Version 2001 is used to generate the design alternatives. Fig. 13illustrates the structural relationships among the recommended design parameter values of the electric fan. A completed design alternative of an electric fan based on the recommended design parameter values is illustrated in Fig. 14. In Fig. 15, three alternative combinations of the recommended design parameter values are also presented for the designers’ reference.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Product design is a complicated activity that is highly reliant on human experience, thought, and knowledge. Although many companies have attempted to use CAD/CIM (Computer-Aided Design/Computer Integrated Manufacturing) and computer-based information systems to enhance the efficiency of their product design efforts, the subjective opinions of designers might affect the design quality. Systematic approaches to the product design process will assist the designer in identifying design problems and design criteria and enhance the effective evaluation of the final design solution. During the product design process, the construction of every form and feature of a product will either directly or indirectly affect the users’ perception of product efficacy. Although the general Taguchi method provides a certain stability in design improvement, the combined experimental configuration of the acquired optimum values match a certain level of the variables of the original experimental parameters, e.g., the number of levels in the experimental configuration is usually restricted to two or three levels. This restriction might affect efforts to search for a more precise and suitable combination of design parameter values. To construct a complete experimental model with stable quality, this research proposes an integrated procedure that combines neural networks and genetic algorithms with Taguchi quality design in the process of product design to aid designers in obtaining design-related data for standardized recommendation values to facilitate the construction process of product design. This research offers a combined construction model in which the variable parameters in the experimental configuration are further classified for better precision.The integrated procedure of neural networks is used to learn the experimental values obtained from the Taguchi method, and the genetic algorithm is used to search for the optimum design parameter values. After setting up the experimental and simulation platform, the predicted and recommended optimum design parameter values are acquired. The recommended design parameter values are subsequently used to construct the product component forms. The predicted S/N ratio derived from the simulation platform is 30.644dB or an enhancement of approximately 7.8% compared with the overall mean of 28.428dB in the experimental platform of the L18 experimental orthogonal array, which suggests a greater improvement value even though discrepancies still exist compared with the largest value of the construct. However, by manipulating the output efficiency, this value could be much greater than the general experimental values. In other words, this study presents a considerable contribution to providing designers with an integrated procedure concerning the simultaneous involvement of engineering process analysis and product design for the improvement of product development. It is noted that the concept of fractal theory is specifically considered in the process of generation of product form alternatives to demonstrate its application in product design. Additionally, this work also presents practical definitions for the characteristic data derived from the design parameter values in 3D product alternative generation that demonstrate the feasibility of using neural networks and genetic algorithms in simulation configuration experiments for better quality of product design.