@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Formulation and analysis of dynamic supply chain of backfill in construction waste management using agent-based modeling

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper proposes two optimization models to solve a dynamic supply chain issue.The outcomes help reuse and recycle backfill, a major type of construction waste.The models are based on mathematical programming and agent-based modeling.The comparative study illustrates the performance of both approaches.Agent-based modeling is more capable of analyzing the dynamic supply chain.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Agent-based modeling,Backfill,Centralized modeling,Construction waste management,Dynamic supply chain,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Backfill is the excavated material from earthworks, which constitutes over 50% of the construction wastes in Hong Kong. This paper considers a supply chain that consists of construction sites, landfills and commercial sources in which operators seek cooperation to maximize backfill reuse and improve waste recovery efficiency. Unlike the ordinary material supply chain in manufacturing industries, the supply chain for backfill involves many dynamic processes, which increases the complexity of analyzing and solving the logistic issue. Therefore, this study attempts to identify an appropriate methodology to analyze the dynamic supply chain, for facilitating the backfill reuse. A centralized optimization model and a distributed agent-based model are proposed and implemented in comparing their performances. The centralized optimization model can obtain a global optimum but requires sharing of complete information from all supply chain entities, resulting in barriers for implementation. In addition, whenever the backfill supply chain changes, the centralized optimization model needs to reconfigure the network structure and recompute the optimum. The distributed agent-based model focuses on task distribution and cooperation between business entities in the backfill supply chain. In the agent-based model, decision making and communication between construction sites, landfills, and commercial sources are emulated by a number of autonomous agents. They perform together through a negotiation algorithm for optimizing the supply chain configuration that reduces the backfill shipment cost. A comparative study indicates that the agent-based model is more capable of studying the dynamic backfill supply chain due to its decentralization of optimization and fast reaction to unexpected disturbances.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
During the construction of underground structures, backfill materials (e.g., sand, gravel, rock, and clay) are firstly excavated and then stockpiled on-site for backfilling when the construction is completed (Fig. 1) [1]. Generally, due to the high holding cost, limited site area or rain water degradation of the soil, some of the stockpiled backfill becomes surplus or undesirable and will be exported to landfills or other construction sites that execute backfilling. When the construction is completed, the stockpiled backfill is used for filling the excavation. If the stockpiled backfill is less than the total demand, the extra amount can be imported either from commercial sources or from other construction sites that execute excavation. Normally, importing or exporting the backfill between construction sites is more economical than landfills or commercial sources. Moreover, it is estimated that the backfill exported to landfills constitutes over 50% of the total construction wastes [2,3]. For these reasons, improving the recovery efficiency of backfill between different construction sites is a cost-effective and environmentally–friendly practice, and should be encouraged.However, there are several challenges in the reuse and recycling of backfill. The first challenge is that construction sites are often operated by different firms that make decisions independently. Sometimes, due to the lack of appropriate information sharing and coordination between the firms, reuse of backfill among the construction sites may not be cost-effective and efficient. Secondly, the supply chain network for backfill shipment changes dynamically, which increases the complexity in solving the logistic issues. As shown in Fig. 2, the backfill supply chain is a network comprised of a landfill, a commercial source and construction sites, some of which carry out excavation and potentially export backfill (denotes by P, i.e., backfill producer), some of which refill excavated areas and potentially import backfill (denoted by C, i.e., backfill consumer). The network structure of a backfill supply chain can change randomly whenever a new site is established, an existing site leaves, or a site alters its state from excavation to backfilling (as shown in Fig. 2b). The inefficient coordination as well as the “dynamic nature” of a backfill supply chain result in a number of barriers for the reuse of backfill. In order to overcome these difficulties, a holistic approach is needed to model and analyze the coordination in the dynamic supply chain of backfill.The application of supply chain management (SCM) in construction has been widely studied in the past few years [4,5]. In fact, there is a trend to adopt SCM techniques to deal with the environmental impacts of various construction activities. Cheng et al. [6] presented a service oriented framework based on the Supply Chain Operations Reference (SCOR) model for performance monitoring of construction supply chains. The SCM framework was later extended to quantify and monitor the environmental footprint generated by the participating members in a construction supply chain [7]. Ofori [8] presented the use of SCM to integrate the construction processes in Singapore for enhancing their environmental performance (e.g., reducing waste, and recycling material). A survey study presented the adoption of supply chain partnership (e.g., among contractors and suppliers/recycling companies) for an effective control and minimization of construction wastes [9]. By far, the previous studies have addressed some environmental issues (including waste) by integrating construction supply chain participants, but their models and methodologies only applied to supply chains with regular and specific cooperation relationships between the participants. No literature has focused on dynamic supply chains with participating members that can change their operational states and cooperation relationships. Hence, there are needs to investigate and identify an appropriate approach to model the dynamic supply chains.Generally, there are two modeling paradigms, i.e., centralized and distributed, to analyze a supply chain issue. The centralized approach is any process where decision making is made by a central authority. The established method for the centralized approach is mathematical programming and its application in SCM has been investigated in a number of studies [10–12]. Tsiakis et al. [13] used a mixed-integer linear programming approach to design a multi-product and multi-echelon supply chain, considering the demand variance. Nagurney et al. [14] developed an integrated supply chain network model which allowed determination of the optimal network flow of products that reduced the transportation cost.Differing with the centralized modeling paradigm, decision making in a distributed approach is often implemented by a large group of individuals geographically distributed in a region [15]. Agent-based modeling (ABM) is considered the most typical distributed approach for analyzing the supply chain performance. Since the concept of ABM was proposed, it was defined as an emerging technology where a number of intelligent agents interact with others and/or their undying environment in order to reach the designed objectives given by the model developer [16,17]. In general, an ABM model consists of three components: (1) agents, with static and dynamic attributes and decision making rules; (2) a set of agent relations and the methods of interaction; and (3) an environment where agents are settled [18]. Agents are the key elements of an ABM model and they are expected to exhibit the following characteristics [19]:•Autonomous: agents should operate without the control and direct intervention of human;Social: agents should be able to interact with other agents and their underlying environment via a communication protocol or algorithm;Reactive: agents should be responsive (in a timely fashion) to the changes in their underlying environment;Goal-directed: agents should be capable of flexible actions and have some goal to achieve.Model developers need to identify and program the characteristics to build an ABM model. By simulating the agent behaviors and interactions in an underlying environment, the effects of these agents on the whole system can be observed. The beauty of ABM, over other modeling approaches, lies in its connections to many other fields including complex science, system dynamic, computer science, management science, and many other transitional modeling and simulation theories [20]. Although the systems to be studied become more complex and beyond the capacity of many traditional modeling approaches, the theoretical foundations and the distributed nature of ABM still make it capable of analyzing and solving problems of a complex nature. Studies on the use of ABM in SCM have been investigated in the past few years [21–23]. Shen et al. [24] provides an update review on the application of ABM in the manufacturing industry including supply chain enterprise collaboration. Julka et al. [25] developed an ABM model for analyzing the effects of business policies on the chemical supply chain participants. Akanle and Zhang [26] proposed an agent-based framework for optimizing the configuration of a supply chain to deal with uncertain customer demand. In these ABM studies, the participating members in a supply chain were often emulated by agents. Model developers extracted useful information to formulate relevant policies based on the agent behaviors and performances in a designed scenario.In this study, we attempt to identify an appropriate modeling paradigm to analyze the dynamic supply chain for improving the waste recovery efficiency of backfill among various construction sites. Both the centralized approach and the distributed approach are used for the optimization in comparing their performances. As ABM is considered appropriate to modeling complex supply chain systems, particular emphasis has focused on the development and operation of the distributed agent-based model. Comparison of the two modeling paradigms can help understand the compatibility and efficiency of ABM in analyzing complex supply chains. This study also examines the dynamic supply chains with participants that can change their operational states and cooperation relationships. This provides a basis for future research on the modeling and simulation of complex supply chain structures in project-based environment. The structure for this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, the problem is formulated and solved by a centralized optimization model (COM). Section 3 presents the optimization concept and the main components used to create the distributed ABM model. In Section 4, the performances of both approaches are compared through an illustrative example. Section 5 concludes the paper and suggests future work.This section presents the model formulation using the centralized approach. As discussed in Section 1, the backfill supply chain is a dynamic network comprised of many landfills, commercial sources and a number of construction sites that are either excavate and export backfill (denoted by producer P), or refill excavations and import backfill (denoted by consumer C). In the centralized optimization model (COM), we assume that the backfill supply chain is static over the time period t. Further, a generic network model can be developed to represent the supply chain structure of backfill, as depicted in Fig. 3. Let B=〈N,L〉 denotes the network model, where 〈N〉 is the set of nodes and 〈L〉 is the set of direct links. The set 〈N〉 consists of the set of producers PI, the set of consumers CJ, the set of landfills LFH, and the set of commercial sources CSW, i.e., N=PI∪CJ∪LFH∪CSW. The set PI, CJ, LFHand CSWinclude a number of individual producer Pi, consumer Cj, landfill LFhand commercial source CSwrespectively, i.e.,Pi∈PI,Cj∈CJ,LFh∈LFHandCSw∈CSW. The directed links 〈L〉 represents the material flow of backfill shipped between two related nodes, namely 〈Pi,Cj〉, 〈Pi,LFh〉, 〈CSw,Cj〉.LetxPiCjtdenote the amount of backfill shipped from producer Pito consumer Cjat time period t, whilexPiLFhtrepresents the amount of backfill shipped from producer Pito landfill LFh, andxCSwCjtis the amount of backfill shipped from commercial source CSwto consumer Cj. Similarly, letCPiCjtdenote the unit shipment cost for the backfill from Pito Cj, whileCPiLFhtrepresents the unit shipment cost for the backfill from Pito LFh, andCCSwCjtis the unit shipment cost for shipping the backfill from CSwto Cj.SPitis the exported backfill at Piover time period t andDCjtis the imported backfill at Cj. We assume that commercial sources and landfills have infinite capacity for backfill supply and disposal.As reuse of backfill between construction sites are more economical and environmentally-friendly, each Pitries to maximize the export of backfill to Cjinstead of LFh, whereas each Cjtries to maximize the import of backfill from Piinstead of CSw. Given the general definition for the notations, the mathematical programing problem can be formulated as follows:(1)min∑Pi∈PI∑Cj∈CJxPiCjtCPiCjt+∑Pi∈PI∑LFh∈LFHxPiLFhtCPiLFht+∑CSw∈CSW∑Cj∈CJxCSwCjtCCSwCjtsubject to(2)∑Cj∈CJxPiCjt+∑LFh∈LFHxPiLFht=SPit∀Pi∈PI,(3)∑Pi∈PIxPiCjt+∑CSw∈CSWxCSwCjt=DCjt∀Cj∈CJ,(4)xPiCjt,xPiLFht,xCSwCjt⩾0∀Pi∈PI,∀Cj∈CJ,∀LFh∈LFH,∀CSw∈CSW,Eq. (1) expresses the total obtained cost (TOC) for backfill shipment. The objective function consists of minimizing the TOC by optimizing the material flow of backfill throughout the supply chain. The TOC can be regarded as a performance indicator of backfill recovery (lower TOC means more backfill is recovered between construction sites). The first part of TOC is the total cost for shipping the backfill from producers to consumers, and the unit shipment cost (CPiCjt) is the sum of the material cost(MCPiCjt)and transportation cost(TCPiCjt). The second part of TOC is the total cost for dumping backfill from producers to landfills, andCPiLFhtis the sum of the transportation cost(TCPiLFht)and waste disposal charge(WCPiLFht). The last part of TOC is the total cost for obtaining backfill from commercial sources to consumers, andCCSwCjtis the sum of the material cost(MCCSwCjt)and transportation cost(TCCSwCjt). In general, dumping to landfills is more expensive than exporting to other construction sites (i.e.,CPiLFht>CPiCjt) due to a high waste disposal charge. Moreover, it is better to obtain backfill from construction sites than commercial sources due to the high commercial fee (i.e.,CCSwCjt>CPiCjt). Therefore, the amount of backfill shipped between producers and consumers∑Pi∈PI∑Cj∈CJxPiCjtis potentially larger than the backfill shipped to landfills∑Pi∈PI∑LFh∈LFHxPiLFhtor obtained from commercial sources∑CSw∈CSW∑Cj∈CJxCSwCjt.Constraint (2) requires that the exported backfill of a producer Pishould be equal to the amount of backfill shipped to consumers and landfills. Constraint (3) expresses that the imported backfill of a consumer Cjshould be equal to the amount of backfill obtained from producers and commercial sources. Constraint (4) enforces the non-negativity for the variables,xPiCjt,xCSwCjtandxPiLFht.The rationale behind ABM is that producer Pi, consumer Cj, landfill LFhand commercial source CSwsolve decision making issues based on their own objectives, and then share the results in order to find an agreement for backfill shipment. This study models the backfill supply chain as a multi-agent system. The decision making and cooperation between different business entities are modeled by autonomous agents. The following section explains the role of different agents and the negotiation algorithm in the ABM.This agent models the operations of a construction site. As discussed in Section 1, a construction site may excavate and export backfill at an early stage, and require backfilling and import backfill later. In order to explicitly express decision making issues at different states, a generic diagram is developed, as depicted in Fig. 4. The term producer Pirefers to the state when a site carries out excavation and potentially exports backfill. Idle means the state when a site constructs the underground structures, and neither imports nor exports backfill. Consumer Cirefers to the state when the site backfills the excavation and potentially imports backfill. In a backfill supply chain, a construction site can be a pure producer, a pure consumer, or a producer–consumer. We define a discrete local time period m(=0,1,2,…M) to represent the duration of a producer Pi, n(=0,1,2,…N) to represent the duration of Ci, and Tidleto represent the duration for the idle state. We also define t(=0,1,2,…T) to represent the global time period for the backfill supply chain. Assume that tiis the start for construction site i along the global time horizon and accordingly (ti+M+Tidle+N) is the end of construction at site i. The three decision making issues for Piare: (1) the amount of stockpiled backfill on-site for filling the excavation, considering the material holding cost, (2) the optimum amount of exported backfill to other construction sites, considering potential demand variation, and (3) a cost-effective way for shipping the exported backfill. The two decision making issues for Ciare: (1) the optimum amount of imported backfill from other construction sites, considering potential supply variation, and (2) a cost-effective way to import the backfill. In our agent-based model, a single unified type of agent is developed to address the decision making issues at different states.(1)Pure producer caseAn agent in the producer state aims to (1) determine the optimum amount of exported backfill at different time periods, considering the demand variance, and (2) minimize the backfill shipment cost (i.e., the sum of transportation cost and material cost). Minimization of the shipment cost is achieved through coordination with agents in the consumer state and will be discussed in Section 3.2 in regard to the negotiation algorithm. Therefore, this section only introduces how a producer determines the optimum amount of exported backfill at a random time period. Consider a producer Piwhere excavation is proceeding, as shown in Fig. 5a. The rate of backfill generation on the construction site over time period m is treated as the backfill inflow rate, denoted asIRim. DefineORimas the backfill outflow rate of Pi, which represents the rate of exporting backfill to the landfills and consumers. Hence, the stockpiled backfill on the construction site is equal to∑m(IRim-ORim).Producer Piaims to identify the optimal amount of exported backfill,ORim, under various constraints (e.g., holding cost and field space) considering potential backfill demand variations. The objective is to minimize the sum of the backfill holding cost and the dumping cost. The demand variance of backfill is incorporated to the formulation using stochastic programming [27,28], which is an effective optimization approach for modeling problems that involve uncertainties. Stochastic programming has been applied in many fields of research, such as supply chain design and capacity planning [10,13,29], and in this study the technique will be used to model the uncertainties in backfill demand. A stochastic model for identifying the optimalORimis formulated as follows:(5)min1K∑k=1KG(ORim,dk)subject to(6)G(ORim,dk)⩾Xim·HCi+ORim-dk·CPiLFht,∀k=1,2,…K(7)G(ORim,dk)⩾Xim·HCi,∀k=1,2,…K(8)0⩽∑m(IRim-ORim)⩽FSi(9)Xim=∑m-1IRim-ORim+12IRim-ORimwhereG(ORim,dk)denotes the expected total cost; HCirepresents the backfill holding cost at producer Pi;Ximrepresents the backfill stocked on site for self-use over time period m; dkdenotes the average backfill demand per producer as the result of the k-th random sampling, in which k is the number of times the random sampling is undertaken. The expectation in Eq. (5) is taken with respect to the probability distribution of dk, which is supposed to be known. Eqs. (6) and (7) ensure that the optimal solution will be larger than the maximum value of the cumulative cost. FSirepresents the available field space on-site for storing backfill and Eq. (8) corresponds to the field space constraint of producer Pi. Implementation of the stochastic model generates the optimum amount of exported backfill, which considers the demand variances from other construction sites and minimizes the amount of backfill disposed of at landfills.(2)Pure consumer caseAn agent in the consumer state aims to (1) identify the optimum amount of imported backfill at different time periods, and (2) minimize the backfill shipment cost through coordination with other agents. Consider a consumer Cjwhere backfilling is proceeding, as shown in Fig. 5(b).IRjndenotes the backfill inflow rate of Cj, which represents the rate of importing backfill from commercial sources and producers.ORjndenotes the backfill outflow rate of Cj, which represents the backfill demand for filling the excavation. Hence, the stockpiled backfill on-site is equal to∑n(IRjn-ORjn).Consumer Cjaims to identify the optimum amount of imported backfill,IRjn, under various constraints considering the potential backfill supply variations. A stochastic model for identifyingIRjnis formulated for minimizing the on-site holding cost and the backfill obtaining cost. Since import of backfill from consumers and commercial sources only increases these cost, the optimum for a consumer state agent is to import the same amount of backfill as the total backfill demand, i.e.,IRjn=ORjn.(3)Producer-to-consumer caseThe majority of construction sites generate backfill which is stockpiled and reused at a later stage, and can go through both producer state and consumer state in one project. This requires an integrated agent model that can change its state from a producer Pito a consumer Ci. When a producer changes to a consumer, decisions should be made regarding the backfill quantity that is stockpiled for backfilling the excavation. Two key parameters are considered in this problem: (1) the material holding cost (HCi) from the end of the producer state to the start of the consumer state (Tidle), and (2) the estimated material purchasing cost (PCi). An agent in the producer state Pishould compare these parameters and decide the value of backfill retainage for self-use, denoted by Q, and calculated as:(10)Q=min∑0<m⩽MIRim,∑0<n⩽NORin,FSi,Q×Tidle×HCi⩽Q×PCi0,otherwisewhere∑0<m⩽MIRimrefers to the total backfill generation at Piover the local time period m;∑0<n⩽NORinis the total backfill demand at Ciover the time period n; FSiis the available field space for stockpiling the backfill. In order to force the producer Pito reserve the backfill quantity Q for backfilling, constraint (11) should be added during the minimization of Eq. (5) to allow a backfill retainage.(11)∑M(IRim-ORim)=QorIRim-ORim=QMThis agent models the operations and communications of a landfill with backfill producers. In a backfill supply chain, the landfill agent is responsible for handling part of the surplus or undesirable backfill exported from a producer. Generally, on receiving a request from a producer, the landfill agent arranges a disposal plan and starts receiving the backfill. Every single batch of backfill will be charged at a rate according to the waste charging scheme. Usually, the local government sets up a high waste charge to avoid direct dumping of construction waste. Therefore, recycling and reusing the backfill between construction sites become more economical and environmentally-friendly.A commercial source agent is responsible for providing the imported backfill required by a consumer. Because the network structure of a backfill supply chain changes from time to time, the partnership between consumers and commercial sources would change accordingly. For this, commercial source agent shall take into account a long-term alliance with the construction sites and keeps a tracked record of market demand. After receiving an order from a consumer, the commercial source agent forwards the message to its sales department for preparation and shipment of backfill. The unit cost of backfill from commercial sources may be different due to the variance in the transportation distance, material-handling cost and company operating cost, etc. Generally, a consumer would select the cheapest commercial source to supply the imported backfill.This section presents the negotiation algorithm that was developed based on the contract net protocol (CNP) [30]. The purpose of this algorithm is to optimize the material flow throughout the backfill supply chain and to maximize the backfill recovery between construction sites. In traditional CNP, there are three major stages for contracting a bid: task announcement, bidding, and awarding. Task announcement includes the information regarding the task abstraction, eligibility and bid specifications. Task sender initiates the contracting process by sending task announcements to receivers. When received an announcement message, a receiver starts processing the task and replying a bid for task awarding. Normally, a contract will be awarded to most acceptable bidders by announcing award message and the unsatisfactory bidders will be rejected.In the negotiation algorithm, agents coordinate with others by sending messages. A generic form of the message is constructed as messageType (sender & receiver & messageContents), where messgeType and messageContents are specific to the stage of the negotiation process. The sender and receiver correspond to the index of agent that sends and receives message, respectively. Fig. 6shows the task announcement, bidding and awarding in our multi-agent system composed of many producers and consumers. At the beginning of a random time period t, the consumers initiate the negotiation algorithm by announcing their optimum amount of imported backfill(IRjn)and the unit shipment cost for backfill from commercial sources(CCSwCjt). The receivers are the producers in the supply chain network.On receiving announcement messages, a random producer Pistarts ranking the consumers and determining their sequences for bidding. The priority of the consumer is presented as the ratio of the sum of the transportation cost and the material cost over the unit shipment cost from commercial sources, namelyTCPiCjt+MCPiCjt/CCSwCjt, whereCCSwCjtis equal to the sum ofTCCSwCjtandMCCSwCjt. Higher priority is given to the consumers in whichTCPiCjtandMCPiCjtare low whileCCSwCjtis high, leading to a lower cost for backfill shipment. The consumer with the highest priority will be ranked in the first place and selected at the beginning. This consumer is identified as the current_consumer, Cj, and put into a selected_consumer set. UseqPiCjtto denote the bid quantity of backfill sending to the current_consumer Cj, and computeqPiCjtin terms ofORimandIRj′n, as follows:qPiCjt=0uz=ORimfor 1 to received_messge.size()getIRjn, from announcement_message of Cj,uz+1=uz-IRjn,ifuz+1>0qPiCjt=IRjn,uz=uz+1,send bid_message and nextifuz+1=0qPiCjt=IRjn,send bid_message and returnifuz+1<0qPiCjt=uz,send bid_message and returnFollowed by computation ofqPiCjt, producer Pisends a bid message, i.e., (Pi,Cj′qPiCjt,TCPiCjt+MCPiCjt,CPiLFht), to the current_consumer Cjas a request for awarding. In the case ofuz+1>0, the producer Pishould start seeking the second current_consumer from the ranked consumers for the next bidding. On receiving the bid messages, a consumer starts ranking producers based on the ratio of the sum of transportation cost and material cost over the unit shipment cost at a landfill, expressed as(TCPiCjt+MCPiCjt)/CPiLFht, whereCPiLFhtis equal to the sum ofTCPiLFhtandWCPiLFht. Similarly, high priority is given to the producer in whichTCPiCjtandMCPiCjtare low whileCPiLFhtis high. The producer with the highest priority will be selected at the beginning and will be identified as the current_producer and put into a selected_producer set. LetqPiCjt∗denote the actual backfill quantity accepted by the consumer and the value is computed referring to the bid quantityqPiCjt, as follows:qPiCjt∗=0uz∗=IRjnfor 1 to received_messge.size()getqPiCjt, from bid_message ofPiuz∗+1=uz∗-qPiCjt,ifuz∗+1>0qPiCjt∗=qPiCjt,uz∗=uz∗+1,send award_message and nextifuz∗+1=0qPiCjt∗=qPiCjt,send award_message and reject remaining producers, stop awardingifuz∗+1<0qPiCjt∗=uz∗,send award_message and reject remaining producers, stop awardingThe consumer sends an award message, i.e., (Cj,Pi,qPiCjt∗) to the current_producer for confirming the backfill shipment. In the case ofuz∗+1>0, the consumer should start seeking the second current_producer for the next awarding; while foruz∗+1⩽0, the consumer should reject remaining producers and then stop bidding.Producer Picollects the award information and checks whether its optimum amount of exported backfill (ORim) satisfies the imported backfill(IRjn)required by the consumers. This is done by calculating∑Cj∈selected_consumerqPiCjt-∑Cj∈selected_consumerqPiCjt∗, where the former means the total bid quantity of backfill sending to the selected_consumer and the latter represents the actual quantity accepted by the selected_consumer. If the difference is equal to zero, Pidoes not receive rejected message and stops the bidding process; if the difference is larger than zero, Pireceives rejected messages and should repeat the bidding with a remaining backfill quantity ofORim-∑Cj∈selected_consumerqPiCjt∗. The negotiation process terminates when the random time period t is finished. The backfill that cannot be exported to consumers will be exported to landfills, whereas the backfill that cannot be obtained from producers will be imported from commercial sources.This section presents an illustrative example that compares the performance of COM and ABM. In the scenario considered, there are a landfill, a commercial source and six construction sites located in Hong Kong (see Fig. 7, the map of Hong Kong is obtained from [31]). The excavation and backfilling schedules of the construction sites at different time periods are summarized in Table 1. The index represents the geographical location of a construction site and the number is unique for one site. Table 2summarizes the transportation costs, material costs and waste disposal charges between different locations. In the COM, the information is applied in optimizing the material flow of backfill throughout the supply chain while in the ABM the information is used for ranking in the negotiation algorithm. The COM was solved by Excel Solver whereas the negotiation algorithm in the ABM was implemented by a customized Java program. The computational results are shown in Table 3and Fig. 8, and compared graphically in Figs. 9 and 10.As shown in Fig. 8, the results determined from the COM are almost consistent with the results from the ABM (except the supply chain configuration between P2, P3 and C4 at first time period). The differences are mainly due to their modeling paradigms. As shown in Fig. 9a, optimization in the COM requires input of the complete information from all supply chain entities (i.e., six construction sites, one landfill and one commercial source). Computation of recycling strategies is implemented by a central authority that acts as a coordinator and the optimal plans are shared with the relevant entities. Finally, all relevant entities must follow the decision results made by the central authority to distribute the backfill materials. As opposed to the centralized model, the ABM requires limited information exchange and the optimization is implemented by different supply chain entities geographically distributed in Hong Kong (Fig. 9b). In the ABM model, an entity (agent) in the supply chain network does not require global information input, but rather local information sufficient for making the decision choices (i.e., producer agents should decide the optimal export rateORim). The agents then exchange their decision results (with the selected counterparts) via the negotiation algorithm for finding a common agreement to distribute the backfill. As complete information can be obtained and used in the centralized optimization, the COM is expected to generate better results than the ABM.The benefit of ABM lies in the cooperation of tasks between many interactive individuals. In ABM, optimization is allocated from a centralized authority to a number of distributed agents (also known as optimization decentralization). The construction site, landfill, and commercial source agents make decisions independently based on their local information and objectives, followed by negotiation to come out the general solution. Because in reality SCM is often concerned with multiple decision makers, the decision making process of ABM based on the negotiation and information sharing between different agents is more close to the real business cooperation style. In contrast, the underlying assumption of perfect information availability in COM (i.e., complete information input) is almost an impractical condition due to company trust, confidential issue, etc. For real SCM, users would prefer ABM that requires limited information exchange amongst a part of the supply chain entities.Another advantage of using ABM is the fast reaction capacity. It is known that the backfill supply chain has a network structure that changes dynamically as time passes. This dynamic nature of the backfill supply chain is best captured by the ABM paradigm. The agents in the ABM model are autonomous and reactive. They are able to perceive and respond (in a timely manner) to the unexpected disturbances in the backfill supply chain. For example, if a selected consumer suddenly changes the backfilling schedule, the agent Cjwill automatically calculate the optimal import rate (IRjn) and then exchange the updated information with producers for finding a new backfill distribution plan. These processes are immediate and automatic, and do not require additional data collection or optimization. As compared with ABM, the central authority in COM needs to collect up-to-date information, reconfigure the network structure and recompute the optimum, in case there are sudden disturbances to the supply chain entities (e.g., addition or removal of agents in the supply chain, or change of construction schedule). In reality, this will lead to outdated decision results or delays to the decision making process. As a matter of fact, these are unacceptable conditions for SCM, which arise the need for ABM adoption.However, ABM is not without limitations. As shown in Table 3, the TOC determined from the ABM is HK$ 42 (i.e., 0.30%) higher than the COM due to the differences in supply chain configuration at first time period. Fig. 10 highlights and compares the differences in details. For the COM (see Fig. 10a and b), the optimal material flow of backfill (i.e., P2 to C4,P3 to C4) is allocated by the central authority, considering the transportation and material costs obtained from producer P2, producer P3 and consumer C4. As discussed earlier, the COM aims to achieve a good global performance and complete information can be acquired in the optimization; therefore, the backfill distribution plan of COM is often considered the global optimum. For the ABM (Fig. 10c and d), however, the optimal material flow is determined from the negotiation algorithm between P2, P3 and C4. Based on the negotiation algorithm, consumer C4 selects the closest producer P3 instead of producer P2 while P2 is rejected by C4 and selects a further consumer C5. This results in an increment in the transportation distance and TOC. The shipment strategy of ABM loses its optimality as the agent (i.e., C4) makes decisions based on its own interest without considering the global performance of the backfill supply chain. The situation can be improved by considering more efficient collaboration strategies between the supply chain entities (agents). Akintoye et al. [32] reported that trusts between different entities and senior management supports are the most important factors in forming successful supply chain collaboration. Mutual interest between supply chain partners is another major requirement for successful implementation of supply chain alignment. Other problems in implementing successful supply chain collaboration are associated with information availability such as free flow of information and development of integrated information system. In order to achieve good collaboration in the ABM model, the agents should view the global performance of the supply chain as their mutual interest and target at mitigating the TOC. In the negotiation algorithm, an agent should be able to announce its bidding or awarding information to all other agents (both producers and consumers) in the backfill supply chain. Moreover, negotiation should not be limited to Piand Cj, but also Piand Pi, and Cjand Cj, considering the reduction of TOC as their ultimate objective.Despite the loss of solution optimality, ABM is still considered as an efficient approach for studying the dynamic network structure of the backfill supply chain because ABM requires limited sharing of information, which has fewer barriers for implementation. In addition, the dynamic nature of a backfill supply chain is best captured by ABM due to its decentralization of optimization and fast reaction to supply chain disturbances.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The objective of this paper is to identify an appropriate modeling approach to study and analyze the dynamic network of a backfill supply chain in order to maximize the backfill recovery among construction sites and reduce the amount of construction wastes disposed to landfills. Both the centralized approach (using mathematical programing) and the distributed approaches (using the agent-based modeling) are used to implement the optimization. A comparative study indicates that ABM is more capable of modeling a dynamic supply chain due to its decentralization of optimization and fast reaction to unexpected disturbances. A disadvantage of ABM is that solution optimality is sacrificed due to the lack of global information. However, this situation can be improved by considering an efficient collaboration strategy between the agents, through improving information availability and using TOC as the ultimate objective in the negotiation algorithm. In this context, we propose to develop a decision support system based on the ABM for making decision support more practical and reliable. Future research is still mandatory and has to focus on a database for the storage of modeling data, a user interface for result visualization as well as their connections with the ABM. In addition, recent models only consider one commercial source and landfill in the supply chain network. Consideration of more than one commercial sources and/or landfills is needed and will be included in the future development.