@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A two-level advanced production planning and scheduling model for RFID-enabled ubiquitous manufacturing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An RFID-event driven mechanism is used to integrate planning and scheduling.RFID production shopfloor data was used to obtain APPS parameters.Release strategy is efficient to reduce the total tardiness by 44.46% averagely.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Advanced production planning and scheduling (APPS),Radio frequency identification (RFID),Real-time,Ubiquitous manufacturing,Two-level,Shop floor,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Radio frequency identification (RFID) technology has been used in manufacturing industries to create a RFID-enabled ubiquitous environment, in where ultimate real-time advanced production planning and scheduling (APPS) will be achieved with the goal of collective intelligence. A particular focus has been placed upon using the vast amount of RFID production shop floor data to obtain more precise and reasonable estimates of APPS parameters such as the arrival of customer orders and standard operation times (SOTs). The resulting APPS model is based on hierarchical production decision-making principle to formulate planning and scheduling levels. A RFID-event driven mechanism is adopted to integrate these two levels for collective intelligence. A heuristic approach using a set of rules is utilized to solve the problem. The model is tested through four dimensions, including the impact of rule sequences on decisions, evaluation of released strategy to control the amount of production order from planning to scheduling, comparison with another model and practical operations, as well as model robustness. Two key findings are observed. First, release strategy based on the RFID-enabled real-time information is efficient and effective to reduce the total tardiness by 44.46% averagely. Second, it is observed that the model has the immune ability on disturbances like defects. However, as the increasing of the problem size, the model robustness against emergency orders becomes weak; while, the resistance to machine breakdown is strong oppositely. Findings and observations are summarized into a number of managerial implications for guiding associated end-users for purchasing collective intelligence in practice.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the last decade, manufacturing sectors had significant interests in RFID (radio frequency identification) applications. In this context, the motivation for integrating production planning and scheduling is a gain in collective intelligence: it is more effective and faster to carry out manufacturing operations within the RFID-enabled real-time ubiquitous environment where ultimate advanced production planning and scheduling (APPS) maybe enabled [1]. In this paper, APPS in RFID-enabled real-time ubiquitous manufacturing shop floor has several key characteristics comparing with typical production sites.Firstly, decision-making using a hierarchical approach is divided into two levels: production planning and scheduling. In planning level, production orders are sequenced to minimize the total differences of finished time and due date. In scheduling level, jobs are determined in an optimal sequence descripting when a job will be processed by which machine/operator to minimize the total tardiness. From planning to scheduling, a production order maybe split into several batches each of which is regarded as a job that contains 180 pieces of items.Secondly, production scheduling follows up a hybrid flow shop (HFS) principle. In HFS, there are several stages each of which has several machines with similar function. Jobs are processed within these stages in strict sequences. Some stages may be ignored according to the technique requirements.Thirdly, the concept of real-time job pool plays an imperative role in the RFID-enabled ubiquitous manufacturing environment [2]. Two types of job pool are used. One is for production orders in planning level, where the real-time job pool is responsible for sequencing, managing, and releasing the production orders. The other is for each stage in scheduling level, where it is responsible for sequencing and releasing jobs by RFID-driven events. A RFID event is behaved when a reader detect a tag which is described in the RFID-enabled real-time ubiquitous manufacturing shop floor later.Fourthly, rules play significant roles in this RFID-enabled ubiquitous manufacturing environment. In planning level, production orders are sequenced in the job pool according to their priorities, customer importance, earliest due date (EDD) and first in first out (FIFO). In scheduling level, jobs are sequenced in the job pool according to material-based grouping, shortest processing time (SPT) and order-based rule. Additionally, a job assigned to a specific machine from the job pool may consider some rules such as material property and machine processing speed.Finally, manufacturing resources like machines, materials and workers are equipped with RFID devices. Once bound by RFID, they become smart manufacturing objects (SMOs) which are able to sense, interact, and behave according to the production workflows within the environment, where APPS could be deterministic since RFID technology enables the real-time data collection instantly. Thus, the traditional hierarchical decision-making principle is upgraded into a closed-loop fashion that the real-time information such as operator statuses, machine situations, job progresses, and material arrivals at scheduling level could be fed back to planning level.Due to the key features of APPS in RFID-enabled real-time ubiquitous manufacturing environment, several challenges exist when conducting operation decisions. The arrival of customer orders is highly stochastic firstly, which causes a large variability of production orders. In most cases, specific possibilities like normal distribution are given for theoretical analysis [3]. However, in real-life practice, the possibility may be diversified, thus, the precise estimation of their arrivals is critical. Secondly, orders release from planning level to the 1st stage of scheduling level is difficult to carry out due to the variability. In most investigated companies, there is no any control mechanism. As a result, decisions in scheduling level are usually interrupted and re-planning & re-scheduling are frequently executed. Thirdly, plans and schedules within the RFID-enabled ubiquitous manufacturing heavily rely on standard operation times (SOTs). Deviations of the SOTs exist because different operators have different skill levels and large number of impact factors such as shifts may have influence on the time [4].In order to address the above challenges, this paper proposes an APPS model for facilitating the collective intelligence within the RFID-enabled ubiquitous environment. Several research questions are concerned and the corresponding methodologies are proposed.•How can we precisely estimate the arrivals of production orders so that plans and schedules based on the estimation are more accurate and practical? This paper introduces an approach integrate least square polynomial fitting (LSPT) and exponential distribution estimation to discover the actual distribution from long- and short-term aspects. Using the Poisson process, the arrival of production orders could be predicted reasonably.How can we define a release strategy after estimating the arrivals of production orders so that plans and schedules could be balanced to reduce the re-planning and re-scheduling operations ultimately? This paper reports on a model which integrates the planning and scheduling levels through RFID-event driven mechanism to obtain a strategy which indicates the optimal percentage for this purpose. Specifically a control mechanism is proposed to determine the optimal amount of production orders released from planning to scheduling level.How can we establish a mathematic model to obtain the optimal results in planning and scheduling level within the RFID-enabled ubiquitous manufacturing environment so that limited production resources could be concerned? This paper proposes a model which integrates stochastic elements like production arrival and deterministic factors like machine, operator and jobs by using RFID technology so as to adaptively guide the manufacturing resources to obtain the optimal results for collective intelligence.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the key related work which is categorized into RFID-enabled ubiquitous manufacturing, advanced production planning and scheduling (APPS), and hybrid flow shop (HFS) scheduling. Section 3 introduces a RFID-enabled real-time ubiquitous shop floor manufacturing. Section 4 illustrates the problem description in terms of symbols and assumptions. In Section 5, a two-level model and solution framework are presented. Experiments and discussions are proposed in Section 6, which presents the managerial implications based on the experimental results. Section 7 summarizes this paper by giving our findings, key contributions as well as the future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
