@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Transcriptome-wide identification of Rauvolfia serpentina microRNAs and prediction of their potential targets

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Fifteen conserved microRNAs were identified from Rauvolfia serpentina.Uracil was preferred initial base (86.67%) of identified mature miRNA sequences.Phylogenetic analysis revealed pre-miRNAs evolutionary relationship across species.Thirty six potential targets of identified miRNAs were predicted in R. serpentina.Predicted targets were associated with regulation of diverse biological processes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Rauvolfia serpentina,MicroRNA,Gene expression regulation,Secondary metabolism,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs of ∼19–24 nucleotides (nt) in length and considered as potent regulators of gene expression at transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels. Here we report the identification and characterization of 15 conserved miRNAs belonging to 13 families from Rauvolfia serpentina through in silico analysis of available nucleotide dataset. The identified mature R. serpentina miRNAs (rse-miRNAs) ranged between 20 and 22nt in length, and the average minimal folding free energy index (MFEI) value of rse-miRNA precursor sequences was found to be –0.815kcal/mol. Using the identified rse-miRNAs as query, their potential targets were predicted in R. serpentina and other plant species. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation showed that predicted targets of rse-miRNAs include transcription factors as well as genes involved in diverse biological processes such as primary and secondary metabolism, stress response, disease resistance, growth, and development. Few rse-miRNAs were predicted to target genes of pharmaceutically important secondary metabolic pathways such as alkaloids and anthocyanin biosynthesis. Phylogenetic analysis showed the evolutionary relationship of rse-miRNAs and their precursor sequences to homologous pre-miRNA sequences from other plant species. The findings under present study besides giving first hand information about R. serpentina miRNAs and their targets, also contributes towards the better understanding of miRNA-mediated gene regulatory processes in plants.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are tiny regulatory nucleic acid molecules belonging to the small RNA world. These endogenous, non-coding RNA (ncRNA) molecules are ∼19–24 nucleotides (nt) in length and are potent regulators of gene expression in animals, fungi, nematodes, plants and viruses. In plants, miRNAs originate from long self complementary secondary structure containing transcripts that are transcribed into long primary miRNAs (pri-miRNAs) by RNA polymerase II from intergenic or coding regions (Lee et al., 2004). DICER-LIKE 1 (DCL1), an RNase III enzyme, process these pri-miRNAs into shorter stem-loop hairpin containing sequences called precursor miRNAs (pre-miRNAs). The pre-miRNAs are further subjected to cleavage by DCL1 to generate a double-stranded structure known as miRNA/miRNA* duplex containing mature miRNA and its opposite sequence (Kurihara and Watanabe, 2004). In plants, these duplexes are characterized by ∼2nt overhangs at their 3′ ends (Bartel, 2004), and 2′-O-methylation by Hua-Enhancer1 (HEN1), a nuclear RNA methyl transferase (Yu et al., 2005). The export of miRNA/miRNA* duplexes from nucleus to cytoplasm is facilitated by an exportin 5 homolog, HASTY. The mature miRNA molecule from duplex gets incorporated into an RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) while the miRNA star (miRNA*) sequence usually gets degraded, but recently biological roles of miRNA* sequences have also been reported (Guo and Lu, 2010; Hsieh et al., 2009). The RISC contains argonaute family proteins which facilitate the interaction of mature miRNA with its target mRNAs (Baumberger and Baulcombe, 2005). The negative regulation of target gene expression by either transcript cleavage or translational inhibition within RISC depends upon the level of complementarity between mature miRNA and its target transcript (Kidner and Martienssen, 2005). Near perfect or perfect complementarity between miRNA and its target mRNA leads to suppressed gene expression either by translational inhibition or target mRNA degradation (Zhang et al., 2006a). Plant miRNAs exhibit near perfectly to complete complementarity to target mRNA transcript(s), thus, regulate the concerned gene through either translational repression or degradation (Aukerman and Sakai, 2003; Schwab et al., 2005). The precise slicing of target mRNA molecules between 10th and 11th bases from the 5′ end of majority of plant miRNAs leads to the degradation of their targets. Majority of the predicted targets that are regulated by plant miRNAs are transcription factors as they usually exhibit perfect or near perfect complementarity for duplex formation with mature plant miRNA sequences (Bartel, 2004). In plants, miRNAs play pivotal role(s) in the regulation of growth and developmental activities (Aukerman and Sakai, 2003; Kim et al., 2005; Palatnik et al., 2003; Wang et al., 2005). Moreover, the regulatory roles of miRNAs in responses to abiotic as well as biotic stresses (Khraiwesh et al., 2012; Ruiz-Ferrer and Voinnet, 2009; Sunkar et al., 2012), secondary metabolism (Lu et al., 2013) and as potential graft-transmissible signal (Bhogale et al., 2014) has also been emerged recently.Identification of miRNAs relies either on small RNA sequencing and subsequent bioinformatics analysis or solely on the bioinformatics approaches provided that the sequence resources are available in databases. Besides high-throughput sequencing, the available sequence databases provide a useful resource to mine the conserved miRNAs in different plant species. The in silico identification of miRNAs in publically available databases is cost effective, fast and reliable due to the specialized algorithms such as BLASTN for homology-based searches, and MFold (Zuker, 2003) or UNAFold (Markham and Zuker, 2008) for prediction of stem-loop hairpin structures. Simultaneously, the targets of miRNAs could be predicted by using web-based tools such as psRNATarget (Dai and Zhao, 2011). Computational analysis of expressed sequence tags (ESTs) and/or genomic sequence resources has been a successful approach towards the identification of miRNAs and prediction of their targets in several plants including Arabidopsis thaliana (Wang et al., 2004), banana (Chai et al., 2015), barley (Colaiacovo et al., 2010), Brassica napus (Xie et al., 2007), cabbage (Wang et al., 2011), cotton (Zhang et al., 2007), sorghum (Katiyar et al., 2012), soybean (Zhang et al., 2008), tobacco (Frazier et al., 2010), tomato (Yin et al., 2008), and wheat (Han et al., 2013), etc. Besides EST and genomic sequence resources, bioinformatics analysis of deep sequencing-generated small RNA reads by aligning them to the whole genome or transcriptome sequence resources has also been a successful approach for the identification of miRNAs and prediction of their stem-loop hairpin structures (Jain et al., 2014; Wan et al., 2012). In the past recent years, microRNAs and their targets have also been reported in few medicinal plants like Artemisia annua (Pérez-Quintero et al., 2012), Catharanthus roseus (Prakash et al., 2015), Papaver somniferum (Unver et al., 2010), Panax ginseng (Li et al., 2013), and Taxus chinensis (Qiu et al., 2009), etc. The miRNAs and their targets identified computationally from these plants would throw some light on the possibilities of miRNA-mediated regulation of important pathway genes and transcription factors involved in secondary metabolism.Rauvolfia serpentina (family: Apocynaceae) is well known for the biosynthesis of terpenoid indole alkaloids. The important alkaloids of R. serpentina include ajmalicine, ajmaline, deserpidine, rescinnamine, reserpine, serpentine and yohimbine; all of which have pharmaceutical importance. Approximately 85–90% of alkaloids are present in the bark of root and exhibit important biological activities (Itoh et al., 2005). R. serpentina alkaloids have been reported to be effective against breast cancer, cardiovascular diseases, hypertension, and snake bite. Reserpine, a major alkaloid, is commonly known for its antihypertensive and antipsychotic activities. Other alkaloid such as ajmaline is used as an antiarrhythmic agent whereas ajmalicine, deserpidine and rescinnamine are antihypertensive drugs effective against high blood pressure (Vakil, 1955). Its root extract is effective in treatment of disorders which are generally associated with central nervous system such as epilepsy, insanity, insomnia, psychosis and schizophrenia (Dey and De, 2011). Considering the pharmaceutical and economic importance of secondary metabolites of R. serpentina, its transcriptomic resources were generated and reported in National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) by Góngora-Castillo et al. (2012). So far no information regarding miRNAs is available from R. serpentina which produces several secondary metabolites having commercial and pharmaceutical importance.In the present study, we in silico analyzed the nucleotide sequences of R. serpentina available in NCBI database including transcriptome shotgun assembly (TSA) entries for the identification of potential miRNAs and their targets. We report 15 rse-miRNAs in the dataset, and a few of them are predicted to target secondary metabolism-related genes. The presence of rse-miRNAs and their targets in the transcriptomic sequences indicates miRNA-mediated control of certain regulatory genes and metabolic pathways which could be further used as a tool for manipulating secondary metabolism in R. serpentina for enhanced production of commercially important alkaloids.A total of 7201 mature miRNA sequences from 53 plant species were downloaded from miRNA sequence database (miRBase release 21) available at http://www.mirbase.org These mature miRNA sequences were used as reference sequence for performing BLASTN search against all 99,763 nucleotides entries including TSA dataset (contigs) of R. serpentina available at NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov).For the identification of miRNAs, two parameters were considered: (a) sequence conservation among mature miRNA sequences i.e. homologs in R. serpentina nucleotide dataset having no more than 2nt mismatch to the mature miRNAs available in miRBase, and (b) formation of stem-loop hairpin structures with minimal folding free energy index (MFEI) value <–0.66kcal/mol. A BLASTN search was carried out using the mature miRNA sequences of miRBase as query against R. serpentina nucleotide dataset using default parameters for short input sequences and a cut-off e-value of 10. The sequences with only 0–2nt mismatches to the queried miRNAs were manually selected. These filtered sequences were subjected to the miRNA identification pipeline of C-mii tool (Numnark et al., 2012). The parameters and other criteria used for identification of R. serpentina primary and precursor miRNA sequences by using C-mii tool were the same as described previously by Prakash et al. (2015).Targets of the identified rse-miRNAs were predicted in R. serpentina nucleotide dataset by using the user-submitted small RNAs/user-submitted transcript option as well as in other plant species by using the user-submitted small RNAs/preloaded transcript option of web-based plant small RNA target analysis tool psRNATarget (http://plantgrn.noble.org/psRNATarget). The parameters considered for target prediction include (i) 0–2nt mismatches between mature rse-miRNA and its complementary sequence for target prediction in other plant species, while 0–3nt mismatch for target prediction in R. serpentina, (ii) complementarity scoring length (hspsize): 20, (iii) maximum allowed unpaired energy (UPE): 25, (iv) Flanking length of 17bp upstream and 13bp downstream around the target site for analysis of target accessibility, and (v) central mismatch range leading to translation inhibition: 9–11nt. The predicted rse-miRNA targets were subjected to Gene Ontology (GO) annotation by using Blast2GO suite.Nucleotide composition and their dominance at particular positions in mature rse-miRNAs were analyzed by using BioEdit tool (Hall, 1999). Positional frequency summary analysis of mature rse-miRNA sequences was performed and the average percentage of A, C, G and U bases was calculated. BioEdit and WebLogo 3 (Crooks et al., 2004) were used to represent the overall position-specific base analysis in graphical form.The precursor sequences of identified rse-miRNAs were used for a BLASTN-assisted homolog search (e-value cutoff: 10) against all the miRNA stem-loop sequences in miRBase. Three best hits for each rse-miRNA precursor were retrieved and aligned along with the identified precursors of rse-miRNAs by using CLUSTALX2. A phylogenetic tree of aligned sequences was constructed by maximum likelihood method using MEGA version 5.2 (Tamura et al., 2011) to analyze the evolutionary relationship among the rse-miRNA precursors and their homologous stem-loop sequences present in other plants.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
