@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
On origin and evolution of carbonic anhydrase isozymes: A phylogenetic analysis from whole-enzyme to active site

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Phylogenetic analysis of isozymes of carbonic anhydrase family was carried out.Kingdom-specificity of the members of the family was explored.All the members of the family were discovered to be present in all three forms of life.Evolution of active site across different classes of the members was carried out.Similarity of sequences in the proximity of Zn ion was proposed to be responsible for functional similarity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Kingdom-specificity,Active site,Sequence alignment,Carbonic anhydrases,Biological function,Structural similarity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Genetic evolution of carbonic anhydrase enzyme provides an interesting instance of functional similarity in spite of structural diversity of the members of a given family of enzymes. Phylogenetic analysis of α-, β- and γ-carbonic anhydrase was carried out to determine the evolutionary relationships among various members of the family with the enzyme marking its presence in a wide range of cellular and chromosomal locations. The presence of more than one class of enzymes in a particular organism was revealed by phylogenetic time tree. The evolutionary relationships among the members of animal, plant and microbial kingdom were developed. The study revises a long-established notion of kingdom-specificity of the different classes of carbonic anhydrases and provides a new version of the presence of multiple classes of carbonic anhydrases in a single organism and the presence of a given class of carbonic anhydrase across different kingdoms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The name carbonic anhydrase (CA) represents a family of enzymes which is found in all three forms of life, i.e., animals, plants and micro-organisms. The classical notion about CA described it to be derived from a single gene, now known as the α-CA gene, which later proved to be wrong with the acceptance of β- and γ-CA as genetically distinct. A comparison of amino acid sequences and crystal structures of three main classes of CA, viz., α-, β-, and γ-CA, shows that the three classes are evolutionarily different and have evolved independently (Tripp et al., 2001). Yet, interestingly, all of them catalyze the reversible hydration of CO2 to a bicarbonate ion and a proton (CO2+H2O↔HCO3−+H+). The interchange CO2↔HCO3−in a human body under different biological conditions has been reported as early as in 1930s by Meldrum and Roughton (1933), an era when α-CA was synonymous to CA. However, with the discovery of β-CA in plants (Hewett-Emmett et al., 1984) and γ-CA in micro-organisms (Alber and Ferry, 1994), the genetic characteristics and diversity of CA became a subject of interest. It is needless to say, however, that due to interesting structural and functional spectra provided by carbonic anhydrase isozymes, newer classes of this enzyme are continuously being discovered with δ-, ζ-, and η- carbonic anhydrases (Zimmerman and Ferry, 2008; Kumar and Ferry, 2014; Del Prete et al., 2014) reported in the recent past. However, the we confine the scope of the present study to α-, β- and γ- carbonic anhydrases mainly due to the fact that the current study is based upon bioinformatics tools and only these three classes of carbonic anhydrases have been reported well-enough in the literature to have the critical mass for the database to be worthwhile for any bioinformatics study.The CA family is distinct from other families of enzymes because of the diversity exhibited by them both in cellular distribution and in the putative or biological functions of its member enzymes which range from photosynthesis, to respiration, pH homeostasis, and ion transport (Tashian, 1989). Although α-, β- and γ-CA have no amino acid sequence similarity, they are functionally identical biocatalysts. The sixteen isozymes of α-CA possess an active site consisting of a Zn2+ ion coordinated tetrahedrally to three His residues and a water molecule (Eriksson et al., 1988). The X-ray structure of β-CA, derived from red alga Porphyridium purpureum, reveals that the dimeric enzyme consists of two identical structural motifs with each motif carrying three projecting α helices (Mitsuhashi et al., 2000). It also consists of a Rossmann fold and an anti-parallel β-strand. This motif is remarkably different from those in α and γ-CA. Two zinc binding are sites present on both sides of a monomer of β-CA. The zinc atom is coordinated to Cys, Asp, His and Cys residues. No water molecule is present within the coordination radius of the zinc ions. X-ray crystallographic structure of γ-CA from archaeon Methanosarcina thermophila (Kisker et al., 1996) reveals a unique structure. The trimeric molecule has a completely different fold when compared to α and β-CA. Each subunit of the trimeric molecule is dominated by seven turns of a left handed β-helix, with three short strands per turn. The zinc ions are located between the subunits and the ions are coordinated by two His residues from one subunit and another His residue from the neighboring subunit. A water molecule is also present in the active site.Since the reversible hydration of CO2 catalyzed by CA has been of widespread adaptive value to the early organisms, it is possible that it was one of the first enzymes to appear (Tashian, 1989). The original gene family of CA probably arose before the divergence of prokaryotes and eukaryotes more than half a billion years ago and for this prolonged period in the evolutionary history of CA, the CA genes underwent several rounds of erroneous duplication resulting in new genes. While most of the CA of animal kingdom fall under one gene family referred to as the α class, CA from several plant chloroplasts were observed to fall under a distinct category of gene family known as the β-CA gene family. In 1990, Miyachi and co-workers (Fukuzawa et al., 1990, 1990) showed that Chlamydomonas reinhardtii possessed α-CA linked CAH1 and CAH2 genes. Alber and Ferry (1994) later introduced another CA gene family which was characteristically distinct from other CA gene families. Hewett-Emmett and Tashian (1996) analyzed the evolutionary history of the genes by phylogenetic analysis and functional similarities of the CA encoded by three individual gene families known then. Their analysis involved ten types of CA under α-CA gene family. The authors concluded that α-CA are restricted to animal kingdom and green algae, β-CA are restricted to plants and eubacteria and γ-CA to archaebacteria and eubacteria. However, today, after nearly two decades, sixteen types of α-CA genes have been discovered. β-CA have also evolved and studied extensively, numerous new entries now being added. Therefore, it is important to carry out a thorough phylogenetic analysis of these ubiquitous enzymes to understand the evolutionary relationships among them. Further, as pointed out earlier, despite structural differences, the functional similarity of the enzymes remains. Therefore, it is also interesting to comment upon the similarity/differences in their active sites. In this paper, we analyze the protein sequence data of sixteen isozymes of α-CA, forty six different protein sequences of different species of β-CA and ten γ-CA protein sequences and analyze the evolution of each family, their evolutionary relationships and their active site evolution.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Phylogenetic analysis of α-, β- and γ-CA revealed the evolutionally relationships among the members of CA family from animal, plant and microbial kingdom. The presence of members from more than one kingdom was observed in all classes of CA enzymes, as was seen from the phylogenetic time tree. Further, the presence of more than one type of CA was also observed in several organisms. Therefore, this study conclusively provides a new version of kingdom-non-specificity of CA. The reason behind the functional similarity of the enzyme family despite the structural diversity was established and it was attributed to similarity in sequences up to 4Åfrom active Zn2+ center. The differences in the activities of different members, thus, potentially arise due to residues far from the active centre. Whereas the structural and functional relationships in CA family from an evolutionary perspective for CO2 hydration action has been conclusively achieved in this study, it will be interesting to divert further efforts towards understanding such relationships in this diverse family for other biologically important functions such as cellular signaling.Conceived and designed experiments: PAD; performed the experiments: SB; analyzed the data: SB and PAD; wrote the paper: PAD and SB.