@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Computational exploration of microRNAs from expressed sequence tags of Humulus lupulus, target predictions and expression analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Twenty-two miRNAs belonging to 17 miRNA families were identified in hop following comparative computational approach and EST-based homology search according to a series of filtering criteria.The total of 47 potential miRNA targets were identified for predicted 22 miRNAs.The new miRNAs identified in this study should enable investigation of the complexity of miRNA-mediated genes network in understanding their roles in regulating growth, development, metabolism, and other physiological processes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
microRNA,Humulus lupulus,Comparative genomics,Posttranscriptional gene regulation,Expressed sequence tags,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Among computationally predicted and experimentally validated plant miRNAs, several are conserved across species boundaries in the plant kingdom. In this study, a combined experimental-in silico computational based approach was adopted for the identification and characterization of miRNAs in Humulus lupulus (hop), which is widely cultivated for use by the brewing industry and apart from, used as a medicinal herb. A total of 22 miRNAs belonging to 17 miRNA families were identified in hop following comparative computational approach and EST-based homology search according to a series of filtering criteria. Selected miRNAs were validated by end-point PCR and quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), confirmed the existence of conserved miRNAs in hop. Based on the characteristic that miRNAs exhibit perfect or nearly perfect complementarity with their targeted mRNA sequences, a total of 47 potential miRNA targets were identified in hop. Strikingly, the majority of predicted targets were belong to transcriptional factors which could regulate hop growth and development, including leaf, root and even cone development. Moreover, the identified miRNAs may also be involved in other cellular and metabolic processes, such as stress response, signal transduction, and other physiological processes. The cis-regulatory elements relevant to biotic and abiotic stress, plant hormone response, flavonoid biosynthesis were identified in the promoter regions of those miRNA genes. Overall, findings from this study will accelerate the way for further researches of miRNAs, their functions in hop and shows a path for the prediction and analysis of miRNAs to those species whose genomes are not available.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Hop (Humulus lupulus L., Cannabaceae) is a dioecious, rhizomatous, twining perennial flowering plant, native to Europe, western Asia and North America. Lupulin glands of hop cones (female inflorescences) are composed of biosynthetic cells that secret a specific but complex metabolites consisting mainly of terpenophenolics (hop bitter acids and prenylflavonoids) and terpenoids (essential oil components), which serve essential raw ingredient in beer, contributing the distinctive bitterness, flavour and aroma, as well as preservative activity (Matoušek et al., 2006). In addition, hop has been traditionally used for variety of health benefits that lately has been confirmed through research. Among these health benefits from hops include relaxation and sleep inducer, anti-inflammatory effect, estrogenic effect, antioxidant activity and as an anti-tumor properties (Van Cleemput et al., 2009). Until recently limited progress has been made in basic gene discovery and gene regulation in hop, and none of the miRNAs have been reported. Understanding gene function and their regulatory mechanisms could provide new insight into the mechanisms of hop growth and development, the response to environmental abiotic/biotic stresses and particularly on cones initiation and development.MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a subset of endogenous approximate 22 nucleotide (nt) small non-coding regulatory RNA molecules that regulate gene expression post-transcriptionally by mediating mRNA degradation or translational repression in a sequence specific manner (Filipowicz et al., 2008). In plants, most miRNA genes are intergenic and transcribed individually from their own region, but a few genes are organized into polycistronic transcription units and co-transcribed from a single promoter at the end of a miRNA gene cluster (Voinnet, 2009). Like other RNAs and protein-coding genes, miRNA genes are transcribed by RNA polymerase II (Pol II) in which the general transcriptional co-activator and mediator are used to recruit Pol II to miRNA gene promoters for transcription initiation (Kim et al., 2011). Increasing evidence suggests that miRNAs play pivotal roles in multiple biological processes in plants, especially controlling tissue (leaf, root, stem, and flower) differentiation and development, self-negative feedback regulation of metabolism, phase transition from vegetative growth to reproductive growth. signal transduction and response to environmental conditions such as biotic/abiotic stresses (Lakhotia et al., 2014), including nutrient stresses, for example, phosphorus starvation (Gu et al., 2010), nitrogen starvation (Zhao et al., 2011), and micronutrient deficiency or toxicity (Valdes-Lopez et al., 2010). Considering the importance of miRNAs several approaches have been established for identifying miRNAs in various plant species, such as, direct cloning, small RNA (sRNA) high-throughput sequencing by next generation sequencer (NGS) and computational prediction. Since some miRNAs are expressed at a low level and the expression of many miRNAs has spatio-temporal specificity, it is difficult to clone low-abundance miRNAs through direct cloning approach (Llave et al., 2002). High-throughput sequencing of sRNA has great promise to generate an accurate and comprehensive picture of the sRNA transcriptome in different plants, tissues, and at different developmental stages. Meanwhile, such a tool provides the direct way of discovering miRNAs as well as to quantify them, some of which facilitates the investigation of sRNA populations in economically important species which lack complete genome information. It is a high throughput and simple method, but costly for miRNA discovery (Martin et al., 2013).A comparative genomics study across phylogenetically distant taxa has shown that many miRNAs are highly evolutionarily conserved in the plant and animal kingdom (Axtell et al., 2006). This feature of extensive evolutionary conservation of these miRNAs among themselves renders a powerful approach to their identification using computational based approaches. On the basis of this strategy, researchers developed an expressed sequence tag (EST) and a genome survey sequence (GSS) approach to identify miRNAs (Zhang et al., 2005) from plants or even from various animals. EST analysis has some substantial advantages over the other approaches such as: (1) conserved miRNAs can be identified without whole genome sequences, (2) direct evidence for miRNA expression could be obtained without genomic sequence surveys, and (3) miRNA identification can be conducted without highly specialized software. Based on this approach, thousands of miRNAs have been systematically identified in more than 42 plant species, including many important plant and agricultural crop species, such as maize (Zhang et al., 2006a), wheat (Han et al., 2009), soybean (Chen et al., 2009), tobacco (Frazier et al., 2010), potato (Xie et al., 2011) and Asiatic cotton (Wang et al., 2012).In this study, we employed a comparative genome-based homology search to identify miRNAs in hop using their current expressed sequence tags (ESTs) available in the NCBI GenBank database. The new miRNAs identified in this study would enable investigation of the complexity of miRNA-mediated genes network in understanding their roles in regulating growth, development, metabolism, and other physiological processes such as cone development and transcriptional factors (TFs) involved in secondary metabolic pathway including a prenylflavonid, xanthohumol which has various useful biological activity (Matoušek et al., 2006).The known plant miRNA sequences from Arabidopsis, Brassica, Glycine, Saccharum, Sorghum, Vitis, Solanum, Oryza, Triticum, Chlamydomonas, and other plant species were downloaded from the miRNA database miRBase (http://www.mirbase.org/) (miRBase version 21.0, accessed June 2014) and plant microRNA database (http://bioinformatics.cau.edu.cn/PMRD/). After removing redundant sequences, the unique sequences were used as reference miRNA set for identification of hop miRNAs using Blastn searches. Hop expressed sequence tags (ESTs), cDNAs, and mRNAs were downloaded from the GenBank nucleotide databases from the National Centre for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). Currently, a total of 25,692 hop ESTs are available in the NCBI EST database (dbEST release 130101, January 1, 2013; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/dbEST/dbEST_summary.html). Comparative software mpiBLAST-1.6.0 (Darling et al., 2003) consist of core algorithm similar to BLAST-2.2.22 of NCBI GenBank (Altschul et al., 1997) was downloaded and set up locally. To predict the secondary structure of pre-miRNA, Zuker folding algorithm software MFOLD 3.2 (http://mfold.rna.albany.edu/?q=mfold/RNA-Folding-Form) was used online to analyze the secondary structure and calculating the minimum free energy (Zuker, 2003).The mature sequences of all currently available plant miRNAs after removing redundant sequence were subjected to a Blastn search against all of the currently available hop EST sequences using mpiBLAST-1.6.0 algorithm in Linux based 32 core cluster system. Adjusted blast parameter settings were as follows: (1) the default word-match size between query and database sequences was set at seven; (2) the expected values were set at 1000 to increase the hit chance for more potential sequences and (3) the sequence number of the BLASTn search and the sequence alignments were set to 1000. If only a partial reference mature miRNA sequence was aligned to a EST sequence, the non-aligned parts were manually inspected and compared to determine the number of matching nucleotides. These sequences were considered as potential miRNA candidates only if they fullfil the following criteria with slight modification from a previous study (Zhang et al., 2007): (1) at least 18–22nt length was assumed between the predicted mature miRNAs, and (2) allowed to have 0–4nt mismatches in sequence with all previously known plant mature miRNAs. These whole EST sequences were used for BLASTx analysis using NCBI BLAST+2.2.29 against NCBI nr (non-redundant protein) database for removing the protein-coding sequences and retaining only the non-protein coding sequences (Altschul et al., 1997). In total, 47 EST sequences were found to be non-protein coding sequences.The secondary structure of candidate pre-miRNA sequences of these potential miRNA homologs was predicted using the Zuker folding algorithm with MFOLD-3.2 (Zuker, 2003). All parameters were set to default values. All outputs obtained from mfold were recorded into an excel file, which included the EST ID numbers, respective miRNA homologs, total length of the sequences, the number of each nucleotide (A, G, C and U), the number of arms per structure, location of the matching regions, percentage (%) of (A+U/T) and (G+C) content and minimal folding free energy (MFE, DG in kcal/mol). Then, the adjusted minimal folding free energy (AMFE) [AMFE=(MFE/length of a potential pre-miRNA)×100] and the minimal folding free energy index (MFEI) [MFEI=AMFE/(G+C)%, where (G+C)% represents% GC content over pre-miRNA sequence] were calculated according to a previous report (Zhang et al., 2006b). An EST was considered a miRNA candidate when it fit all of the following criteria: (1) the predicted mature miRNAs had no more than three nucleotide substitutions compared with a known mature miRNAs; (2) the EST sequence could fold into an appropriate stem-loop hairpin secondary structure; (3) the mature miRNA was localized in one arm of the stem-loop structure; (4) there was no loop or break in the miRNA or miRNA* sequences; (5) there were no more than 6 mismatches between the predicted mature miRNA sequence and its opposite miRNA* sequence in the secondary structure; and (6) the predicted secondary structure had high negative MFE and high MFEI value. Candidate miRNAs met the criteria were further scanned to remove repeated sequences and the remaining list was used for subsequent analysis (Jones-Rhoades and Bartel, 2004).A homology search of candidate hop miRNA was done against all plant miRNAs using a Bioedit sequence alignment (clustalW) editor tool (version 7.0.9.0) (Hall, 1999) allowing maximum of two mismatches and e-value <0.001. The corresponding precursor sequences of sRNAs homologs were identified and were aligned with hop miRNA homologs using Jalview 2.6.1 (Waterhouse et al., 2009). A query of hop sRNAs against known miRNA families (miRBase, release 21) allowed us to predict the family of hop miRNAs. The maximum likelihood trees were constructed based on the Tamura-Nei model (Tamura and Nei, 1993) with default bootstrap values using MEGA5.0 (Tamura et al., 2011) to illustrate the evolutionary relationships with other members of the same or different family.The Dana-Farber Cancer Institute (DFCI) Plant Gene Index datasets was used for hop miRNA targets discovery (http://compbio.dfci.harvard.edu/tgi/). Prediction of candidate miRNA targets was done using psmiRNATarget (psRNAtarget, http://plantgrnnoble.org/psRNATarget/) with following parameters: (1) maximum expectation value 3; (2) multiplicity of target sites 2; (3) range of central mismatch for translational inhibition 9–11 nucleotide; (4) maximum mismatches at the complementary site ≤4 without any gaps. psRNA Target provides reverse complementary matching between miRNAs and its target transcript and finds the target site accessibility by calculating unpaired energy (UPE) necessary for opening the secondary structure around the miRNA target site (Dai and Zhao, 2011). The functional assignment of predicted target genes were performed by using COGnitor program against the Clusters of Orthologous Groups of proteins (COG) database (Tatusov et al., 2001) (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/COG/).For promoter prediction, draft genome sequence of hop was downloaded from the European nucleotide archive (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/data/search?query=Humulus+lupulus). The 1000bp upstream promoter regions from the 5′-end of the entire hairpin structure of miRNA precursor sequence of each predicted miRNA genes were used for cis-regulatory elements analysis. Promoters were predicted by the plant promoter identification program TSSP (http://www.softberry.com), which is designed for predicting plant Pol II promoters (Shahmuradov et al., 2005). The predictions were performed at the default TSSP settings. Potential promoter regions from transcription start site (TSS) to 800bp upstream were obtained to predict the potential cis-acting elements and motifs. If there were overlapping TSSs in the selected region, only the sequence between the two TSSs was analyzed to exclude redundancy (Liu et al., 2010). The PlantCARE database (http://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/webtools/plantcare/html), a database of plant cis-acting regulatory elements (Lescot et al., 2002), was used to analyze the cis-acting elements of the miRNAs.The predicted hop miRNAs were validated using stem-loop RT-PCR and End-point PCR according to the previous report (Varkonyi-Gasic et al., 2007). A stem-loop-containing RT primer with its 5′ end complementary to target the miRNA’s last six nucleotides at the 3′ end was designed. Small RNA was extracted from leaves, root and cones tissues of hop Osvald's clone 72 (also known as Saaz), which was grown under natural field conditions in Hop Research Institute in Žatec (Northern Bohemia, Czech Republic), using PureLink™ miRNA Isolation Kit (Invitrogen, Czech Republic). After measuring the concentration and quality of the miRNAs, 200ng of miRNA was used to reverse transcribe a miRNA into cDNA using a miRNA-specific stem-loop primer and the SuperScript™ III Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Reverse transcription (RT) reactions (20μl) consisted of 2μl of miRNA, 50nM stem-loop RT primer, 0.25mM each of dNTPs, 50 units reverse transcriptase, 1× reverse transcriptase buffer, 10mM DTT, and 4 units RNase inhibitor. The reactions were incubated for 30min at 16°C, followed by pulsed RT of 60 cycles at 30°C for 30s, 42°C for 30s, and 50°C for 1s. Pulsed RT reactions provide better detection sensitivity compared with non-pulsed reactions (Tang et al., 2003). Reactions were terminated by incubating at 85°C for 5min to inactivate the reverse transcriptase. U6, one of the uniformly expressed sRNAs, was used as the internal control for stem-loop RT-PCR. All the oligos used in this study were listed in supplemental table (Table S1).End-point PCR 20μl reaction mixture consisted of 1μl of RT product, 0.25μM each miRNA-specific forward primer and universal reverse primer, 0.6 units of Hot Start Ex Taq polymerase (TaKaRa Bio), 1× Taq buffer, 200μM dNTPs mixture. The amplifications were carried out in thermal cycler (Bio-Rad) with an initial denaturing step at 94°C for 2min, followed by 40 cycles of 95°C for 15s and 60°C for 1min. The product size was confirmed by melting analysis and 4% agarose gel electrophoresis.Quantitative real time PCR (qRT-PCR) was performed on an iQ5™ Real-Time PCR Systems (Bio-Rad). For each reaction, 20μL PCR reaction mixtures were prepared and each contained 2μL of RT product from the reverse-transcription reaction, 0.5μM miRNA-specific forward primer and stem-loop reverse primer, 1× Universal SYBR® Green PCR Master Mix (Invitrogen). Amplification curves were generated with an initial denaturing step at 95°C for 10min, followed by 45 cycles of 95°C for 15s and 60°C for 60s. Melting curves were generated using the following program: PCR products were denatured at 95°C and cooled to 65°C at the rate of 20°C per second to determine the specificity of each reaction. The fluorescence signals at a wavelength of 530nm were then monitored continuously from 65°C to 95°C as the temperature was increased at the rate of 0.2°C per second. All reactions were performed in triplicate and a control reaction without template was performed for each miRNA. The threshold cycle (CT) values were determined automatically by the instrument and the fold changes of each miRNA gene were calculated as relative quantity (RQ) values using the comparative CT(2−ΔΔCt) method (Schmittgen and Livak, 2008)

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
