@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel biological role for nsLTP2 from Oriza sativa: Potential incorporation with anticancer agents, nucleosides and their analogues

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Nonspecific lipid transfer protein (nsLTP2) binds with nucleosides and anticancer drugs.Hydrophobicity of the active site plays prominent role in this regard.Purine analogues drugs presented higher affinity than pyrimidine counterparts.Binding affinity is influenced by the modifications occurring in the base and sugar moiety of the ligands.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
NsLTP2,Anti-viral drugs,Anti-cancer agents,Drug delivery,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Development of a protein-based drug delivery system has major impact on the efficacy and bioavailability of unstable and water insoluble drugs. In the present study, the binding modes of a nonspecific lipid transfer protein (nsLTP2) from Oryza sativa with various nucleosides and analogous molecules were identified. The 3-D structure of the protein was designed and validated using modeler 9.13, Molegro virtual docker and procheck tool, respectively. The binding affinity and strength of interactions, key contributing residues and specificity toward the substrates were accomplished by computational docking and model prediction. The protein presented high affinity to acyclovir and vidarabine as purine-analogous drugs. Binding affinity is influenced by the core template and functional groups of the ligands which are structurally different cause the variation of interaction energies with nsLTP2. Nonetheless, all the evaluated analogous drugs occupy the proximity space at the nsLTP active site with high similarity in their binding modes. Our findings hold great promise for the future applications of nsLTPs in various aspects of pharmaceutical science and molecular biology.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Ligand-binding proteins are versatile carriers, can be combined with various ligands, have emerged as convenient platform for the development of protein-based drug carriers. Among these proteins plant non-specific lipid transfer proteins (nsLTPs) are, embody two main subfamily (LTP1 and LTP2), and function as vehicles in drug delivery systems due to wide association potential they exhibit relative to various molecules (Cheng et al., 2004; Kader, 1996; Pato et al., 2001; Samuel et al., 2002). They have turned out to have multiple biological and pharmacological activities. The multifunctional character raised considerable interest in evaluating their potential application for drug carrier systems. There are several examples in the literature covering this subject. It has been reported that wheat nsLTP1 can facilitate the transfer of BD56 (an azole derivative with antitumoral and/or antileishmania properties) through the same binding pattern of ether phospholipids (Cheng et al., 2004). This notion was further supported by the results of affinity binding assessment of skin lipids such as sphingomyline, sphingosine and cerebroside with the same protein. Appreciable affinity of the LTP1 with amphotericin B (an anti-fungal and anti-leishmaniasis drug) has also been evidenced (Cheng et al., 2004). Kwong and Wasan (2002) reported that “cholesteryl ester transfer protein” assisted the transfer of water insoluble drugs between different lipoprotein subclasses. Literature precedents have hinted at the complex formation of 2-(4,4-bis-phosphonooxy-benzhydryl)-pyridine with rice nsLTP2. Binding affinity is achieved by the triphenylmethyl moiety of the molecule which involved in the treatment of sickle cell disease and diarrhea (Wulff et al., 2000). More specifically, beta-sitosterol (a sterol-like drug) using in benign prostate hypertrophy (Berges et al., 1995; Ravenna et al., 1996) exhibited a satisfactory association with nsLTP2. Interestingly, while LTP1 is not able to bind with sterols, computational studies confirmed that the flexibility of triangular hollow box at the binding site of rice nsLTP2 is critical for association of sterols (Samuel et al., 2002; Buhot et al., 2001). In a recent report, we addressed that special chemical features of fatty acids facilitate the incorporation in the hydrophobic cavity of rice nsLTP2 (Tousheh et al., 2013). A key feature of nsLTPs is the high stability of overall fold, evolved due to the conserved eight cysteine residues affording a network of four disulfide bridges (Pato et al., 2001). Thanks to the large structural stability, the usefulness of nsLTPs is improved by providing stable atmosphere protecting drugs against oxidation or degradation. To this end, incorporation with prostaglandin B2 (Moindrot-Tassin et al., 2000) underlined that nsLTP1 efficiently shielded the ligand from the deleterious environment; highlights promise applications of LTP1 as a protective drug carrier.The interplay between wide biological roles, binding properties and transporting machinery of nsLTPs provoked to probe the binding affinity of nsLTP2 from Oryza sativa for other class of therapeutic compounds, namely anti-cancer nucleosides and analogous molecules evidenced to have antiviral activity. Nucleosides and their analogues are a group of therapeutic compounds used as agents against common hyperproliferative diseases, including viral infections and cancer (Berdis., 2008; Jepsen et al., 2004; William et al., 1998). Their therapeutic utility is often hampered by the severity of side effects caused by killing of healthy cells. This highlights the importance of targeting strategies and efficient carrier systems. In this context, a proficient drug carrier system may confer desired achievements. Despite computational and ligand binding studies, no clues were available that would have provided hints of nature and extent of the attractive interactions, if any, between nucleosides and nsLTP2, and how may these interactions impact the functional assignment. Modeling approaches provide the best means of establishing topology and entity of such interactions. Provided that one has fundamental knowledge of the mechanism of nsLTP–nucleoside interaction, successful and efficient rational design in molecular biology to reconstruct and engineer nsLTP structural properties can be achieved. The major aims of such an approach would be to optimize formulation and development for a protein-based drug carrier and may have important repercussions in the therapeutic efficacy of such molecules.Analysis, manipulation and translation of the nucleotide sequences were performed using Expasy Molecular Biology Server (www.expasy.ch). Pairwise and multiple sequence alignments were carried out respectively with BLAST in NCBI server and CLUSTALW (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/clustalw/) (Altschul et al., 1990; Johnson et al., 2008). Amino acid sequences of nsLTP2 from O. sativa (Indica group, Accession No. A2XBN5.2) were obtained from SWISS-PROT database and verified according to the data of Protein Data Bank (PDB) (www.rcsb.org). The protein possesses 96 amino acid residues, of them 27 residues removes during the post translational modification.The 3D model of the protein was generated using Modeler v.9.13 software (Eswar et al., 2007; Prajapat et al., 2014) based on the sequence [A.N: Q10ST8] and the crystal structure [PDB: 1L6H] of nsLTP2 (A2XBN5.2) from O. sativa (Indica group) as template, which has 97% identity with Q10ST8. The ESPript server (http://espript.ibcp.fr/ESPript/) (Gout et al., 1999) was applied to obtain alignment file between query and template sequence with PIR format (Meshram et al., 2010; Chauhan and Shakya., 2009; Krieger et al., 2009). Due to the limitations in loop modeling, the ModLoop (https://modbase.compbio.ucsf.edu/modloop/) server was used to improve the accuracy of loop predictions (Rodriguez et al., 1998). Finally, to obtain a stable structure before further studies, the energy of model was minimized using YASARA server (http://www.yasara.org/minimizationserver.htm) (Kaistha and Sinha., 2009; Fernandez-Fuentes et al., 2007; Manikandan and Malik, 2008; Eastwood et al., 2001).A set of tools including PROCHECK, ERRAT and VERIFY3D were adopt (http://nihserver.mbi.ucla.edu/SAVES) to verify the 3D model (Manikandan and Malik, 2008; Kumar and Carugo, 2011; Laskowski et al., 1993; Vinay and Reema, 2011; Colovos and Yeates, 1993; Bowie et al., 1991). The stereo chemical qualities of the model, the statistical accuracy of non-bonded interactions between different atom types and plots and the symmetry of the atomic model with its own amino acid sequence were studied (Table 1). The quality of the model was also validated by Qmean server (http://swissmodel.expasy.org/qmean) (Benkert et al., 2009, 2008). Molegro Virtual Docker 2011.4.3.0 (MVD) was used to final validation of the obtained model. To this purpose, the charge was calculated by MVD and added to the model. Explicit hydrogen bonds created and explicit bonds assigned (Thomsen and Christensen, 2006).The DrugBank database is a unique bioinformatics and cheminformatics resource which combines detailed drug data (i.e., chemical, pharmacological and pharmaceutical) with comprehensive drug target (i.e., sequence, structure, and pathway) information. Both 2D and 3D structures of anti-viral drugs and nucleic acid subunits were studied using the ChemSpider (http://www.chemspider.com) (Pence and Williams., 2010), comprehensive medicinal chemistry (CMC) and PubChem Database, which is available through the NCBI World Wide Web server (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) (refer to Figs. 1 and 2).Molecular docking is a key tool in structural molecular biology and computer-assisted drug design. Studies were performed using Molegro software (http://www.molegro.com). This docking program is based on a new hybrid search algorithm, called guided differential evolution. The guided differential evolution algorithms combine the differential evolution optimization technique with a cavity prediction algorithm, which is dynamically used during the docking (Ratnavali et al., 2011; Thomsen and Christensen, 2006; Zhao et al., 2009). Binding affinity (kcal/mol) was calculated on the base of known experimental data. The MolDock scoring functions takes into account directional hydrogen bonding and charges. The following parameters (are listed in Table 2) were fixed throughout virtual screening survey.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
