@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Two highly similar LAEDDTNAQKT and LTDKIGTEI epitopes in G glycoprotein may be useful for effective epitope based vaccine design against pathogenic Henipavirus

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Computational approaches were used to identify epitopes for vaccine development against Henipavirus.The strategy combines B-cell epitope prediction, T-cell epitope prediction, docking simulation assay, and cytotoxicity analysis of the G glycoprotein.Two potential epitopes were predicted which may be used for the development of peptide vaccines.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Henipavirus,G glycoprotein,Conserved epitopes,Universal vaccine,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Nipah virus and Hendra virus, two members of the genus Henipavirus, are newly emerging zoonotic pathogens which cause acute respiratory illness and severe encephalitis in human. Lack of the effective antiviral therapy endorses the urgency for the development of vaccine against these deadly viruses. In this study, we employed various computational approaches to identify epitopes which has the potential for vaccine development. By analyzing the immune parameters of the conserved sequences of G glycoprotein using various databases and bioinformatics tools, we identified two potential epitopes which may be used as peptide vaccines. Using different B cell epitope prediction servers, four highly similar B cell epitopes were identified. Immunoinformatics analyses revealed that LAEDDTNAQKT is a highly flexible and accessible B-cell epitope to antibody. Highly similar putative CTL epitopes were analyzed for their binding with the HLA-C 12*03 molecule. Docking simulation assay revealed that LTDKIGTEI has significantly lower binding energy, which bolstered its potential as epitope-based vaccine design. Finally, cytotoxicity analysis has also justified their potential as promising epitope-based vaccine candidate. In sum, our computational analysis indicates that either LAEDDTNAQKT or LTDKIGTEI epitope holds a promise for the development of universal vaccine against all kinds of pathogenic Henipavirus. Further in vivo and in vitro studies are necessary to validate the obtained findings.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Henipavirus, a genus of the paramyxovirus family, is responsible for several epidemics in some regions of Asia and Australia in the last few years (Aljofan, 2013; Field et al., 2007; Luby and Gurley, 2012). Viruses belonging to this group are deadly pathogens and are characterized by their zoonotic nature, broad host range, and ease of transmission from person to person (Mathieu and Horvat, 2015). Among three established species of the genus Henipavirus, Nipah Virus (NiV) and Hendra Virus (HeV) are responsible for causing lung disease and encephalitis in pigs, horses and humans, while the other, the most recent member of Henipavirus, Cedar Virus (CedPV) is harmless (Luby et al., 2009; Middleton, 2014; Marsh et al., 2012). Pteroid fruit bats and microbats are the common reservoir of Henipavirus (Croser and Marsh, 2016). Upon contact with the bats, domestic animals develop infection and further transmit the virus to human. Environmental changes, destruction of bat habitats through deforestation, and genetic diversification have been implicated as the reasons behind the emergence and re-emergence of the viruses in recent time (Clayton et al., 2013).Since the first emergence in 1994, HeV outbreaks have been observed at least once a year (Tulsiani et al., 2011). During all outbreak events, the horses were infected first and subsequently transmitted to human. Approximately, one hundred horses were affected by the virus with a fatality rate of 70%. In case of human, four out of seven infections became fatal along with influenza-like symptoms in all patients. While some of them recovered from the viral infection, others either developed pneumonitis or encephalitis or even multi-organ failure (Blum et al., 2009). NiV was identified relatively later in 1999 during an outbreak in pig farms. The event was responsible for 257 human infections, including 105 confirmed deaths (Field et al., 2001). Eight more outbreaks of NiV have occurred since then in Bangladesh and India (Chadha et al., 2006). In an outbreak in February, 2011 in the northern region of Bangladesh, 17 out of 24 NiV infected persons died (Chua et al., 2000, 2002; Hughes et al., 2009). The number of outbreaks and re-emergence of Henipaviruses imply its high potency as pathogen which can evolve further by the interplay between the genome of the virus species during growth and multiplication in the common host.Henipaviruses are pleomorphic in nature and their size ranges from 40 to 600nm in diameter17. The genome of the Henipavirus is ∼18.2kb long, non-segmented, single stranded negative sense RNA, which encodes six genes corresponding to six structural proteins (Wang et al., 2001). The core of the virus is composed of RNA, which is tightly bound to nucleocapsid (N) protein and associated with large (L) and phosphoprtein (P). F (fusion) and G (attachment) proteins are embedded within the lipid membrane. The role of the G glycoprotein is to attach the virus with the surface of a host cell through a highly conserved mammalian protein, EFN B2 (Bonaparte et al., 2005; Negrete et al., 2005). The F protein helps to fuse the viral membrane with the host cell membrane, which allows the release of the virion into the cell.The deadly nature of Henipaviruses become more frightening due to the unavailability of any approved vaccine or drug either to induce protection against the virus or to control viral infection. None of the several attempts that have been made could develop a successful treatment option. For example, Ribavirin was tested to treat animal models infected with NiV and HeV, but showed no significant increase in the survival rate of the animals (Gurley et al., 2007; Homaira et al., 2010). Monoclonal antibody has also been an attractive treatment option. A neutralizing antibody, mAb m102.4, targeting the glycoprotein domain of the virus that binds to ephrin-B2 and ephrin-B3 receptor of host, has already been tested (Bishop et al., 2007; Negrete et al., 2006; Pasquale, 2008). In vivo experiment has shown enhanced survival of the animals challenged with HeV and NiV (Plotkin, 1999). In addition to these post-exposure treatment options, some recent studies have been able to successfully induce immunity against Hendravirus by injecting animals with a fragment of G protein working as a subunit vaccine (Guillaume et al., 2004, 2006, 2009; Weingartl et al., 2006). Assessment of the vaccine in non-human primates revealed its potential for human use, but it has not been studied in human so far (Mire et al., 2014). Nevertheless, no universal vaccine has yet been developed that works against all Henipaviruses irrespective of their genetic differences.With the advent of various bioinformatics tools and the availability of enormous sequence data, epitope based vaccine design against highly conserved antigenic protein has become easier. Computational prediction of conserved epitope for the development of novel vaccine will not only save time, but also reduces the cost associated with the whole process. In the present study, we employed various bioinformatics tools to find out the highly conserved peptide and mapped the evolutionary conserved epitopes. We predicted two highly conserved epitopes which may be used to develop universal vaccines to prevent all types of Henipavirus infections.Sequences of the G glycoprotein of Henipaviruses were retrieved from the NCBI database (Benson et al., 2009) and a total 40 sequences were found in the database. All the sequences were downloaded from the database in FASTA format. Among 40 sequences, 21 belongs to Hendra Virus (HeV) and 19 belongsto Nipah Virus (NiV) respectively. The sequences were selected from different isolates, all of them were wild type, covering a wide range of geographical distribution. Also, their dates of isolation were taken into regard to cover maximum epidemics in the past. The length of the glycoprotein sequences for HeV were 604 amino acids, whereas that for NiV were 602 amino acids.To determine the degree of conservation, all the retrieved sequences were aligned by using EBI-Clustal Omega program (Sievers et al., 2011) anda multiple sequence alignment (MSA) was generated. The MSA was visualized using Jalview (Waterhouse et al., 2009). The absolute site variability in the MSA was calculated by Shannon entropy analysis (Shannon, 1948) using Protein Variability Server (PVS) (Garcia-Boronat et al., 2008). PVS utilizes several variability metrics to compute absolute variation in a MSA.In order to develop a subunit vaccine, it is imperative to identify those proteins which can induce protection from subsequent challenges. A reference G glycoprotein having accession number, NP_047112, was tested for its antigenicity. VaxiJen v2.0 server (Doytchinova and Flower, 2007) and Kolaskar & Tongaonkar method (Kolaskar and Tongaonkar, 1990) were used to analyze the antigenic property of the given sequence. VaxiJen utilizes an alignment independent approach to predict the antigenicity of a given protein, which is solely based on physiochemical properties of amino acids.B cell epitope prediction can be done with several software packages and each one has its own strength and weakness (Blythe and Flower, 2005; Yang and Yu, 2009). To minimize the false positive predictions, four popular and widely used tools were utilized. For theprediction of B-cell epitopes, sequence was submitted to BepiPred (Larsen et al., 2006), IEDB linear B cell prediction (Vita et al., 2010), BCPRED (El-Manzalawy et al., 2008), and ABCpred (Saha and Raghava, 2006) web servers. BepiPred 1.0 (Larsen et al., 2006) server predicts the epitopes based on a hidden Markov model along with a propensity scale and the threshold for the prediction was set 0.35. IEDB linear B cell epitope prediction tool (Vita et al., 2010) was used as default parameters. Non-overlapping and fixed length epitopes of 14 amino acids were predicted using 75% specific criteria using BCPREDS server (El-Manzalawy et al., 2008). Seventy five percent threshold along with a window length of 10 amino acids was set as parameter for the prediction of epitopes in ABCpred server (Saha and Raghava, 2006). The predicted epitopes from these four servers were compared manually and epitopes that were recognized by all the servers were selected for further analysis.When an antibody or a cell surface receptor binds to an epitope, it will induce an immune response in turn. An ideal epitope should be accessible to an antibody or a cell surface receptor (Caoili, 2010). In order to determine the surface accessible regions, Emni surface accessible prediction tool of IEDB was used (Vita et al., 2010; Emini et al., 1985). Later, the accessible regions were compared with the selected B cell epitopes. Epitopes that were found to have surface accessibility were selected further for conservancy analysis.An ideal epitope should be conserved so that it provides a broader protection against multiple strains, in some cases, even species. Amino acid residues that are crucial for critical functions are believed to have lower variability even under immune pressure. Conservancy analysis of the surface accessible epitopes with all the glycoprotein sequences was analyzed by the IEDB epitope conservancy tool (Bui et al., 2007). For calculating conservancy score, the sequence identity threshold was set at atleast 80 percent.Earlier studies reported that hydrophilicity and flexibility of a peptide correlate with its antigenicity (Novotny et al., 1986). For this, conserved epitopes were subjected to Karplus and Schulz (KS) flexibility prediction (Karplus and Schulz, 1985), and Parker hydrophilicity prediction tools (Parker et al., 1986) for flexibility and hydrophilicity analyses respectively (Tenzer et al., 2005). The KS method uses normalized B-values of Cα-atoms in protein structures for predicting protein flexibility. For its robustness, it has been widely used for analysis of protein flexibility (Sharmin and Islam, 2014; Islam et al., 2012; Oany et al., 2014).T cell epitopes were identified by NetCTL prediction method (Larsen et al., 2005, 2007) of IEDB. The threshold was set at 0.50 allowing the sensitivity and specificity of 0.89 and 0.94 respectively. NetCTL predicts T cell epitopes by integrating predictions of proteasomal cleavage, TAP transport efficiency, and MHC class I affinity. This combined algorithm provides overall prediction scores and based on this scores, top 10 epitopes were taken for further analysis. MHC-I alleles interacting each of the selected epitopes were determined by MHC-I prediction server (Peters and Sette, 2005) of IEDB. Stabilized matrix method (SMM) (Peters and Sette, 2005) was utilized for the determination of half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) of peptide binding to MHC-I alleles. For the binding analysis, all the available MHC class I alleles were selected and the peptide lengths wereset at 9 aminoacids. Selected T cell epitopes were subjected to IEDB conservancy analysis tool with a sequence identity threshold of 80 percent (Bui et al., 2007).For the docking simulation assay, 3D structures both of the peptides and corresponding alleles were required. The 3D structures of the selected peptides were generated using the PEP-FOLD Peptide Structure Prediction server (Thevenet et al., 2012; Maupetit et al., 2009). PEP-FOLD uses a de novo approach to predict peptide structure from amino acids, ranging from 9 to 36 residues. This method is based on a Hidden Markov Model derived Structural Alphabet (SA) letter coupled the predicted series of SA letters to a greedy algorithm and a coarse-grained force field (Thevenet et al., 2012). SA letters descibre conformations of four consecutive residues. The best models provided by the server were chosen for the docking study. HLA-C 12*03 was found to interact with most of the predicted T cell epitopes. For this reason, the 3-D model of HLA-C 12*03 was generated using SWISS MODEL server (Biasini et al., 2014). The homology-modeling method comprises following four steps: (i) template selection; (ii) target template alignment; (iii) model building; and (iv) evaluation (Schwede et al., 2003). These steps can be iteratively repeated, until a satisfying model structure is obtained. The HLA-C 12*03 −3D model was evaluated by PROCHECK software (Laskowski et al., 1993) and ProSA web tool (Wiederstein and Sippl, 2007). Ramachandran plot (Laskowski et al., 1993), constructed using the PROCHECK software assesses the stereo-chemical quality of 3-D structure analyzing residue-by-residue geometry and overall structure geometry. ProSA tool provides a Z-score which is a measurement for the quality of the model (Wiederstein and Sippl, 2007).To investigate the interaction of the T cell epitopes with the corresponding MHC class I molecules, docking analysis was performed. Computer-simulated ligand docking is a powerful technique for evaluating relative binding affinity of the ligand toward its receptor (Patronov and Doytchinova, 2013). The AutoDOCK tool from the MGL software package was utilized for the docking purpose (Morris et al., 1998, 2009). At first, both the allele (HLA-C 12*03) and ligand (epitope) files were converted into PDBQT format to use them for the docking study. The grid/space box center was set at −15.059, −3.063, and −26.955Å in the x-, y-, and z-axes, respectively, which allows the predicted epitopes to bind to the binding groove of the selected MHC class I. The size was set at 20, 40, and 40° A in the x, y, and z dimensions, respectively. The 3D structure of MHC class I H-2Kb molecule complexed with the octapeptide, KVITFIDL (PKB1), was employed as a positive control for the binding assay. The complex structure was resolved at 2.3Å by X-ray differaction method.The binding of octapeptide to H-2Kb molecule causes a tremendously large conformational change to be readily reconiged by a T-cell receptor (TCR) (Reiser et al., 2016). This conformational change renders a good platform to analyze docking simulation assay. First, the octapeptide was separated from H-2Kb and then it was docked with H-2Kb and selected the MHC class I molecule by setting similar parameters. Binding energy for control peptide was calculated and compared with the energy found for the predicted T cell epitopes. All the analyses were done at 1.0Å spacing and complexes were visualized using Discovery studio 4.1 (Anon., 2013).The ease of manufacture, high specificity, and high penetration of peptides presents the peptide based therapy promising. But toxicity of peptides bottlenecks the success of peptide based therapy. An ideal epitope should have no or less toxicity, but high antigenicity (Vlieghe et al., 2010). Hence, to determine the toxicity of the selected epitopes, ToxinPred web server was used (Gupta et al., 2013).Since the workflow used here included various computational tools developed by different platforms, so the valiadation of the workflow was required. Both positive and negative controls were taken into consideration for this purpose. Five linear B cell epitopes were identified and mapped for non-structural protein 1 (NS1) of West Nile virus (Sun et al., 2012). The protein sequence of NS1, as positive control, was retrieved from the NCBI database and fed into the workflow. In parallel, as negative control, a random sequence about 600 aminoacids long was used to determine the functionality of the designed workflow.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
