@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Inferring biological basis about psychrophilicity by interpreting the rules generated from the correctly classified input instances by a classifier

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Enhanced classification of psychrophilic proteins by rotation forest.Rule extraction from correctly classified sequences.Validation of generated rules on structural data.Biological interpretation of rules.Ranking of amino acids according to their discriminative ability.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Biologically interpretable rules,Cold adaptation,Amino acid composition patterns,Rotation forest,PART rule induction method,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Organisms thriving at extreme cold surroundings are called as psychrophiles and they present a wealth of knowledge about sequence adjustments in proteins that had occurred during the adaptation to low temperatures. In this paper, we propose a new cascading model to investigate the basis for psychrophilicity. In this model, a superior classifier was used to discriminate psychrophilic from mesophilic protein sequences, and then the PART rule generating algorithm was applied on the input instances that are correctly classified by the classifier, to generate human interpretable rules. These derived rules were further validated on a structural dataset and finally analyzed to discover the underlying biological basis about the psychrophilicity. In this study, we have used one of the key features of psychrophilic proteins accountable for remaining functional in extreme cold temperature surroundings i.e., global patterns of amino acid composition as the input features. The rotation forest classifier outperformed all the other classifiers with maximum accuracy of 70.5% and maximum AUC of 0.78. The effect of sequence length on the classification accuracy was also investigated. The analysis of the derived rules and interpretation of the analyzed results had revealed some interesting phenomena such as the amino acids A, D, G, F, and S are over-represented, and T is under-represented in psychrophilic proteins. These findings augment the existing domain knowledge for psychrophilic sequence features.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Extreme cold or hot temperatures are detrimental to the growth of organisms, yet a number of organisms thrive in these hostile environments. Psychrophiles are among the extremophilic organisms which have optimum growth even at the very low temperature surroundings. These psychrophilic proteins have been evolved through changes at the molecular level to cope up with the continuing threat posed by the low temperature surroundings such as cold denaturation, local flexibility etc., (Siddiqui and Cavicchioli, 2006) for carrying out normal physiological and other biochemical functions. A better understanding of psychrophilicity will aid us in designing biocatalysts that can remain functional at very low temperatures. Various other fruitful applications of psychrophilic enzymes have been cited in the research papers on biotechnology and biocatalysis (Bell et al., 1995; Margesin and Schinner, 1998; Timmis and Pieper, 1999).Many classification schemes have been successfully attempted for discriminating mesophilic and thermophilic proteins using both sequence and structural features (Li et al., 2010; Lin and Chen, 2011; Wu et al., 2009; Zhang and Fang, 2006). This is due to the abundant availability of structural data for mesophilic and thermophilic proteins as compared to the scarce availability of structural data for psychrophilic proteins.Previous studies had revealed significant amino acid compositional differences between mesophilic and psychrophilic protein sequences (Jahandideh et al., 2008, 2007a,b; Metpally and Reddy, 2009). The amino acid composition alone was proved to be a very useful feature for discriminating mesophilic and thermophilic protein sequences as reported in the literature (Gromiha and Suresh, 2008; Nikookar et al., 2012; Zhang and Fang, 2007). In our previous study, we had used a random forest classifier for discriminating psychrophilic protein sequences from mesophilic counterparts using sequence based features of amino acid composition and hydrophobic residue patterns (Nath et al., 2012).The molecular basis of the cold adaptation is yet to be explored in detail. It has been observed that temperature adaptation of proteins is linked with small adjustments that occurred along the amino acid sequences. These adjustments like an insertion/deletion/change of amino acids at one or more positions might have resulted in some distinctive amino acid compositional patterns (De Vendittis et al., 2008).The major advantages of the machine learning classifiers are their high generalization ability and graceful performance degradation with respect to increasing errors in the input. But their main disadvantage is their poor interpretability due to black box nature as they do not provide any information regarding the exact relationship between the input instance and its corresponding classification category. The predictions/classifications/recognitions made by various machine learning techniques provide the prediction results without explaining the concrete basis on which the classification decisions were taken. So, the classification results are needed to be analyzed/interpreted to know the basis on which the classification decisions were taken which consequently help us in making the biological interpretation. This has inspired us for developing a novel three stage cascade model for inferring the underlying biological basis of psychrophilicity. Further, the feature ranking algorithms are used to validate whether the global patterns of amino acid composition can effectively be used as a significant input feature for discriminating psychrophilic and mesophilic protein sequences or not. We have also investigated the effect of length on discrimination accuracy.Two datasets were created in this study. The first dataset was created from the protein sequences of completely sequenced species of psychrophiles and mesophiles as used by (Metpally and Reddy, 2009). A pre-processing was done on these sequences initially by removing those sequences having the keyword putative, predicted, hypothetical, and fragment and then removing the sequences having non-standard residues of ‘B’,‘J’,‘O’,‘U’,‘X’, or ‘Z’. All the protein sequences belonging to Lactobaccilus salivarius had automatically gotten removed during this process. After the pre-processing the dataset is reduced to 19,403 psychrophilic protein sequences and 11,721 mesophilic sequences belonging to six psychrophiles and five mesophiles. The CD-HIT (Li and Godzik, 2006) program was then applied to the reduced dataset to cluster them with less than 40% sequence identity in order to eliminate the classifier bias due to redundancy. The resulting dataset contains 8677 sequences belonging to psychrophilic group and 5455 sequences belonging to mesophilic group. From this, resultant dataset 4000 psychrophilic sequences and 4000 mesophilic sequences were separated for creating training set by a random selection process and the remaining of 4677 psychrophilic and 1455 mesophilic sequences were used as testing set. This first dataset was used for both discriminating psychrophilic proteins by the rotation forest algorithm as well as for investigating the effectiveness of global amino acid composition patterns as an input feature in the discrimination. The correctly predicted instances by the rotation forest algorithm forms the subset of first dataset (called Rule Induction dataset) that is used for extracting rules by applying a rule generating algorithm on them to gain interpretability of the classification mechanism.The second dataset of (Jahandideh et al., 2007a) which consists of 13 pairs of structurally defined psychrophilic and mesophilic proteins was used for verifying and validating the classification rules generated from the result of first data set.In this work, we have focussed on exploring the biological basis of psychrophilicity in terms of molecular level changes. So, accordingly, the input feature vectors were generated by encoding each sequence into 20 length feature vectors of amino acid composition. These feature vectors are calculated using the formula:(1)f(i)=X(i)∑i=120X(i)×100where f (i) stands for the percentage frequency of ith residue (where ‘i’ varies from 1 to 20 indicating specific amino acids). X (i) stands for the total number of residues of ith type.A novel three stage cascading model was designed for discovering the basis for psychrophilicity. The first stage performs classification using a superior classifier for discriminating psychrophiles from mesophiles. The second stage generates the rule for determining psychrophilicity and mesophilicity based on the correctly classified sequences of the first stage by filtering out the falsely classified sequences. The third and final stage is the manual analysis and interpretation of the generated rules. The information flow in our cascading approach of this model is given below:(i)The correctly classified input instances from the output of the first stage classifier become the input to the second stage rule generating PART algorithm.The outputs of the second stage i.e., human interpretable rules are used for further analysis and interpretation in order to extract the biological basis of the psychrophilicity.In the first stage, ROF is used as a filter to sieve out the negatively predicted sequences from the dataset. This provides a rich set of strong instances for generating the interpretable classification rules. A variety of classifiers was experimented for selecting the best one for generating the classification rules. Both rotation forest and random forest (ensemble learning methods) performs better than all the other classifiers. The rotation forest (Rodriguez et al., 2006) creates the training data by randomly splitting feature vector into K subsets and principal component analysis is applied to each subset and trains each base classifier with whole dataset. In random forest (Breiman, 2001), the best among randomly chosen feature is chosen to split a node during the construction of the tree. In discriminating psychrophiles from mesophiiles, the rotation forest algorithm has a slight edge over random forest in the classification performance. So, the rotation forest was chosen for creating strong instances for rule generation.The rotation forest (ROF) is an ensemble classifier that combines different models to reach an outcome. For a successful ensemble classifier there should be an optimal diversity and accuracy among the different base classifiers. Bagging is one of the prominent ensemble classifier schemes developed by (Breiman, 1996). The idea is to use a group of base classifiers, each independently grown with randomly chosen samples of the same size with replacement (bootstrap aggregation) from the given training set. Decision trees are the most preferable base classifiers for using with bagging as they are susceptible to slight changes in the training data. Diverse classifiers making errors in the different parts of the input space produce better results when they are combined through an appropriate scheme. rotation forest uses the concept of bagging and feature randomization to increase diversity. It also uses Principal Component Analysis for feature extraction. It is briefly described below:Let N be the total number of features, rotation forest splits the feature set into K subset of features (K is a parameter of the algorithm). A bootstrap sample is drawn and PCA is applied to all the feature subsets. All the principal components are retained in a rotation matrix which is used to train the base classifiers. Finally, it combines the results of all the base classifiers by majority voting. Each base classifier is trained on the full dataset in a rotated feature space. rotation forest allows the flexibility of using classifiers other than trees as base classifiers and in place of PCA other techniques like random projection can also be used (Kuncheva and Rodriguez, 2007).Previously the rule extraction methods were used for classification purpose, for example it was used for predicting the protein secondary structure (Jieyue et al., 2006; Nguyen et al., 2011). Motivated by the ease of understanding and possible interpretability of these classification rules, we have employed the rule induction method to extract a set of human interpretable rules in order to gain the interpretability. For this we have used only the correctly predicted sequences by ROF (excluding the misclassified sequences) for applying to the rule induction method and formed a RI_dataset (Rule Induction dataset). The misclassified instances are excluded to avoid the generation of wrong rules. This RI_dataset consists of 9949 correctly predicted instances.Rule induction methods extract the rules that relate the input instance to the corresponding target class. These decision rules can be considered as small independent chunks of knowledge. We have used RI_dataset for discriminating psychrophilic and mesophilic protein sequences. The analysis of generated rules is extremely useful in understanding how psychrophilic protein sequences are discriminated from mesophilic protein sequences on the basis of the global amino acid composition patterns ranges. The detailed analysis of these rules will in turn help us to increase the domain knowledge and biological basis for the particular class. The rule based classifiers provide a scope for getting deeper insight into the hidden knowledge about how global patterns like amino acid composition are associated with psychrophilic and mesophilic sequences.The outputs of rule based methods are a set of human interpretable rules, unlike general machine learning under weak modeling function like a black box. So, it is possible for us to analyze and interpret the classification results to discover the underlying biological facts about psychrophilicity.PART (Frank and Witten, 1998) generates a set of compact rules which increases its acceptance for human comprehensibility. Experiments have shown the usefulness of PART in generating rules as accurate as C4.5 (Quinlan, 1993) and in most of the cases better than RIPPER (Cohen, 1995). Unlike C4.5 and RIPPER which consists of two steps viz., Decision tree induction and rule enrichment, PART create partial decision trees and uses separate and conquer rule learning technique. The basic idea of PART is to generate a stable sub-tree, choosing the leaf that covers the highest number of instances for rule generation, removing the instances it covers and creating sub-trees for the remaining instances until no instances are left.Before using PART for rule induction, we need to discretize the amino acid composition values. Discretization is the process of converting a continuous feature, or variable to nominal or discretized feature (Dougherty et al., 1995). The discretization of features have advantages such as reducing learning time for rule induction, improving the generalization ability, comprehensibility, interpretability of generated rules etc., (Wakulicz-Deja et al., 1998). The (Fayyad and Irani, 1993) method of supervised discretization was used in this study. It uses the minimization of class information entropy.Let S be a set of instances, A be a feature, T be the partition boundary and the class information entropy of the partition induced by T is defined as(2)E(A,T;S)=|S1||S|Ent|S1|+|S2||S1|Ent|s2|The boundary interval T which minimizes the entropy function for all possible partition boundaries is chosen as the binary discretization boundary. The minimum description length principle is used as the stopping criterion for accepting or rejecting a given partition.(3)Gain(A,T;S)<Log2(N−1)N+Δ(A,T;S)Nwhere N indicates the number of instances in the S.We have implemented rotation forest using Weka (Hall et al., 2009) with J48 tree as the base classifier. The ensemble size was chosen as 100 with principal component analysis method for feature extraction. The ROF classifiers have been applied successfully for various types of biological classification tasks (Dehzangi et al., 2010; Liu and Huang, 2008; Ozcift and Gulten, 2011).The relative performance of the prediction models is evaluated through four parameters that are derived from the values of confusion matrix namely TP: true positives (the number of correctly predicted Psychrophiles), TN: true negatives (the number of correctly predicted mesophiles), FP: false positives (the number of incorrectly predicted Psychrophiles) and FN: false negatives (the number of incorrectly predicted mesophiles). These performance parameters are calculated by using the following formulae.Sensitivity: Expresses the percentage of correctly predicted Psychrophiles.(4)Sensitivity=TP(TP+FN)×100Specificity: Expresses the percentage of correctly predicted mesophiles.(5)Specificity=TN(TN+FP)×100Accuracy: Expresses the correctly predicted both Psychrophiles and mesophiles.(6)Accuracy=TP+TNTP+FP+TN+FN×100Area under ROC: ROC (receiver operating characteristic) curve shows the trade-off between sensitivity and specificity. If this curve is closer to left and top side of the ROC space then it indicates the prediction model is more accurate. ROC curves can be summarised by a single numerical quantity known as Area under ROC Curve (AUC). It is an important statistical property to compare the relative performance of the prediction methods. AUC can take values from 0 to 1. The value of 0 for the worst case, 0.5 for worthless prediction and 1 indicates the perfect prediction.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, we have attempted to infer the biological basis of psychrophilicity in terms of amino acid composition frequency ranges. Some of the salient features of our proposed methodology are (i) a variety of classification algorithms were tested to select the best choice for creating strong instances by filtering out misclassified instances. The ROF (rotation forest) with strong generalization ability was proved to be the best classifier for the filtering purpose, (ii) three different rule induction methods were experimented for extracting rules out of the filtered Rule_Induction dataset. The PART method with better comprehensibility was selected for rule induction, (iii) these generated rules were validated with structural dataset, (iv) the generated gross rules showing the different combination of individual amino acids composition ranges satisfying a particular class were categorised into three groups based on their prediction performance, (v) the detailed analysis on these rules had revealed some valuable biological insights such as the amino acids A, D, G, F, and S are over-represented and T is under-represented in psychrophilic proteins, and (vi) Using various feature ranking methods we ranked the 20 amino acids according to their contribution to discrimination. The results obtained from this method on both datasets showed that the global amino acid composition could be one of the very distinguishing attribute for the discrimination. These biological interpretations could be very useful for wet experiments to design psychrophilic proteins satisfying the extracted sequence conditions. The future study can be carried out by exploring other different useful features like physicochemical properties of amino acids, positional orientation of different amino acids, some specific combination pattern along the sequence etc., which may help to achieve much higher classification accuracy. A better selection of input features will enhance the classification performances which in turn yield additional biological interpretations with respect to different biochemical parameters.