@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Core and peripheral connectivity based cluster analysis over PPI network

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
CPCA uses core-periphery structure of complexes to detect clusters in PPI network.Two criterion functions are used to identify core and peripheral regions of the clusters.To locate initial node of a cluster a measure named DNQ index is used.CPCA performs well when compared with well known counterparts.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Protein–protein interaction network,Biological network,Clustering,Protein complex,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A number of methods have been proposed in the literature of protein–protein interaction (PPI) network analysis for detection of clusters in the network. Clusters are identified by these methods using various graph theoretic criteria. Most of these methods have been found time consuming due to involvement of preprocessing and post processing tasks. In addition, they do not achieve high precision and recall consistently and simultaneously. Moreover, the existing methods do not employ the idea of core-periphery structural pattern of protein complexes effectively to extract clusters. In this paper, we introduce a clustering method named CPCA based on a recent observation by researchers that a protein complex in a PPI network is arranged as a relatively dense core region and additional proteins weakly connected to the core. CPCA uses two connectivity criterion functions to identify core and peripheral regions of the cluster. To locate initial node of a cluster we introduce a measure called DNQ (Degree based Neighborhood Qualification) index that evaluates tendency of the node to be part of a cluster. CPCA performs well when compared with well-known counterparts. Along with protein complex gold standards, a co-localization dataset has also been used for validation of the results.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A protein, which is a very important biomolecule with one or multiple chains of amino acid residues, performs a large number of biological functions in a living organism (Nelson et al., 2008). A protein complex, also called a multi protein complex, is a group of protein molecules, i.e., polypeptide chains attached through non-covalent protein–protein interactions. A protein complex is responsible for a single or multiple biological functions in biological processes (Hartwell et al., 1999).Proteins bind with each other as a result of biochemical phenomena. There are a number of methods to detect the amount of interaction that exists between a pair of proteins including yeast two-hybrid screening and affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry (Phizicky and Fields, 1995). Yeast two-hybrid screening also known as the Y2H method, detects interaction between a pair of proteins by attaching a protein to the DNA binding domain of a yeast transcription factor such as Gal4 and attaching the other protein to the activation domain of the transcription factor (Von Mering et al., 2002). The protein attached to the DNA binding domain is called the bait protein and the protein attached to the activation domain is called prey protein. Interaction between the proteins brings the binding domain and the activation domain closer, leading to expression of the associated gene. The presence of the gene product implies interaction between the pair of proteins. A second method extracts protein complexes with a target protein from a sample using affinity purification (Von Mering et al., 2002). Finally, mass spectrometry is used to identify the proteins under study and measure the amount of interaction. A protein–protein interaction network (PPIN) is a network or graph of nodes corresponding to proteins, with edges among the nodes corresponding to interaction among the proteins (Rual et al., 2005). A formal definition of PPIN is presented next.Definition 1Protein–protein interaction network: A PPI network is defined as a graph G=(V, E) where V is the set of vertices corresponding to proteins and E is the set of edges. An edge is an unordered pair of vertices ,(vi,vj)wherevi,vj∈V, representing an interaction between the proteins corresponding to the verticesviandvj.There are a number of public databases that collect published information about protein–protein interactions and prepare curated datasets (Lehne and Schlitt, 2009). Some such widely used databases are Biomolecular Interaction Network Database (BIND) (Bader et al., 2003), Munich Information Center for Protein Sequences (MIPS) database (Mewes et al., 2004), BioGRID (Stark et al., 2006), Database of Interacting Proteins (DIP) (Xenarios et al., 2000), IntAct (Hermjakob et al., 2004), Molecular INTeraction database (MINT) (Zanzoni et al., 2002), Human Protein Reference Database (HPRD) (Peri et al., 2003), YPD (Costanzo et al., 2001) and Funcoup (Alexeyenko et al., 2012). Some of the widely used sources of protein–protein interaction data for clustering are datasets of Krogan et al. (2006), Gavin et al. (2002), Collins et al. (2007), Ho et al. (2002), Ito et al. (2001), Uetz et al. (2000), Giot et al. (2003) and Li et al. (2004).Along with numerous PPI network repositories, there are a few databases which store records of protein complexes such as MIPS (Mewes et al., 2004), SGD (Hong et al., 2008) and CYC2008 (Pu et al., 2009). Computer scientists have always been assisting biologists by developing mathematical models that act behind biological phenomena. The current state of PPI and protein complex research in terms of experimental findings and well-managed repositories of such findings present the computer scientist with a problem that seeks to determine mathematical relationships that exist among proteins of the same complex in a PPI network. Formally, this problem can be defined as follows.Problem Definition: Suppose a set of protein complexes is represented by P, where each complex Pi∈P is a set of proteins. The problem involves designing an algorithm that accepts a PPI network G=(V, E) and produces a set of clusters C where each cluster Ci∈C is a subset of V i.e., Ci⊆V using some graph theoretic criteria applied on G such that similarity between P and C is maximized.Existing methods of clustering PPI network are reported in Section 2. Section 3 presents motivation behind the work. Section 4 presents the proposed method. Experimental evaluation of the method is presented in Section 5 and finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
