@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
BagReg: Protein inference through machine learning

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
BagReg is a novel learning-based protein inference algorithm.BagReg can fully utilize the latent information in the input data.BagReg is competitive with the state-of-the-art protein inference algorithms.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Protein inference,Machine learning,Shotgun proteomics,Protein identification,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Protein inference from the identified peptides is of primary importance in the shotgun proteomics. The target of protein inference is to identify whether each candidate protein is truly present in the sample. To date, many computational methods have been proposed to solve this problem. However, there is still no method that can fully utilize the information hidden in the input data.In this article, we propose a learning-based method named BagReg for protein inference. The method firstly artificially extracts five features from the input data, and then chooses each feature as the class feature to separately build models to predict the presence probabilities of proteins. Finally, the weak results from five prediction models are aggregated to obtain the final result. We test our method on six public available data sets. The experimental results show that our method is superior to the state-of-the-art protein inference algorithms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Proteomics is an emerging discipline which is focused on the large-scale studies of proteins expressed in an organism (Altelaar et al., 2012). An explicit goal of proteomics is the prompt and accurate identification of all proteins in a cell or tissue. Protein identification is the foundation of proteomics research, which is of primary importance to the success of down-stream analysis tasks such as protein quantification and biomarker discovery.Mass spectrometry-based shotgun proteomics is a strategy which offers fast, high-throughput characterization of complex protein mixtures. In shotgun proteomics, the protein identification procedure has two main steps: peptide identification and protein inference. More precisely, the experimental tandem mass spectra are firstly searched against a protein sequence database to obtain a set of peptide spectrum matches, and then the identified peptides are assembled into a set of confident proteins. Fig. 1gives an illustration of protein identification process. In this article, we focus on the protein inference problem.To date, many computational approaches for protein inference have been proposed. The details of these existing methods and the challenges of protein inference problem have been summarized and discussed in several recent reviews (Claassen, 2012; Huang et al., 2012; Li and Radivojac, 2012). In general, the input for protein inference can be modeled as a bipartite graph in which one side is a set of peptides and the other is a set of candidate proteins. There are many important features that are embedded in the input graph for each protein, such as spectra count, scoring information, the number of shared peptides, etc. Many protein inference algorithms have taken advantage of some of these features to identify whether one protein is present in the sample or not.Unfortunately, existing protein inference methods cannot fully utilize available latent information in the input graph. For example, ProteinProphet (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003) employs an EM-like iterative procedure to estimate protein probabilities, but the information of spectra count is ignored. Similarly, methods like MSBayesPro (Li et al., 2009) and ProteinLP (Huang and He, 2012) just consider the best matched spectrum for each peptide and discard spectra with lower scores that may be the real spectra generated from the target peptide.The aforementioned observations motivate our research. We propose a new protein inference model based on machine learning to fully utilize the information hidden in the input graph. Our method is called BagReg, which can be divided into three major phases: feature extraction, prediction model construction and prediction result combination.In feature extraction, we generate five features from the input graph for each protein: the number of matched peptides, the number of unique peptides, the number of matched spectra, the maximal score of matched peptides and the average score of matched peptides. These features have a common characteristic: they are positively correlated with the presence probabilities of proteins. That is, more larger the feature values are, the more likely that the proteins are present in the sample.In prediction model construction, we build five classification models to predict the presence probabilities of proteins. In each model, we take one feature as the class/target feature and use the remaining four features as dependent features. Thanks to the positive correlation between protein presence probability and the value of extracted features, we can sort proteins according to the class feature values in a decreasing order. The training data set is constructed by selecting a subset of proteins with higher (lower) class feature values as the positive (negative) data set, respectively. Classification methods such as logistic regression (Lee and Silvapulle, 1988) are first exploited to construct a predictive model on the training data and then the classifier is applied to predict the presence probabilities for all proteins.In prediction result combination, we aggregate the prediction probabilities from five models to generate a consensus presence probability for each protein. Here we simply use the average of probabilities to calculate the final protein probabilities.It is clear to see that our BagReg method mainly utilizes the supervised learning and ensemble learning techniques for solving the protein inference problem. The whole procedure is flexible and easy to understand. Experimental results on several real proteomics data sets show that, BagReg is competitive with the state-of-the-art protein inference algorithms.The rest of this article is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe our method in detail. Section 3 presents the experimental results and Section 4 concludes the article.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we tackle the protein inference problem from a machine learning perspective and propose a novel method called BagReg. Different from previous algorithms in this field, we transform the unsupervised protein inference problem into a supervised classification problem through automatic feature extraction and training data construction. The main advantage is that our method can improve the prediction precision of protein inference and fully utilize the latent information in the input data. According to the experimental results, our method has better performances than those competitive methods.In fact, there are already some learning-based approaches to solve protein inference problem such as Barista (Spivak et al., 2012), ProteinLasso (Huang et al., 2013) and Re-Faction (Yang et al., 2012). Baristia directly optimizes the total number of identified proteins by training a supervised learning algorithm to introduce a ranking on the combined set of target and decoy proteins. ProteinLasso formulates the protein inference problem as a constrained Lasso regression problem and then solves it with a fast pathwise coordinate descent algorithm. Re-Faction constructs a support vector machine (SVM) regression model on proteomics data generated from samples fractionated by gel electrophoresis to assign proteins to expected protein fractions. This information is then used to appropriately assign peptides to specific proteins. Clearly, our BagReg method differs from existing learning-based approaches in both the key idea and underlying methodology.Actually, many research efforts in other bioinformatics applications have demonstrated that the use of different features and different training sets may lead to significant different prediction performances (e.g. Gong et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2014a,b; Wei et al., 2014). Therefore, we will investigate the feasibility and advantage of incorporating more features into the prediction model of BagReg in the future work. Moreover, new effective training data selection strategies will be further studied as well.