@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Characterizing the protonation states of the catalytic residues in apo and substrate-bound human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 protease

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Protonation states of the catalytic residues in HTLV-1 protease were investigated.In apo HTLV-1 protease, the two catalytic residues are both unprotonated.In HTLV-1 protease–substrate complex, Asp32 is protonated, Asp32′ is unprotonated.Substrate binding favors a protonated Asp32 over protonated Asp32′ by 2.8kcal/mol.The HTLV-1 protease–substrate complex structure was analyzed in detail.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
HTLV-1 protease,Catalytic residues,Protonation states,Free energy simulations,QM/MM,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) protease is an attractive target when developing inhibitors to treat HTLV-1 associated diseases. To study the catalytic mechanism and design novel HTLV-1 protease inhibitors, the protonation states of the two catalytic aspartic acid residues must be determined. Free energy simulations have been conducted to study the proton transfer reaction between the catalytic residues of HTLV-1 protease using a combined quantum mechanical and molecular mechanical (QM/MM) molecular dynamics simulation. The free energy profiles for the reaction in the apo-enzyme and in an enzyme – substrate complex have been obtained. In the apo-enzyme, the two catalytic residues are chemically equivalent and are expected to be both unprotonated. Upon substrate binding, the catalytic residues of HTLV-1 protease evolve to a singly protonated state, in which the OD1 of Asp32 is protonated and forms a hydrogen bond with the OD1 of Asp32′, which is unprotonated. The HTLV-1 protease–substrate complex structure obtained from this simulation can serve as the Michaelis complex structure for further mechanistic studies of HTLV-1 protease while providing a receptor structure with the correct protonation states for the active site residues toward the design of novel HTLV-1 protease inhibitors through virtual screening.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) protease cleaves a viral polyprotein precursor to form individual mature proteins during the life cycle of human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (Martins et al., 2012), which has been convincingly associated with adult T-cell leukemia (ATL) (Poiesz et al., 1980; Yoshida et al., 1984), tropical spastic paraparesis/HTLV-1 associated myelopathy (TSP/HAM) (Gessain, 1996), and numerous chronic diseases, including inflammation of the eye (uveitis) (Mochizuki et al., 1992), joints (arthritis) (Abe et al., 2004), muscles (myositis) (Inose et al., 1992), and skin (dermatitis) (McGill et al., 2012). Currently, no effective therapies are available for these HTLV-1 associated diseases. HTLV-1 protease is an attractive target for the development of inhibitors that treat HTLV-1 associated diseases due to its critical roles for HTLV-1 virion replication (Tözsér and Weber, 2007). Understanding the catalytic mechanism of HTLV-1 protease is essential when designing improved inhibitors for this enzyme.Like other retroviral proteases (Wlodawer and Gustchina, 2000), HTLV-1 protease is a homodimeric aspartic protease with two catalytic aspartic acid (Asp) residues from each subunit in its active site. The catalytic mechanism of HTLV-1 protease remains poorly understood at the atomic level. The catalytic process of aspartic proteases may involve a general acid-base mechanism; specifically, one aspartic residue at the active site is protonated to serve as a general acid, while the other remains unprotonated to serve as a general base (Suguna et al., 1987; Hyland et al., 1991; Dunn, 2002; Brik and Wong, 2003). Although the enzymatic properties of HTLV-1 protease have been thoroughly studied (Louis et al., 1999; Kadas et al., 2004) and molecular dynamics simulations have been performed on both the apo and ligand-bound forms of HTLV-1 protease (Rucker et al., 2011), a detailed study of the protonation states of the catalytic residues (Asp32 and Asp32′) in HTLV-1 protease have not been reported; these data are important for understanding the catalytic mechanism and designing novel inhibitors for HTLV-1 protease. Correspondingly, the protonation states of the active site Asp residues of the homologous HIV-1 protease have been widely studied (Smith et al., 1996; Piana and Carloni, 2000; Piana et al., 2001; Wang et al., 1996; Czodrowski et al., 2007; Torbeev and Kent, 2012). Smith et al. (1996) used 13C NMR experiments to characterize the protonation states of the active site Asp residues in the apo and pepstatin-bound HIV-1 protease. They concluded that in the apo enzyme, both Asp residues are deprotonated; in the HIV-1 protease–pepstatin complex, one Asp is protonated and the other is not. Wang et al. (1996) performed solution state NMR studies on a complex of HIV-1 protease with inhibitor KNI-272. They also reported that one Asp is protonated in the active site while the other is not in this enzyme–inhibitor complex. During a recent 13C labeled NMR study, Torbeev and Kent (2012) reported that one active site Asp is protonated and the other is unprotonated in the apo HIV-1 protease, and the same conclusion was also reached by Piana and Carloni (2000), who performed an ab initio study on the apo form of HIV-1 protease. Piana et al. (2001) carried out ab initio molecular dynamics simulations on simplified models of HIV-1 protease–pepstatin complex, suggesting that both of the active site Asp residues are protonated in this enzyme–inhibitor complex. After performing pKa calculations on a complex of HIV-1 protease with a pyrrolidine containing inhibitor, Czodrowski et al. (2007) reported that both catalytic Asp residues are deprotonated in this complex. Evidently, the protonation states of the catalytic Asp residues remain uncertain for the apo and ligand-bound forms of HIV-1 protease; therefore, additional studies are required to understand the protonation states of the active site residues in HIV-1 and HTLV-1 protease. In this work, combined quantum mechanical and molecular mechanical (QM/MM) (Warshel and Levitt, 1976; Field et al., 1990; Gao and Xia, 1992) molecular dynamics (MD) simulations have been performed to determine the protonation states of the two catalytic aspartic acid residues in the apo and substrate-bound HTLV-1 protease.The X-ray crystal structures available for HTLV-1 protease are all hexamers with three active sites (Li et al., 2005; Satoh et al., 2010). Because the active form of HTLV-1 protease is a homodimer, we focused on one of the three active sites during our simulations. The structure of HTLV-1 protease in complex with a statine-containing peptide inhibitor (PDB ID: 3LIY) (Satoh et al., 2010) and its A, B, and I subunits have been used during our simulations, where ‘A’ and ‘B’ are the two subunits of HTLV-1 protease (Asp32 is from subunit A and Asp32′ is from subunit B. The atom names and residues from subunit B are labeled with a prime throughout this paper), and ‘I’ represents the inhibitor (Fig. 1).Fig. 1(b) shows that when protonated, any one of the four carboxylic oxygen atoms in Asp32 and Asp32′ can form a strong hydrogen bond with the inhibitor. And the OD1 of Asp32 and Asp32′ form hydrogen bonds with the N of Gly34 and Gly34′, respectively. Therefore, the protonation states of the two active site residues Asp32 and Asp32′ cannot be determined from the X-ray crystal structure. To characterize the protonation states of Asp32 and Asp32′ during catalysis, we constructed a complex structure of HTLV-1 protease with a substrate, then undertook combined QM/MM molecular dynamics simulations on the complex structure. Our simulations demonstrated that the enzyme–substrate complex structures with OD2 protonated in both Asp32 and Asp32′ led to the CBCG bond rotation; therefore, the enzyme–substrate complex structures converged to a state where the OD1 atom from either Asp32 or Asp32′ is protonated. To further determine whether the OD1 atom of Asp32 or Asp32′ is protonated in the complex structure of HTLV-1 protease and its substrate, we carried out free energy simulations for the proton transfer reaction between Asp32 and Asp32′. In addition, we performed free energy simulations for the same proton transfer reaction in the apo HTLV-1 protease, to understand the effects of substrate binding on the protonation states of the active site aspartic acid residues.All of the available X-ray crystal structures of HTLV-1 protease are enzyme–inhibitor complexes. Our simulation began with one of these structures (PDB ID: 3LIY) (Satoh et al., 2010), which is a hexamer with three active sites. Because the active form of HTLV-1 protease is a homodimer, we focused on one of the three active sites. Fig. 1(a) shows a homodimer of the HTLV-1 protease in complex with a substrate-analog inhibitor (Ace-Ala-Pro-Gln-Val-Sta-Val-Met-His-Pro where ‘Sta’ represents statine) bound to the active site. The A, B and I subunits from the original structure (3LIY) were used in our simulations, where ‘A’ and ‘B’ are the two subunits of the HTLV-1 protease, and ‘I’ represents the inhibitor. To simulate the proton transfer reaction between Asp32 and Asp32′ in the apo HTLV-1 protease, we removed the inhibitor from the active site and equilibrated the structure in solvent before undertaking the free energy simulations.Studies comparing the substrate specificity of HTLV-1 protease have indicated that a substrate with a sequence of Lys-Gly-Pro-Pro-Val-Ile-LEU-ǀ-PRO-Ile-Gln-Ala-Pro showed the highest specificity (Louis et al., 1999; Kadas et al., 2004). Therefore, during our simulations, we decided to choose a shorter substrate (Ace-Pro-Val-Ile-LEU-ǀ-PRO-Ile-NMe) that includes the same LEU-PRO cleavage site, with the N- and C-termini capped by an acyl (Ace) group and an N-methyl amino (NMe) group, respectively. This substrate is long enough to include the cleavage site between the Leu and Pro and when it is docked to the active site of HTLV-1 protease, the entire system can be effectively simulated using the combined QM/MM method. The complex structure of HTLV-1 protease with the selected substrate (Ace-Pro-Val-Ile-LEU-ǀ-PRO-Ile-NMe) was obtained by modifying the structure of the statine-containing peptide inhibitor to that of the substrate using the Maestro graphical user interface (Maestro, 2012). Four complex structures were constructed, each with a different protonation state on the OD1 or OD2 atom of either Asp32 or Asp32′.To model the proton transfer reaction between the two catalytic aspartic acid residues in HTLV-1 protease, a combined quantum mechanical and molecular mechanical method has been employed. The semiempirical AM1 method (Dewar et al., 1985) could correctly calculate the heat of formation for acetic acid (−103.1kcal/mol (AM1) vs. −103.3kcal/mol (exp) (Lias et al., 1988)) and acetate (−115.5kcal/mol (AM1) vs. −120.5kcal/mol (exp) (Lias et al., 1988), which are the model compounds for the protonated and unprotonated aspartic acid side chain. In addition, the AM1 method has been found to perform well in calculating the geometries and energetics of a model system (containing two malonic acid molecules and one water molecule) that mimic the catalytic center of penicillopepsin, a monomeric aspartic protease (Ciarkowski and Oldziej, 1993). Therefore, the AM1 method was employed in the combined QM/MM potential. During our simulations, the side chains (15 atoms in total) of the two catalytic Asp residues (Asp32 and Asp32′) were treated quantum mechanically, unless otherwise stated. In all of the equilibrated HTLV-1 protease–substrate complex structures, one water molecule (wat1 in Fig. 13) enters the active site and forms hydrogen bonds with the substrate and the catalytic Asp residues, this water molecule will serve as the lytic water during the substrate hydrolysis catalyzed by HTLV-1 protease.In order to investigate whether including wat1 in the QM region might affect the energetics for the proton transfer reaction between the two catalytic Asp residues, for the enzyme–substrate complex structure with OD1 of Asp32 being protonated, we undertook an additional QM/MM simulation with wat1 being partitioned to the QM region along with the side chains of the two catalytic Asp residues (18 atoms in total). In both QM/MM partitions, the Cα(named CA throughout this paper) atoms of Asp32 and Asp32′ served as the boundary atoms and they were treated by the generalized hybrid orbital (GHO) method (Gao et al., 1998; Amara et al., 2000). The rest of the system, including the rest of HTLV-1 protease, the substrate (for the enzyme–substrate complex), and water were all treated using the CHARMM22 force field (MacKerell et al., 1998) and a TIP3P water model (Jorgensen et al., 1983).The initial setup included the apo form of HTLV-1 protease and four structures of HTLV-1 protease in complex with its substrate. The only difference among the four complex structures was the protonation states of Asp32 and Asp32′; the OD1 or OD2 atom of Asp32 or Asp32′ was protonated, respectively in each complex structure. All of the other Asp and Glu residues were unprotonated, while Lys and Arg residues were protonated. In addition, when inspecting the hydrogen bond interactions with other residues, His23 was set neutral with the proton on NE2, and His66 was also neutral with the proton assigned to ND1. The total charge of the system was neutralized by five chloride ions.For each of the complex structures, the substrate was first minimized for 30 steps using the adopted basis set Newton–Raphson (ABNR) method (Brooks et al., 2009), then the system was fully solvated in a rectangular box (80×60×60Å3) of water molecules (Fig. 2). The water molecules that were within 2.5Å of any heavy atoms of the system were deleted, and the crystal water molecules were kept. The chloride counter ions were positioned approximately 5–6Å away from positively charged residues on the protein surface, and all of these chloride anions are far away from the active site. To remove any close contacts, the enzyme and substrate were minimized over 30 steps using the adopted basis set Newton–Raphson method, which was followed by another 30 steps of ABNR minimization for the water and chloride ions. The apo enzyme system was dissolved into a water box of the same size, and then minimized in the same way, 30 steps of ABNR minimization of HTLV-1 protease followed by another 30 steps of ABNR minimization of water and chloride ions.The entire system was then partitioned into the quantum mechanical (QM) and molecular mechanical (MM) regions as described in Section 2.2, which was followed by 30 steps of minimization for the protein, the substrate (for complexes) and QM atoms, and another 30 steps of minimization for the water and chloride ions, using the AM1/MM potential and the ABNR method. Next, the system was gradually heated to 298K for the first 15ps. After heating, the system was equilibrated at 298K for 100ps with periodic boundary conditions and the isothermal–isobaric (NPT) ensemble at 298K and 1atm. The particle mesh Ewald summation method (Darden et al., 1993) was employed to calculate the long-range electrostatic interactions. The integration time step for the MD simulations was 1fs and the Nose–Hoover (Nose, 1984; Hoover, 1985) thermostat algorithm was used throughout. A cutoff distance of 13Å was used for the nonbonded interactions, and the nonbonded pair list was updated every 25 steps. All of the bond lengths involving hydrogen atoms were constrained by the SHAKE algorithm (Ryckaert et al., 1977).We started the free energy simulations from the equilibrated structures described in Section 2.3 and computed the free energy changes for the proton transfer reactions during the following processes (atom names are corresponding to Fig. 3(a) and (c)): transferring HD1 from Asp32 to the OD1′ of Asp32′, transferring HD1′ from Asp32′ to the OD1 of Asp32 in the HTLV-1 protease–substrate complexes, and the transferring of HD1 from Asp32 to the OD1′ of Asp32′ in the apo HTLV-1 protease. During all of these free energy simulations, the reaction coordinate (RC) was defined as: RC=ROD1–HD1−RHD1–OD1′ for the proton transfer from Asp32 to Asp32′, where ROD1–HD1 represents the bond length of the breaking bond, and RHD1–OD1′ represents the forming bond; or RC=ROD1′–HD1′−RHD1′–OD1 for the proton transfer from Asp32′ to Asp32, where ROD1′–HD1′ and RHD1′–OD1 represent the breaking and forming bond, respectively.The free energy changes were determined using the umbrella sampling (Kottalam and Case, 1988; Hooft et al., 1992) technique during the molecular dynamics simulations. Each simulation was divided into 13 simulation windows with reaction coordinates from −1.0 to 1.0Å. The force constants of 30.0–100.0kcalmol−1Å−2 were employed in these simulation windows, with smaller force constants being applied to the reactant and product states and larger values to the transition state. For each simulation window, we performed at least 100ps of equilibration, followed by another 100ps for averaging and trajectory collection; 500 structures were saved for further analysis. The weighted histogram analysis method (WHAM) (Kumar et al., 1992) was used to obtain the free energy profiles.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have performed combined QM/MM molecular dynamics simulations on the different protonation states among the catalytic residues (Asp32 and Asp32′) of HTLV-1 protease. Our results indicated that the structures converge to the protonation at the OD1 atom of Asp32 or Asp32′ after the MD simulations. To determine whether Asp32 or Asp32′ is protonated in the Michaelis state, free energy simulations were carried out for a proton transfer reaction between Asp32 and Asp32′ in the apo and substrate-bound HTLV-1 protease. Our results suggest that in the apo HTLV-1 protease, both Asp32 and Asp32' are unprotonated, and substrate binding prefers a protonated Asp32 over a protonated Asp32′ by 2.8kcal/mol. Therefore, we conclude that in the Michaelis state of HTLV-1 protease, Asp32 is protonated on the OD1 atom, while Asp32′ remains unprotonated. The equilibrated HTLV-1 protease–substrate complex can serve as the Michaelis complex structure for further mechanistic studies of HTLV-1 protease while also providing a receptor structure with the correct protonation state among the active site residues during the design of novel HTLV-1 protease inhibitors through virtual screening.