@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Computational Analysis of CRTh2 receptor antagonist: A Ligand-based CoMFA and CoMSIA approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Ligand based CoMFA and CoMSIA were performed on CRTh2 antagonist.Implemented two different alignments based on systematic search and simulated annealing.Steric, electrostatic, hydrophobic, H-bond donor and H-bond acceptor parameters were desirable for potent inhibitory activity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
CRTh2,3D-QSAR,CoMFA,CoMSIA,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
CRTh2 receptor is an important mediator of inflammatory effects and has attracted much attention as a therapeutic target for the treatment of conditions such as asthma, COPD, allergic rhinitis and atopic dermatitis. In pursuit of better CRTh2 receptor antagonist agents, 3D-QSAR studies were performed on a series of 2-(2-(benzylthio)-1H-benzo[d]imidazol-1-yl) acetic acids. There is no crystal structure information available on this protein; hence in this work, ligand-based comparative molecular field analysis (CoMFA) and comparative molecular similarity indices analysis (CoMSIA) were performed by atom by atom matching alignment using systematic search and simulated annealing methods. The 3D-QSAR models were generated with 10 different combinations of test and training set molecules, since the robustness and predictive ability of the model is very important. We have generated 20 models for CoMFA and 100 models for CoMSIA based on two different alignments. Each model was validated with statistical cut off values such as q2>0.4, r2>0.5 and r2pred>0.5. Based on better q2 and r2pred values, the best predictions were obtained for the CoMFA (model 5 q2=0.488, r2pred=0.732), and CoMSIA (model 45 q2=0.525, r2pred=0.883) from systematic search conformation alignment. The high correlation between the cross-validated/predicted and experimental activities of a test set revealed that the CoMFA and CoMSIA models were robust. Statistical parameters from the generated QSAR models indicated the data is well fitted and have high predictive ability. The generated models suggest that steric, electrostatic, hydrophobic, H-bond donor and acceptor parameters are important for activity. Our study serves as a guide for further experimental investigations on the synthesis of new CRTh2 antagonist.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Chemoattractant receptor-homologous molecule expressed on Th2 cells (CRTh2) is a G-protein coupled receptor that plays a recognized role in initiation and perpetuation of allergic diseases (Pettipher and Whittaker, 2012; Shimono et al., 2012; Pothier et al., 2012; Birkinshaw et al., 2006; Bonafoux et al., 2011; Hirai et al., 2001; Nagata et al., 1999a; Gervais et al., 2011; Schroder et al., 2012). CRTh2 is selectively expressed by Th2 cells, eosinophils, and basophils and mediates chemotactic activation of these cells in response to prostaglandin D2 (PGD2) (Pettipher and Whittaker, 2012; Nagata et al., 1999b; Iwasaki et al., 2002; Uller et al., 2007; Sykes et al., 2012) which is produced in high quantities by mast cells during allergic attacks (Birkinshaw et al., 2006; Huang et al., 2004; Takeshita et al., 2004; Pettipher, 2008). PGD2 exhibit its biological responses by activating the classical DP1 receptor and CRTh2 receptor (also known as DP2) which is linked to different signalling pathways and it negatively regulates adenylyl cyclases and stimulates phosphoinositide 3-kinase, mitogen-activated protein kinases and phospholipase C (Hata et al., 2005; Hata et al., 2005; Jain et al., 2008; Nagata and Hirai, 2003; Mathiesen et al., 2005; Hata and Breyer, 2004Nagata and Hirai, 2003; Mathiesen et al., 2005; Hata and Breyer, 2004). To date, CRTh2 is the only receptor that links a major lipid mediator of mast cells with Th2 cells, eosinophils, and basophils (Nagata and Hirai, 2003). There has been a dramatic increase in the number of published articles and patents describing the identification and optimization of potent CRTh2 antagonists in recent years (Ulven and Kostenis, 2010). It has been suggested that antagonizing selectively the CRTh2 receptor could be useful in the treatment of asthma and other inflammatory diseases (Pothier et al., 2012). CRTh2 antagonists had a very strong preference for a carboxylic acid moiety (Pettipher and Whittaker, 2012) and have variety of fused 6–5-membered ring chemotypes as a core structure such as indole, azaindole, benzimidazole, indolizine, spiro–indoline (Shimono et al., 2012). Ramatroban a drug currently used for treatment of allergic rhinitis also possess CRTh2 antagonist activity (Pettipher and Whittaker, 2012; Shimono et al., 2012; Hata et al., 2005; Hata and Breyer, 2004). More recently, an orally bioavailable CRTh2 antagonist (OC000459) successfully completed Phase IIa trials demonstrating efficacy in asthma and allergic rhinoconjunctivitis (Bonafoux et al., 2011). These suggest that CRTh2 antagonist is a potential therapy in allergic and inflammatory disorders.When 3D structure of the macromolecular target is not available 3D-QSAR is the prominent computational means to support chemistry within drug design projects (Puzyn et al., 2010). The primary objective of 3D QSAR was to understand which properties are important to control a specific biological activity of a series of compounds. The most popular methods are CoMFA and CoMSIA which correlate biological activity with the molecular features (Jain et al., 2008; Doweyko, 2004). Hence, in the present study, ligand-based CoMFA and CoMSIA were performed on a series of 2-(2-(benzylthio)-1H-benzo[d]imidazol-1-yl) acetic acids. The selected series satisfies the key requirement of CRTh2 antagonist and have similar structural features to indomethacin which is reported potent agonist for the development of CRTh2 antagonist. The majority of currently available CRTh2 antagonists (Shimono et al., 2012; Birkinshaw et al., 2006; Ulven et al., 2007; Sandham et al., 2009; Tumey et al., 2010; Gallant et al., 2011) have the core structures of indole acetic acid but the series used in our study alone replaces the indole acetic acid by imidazole acetic acid which paves the way for the discovery of novel antagonist against CRTh2. In addition, the compounds have sulfur atom attached to benzimidazole ring which makes the compound to be more potent. The highly active molecule among the dataset was selected as template and its conformation was searched through systematic search and simulated annealing methods. The bioactive conformations using two search methods were taken and the common scaffold was used to align the compounds. We segregated the dataset (65 compounds) into test (15 compounds) and training (50 compounds) set. Ten different combinations of training and test set compounds were used which produced 20 CoMFA models and 100 CoMSIA models. The statistical results of the generated models were found and each model was validated with statistical cut off values such as q2>0.4, r2>0.5 and r2pred>0.5. Based on the predictive ability (r2pred) of the test set the best model was chosen in CoMFA and CoMSIA analysis and it was graphically interpreted by field contribution maps. This 3D-QSAR analysis provides guidelines for the design of next-generation compounds with enhanced bioactivity or specificity and has ability to predict biological activities of novel compounds.In this study, a dataset of 65 compounds obtained from Pothier et al. consisted of (2-(2-(benzylthio)-1H-benzo[d]imidazol-1-yl acetic acids) derivatives showed inhibitory activity towards human CRTh2 receptor (Pothier et al., 2012). In a total set of 65 compounds reported, 50 compounds were used as training set and 15 compounds were used as test set based on random selection. For QSAR analysis, the given inhibitory concentration values were changed to minus logarithmic scale value (pIC50), as a dependent variable for CoMFA and CoMSIA analysis.pIC50=−log(IC50).The structures and biological activities of all compounds including both training set and test set molecules is shown in Table 1.The partial atomic charges were assigned for each ligand by utilizing Gasteiger Hückel charge, available in SYBYL X1.1 package. Since, here was no information about the bioactive conformation; the compound with the highest pIC50 value was utilized as a template molecule to perform 3D-QSAR calculations. As compound 58 was the most active, the bioactive conformations were obtained by systematic conformational search analysis and simulated annealing search. The default options were used during simulated annealing of highly active compound. During systematic conformation search all rotatable bonds were searched with incremental dihedral angle from 120° and the lowest energy conformer was assumed as bioactive conformer and was chosen for subsequent QSAR modelling. Using this particular conformer structure as standard, bioactive conformations for other compounds were determined by systematic conformer search for the additional moieties, by keeping core part constrained. In this way, the common scaffold of every inhibitor occupies the same area in three-dimensional space. The most active molecule was used as the reference to align all the compounds using atom-to-atom matching. The matching atoms were selected by maximum common substructure (MCS) as shown in Fig. 1(a) and the alignment of the all molecules using systematic search conformation and simulated annealing is shown in Fig. 1(b) and (c), respectively.CoMFA has been used widely to relate the chemical structure to their chemical and biological properties. CoMFA fields are the interaction energies between a probe atom or a molecule and a set of aligned molecules, which are used to establish the three-dimensional quantitative structure/activity relationship (3D-QSAR) equations (Hong et al., 2003). The steric and electrostatic potential fields for CoMFA were calculated at each lattice intersection of a regularly spaced grid of 2.0Å which provides all information necessary for understanding the biological properties of a set of compounds. The Van der Waals potential and columbic terms, which represent steric and electrostatic fields, respectively, were calculated using Tripos force field. The steric and electrostatic interaction energies were calculated for each molecule at each grid point using a sp3 carbon probe with a +1.0 charge. An energy cut off value of 30kcal/mol was imposed on all CoMFA calculations to avoid excessively high and unrealistic energy values within the molecule. With standard option for the scaling of variables, the regression analysis was carried out using cross-validated partial least squares approach (PLS) of LOO (leave-one-out). After that a non-cross-validated analysis was carried out without column filtering.During calculation of the steric and electrostatic fields in CoMFA, many grid points on the molecular surface were ignored due to the rapid increase in Van der Waals repulsion. To avoid a drastic change in the potential energy of the grid points near the molecular surface, CoMSIA employed a Gaussian-type function based on distance (Zhao et al., 2011). The grid constructed for the CoMFA field calculation was also used for the CoMSIA field calculation. Five physico-chemical properties (steric, electrostatic, hydrophobic, and hydrogen bond donor and acceptor) were evaluated using a common probe atom placed within a 3D grid. Different from the CoMFA, a Gaussian-type distance dependence of physicochemical properties (attenuation factor of 0.3) was assumed in the CoMSIA calculation.In 3D-QSAR, the CoMFA and CoMSIA descriptors were used as independent variables and pIC50 values were used as the dependent variable. The partial least squares (PLS) method was used to explore a linear correlation between the CoMFA and CoMSIA fields and the biological activity values. It was performed in two stages. First, cross-validation analysis was done to determine the number of components to be used. The value of q2 that resulted in a minimal number of components and the lowest cross-validated standard error of estimate was accepted. The CoMFA cutoff values were set to 30kcal/mol for both the steric and electrostatic fields, and all fields were scaled by the default options in SYBYL. Second, the optimum number of components were used to derive the final PLS model, with no validation method (Zhao et al., 2011). CoMFA and CoMSIA results were then graphically interpreted by field contribution maps.The predictive power of CoMFA, and CoMSIA models were derived from the test set molecules, which were excluded during model development. In the structural preparation of test set molecules, sketching and optimization was same as the training set molecules. The activity of the test set was predicted by using model derived from training set. The predictive correlation coefficient for developed model was determined by using following formula:rpred2=(SD−PRESS)SDwhere PRESS is the sum of the squared deviation between the predicted and actual activity of the test set molecules, and SD is defined as the sum of the square deviation between the biological activity of the test set compounds and the mean activity of the training set molecules. Poor q2 models as well as good q2 models were found to be well spread between high and low test set r2pred, indicating that there is no relationship between q2 and the model’s ability to predict an external test set (Puzyn et al., 2010; Puzyn et al., 2010; Doweyko, 2004).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
