@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Circular code motifs in the ribosome decoding center

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Identification of circular code motifs in the ribosome decoding center.The universally conserved nucleotides A1492 and A1493 in circular code motifs.Identification of the conserved nucleotide G530 in nuclear and chloroplast rRNAs.The conserved nucleotide G530 in circular code motifs.Translation code based on the circular code.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Circular code motif,Trinucleotide,Ribosomal RNA,Translation code,Ribosome decoding center,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A translation (framing) code based on the circular code was proposed in Michel (2012) with the identification of X circular code motifs (X motifs shortly) in the bacterial rRNA of Thermus thermophilus, in particular in the ribosome decoding center. Three classes of X motifs are now identified in the rRNAs of bacteria Escherichia coli and Thermus thermophilus, archaea Pyrococcus furiosus, nuclear eukaryotes Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Triticum aestivum and Homo sapiens, and chloroplast Spinacia oleracea. The universally conserved nucleotides A1492 and A1493 in all studied rRNAs (bacteria, archaea, nuclear eukaryotes, and chloroplasts) belong to X motifs (called mAA). The conserved nucleotide G530 in rRNAs of bacteria and archaea belongs to X motifs (called mG). Furthermore, the X motif mG is also found in rRNAs of nuclear eukaryotes and chloroplasts. Finally, a potentially important X motif, called m, is identified in all studied rRNAs. With the available crystallographic structures of the Protein Data Bank PDB, we also show that these X motifs mAA, mG, and m belong to the ribosome decoding center of all studied rRNAs with possible interaction with the mRNA X motifs and the tRNA X motifs. The three classes of X motifs identified here in rRNAs of several and different organisms strengthen the concept of translation code based on the circular code.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The ribosome is a complex ribonucleoprotein particle responsible for the synthesis of the cell protein by translating messenger RNA (mRNA). Ribosomes are composed of two subunits, a large subunit and a small subunit. Each subunit is formed by ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) and proteins. A ribosome contains three transfer RNA (tRNA) binding sites: A-site (aminoacyl), P-site (peptidyl), and E-site (exit). During the translation process, the aminoacyl tRNA binds to the A-site where the decoding center containing the universally conserved dinucleotide AA (A1492 and A1493) is tasked with distinguishing cognate from non-cognate tRNAs by anticodon–codon interactions (Wilson, 2014). The transfer of the amino acid from the P-site to the A-site results in the peptide-bond forming between the carboxyl group at the P-site and the newly arrived amino acid at the A-site. As the ribosome progresses by three nucleotides, the peptidyl tRNA moves from the A-site to the P-site. Finally, the unloaded tRNA moves from the P-site to the E-site.The introduction of 3D crystallographic structure contributed significantly to the better understanding of the functionality of ribosomes. 3D structures and experimental biological results proved that the decoding center is located in the RNA region of the ribosome.In 1996, a statistical analysis of occurrence frequencies of the 64 trinucleotides {AAA, …, TTT} in the three frames zero, one and two of genes of both prokaryotes and eukaryotes showed that the trinucleotides are not uniformly distributed in these three frames (Arquès and Michel, 1996). By convention here, the frame zero is the reading frame in a gene, and the frames one and two are the reading frame zero shifted by one and two nucleotides in the 5′-3′ direction, respectively. By excluding the four periodic permuted trinucleotides {AAA, CCC, GGG, TTT} and by assigning each trinucleotide to a preferential frame (frame of its highest occurrence frequency), three subsets X=X0, X1, and X2 of 20 trinucleotides are found in the frames zero, one, and two, respectively, simultaneously of two large gene populations (protein coding regions): eukaryotes (26,757 sequences, 11,397,678 trinucleotides) and prokaryotes (13,686 sequences, 4,709,758 trinucleotides) (Arquès and Michel, 1996). This set X contains the 20 following trinucleotides(1)X={AAC,AAT,ACC,ATC,ATT,CAG,CTC,CTG,GAA,GAC,GAG,GAT,GCC,GGC,GGT,GTA,GTC,GTT,TAC,TTC}.The two sets X1 and X2, of 20 trinucleotides each, in the shifted frames one and two of genes can be deduced from X by the circular permutation map (see below). These three trinucleotide sets present several strong mathematical properties, particularly the fact that X is a C3 self-complementary trinucleotide circular code (Arquès and Michel, 1996). A trinucleotide circular code has the fundamental property to always retrieve the reading frame in any position of any sequence generated with the circular code. In particular, initiation and stop trinucleotides as well as any frame signals are not necessary to define the reading frame. Indeed, a window of a few nucleotides positioned anywhere in a sequence generated with the circular code always retrieves the reading frame. For crossing the largest ambiguous words of the circular code X (words, not necessarily unique, in two or three frames), this window needs a length of 13 nucleotides with X (Fig. 3 in Michel, 2012). A window of 13 nucleotide length is the largest window of X to retrieve the reading frame for all the ambiguous words of X.Recently, X circular code motifs (X motifs shortly), i.e., motifs generated from the circular code X, are identified in the 5′ and/or 3′ regions of 16 isoaccepting tRNAs of prokaryotes and eukaryotes (Michel, 2013). X motifs are also found in 16S rRNAs, in particular in the decoding center which recognizes the codon–anticodon helix in A-tRNA (Michel, 2012). A 3D visualization of X motifs in the ribosome shows several spatial configurations involving mRNA X motifs, A-tRNA and E-tRNA X motifs, and four 16S rRNA X motifs. These results led to the concept of a possible translation (framing) code based on the circular code (Michel, 2012).By developing a search algorithm of X motifs in a DNA multiple sequence alignment, obtained here with a global multiple sequence alignment program, three classes of X motifs identified in multiple aligned rRNAs are involved in the ribosome decoding center of bacteria, archaea, nuclear eukaryotes, and chloroplasts.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
