@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Identification of putative and potential cross-reactive chickpea (Cicer arietinum) allergens through an in silico approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
First study reported on identification of putative allergens in chickpea using in silico approaches.Seven novel putative allergens from chickpea (Cicer arietinum) have been identified, based on sequence, structural and physicochemical similarities.Four out of seven putative allergens may also show cross reactivity with reported allergens, since the potential allergens had common sequence and structural features with the reported allergens.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Chickpea,Allergens,Allergen prediction,Bioinformatics,Proteomics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundAllergy has become a key cause of morbidity worldwide. Although many legumes (plants in the Fabaceae family) are healthy foods, they may have a number of allergenic proteins. A number of allergens have been identified and characterized in Fabaceae family, such as soybean and peanut, on the basis of biochemical and molecular biological approaches. However, our understanding of the allergens from chickpea (Cicer arietinum L.), belonging to this family, is very limited.ObjectiveIn this study, we aimed to identify putative and cross-reactive allergens from Chickpea (C. arietinum) by means of in silico analysis of the chickpea protein sequences and allergens sequences from Fabaceae family.MethodsWe retrieved known allergen sequences in Fabaceae family from the IUIS Allergen Nomenclature Database. We performed a protein BLAST (BLASTp) on these sequences to retrieve the similar sequences from chickpea. We further analyzed the retrieved chickpea sequences using a combination of in silico tools, to assess them for their allergenicity potential. Following this, we built structure models using FUGUE: Sequence-structure homology; these models generated by the recognition tool were viewed in Swiss-PDB viewer.ResultsThrough this in silico approach, we identified seven novel putative allergens from chickpea proteome sequences on the basis of similarity of sequence, structure and physicochemical properties with the known reported legume allergens. Four out of seven putative allergens may also show cross reactivity with reported allergens since potential allergens had common sequence and structural features with the reported allergens.ConclusionThe in silico proteomic identification of the allergen proteins in chickpea provides a basis for future research on developing hypoallergenic foods containing chickpea. Such bioinformatics approaches, combined with experimental methodology, will help delineate an efficient and comprehensive approach to assess allergenicity and pave the way for a better understanding of the biological and medical basis of the same.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A generally accepted definition of allergy is that it constitutes a hypersensitivity reaction where symptoms appear rapidly and are caused by exposure to exogenous macromolecules, also known as antigens or allergens. This reaction is most commonly mediated by a specific class of antibody, known as immunoglobulin E (IgE). It has been estimated that around 1–2% of the population, and up to 8% of children suffer from some type of food allergy (Mills et al., 2003). Majority of food allergies are caused by only around eight types of foods (Mills et al., 2003), including a number of foods of plant origin such as peanuts, tree nuts, wheat and soya. Although our understanding of plant food allergens has considerably advanced in the last decade (Kumar et al., 2012), there are still major gaps in our understanding of certain very important questions. For example, it is critical to understand as to what makes certain plant foods more allergenic than others, if we are to develop knowledge-based means of assessing the allergenic potential of novel foods as well as processing strategies to reduce allergen loads (Mills et al., 2003).Bioinformatics tools available for database searching and biological sequence analysis enable the quick identification of sequences of interest and provide bibliographic, taxonomic and feature information. Tools for sequence comparison, motif searching or sequence profiling assist researchers to identify biologically relevant sequence similarities and features (Petrovsky and Brusic, 2002).Various tests to predict potential allergenicity like bioinformatics, in vitro digestibility of the protein, and binding to antisera of allergic patients make allergen prediction an intricate issue. The Codex alimentarius, which has established guidelines to assess potential allergenicity of proteins using bioinformatics in a step-by-step procedure, recommends that potential allergenicity should be considered when there is either:(a)More than 35% similarity over a window of 80 amino acids in the amino acid sequence of the query protein (without the leader sequence, if any) with an entry known as allergen, orA stretch of identity of 6–8 contiguous amino acids (FAO and WHO, 2001, 2003).Physico-chemical properties of the protein such as lipid binding, ionic charge and post translational modifications may also be important in eliciting the allergenicity. Hence, we could assume that potent allergens would possess both such physicochemical properties, as well as relevant structural epitopes; while non-allergens would lack either (Singh et al., 2009).In this study, by means of in silico analyses of the proteome sequences, we have performed a proteome-wide analysis of allergens from Fabaceae families, with the aim of identifying putative and cross-reactive allergens from Chickpea (Cicer arietinum). Our in silico approaches can act as groundwork to perform a preliminary screening of allergens and also provide a foundation for further functional analysis of the allergens.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The availability of the proteome sequences of chickpea (C. arietinum) permitted the identification of seven putative allergens Q9SMK8, Q39450, Q9SMJ4, Q304D4, G1K3R9, G1K3S0 and O23758. The sequence, structural and physiochemical similarities of four of the seven putative allergens namely Q9SMK8, Q39450, Q9SMJ4 and Q304D4 with known allergens may also predict the cross-reactivity within them.Further clinical analysis of above specified allergens would be required for confirmation of their allergenicity and cross-reactivity which would also help us to design the appropriate methods for the production of hypoallergenic chickpea containing food. Combined with experimental methodology validated on animal models that has been extensively used for allergenicity testing, a bioinformatics approach will help define a more efficient and comprehensive approach to the assessment of chickpea and other food proteins. Also, numbers of genetically modified chickpea are being developed and produced using biotechnology approaches for the improvement of agronomic characteristics (such as resistance to herbicides) or quality (such as improved shelf life) wherein proteomic in silico analysis could be used to determine the safety of such products (GMO Database – Authorisation and approval status in the EU, 2013).