@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A dynamic view to the modulation of phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation by inhibition of O-GlcNAcase

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We constructed a mathematical model to describe the dynamics of reciprocally regulated tau O-GlcNAcylation and phosphorylation upon inhibition of O-GlcNAcase.The model has provided insights into seemingly contradictory changes in phosphorylated tau level during long-term versus acute O-GlcNAcase inhibition.The model may serve as a useful investigational tool in pharmacological interventions for tauopathies in particular and for reciprocally modulated reactions in general.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Modeling,Reciprocal regulation,O-GlcNAcylation,Phosphorylation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Protein phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation are reciprocally regulated. As hyperphosphorylation is implicated in tau pathology, approaches have been exploited to reduce the magnitude of tau phosphorylation by increasing the level of tau O-GlcNAcylation. With mathematic models constructed to describe different kinetic scenarios, we analyzed the temporal change of an O-GlcNAcylated protein in contrast to that of the phosphorylated form upon inhibition of O-GlcNAcase (OGA). The analyses indicate that when degradation of the modified protein is negligible relative to the naked one, the magnitude of O-GlcNAcylated protein increase is proportional to the level of inhibition, while the extent of phosphorylated protein decline varies due to other factors. Furthermore, the increase of O-GlcNAcylated protein parallels with the decrease of phosphorylated form upon acute or short-term inhibition of OGA, as observed in many in vitro and short term in vivo studies. However, phosphorylated protein is predicted to return to its initial level while O-GlcNAcylated protein to achieve a higher steady level under sustained inhibition. This simulated result is in line with a recent report on long-term inhibition of OGA in transgenic mice. Noticeably, inhibition withdrawal is anticipated to cause a transient rise of phosphorylated protein. If degradation of modified proteins proceeds in addition to the naked one, the characteristic temporal profiles of each form in response to OGA inhibition would depend on the relative importance of individual degradation pathways. The models described herein may serve as a useful investigational tool that will provide insight into pharmacological intervention for tauopathies in particular and for reciprocally modulated reactions in general.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
O-GlcNAcylation is a common posttranslational modification of cellular proteins by β-N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc). It refers to the enzymatic transfer of GlcNAc from UDP-GlcNAc donor to the hydroxyl group of serine/threonine residues of proteins via an O-glycosidic bond (Hart, 1997). This process is catalyzed by O-linked N-acetylglucosaminetransferase (O-GlcNAc transferase, OGT). O-GlcNAc on proteins can also be removed with the catalysis by β-N-acetylglucosaminidase (O-GlcNAcase, OGA). These two enzymes dynamically regulate protein O-GlcNAcylation in response to cellular signals or cellular stages. The dynamic modification occurs many times during the lifespan of the polypeptide backbone (Zachara and Hart, 2006; Chou et al., 1992; Roquemore et al., 1996), analogous to protein phosphorylation (Varedi et al., 2010).It has been recently observed that O-GlcNAcylation appears to occur on most serine and threonine residues that would otherwise be phosphorylated by serine/threonine kinases. In some proteins, O-GlcNAcylation occurs on the adjacent serine or threonine residues that are known to be phosphorylated. Therefore, these two reactions competitively modify the same serine/threonine residues, or exclude the counterpart by prior occupancy of the adjacent serine/threonine residues (Zeidan and Hart, 2010; Comer and Hart, 2001; Kamemura et al., 2002). This competition is reflected by the extensive interplay of these two reactions (Hart et al., 2011). For instance, many proteins are reciprocally modified under different conditions at the same site by either O-GlcNAc or phosphate (Comer and Hart, 2001; Chou et al., 1995; Cheng and Hart, 2001; Du et al., 2001), and other proteins are competitively modified at proximal sites but not at the same residue (Slawson et al., 2008; Yang et al., 2006; Dias et al., 2009). Of particular importance is the implication of this reciprocity in the modification of the microtubule-associated protein tau due to the possible link of hyperphosphorylation of the protein to the etiology of tauopathies, mostly represented by Alzheimer's disease (AD).Tau protein plays an important role in stabilizing microtubules of neurons under normal physiological conditions (Avila et al., 2004). However, in certain pathological situations, it aggregates into paired helical filaments (PHFs) that, in turn, spontaneously assemble to form neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) (Braak et al., 1986). These NFTs are one of the defining pathological hallmarks of AD and of the wider group of neurodegenerative disorders known collectively as the tauopathies (Lee et al., 2001). Several lines of evidence indicate that hyperphosphorylation attributes to tau aggregation. It has been found that NFTs are mainly composed of insoluble Tau that is hyperphosphorylated on many serine or threonine residues (Lim and Lu, 2005). The number of phosphate groups per tau was reported to increase from 2 or 3 in healthy brain tissue to about 8 in the brains of AD patients (Ksiezak-Reding et al., 1992). It is believed that in addition to promoting self aggregation, tau hyperphosphorylation impairs binding of tau to microtubules and results in decreased microtubule stability (Lindwall and Cole, 1984). In light of these findings, pharmacological intervention of tau phosphorylation has attracted extensive attention and efforts (Boutajangout et al., 2011). However, direct manipulation of phosphorylation is very challenging as this process is regulated by numerous serine/threonine kinases and phosphatases (Boutajangout et al., 2011; Manning et al., 2002). In contrast, O-GlcNAc modification is regulated by only two carbohydrate-processing enzymes (Hart et al., 2007), although both exist in more than one isoform, which may provide some degree of substrate specificity (Hanover et al., 2003). In this regard, the apparent reciprocal relationship between protein phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation has stimulated considerable efforts to reduce the level of phosphorylated tau through elevating the O-GlcNAc form (Boutajangout et al., 2011). One appealing approach is to inhibit OGA with selective small molecules (Macauley and Vocadlo, 2010).This chemical intervention has brought about the expected outcomes described in several reports. A potent, selective OGA inhibitor thiamet G elevated O-GlcNAc levels of global and tau proteins in cell cultures in a concentration-dependent manner. Thiamet G elicited similar results in rats (Yuzwa et al., 2008) and in JNPL3 tau transgenic mice (Yuzwa et al., 2012) following acute or short-term treatment. However, its effect on phosphorylation diminished after long-term treatment regardless of the sustained elevation of O-GlcNAc that was accompanied with reduced rates of neurodegeneration and tau aggregation in the same transgenic mice (Yuzwa et al., 2012). This contradictory effect on phosphorylation prompted us to understand how the dynamics of these reciprocally related reactions would influence the temporal response to reducing O-GlcNAc removal rate. With a mathematical model constructed to describe the reciprocity of phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation, we analyzed the temporal change of an O-GlcNAcylated protein in contrast to that of the phosphorylated form upon inhibition of OGA in different kinetic scenarios. The analyses characterized the key determinants of temporal profiles of these two modified proteins in response to OGA inhibition and provided mechanistic insight into the observations.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
