@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Structure and evolution analysis of pollen receptor-like kinase in Zea mays and Arabidopsis thaliana

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
64 and 73 putative pollen RLKs chosen from maize and Arabidopsis can be divided into 8 subfamilies.Expansion of pollen RLKs were mainly caused by segmental duplication.Maize might have experienced weaker purifying selection as compare to Arabidopsis.Duplication events of Arabidopsis and maize are between 18–69 million years and 0.67–170 million years ago, respectively.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pollen,RLKs,Phylogenetic evolution,Gene duplication,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Receptor-like kinase (RLKs) is an important member in protein kinase family which is widely involved in plant growth, development and defense responses. It is significant to analyze the kinase structure and evolution of pollen RLKs in order to study their mechanisms. In our study, 64 and 73 putative pollen RLKs were chosen from maize and Arabidopsis. Phylogenetic analysis showed that the pollen RLKs were conservative and might had existed before divergence between monocot and dicot which were mainly concentrated in RLCK-VII and LRR-III two subfamilies. Chromosomal localization and gene duplication analysis showed the expansion of pollen RLKs were mainly caused by segmental duplication. By calculating Ka/Ks value of extracellular domain, intracellular domain and kinase domain in pollen RLKs, we found that the pollen RLKs duplicated genes had mainly experienced the purifying selection, while maize might have experienced weaker purifying selection. Meanwhile, extracellular domain might have experienced stronger diversifying selection than intracellular domain in both species. Estimation of duplication time showed that the duplication events of Arabidopsis have occurred approximately between 18 and 69 million years ago, compared to 0.67–170 million years ago of maize.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
During the double fertilization process in plants, a series of activities of pollen tube are controlled by male and female tissues from stigma to female gametophyte with regulation of many proteins and signaling molecules (Chen et al., 2014; Higashiyama and Hamamura, 2008; Beale and Johnson, 2013). Receptor-like kinase (RLKs) as a big subfamily in protein kinase widely participate in various signal transduction processes, its two main functions include controlling plant growth and development; involving in plant–microbe interactions and defense responses (Shiu and Bleecker, 2001). Most RLKs consisting of a ligand-identifying and signal-accepting extracellular domain, a transmembrane domain, and an intracellular domain with kinase activity (Stone and Walker, 1995). RLKs have received the widespread attention since the first receptor-like kinase was found in maize over 20 years ago (Walker and Zhang, 1990). Subsequently, many RLKs members have been identified in other plant species (Shiu et al., 2004).Currently, many experiments showed that RLKs can be involved directly in pollen development, pollen and stigma interactions, pollen tube growth and interaction with the guidance tissues, pollen tube and ovule interactions, as well as the pollen tube rupture in the embryo sac. For example, one lectin receptor-like kinase SGC in Arabidopsis can influence the normal development of pollen (Wan et al., 2008). PiPRK1 in Petunia inflata can specifically expressed in pollen and pollen tubes, the antisense gene could cause half transgenic pollen sterility (Mu et al., 1994; Lee et al., 1996). The pistil determinant SRK in Brassica can participate in pollen self-incompatibility (Takasaki et al., 2000; Stein et al., 1991). RKF1 expressed in Arabidopsis stamen may play a critical role in microsporogenesis, pollen maturation, or pollen–stigma interactions (Takahashi et al., 1998). AtPRK1 and AtPRK2 in Arabidopsis and LePRK1, LePRK2, LePRK3 in tomato can control pollen germination and elongation (Zhang and McCormick, 2007; Muschietti et al., 1998; Tang et al., 2002, 2004). AtPRK1 and AtPRK2 activate RopGEF1 by phosphorylation, thereby control the polar growth of pollen tube (Chang et al., 2013). While LePRK2 maybe influence the normal function of the pollen tube by regulating actin distribution (Salem et al., 2011; Xu and Huang, 2014).In addition, certain receptor-like kinase can regulate the pollen development indirectly. For example, the leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinases (LRR-RLKs) BAM1/BAM2 (DeYoung et al., 2006; Hord et al., 2006), EMS1/EXS (Canales et al., 2002; Zhao et al., 2002), MSP1 (Nonomura et al., 2003), SERK1/SERK2 (Albrecht et al., 2005; Colcombet et al., 2005), GhSERK (Shi et al., 2014), ER family (ER, ERL1 ERL2) (Hord et al., 2008) as well as RPK2 (Mizuno et al., 2007) play role in early anther cell differentiation process. These RLKs influence pollen development indirectly by controlling tapetum development. While, the function of some pollen RLKs has not been studied in depth, their roles in pollen development and related activities remain to be discovered. Such as pollen specific receptor-like kinase ZmPRK1 in maize, AtPRK3 and AtPRKb in Arabidopsis and others (Kim et al., 2002).From above examples, we can know that the function of RLKs is closely related to its own structure, after the signal molecule identified by extracellular N-terminal signal peptide and bind with receptor domain. It can be transmitted into intracellular through transmembrane domains, and received by intracellular kinase domain. This open or close the downstream target proteins through phosphorylation or dephosphorylation, to start a signal cascade reaction (Malho et al., 2006). RLKs are composed of a complex signal path with upstream and downstream component, and regulate the signal response of plant by transmitting signal through phosphorylation (Antolín-Llovera et al., 2012; Dai et al., 2013).With this kind of mechanism, pollen receptor-like kinase are extensively involved in the double fertilization process. The similarity and difference of its function, as well as the location and time of working, suggesting that each sequence must have their own characteristics on the basic of similarity. In this paper, we use the phylogenetic analysis of pollen receptor-like kinase to briefly analyze the relationship between its kinase domain structure and classification of pollen RLKs; and analyze their differences and correlations in evolutionary terms by comparative studying pollen receptor-like kinases in the dicot Arabidopsis and monocot maize.In this study, nearly 20 years of published articles reporting pollen receptor-like kinases which can be directly involved in the process from pollen development to pollen fertilization were searched and used as base material. The BLASTp in GRAMENE (http://www.gramene.org/) and TAIR (http://www.arabidopsis.org/) was used to search for homologues sequence of pollen receptor-like kinase. After that three database websites genevestigator, AtGenExpress Visualization Tool and MaizeGDB were used to predict the expression of these candidate sequences. Finally, we choose the ones that have higher expression level in Arabidopsis and maize pollen as a follow-up research target.Twenty pollen RLKs searched from articles and all putative maize and Arabidopsis pollen RLKs predicted were aligned using ClustalX v1.83, respectively, Phylogenetic tree was constructed using MEGA 5.0 by neighbor-joining (NJ) method. Bootstrap values have been calculated from 1000 iterations. Other parameters were set as the system default value. The kinases active-sites of known pollen RLKs were predicted by ScanProsite (http://prosite.expasy.org/scanprosite/) and the structures of RLKs were predicted by SMART (http://smart.embl-heidelberg.de/).Zea mays and Arabidopsis pollen RLKs were performed on chromosomes according to their staring positions given in the GRAMENE (http://www.maizegenome.org/data_portal.html) and TAIR (http://www.arabidopsis.org/) databases. MapInspect software (http://www.plantbreeding.wur.nl/uk/software_mapinspect.html) was subsequently used for generating image of all Zea mays and Arabidopsis putative pollen RLKs gene location.To analyze the gene duplication events, the multiple sequence alignment of the Zea mays and Arabidopsis putative pollen RLKs gene was performed by ClustalW and calculated using MEGA v5.0, respectively. Then, the gene pairs whose bootstrap value >99 were chosen, and were put on the chromosomes map.The nonsynonymous substitution rate (Ka) and the synonymous substitution rate (Ks) were calculated for ECDs, ICDs, and kinase domains using the DnaSPv5.0 software. The ratio of nonsynonymous to synonymous nucleotide substitutions (Ka/Ks) between paralogs was analyzed to detect the mode of selection. For inferring the dates of gene duplications, only the kinase domain coding sequences were used. The Ks value was translated into duplication time in million years based on a rate of λ substitutions per synonymous site per year (Peng et al., 2012). The duplication time (T) was calculated as T=Ks/2λ×10−6Mya (Lynch and Conery, 2000) (λ=6.5×10−9 for maize and λ=1.5×10−8 for Arabidopsis) (Blanc and Wolfe, 2004; Yu et al., 2005).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
