@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Status quo and open challenges in vision-based sensing and tracking of temporary resources on infrastructure construction sites

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Potential impact of data collection and processing in construction is highlighted.Benefits and current limitations of vision-based sensors is explained.Vision-based sensing framework from raw data to information to knowledge presented.Various applications of vision-based resource detection and tracking are shown.Challenges in academic research and development environment are identified.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Building information modeling,Computer vision and machine learning,Resource location tracking and progress monitoring,Safety and health,Sensors: photo and video cameras, unmanned aerial vehicles,Surveying: laser scanning, photo- and videogrammetry,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Modern construction projects require sufficient planning and management of resources to become successful. Core issues are tasks that deal with maintaining the schedule, such as procuring materials, guaranteeing the supply chain, controlling the work status, and monitoring safety and quality. Timely feedback of project status aids project management by providing accurate percentages of task completions and appropriately allocating resources (workforce, equipment, material) to coordinate the next work packages. However, current methods for measuring project status or progress, especially on large infrastructure projects, are mostly based on manual assessments. Recent academic research and commercial development has focused on semi- or fully-automated approaches to collect and process images of evolving worksites. Preliminary results are promising and show capturing, analyzing, and documenting construction progress and linking to information models is possible. This article presents first an overview to vision-based sensing technology available for temporary resource tracking at infrastructure construction sites. Second, it provides the status quo of research applications by highlighting exemplary case. Third, a discussion follows on existing advantages and current limitations of vision based sensing and tracking. Open challenges that need to be addressed in future research efforts conclude this paper.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In a broader sense, temporary construction resources (personnel, equipment, and materials) “aid the construction process by delivering man- or machine power, and the required material components to assemble or build a structure” [1]. Temporary structures (e.g., scaffolding, formwork, shoring systems) can also be defined as “any structure that assists the creation of a permanent part of a construction project” [2]. Their impact in construction is high as they are frequently used on most projects, impact safety, quality, speed, and profitability of construction, but are also a major cause of spatial conflicts and many disasters [1]. An industry-led study [3] on leading industry practices for estimating, controlling, and managing indirect construction costs identified project management, field supervision, material handling and scaffolding as the top most challenging and wasteful tasks in construction of large capital facilities and infrastructure. Subsequently, the topic deserves attention in research and development, i.e. using technological methods to advance the field of practice.Construction sites associated to capital intensive infrastructure projects involve significant quantities of resources, including multiple levels of manpower, equipment, and materials. Proper coordination of these temporary entities positively impacts on-site productivity, which in turn influences construction safety, costs, and schedule [4–6]. However, leading industry practices in estimating, control, and management are based on frequent manual observations and often still rely on text-based, labor-intensive, time-consuming, inefficient documentation and reporting methods [2]. As such, the task of measuring the progress of construction site activities has often been a subjective and intensive manual process that is prone to error and, in real operations, frequently out-of-date [13].Camera- or video-based monitoring technology in combination with processing algorithms typically provide a non-intrusive, easy, inexpensive, and rapid mechanism for generating a body of operational information and knowledge which, when made publicly available to project stakeholders, enable secure inquiry into construction operations that is currently not possible [12]. Longer term, vision-based research can serve as a valuable aid to project management by enabling tighter control and greater efficiency.Demonstrating that an active vision system can effectively analyze and assess work-site progress will assist project managers by reducing the time spent monitoring and interpreting project status and performance, thus enabling increased attention to control of cost and schedule. By making project management and workforce more aware of the performance status of their project and their work environment, potential savings to the industry are envisioned by researchers and developers. Since benefits in construction often advance a broader theme of issues, they are likely to impact schedule, cost, safety, and quality at the same time.Recent research efforts in this area seek to prove the hypothesis that it is possible to reliably track multiple resources with images (video, still and/or time-lapse) in order to reproduce the daily workflow of activities associated to a worksite. The main purpose behind the research is to understand the temporal and spatial nature of critical work packages on a worksite. The intent behind such monitoring and analysis is to automatically provide critical information on construction operations for improved decision making in construction engineering and management [6].The information obtained from such desired semi- or fully-automated systems generates knowledge about worksite operations. In an information-based framework, much effort is spent acquiring and interpreting information. In a knowledge-based framework, efforts are allocated to making decisions based on the interpreted information. If successful, computer-vision based methods will transform the review of construction operations from being information-based to knowledge-based, thus saving human resources and improving decision effectiveness [7]. Given that current research seeks to demonstrate and validate reliable localization of construction resources (personnel, equipment, and materials), accompanying concepts reviewed within the scope of this article consist of two major components: (1) the derivation of algorithms suited to tracking temporary resources; and (2) the validation and analysis of the algorithm outputs with regards to pre-determined activities or work packages.For the first research component (algorithms), research focuses on fusion of computer vision, machine learning, and methods derived for arriving at robust and adaptive tracking algorithms, which are directly suited for tracking the distinct classes of temporary worksite resources (personnel, heavy or mobile equipment, and temporary material aids, such as formwork, scaffolding) [8]. Heavy equipment and materials detection and tracking algorithms, for example, require investigation into classification and detector-based learning for classifying equipment and identifying bulk materials on the worksite.For the second research component (validation and analysis), research proposes algorithms that are quantitatively compared against ground truth measurements obtained through alternative positioning technologies [9,10]. Existing and new photo or video data of actual construction site operations and work packages are annotated for validation of the algorithms and of the inferences produced from said algorithms. A review of existing academic research approaches verifies that the combination of vision-based tracking information with operational information modeling can provide knowledge about the state of operations of temporary resources on an infrastructure worksite [11].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
