@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Theoretical investigations on the interactions of glucokinase regulatory protein with fructose phosphates

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
F1P and F6P can bind to the same active site with different binding mode.Ligands affect the conformational spaces and motions of GKRP.Electrostatic interaction provides a major driving force for the ligand binding.F6P makes loop2 of GKRP more protruding and strengthens its contacts with GK.The residues 179-184 play a critical role in the binding of phosphate group.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Glucokinase regulatory protein,Molecular docking,Essential dynamics analysis,Molecular dynamics simulations,Conformational changes,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Glucokinase (GK) plays a critical role in maintaining glucose homeostasis in the human liver and pancreas. In the liver, the activity of GK is modulated by the glucokinase regulatory protein (GKRP) which functions as a competitive inhibitor of glucose to bind to GK. Moreover, the inhibitory intensity of GKRP–GK is suppressed by fructose 1-phosphate (F1P), and reinforced by fructose 6-phosphate (F6P). Here, we employed a series of computational techniques to explore the interactions of fructose phosphates with GKRP. Calculation results reveal that F1P and F6P can bind to the same active site of GKRP with different binding modes, and electrostatic interaction provides a major driving force for the ligand binding. The presence of fructose phosphate severely influences the motions of protein and the conformational space, and the structural change of sugar phosphate influences its interactions with GKRP, leading to a large conformational rearrangement of loop2 in the SIS2 domain. In particular, the binding of F6P to GKRP facilitates the protruding loop2 contacting with GK to form the stable GK–GKRP complex. The conserved residues 179–184 of GKRP play a major role in the binding of phosphate group and maintaining the stability of GKRP. These results may provide deep insight into the regulatory mechanism of GKRP to the activity of GK.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Glucokinase (GK) is a dominant glucose sensor for plasma glucose levels, which phosphorylates glucose and triggers its utilization and metabolism in human body (Matschinsky 1990; de la Iglesia et al., 2000). GK expressed in the liver parenchymal cells and the pancreatic β-cells responds to the changes of the blood glucose concentration, and is responsible for modulating the hepatic glucose metabolism and pancreatic insulin secretion (Agius 2008; Slosberg et al., 2001). Dysfunction or mutations of GK can cause hyperinsulinemia, hyperglycemia and type 2 diabetes (Heredia et al., 2006). Accordingly, GK plays an essential role in controlling blood glucose homeostasis in both liver and pancreas (Kamata et al., 2006).In the liver, besides its substrate glucose, the activity of GK is also acutely regulated by the glucokinase regulatory protein (GKRP) in a competitive manner with respect to glucose (van Schaftingen et al., 1994; de la Iglesia et al., 1999). At low glucose level, GK binds to GKRP and forms an inactive complex which is recruited in the hepatocyte nucleus. Conversely, when glucose level rises, GK dissociates from GKRP and translocates from the nucleus to the cytoplasm to participate in glycogen metabolism and facilitate glucose uptake and conversion (Liu et al., 2012). In mammals, glucose itself likely affects the dissociation of GK–GKRP complex. Additionally, different fructose phosphates, such as fructose 6-phospate (F6P) and fructose 1-phospate (F1P), could play a critical role in the dissociation of GK–GKRP complex. It could be shown that the binding of F6P–GKRP increases the affinity of GKRP–GK, thus F6P promotes the formation of the inactive GK–GKRP complex, while the binding of F1P or its analogues to GKRP destabilizes the inactive complex and leads to a shift of equilibrium from inactive state to active state in the cytosol (Toyoda et al., 2001; Pautsch et al., 2013). The crystal structure resolved by (Pautsch et al., 2013) showed that GKRP contains two topologically identical sugar isomerase (SIS) domains, namely SIS1 (residues 45–284) and SIS2 (residues 289–498), which are embraced by a cap region containing an α-helical C-terminal domain named the Lid domain (residues 499–606) and a N-terminal domain (residues 1–44). F1P is completely enclosed within a deeply buried cavity which locates at the junction between the SIS1 and the N-terminal domains, as shown in Fig. 1. The GK–GKRP complex structure also reveals that a protruding loop of GKRP spanning residues 462–470 forms van der Waals contacts with a hydrophobic cleft on GK, and the contacts are enhanced by a H-bond between the backbone carbonyl of Leu464 from GKRP and the side chain of Lys143 from GK. Coulombic interactions are observed involving Arg301 and Arg297 from GKRP. Additionally, a smaller hydrophobic interaction exists in Val441 and Gly442 from GKRP (Supporting information Fig. S1) (Beck and Miller, 2013). It can be seen that the key residues which contact with GK belong to the SIS2 domain of GKRP, and they are important for maintaining the stability of the GK–GKRP complex.Allosteric activators are able to stimulate the activity of GK and decrease blood glucose level, thereby they have been intensively investigated as potential drugs for type 2 diabetes both in preclinical and clinical phases (Grimsby et al., 2003; Matschinsky, 2009). However, owing to the central role of GK and GKRP in glucose homeostasis, many efforts are made to explore the novel drugs directly targeting the GK–GKRP complex for treating type 2 diabetes. More recently, disrupting the GK–GKRP complex has emerged as an orthogonal strategy for increasing the activity and level of GK in the cytosol (Pfefferkorn, 2013). Although this is a promising conception, the current knowledge about the influence of fructose phosphate on the stability of the GK–GKRP complex is still very limited. Therefore, to understand the regulatory mechanism of the fructose phosphate-dependent GKRP–GK, molecular docking and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations have been employed to investigate the interactions of GKRP with different fructose phosphates and the structural changes of the interaction interface from the GK–GKRP complex.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In the present study, the influence of fructose phosphate on the structure and dynamics of GKRP investigated by using molecular docking, ED analysis and molecular simulations. The docking result reveals that F1P and F6P can bind to the same active site with different binding modes owing to the structural change of fructose phosphates. The residues Thr109, Ser258 and Lys514 of GKRP play a critical role in the binding of fructose phosphate. ED analysis shows that the protein motion and conformational space of GKRP are greatly influenced by the presence of fructose phosphate. For the ligand binding, the electrostatic interaction provides the major driving force, whereas, the polar solvation interaction builds negative contribution. For GKRP-F1P, the closing motion coupled with a minor rotation causes the cap region and SIS2 to move toward each other, which weakens the interfacial interactions between GKRP and GK, leading to the dissociation of the GK–GKRP complex. For GKRP-F6P, an opening motion makes the cap region and SIS2 to move away, and a twisting motion speeds the two regions moving apart, which reversely enhances the interfacial contacts between GKRP and GK and promote the formation of the inactive GK–GKRP complex. This result is further demonstrated by the MD simulations. Besides, the MD simulations verify that the conserved residues 179–184 of GKRP play an essential role in the binding of phosphate group and maintaining the stability of the complex. The structural alteration of sugar phosphate changes the interactions between ligand and GKRP. As a result, notable differences in the structure and the protein motion of GKRP are observed between GKRP-F1P and GKRP-F6P. Accordingly, a series of changes of GKRP resulted from the binding of fructose phosphate impacts the interactions of the GK–GKRP complex, which may offers insight into the regulatory mechanism of GKRP-mediated modulating on GK.