@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An efficient approach for the prediction of ion channels and their subfamilies

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
In this paper, random forest based approach is proposed to predict ion channels families and their subfamilies by using sequence derived features.Here, amino acid composition, dipeptide composition, correlation features, composition, transition and distribution and pseudo amino acid composition are used to represent the protein sequence.The minimum redundancy and maximum relevance feature selection is used to find the optimal number of features for improving the prediction performance.Obtained high accuracies, MCC and ROC area values.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Ion channels,Voltage gated ion channels,Ligand gated ion channels,Random forest,Minimum redundancy maximum relevance,Sodium,Potassium,Calcium,Chloride,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Ion channels are integral membrane proteins that are responsible for controlling the flow of ions across the cell. There are various biological functions that are performed by different types of ion channels. Therefore for new drug discovery it is necessary to develop a novel computational intelligence techniques based approach for the reliable prediction of ion channels families and their subfamilies. In this paper random forest based approach is proposed to predict ion channels families and their subfamilies by using sequence derived features. Here, seven feature vectors are used to represent the protein sample, including amino acid composition, dipeptide composition, correlation features, composition, transition and distribution and pseudo amino acid composition. The minimum redundancy and maximum relevance feature selection is used to find the optimal number of features for improving the prediction performance. The proposed method achieved an overall accuracy of 100%, 98.01%, 91.5%, 93.0%, 92.2%, 78.6%, 95.5%, 84.9%, MCC values of 1.00, 0.92, 0.88, 0.88, 0.90, 0.79, 0.91, 0.81 and ROC area values of 1.00, 0.99, 0.99, 0.99, 0.99, 0.95, 0.99 and 0.96 using 10-fold cross validation to predict the ion channels and non-ion channels, voltage gated ion channels and ligand gated ion channels, four subfamilies (calcium, potassium, sodium and chloride) of voltage gated ion channels, and four subfamilies of ligand gated ion channels and predict subfamilies of voltage gated calcium, potassium, sodium and chloride ion channels respectively.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Ion channels are membrane proteins that are responsible for electrical signaling by gating the flow of ions across the cell membrane. These are the prominent component of nervous systems. Ion channels are classified by gating that is used for opening and closing the channels. The voltage gated ion channels are open and close based on the voltage gradient across the cell membrane, while ligand gated ion channels open and close based on the ligand binding of the ion channels. The voltage gated ion channels play an important role in generation and propagation of the nerve impulse and in cell homeostasis (Bezanilla, 2005). The dysfunction of ion channels plays an important role in the development of various diseases such as hypertension, defective insulin secretion, cardiac arrhythmias, neurological diseases such as epilepsy and even developmental defects such as osteopetrosis (Jentsch et al., 2004). So it is necessary to know about the structure and function of the ion channels to develop a new drug for these diseases. Ion channels play an important target for antiepileptic drug design, antihypertensive and antipsychotics disorder such as schizophrenia (Abernethy and Schwartz, 1999; Yogeeswari et al., 2004). Currently, there are various computational intelligence techniques based approaches that have been proposed to predict membrane proteins (Shen et al., 2006; Cai et al., 2006; Yang et al., 2007; Chou and Shen, 2007a; Zhao and Ding, 2008; Wang and Yang, 2010; Huang et al., 2014). Similarly various computational intelligence techniques based approaches have been proposed to predict nuclear receptor (Bhasin and Raghava, 2004a; Cai and Li, 2005; Gao et al., 2009; Wang et al., 2011; Xiao et al., 2012; Wang and Xiao, 2014) and G-protein coupled receptor (Bhasin and Raghava, 2004b, 2005; Gao and Wang, 2006; Gu et al., 2010; Peng et al., 2010).However, few papers reported computational intelligence techniques based methods to predict ion channels and their types. The authors of the papers (Willett et al., 2007; Pourbasheer et al., 2009) have proposed computational intelligence techniques based method to predict the activity of ion channel proteins. In the paper (Liu et al., 2006) a support vector machine based method has been proposed to predict five types of voltage gated potassium channels and obtained accuracy of 98%. The authors of the paper (Saha et al., 2006) have proposed a support vector machine based method to predict four types of voltage gated ion channels by using amino acid composition and dipeptide composition and obtained overall accuracy of 97.78%. In the paper (Chen and Lin, 2012) a support vector machine based method has been proposed to predict voltage gated potassium channel subfamilies by using amino acid composition and dipeptide composition and obtained overall accuracy of 93.09%. In the paper (Lin and Ding, 2011) the authors proposed a support vector machine based method to predict ion channels and their types by using dipeptide mode of pseudo amino acid composition and obtained overall accuracy of 86.6% to discriminate ion channels from non-ion channels, overall accuracy of 92.6% to classify voltage gated ion channels and ligand gated ion channels and an overall accuracy of 87.8% to predict four types of voltage gated ion channels.In this paper a random forest based method has been proposed to predict ion channels and their types by using sequence derived properties of a protein. In this paper 857 sequence derived features with seven features vectors such as amino acid composition, dipeptide composition, correlation, and composition, transition and distribution and pseudo amino acid composition are used to predict the ion channels and their types. The minimum redundancy maximum relevance (mRMR) based feature selection is used to improve the predictive accuracy. In this paper the proposed method used four level strategies to predict ion channels and their types. First, it is determined that protein sequence is ion channel or non-ion channel. Second, if protein is classified as ion channels then the method classify the protein into two groups viz voltage gated ion channels or ligand gated ion channels. Third, it is classified into the subfamilies of voltage gated ion channels and ligand gated ion channels. Fourth, it determines the subfamilies of calcium, potassium, sodium and chloride voltage gated ion channels. The two parameter of random forest the size of random subset of features (mtry) and the number of trees in the forest (ntree) are used to decrease the error rate. Therefore each of the four levels is developed using a random forest classifier with optimized value of ntree and mtry.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper random forest based approach has been proposed to predict ion channels families and their subfamilies by using sequence derived features. The minimum redundancy and maximum relevance feature selection was used to find the optimal number of features for improving the prediction performance. The results show that the mRMR feature selection algorithm reduces the number of input feature vectors by selecting the important features and improve the overall accuracy and MCC. In the 10-fold cross validation the proposed method has achieved an overall accuracy of 100%, 98.01%, 91.5%, 93.0%, 92.2%, 78.6%, 95.5%, 84.9%, MCC values of 1.00, 0.92, 0.88, 0.88, 0.90, 0.79, 0.91, 0.81 and ROC area values of 1.00, 0.99, 0.99, 0.99, 0.99, 0.95, 0.99 and 0.96 to predict ion channels and non-ion channels, voltage gated ion channels and ligand gated ion channels, four types (calcium, potassium, sodium and chloride) of voltage gated ion channels, ligand gated ion channels and predict subfamilies of voltage gated calcium, potassium, sodium and chloride ion channels respectively. The high accuracies, MCC and ROC area values indicate that the proposed method may be useful for the prediction of ion channels families and their subfamilies.