@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Enzyme function is regulated by its localization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
MurG membrane localization is determined by an amphipathic helix.Cardiolipin also plays a role in MurG localization to the membrane.Membrane localization correlates with MurG function in cells during sporulation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Enzyme localization,MurG,Cell wall,Cardiolipin,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
To better understand how enzyme localization affects enzyme activity we studied the cellular localization of the glycosyltransferase MurG, an enzyme necessary for cell wall synthesis at the spore during sporulation in the bacterium Bacillus subtilis. During sporulation MurG was gradually enriched to the membrane at the forespore and point mutations in a MurG helical domain disrupting its localization to the membrane caused severe sporulation defects, but did not affect localization nor caused detectable defects during exponential growth. We found that this localization is dependent on the phospholipid cardiolipin, as in strains where the cardiolipin-synthesizing genes were deleted, MurG levels were diminished at the forespore. Furthermore, in this cardiolipin-less strain, MurG localization during sporulation was rescued by external addition of purified cardiolipin. These results support localization as a critical factor in the regulation of proper enzyme function and catalysis.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The study of the mechanisms of protein localization in bacteria is simplified by their lack of multiple sub-cellular structures. Bacillus subtilis is a particularly tractable model, as during sporulation it generates a specialized intracellular compartment, the forespore. Sporulation occurs in exponential cells undergoing starvation and begins with asymmetrical division producing two sister cells of dramatically different size with a specialized spore septum. The smaller of the two cells, the forespore, is engulfed by the larger mother cell generating a double membrane around the forespore. The cortex is synthesized between the two membranes while the spore coat is generated on the outside of the spore. Finally, the mature spore is released upon lysis of the mother cell (Errington, 1993).Several proteins localize specifically to the forespore through a diverse array of mechanisms such as diffusion and capture, targeted insertion, or selective degradation (Rudner et al., 2002; Shapiro et al., 2002, 2009). The caveat of such mechanisms is that they assume a pre-existing asymmetric distribution of the target molecule that is then transmitted to other proteins without explaining the origin of the asymmetry.A recent study discovered that the basis for the localization during sporulation in B. subtilis of the membrane bound protein SpoVM was in part due to hydrophobic residues on an amphipathic helix (Ramamurthi et al., 2006; Ramamurthi and Losick, 2009). SpoVM can discriminate between the different curvatures of membrane surfaces and localize specifically to the forespore. Conversely, the protein DivIVA involved in cell growth and sporulation recognizes zones of negative curvature in the cell septum and poles and binds to membranes through a specific phenylalanine residue in its N-terminal coiled-coil domain (Lenarcic et al., 2009; Oliva et al., 2010; Ramamurthi and Losick, 2009)A third example invoking geometric cues during sporulation, involves the anionic phospholipid cardiolipin (diphosphatidylglycerol) that has an uncommon dimeric structure in which two phosphatidyl moieties are linked by a glycerol generating a highly curved conic shape (Lecocq and Ballou, 1964). In eukaryotic cells, cardiolipin is known to organize mitochondrial topology and stabilize protein complexes (Schlattner et al., 2009), but also determines the distribution of essential mitochondrial proteins such as the pro-apoptotic factor Bid (Kim et al., 2004; Lutter et al., 2000; Petit et al., 2009), cytochrome c (Demel et al., 1989; Kagan et al., 2005) and the nucleoside diphosphate kinase NDPK (Tokarska-Schlattner et al., 2008). In the bacterium Escherichia coli, cardiolipin determines the localization of the osmosensor ProP, the mechanosensitive channel of small conductance MscS (Romantsov et al., 2009), the cell division protein MinD (Mileykovskaya and Dowhan, 2000; Mileykovskaya et al., 2003) and the protease HtrA (DegP) (Romantsov et al., 2007; Skorko-Glonek et al., 1997).In B. subtilis cardiolipin is synthesized mainly by a membrane-bound enzyme encoded by the clsA gene (Kawai et al., 2004). Although cardiolipin represents only 1.4% of the total lipids of cells growing exponentially, at 4h after initiation of sporulation (T4) its levels go up to 5.4% (Kawai et al., 2004) and to 26.5% in spores (Kawai et al., 2006). Cardiolipin-deficient cells sporulate with 50% less frequency than wild type cells (Kawai et al., 2004). Additionally, cardiolipin-deficient spores show increased sensitivity to wet heat and oxidizing agents (Griffiths and Setlow, 2009a). Cardiolipin can specifically accumulate at the spore although a GFP fusion to its synthase ClsA did not show a preferred distribution (Kawai et al., 2006). How then, does cardiolipin mainly localize to the spore? One model states that the preference of cardiolipin for the spore is due to its self-organization into domains that intrinsically prefer zones of high curvature which can be found at the poles and forespore membrane (Huang et al., 2006). An alternate possibility is based on the fact that lipids with overall conical shapes and wide hydrophobic tails such as cardiolipin prefer structures with negative curvature (Antonny, 2006; van den Brink-van der Laan et al., 2004). Although the forespore presents a globally positive curvature to the mother cell compartment (Ramamurthi et al., 2009), during engulfment the curvature at the migrating septal junction becomes extremely negative in the mother cell and could thus be a zone for cardiolipin accumulationDuring sporulation in B. subtilis, cell wall synthesis becomes restricted to the forespore (Meyer, 2010). Cell wall gives shape to the bacterial cell and is composed of peptidoglycan, a rigid molecule made of repeated subunits of disaccharide peptide monomers (van Heijenoort, 2001). Studying cell wall synthesis during sporulation is tractable system for the study of enzyme activity, as once engulfment is finished, spore cell wall synthesis is only obligatory for its resistance to high temperature. Therefore, inactive enzyme mutants essential for sporulation are generally not otherwise lethal. The glycosyltransferase MurG is the last cytoplasmic enzyme of the peptidoglycan synthesis pathway, which is critical for sporulation, and although it is not an integral membrane protein, it transforms the membrane bound lipid I into lipid II by adding soluble UDP-GlcNAc. MurG localizes to zones of peptidoglycan synthesis and in E.coli, lipids that co-purify with MurG are enriched in cardiolipin (van den Brink-van der Laan et al., 2003).Given recent interest in understanding how changes in cellular localization could regulate enzymatic activity (Meyer et al., 2014; Scheu et al., 2014), we investigated the mechanism of MurG localization to the forespore during sporulation. We found that localization of MurG directly impacts its function. During sporulation, MurG initially distributed diffusely throughout the cell and then gradually localized to the membrane patch where cell wall synthesis is active, the forespore. We show that MurG localization is dependent on an amphipathic N-terminal helical domain through which it inserts into membrane. Conversely, we show that the phospholipid cardiolipin is necessary to achieve this particular distribution of MurG. Finally, sporulation efficiency is severely affected in both cardiolipin-deficient and MurG-delocalized mutants. Thus the specific localization of the enzyme MurG through the mechanism that we here uncover is essential to perform effectively its catalytic functions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
