@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Disruption of murine Tcte3-3 induces tissue specific apoptosis via co-expression of Anxa5 and Pebp1

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Tcte3 (T-complex testis expressed 3) is an accessory component of axonemal and cytoplasmic dynein which expresses predominantly in meiotic and postmeiotic germ cells.2D-gel electrophoresis, mass spectrometry and qRT–PCR analyses were performed to elucidate the differential expression of genes, in both wild-type and homozygous Tcte3-3 mice.In an effort to identify the possible role of Tcte3 in sperm development, we employed a set of experimental and in-silico based approaches.Our findings elucidated several co-expressed partners of Tcte3 including Anxa5 and Pebp1, whose functional coherence may help in better understanding of apoptotic induction.A complete understanding of controlling factors which have implications in regulating tissue-specific Tcte3 expression would provide additional insights into the gene control events.Our data would contribute to a better understanding of testes-specific transcriptional control of genes involved in apoptosis by addressing the cooperative influence of diverse regulatory partners.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Apoptosis,Tcte3,Spermatogenesis,qRT–PCR,2D-gel electrophrosis,Transcription factors binding sites (TFBS),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Programmed cell death or apoptosis plays a vital physiological role in the development and homeostasis. Any discrepancy in apoptosis may trigger testicular and neurodegenerative diseases, ischemic damage, autoimmune disorders and many types of cancer. Tcte3 (T-complex testis expressed 3) is an accessory component of axonemal and cytoplasmic dynein which expresses predominantly in meiotic and postmeiotic germ cells. It plays an essential role during spermatogenesis; however, to explore its diverse and complex functioning in male germ cell apoptosis, requires further prosecution. Here, 2D-gel electrophoresis, mass spectrometry and qRT–PCR analyses were performed to elucidate the differential expression of genes, in both wild-type and homozygous Tcte3-3 mice. We observed an increased expression of Tcte3 in homozygotes as compared to wild-type testes. Perpetually, an increased expression of Anxa5 and Pebp1, while a lower expression of Rsph1 was detected in Tcte3-3−/− mice. We propose that over-expression of Pebp1 and Anxa5 in Tcte3-3−/− testes might be due to increased apoptosis. To evaluate this possibility, testes specific microarray data set extracted from NCBI gene ontology omnibus (GEO) was used to cluster the possible co-expression partners of Tcte3. Further functional coherence of compiled candidate genes was monitored computationally by studying the common TFBS overlapped at the regulatory regions. Differential expression of Tcte3-3 and its involvement in apoptosis may provide a basis for the investigation of transcriptional specificities of other Tcte3 paralogs (Tcte3-1 and Tcte3-2). A complete understanding of controlling factors which have implications in regulating tissue-specific Tcte3 expression would provide additional insights into the gene control events. The collective knowledge may prove useful for the development of novel therapeutic regimen and would open new avenues in defining selective roles of Tcte3 in germ cell development.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The coordinated balance and tight regulation among cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis is critical to control various biological events. The process of programmed cell death or apoptosis plays a critical physiological role in development and homeostasis (Steller, 1995; Jacobson et al., 1997). Apoptosis is considered as a vital component of various processes including spermatogenesis, neurogenesis, normal cell turnover, proper development and functioning of the immune system, hormone-dependent atrophy, embryonic development and chemical-induced cell death (Oppenheim, 1991; de Rooij and Grootegoed, 1998). Any alteration or inappropriate apoptosis (either too little or too much) may lead to the onset of a number of abnormalities including testicular diseases (de Rooij and Grootegoed, 1998), neurodegenerative diseases, ischemic damage, autoimmune disorders and many types of cancer. Although many of the key apoptotic proteins have been identified, the complete understanding of molecular mechanisms and signaling pathways that control cell cycle arrest and apoptosis need to be explored which contemplate designing therapeutic strategy to modulate the apoptotic effecter machinery (Strasser et al., 2000; Levy and Holzbaur, 2006).Recently, it has been reported that dyneins have both direct and indirect roles in male germ cell apoptosis which results in male infertility phenotype (Rashid et al., 2010). Dynein is a large multi-subunit protein complex that powers minus end-directed movement along microtubules. It consists of two heavy chains of 530kD (Paschal et al., 1987; Holzbaur and Vallee, 1994), that constitute the motors themselves. It also contains a number of noncatalytic subunits, conspicuously two intermediate chains of 74kD, four light intermediate chains of 55kD and a number of less characterized light chains such as LC8, Tctex1 or Rp3 and Tcte3 (Rappold et al., 1992; King et al., 1998; Hirokawa et al., 2010). Dyneins are classified into two functional categories: axonemal and cytoplasmic (Paschal et al., 1987; Pazour et al., 1999; Sakakibara et al., 1999). Axonemal dyneins are responsible for the movement of cilia and flagella, while cytoplasmic form of dynein serves many cellular functions, including regulation of mitotic checkpoint (Howell et al., 2001), organization of the Golgi apparatus (Vaughan, 2005), minus-end-directed transport of vesicles including endosomes and lysosomes. They also carry out retrograde axonal transport in neurons (Vallee et al., 2004) and implicate in the clearance of protein aggregates (Ravikumar et al., 2005).Tcte3 is a component of outer dynein arm complex, initially characterized in Chlamydomonas as a homolog of LC2 (light chain 2) (Patel-King et al., 1997). Although Tcte3 is predominantly expressed in testis, its expression had also been monitored in several other tissues lacking cilia or flagella (DiBella et al., 2001; Neesen et al., 2002). Previously, we reported that at least three copies of Tcte3 exist in mouse genome and subsequent inactivation of Tcte3-3 copy results in sperm motility defects thereby resulting in partial male infertility phenotype (Rashid et al., 2010). Evidently, Tcte3-3−/− testis exhibited an increased rate of apoptosis in spermiogenesis. It is however unclear why loss of Tcte3-3 results in apoptosis of male germ cells. Here, in an effort to identify the possible role of Tcte3 in sperm development, we employed a set of experimental and in-silico based approaches. Our findings elucidated several co-expressed partners of Tcte3 including Anxa5 and Pebp1, whose functional coherence may help in better understanding of apoptotic induction.Tcte3-3−/− mice (Rashid et al., 2010) were obtained from Institute of Human Genetics, Goettingen, Germany and kept at the animal facility of NCB, Quaid-i-Azam University (www.qau.edu.pk). Tcte3-3 gene was originally disrupted in mixed genetic (129/SvJ/C57BL/6J) background by homologous recombination. Later on, 20 adult male mice were sacrificed by CO2 overdose as approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of Goettingen, Germany. Testicular and brain tissues were dissected from wild-type and Tcte3-3 homozygous animals and immediately stored in the liquid nitrogen until use. Tissues were thawed, incubated in Lysis buffer (9M urea, 4% CHAPS, 1% DTT, 10mM PMSF) and homogenized by sonicating the samples on ice (Vibra Cell sonicator) five times for 5s. Then resulting lysates were clarified by centrifugation and soluble portion was transferred into new tubes.Acetone was added into the sample tubes followed by overnight incubation at −20°C. Later on, samples were centrifuged at 14,000rpm for 20min. The resulting pellet was dried in air and dissolved in 200μl lysis buffer (9M urea, 4% CHAPS). The concentration was measured by Bio-Rad assay as described by the manufacturer (Bradford, 1976).200μg of total protein in a volume of 50μl was used for each 2D-gel experiment. Isoelectric focusing was carried out by using 2.0% ampholines (pH 3.5–10) and 9M urea for 8000V–1.30h. The second dimension was run on a 10% Tris-Glycin acrylamide gel (0.75mm thickness). SDS-PAGE was run for 1.5h at 12.5mA/gel. The gel was stained with Roti Blue stain according to the specified protocol (Roth) and placed between the two sheets of cellophane. The gel spots were detected by PD-Quest Software (Bio-Rad), scanned and labeled.Gel pieces corresponding to the indicated spots were isolated and added into 50μl of H2O. Individual samples were destained by adding 50μl of 50:50 Acetonitrile (ACN) and H2O followed by incubation for 15min. The solution was pulled off and added fresh ACN until the stain was completely removed. Later on, 100μl of 100mM ammonium bicarbonate was added into the samples and equilibrated through 20min incubation. The samples were treated with 100μl ACN followed by another 15min incubation. The solution was completely removed and samples were dried by speed-vac. Samples were subjected to trypsin digestion by adding digestion buffer (5μl of 1M CaCl2, 25μl of 1M ambic and 12.5μl of trypsin) and incubating them on ice for 45min. The digestion buffer was replaced by 50μl buffer without trypsin with an overnight incubation at 37°C. The supernatant was transferred into new tubes followed by addition of 40μl tri-floric acid (TFA). The tubes were incubated in the sonicating water bath for 20min. Peptides resulting from the digest were twice extracted from the gel pieces with TFA and a gradient of ACN. The samples were dried and analyzed by Q-TOF (UMG, Goettingen). The acquired MS/MS spectra were used to search the non redundant database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) using the SEQUEST program (Eng et al., 2008).Roche light cycler 480 SYBR green real time kit was used to conduct quantitative PCR using 4μl of SYBR green I mastermix, 3.5μl of water, 0.5μl of 0.25μg cDNA and 1μl of each 10μM reverse and forward primer (Table 1) total 10μl reaction mix. Amplification conditions for Light Cycler 480 multi well 384 well plates were used according to standard protocol (Roche Applied Science).Apoptosis related experiments from NCBI gene expression omnibus (GEO) database were shortlisted for testis and brain using stringent filters like specie, tissues and GO processes. Shortlisted testes data set having the accession numbers GDS2923 was retrieved. One experiment from each of control and treated group was randomly selected and employed in the current study.Cytoscape tool version 2.8.3 (Shannon et al., 2003) was used for assembling the tissue specific networks for testes data. In order to get rid of genes with low information content, gene clusters were developed using expression value (Eq. (1)) and divided into three groups (up-regulated, down-regulated and non-significant).(1)DExpvalue=TTExp⁡value−CTExpvaluewhere DExpvalue=difference in expression value, TTExpvalue=treated test value of gene expression and CTExpvalue=control test value of gene expression.Negative value indicates down-regulated, positive value represents up-regulated, while zero indicates non-significant genes. Single nodes and small components of the network were removed and the largest component was considered as a new network. Duplicated edges and self-loops were removed by using the network analyzer (Assenov et al., 2008). Green, red and blue color labels were used to represent up-regulated, down-regulated and non-significantly expressed gene clusters. Overall, modified cluster of testes data sets were composed of 9892 nodes.For further analyses, biological processes were selected with associated level of significance (0.01) by applying hyper-geometric test (Eq. (2)) and mouse genome was used as a reference.(2)P(X=k)=(Kk)(N−Kn−k)(Nn)where “N” is the mouse genome, “K” is the number of genes present in biological processes in mouse genome, “n” is the total number of genes present in the network, “k” is the number of genes present in biological processes in network.Next, gene ontology (GO) analysis was carried out for each group of pro-apoptotic testes data set (up-regulated, down-regulated) using Cytoscape plugin BiNGO (Maere et al., 2005). Microtubule and apoptosis related biological processes were shortlisted based on the significant P-value<0.05. To find specific and common genes involved in regulation of both processes, advance merging and three consecutive intersections were carried out for data set. Initial two intersections were executed between apoptosis and microtubule related clusters of pro-apoptotic data, while final intersection was performed by using above two results in order to isolate common candidates involved in both apoptosis and microtubule related biological processes.Transcription factor binding site (TFBSs) analyses of Tcte3 and its putative interacting partners were carried out by Match tool (Kel et al., 2003) which is based on TRANSFAC database. Subsequently, clustering and sub networking (Eqs. (3) and (4)) of TFBSs was performed.(3)SubNetimpTF⟵TFup−reg(∩)TFdown−reg(∩)TFTcte3,Anxa5,Pebp1(4)SubNetT⟵ClusterTestes(∩)SubNetimpTFwhere :"⋂" is intersection, TF is transcription factor related to specific gene of interest, SubNetimpTF is subnet of functionally important TFs, ⟵ is symbol of “implies that”, ClusterTestes is microarray data of testes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
