@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Normal mode analysis based on an elastic network model for biomolecules in the Protein Data Bank, which uses dihedral angles as independent variables

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A program that performs normal mode analysis of molecules in the PDB was developed.It uses dihedral angles as independent variables, rather than Cartesian coordinates.It is based on an elastic network model.It is applicable to a full-atom system of any molecule within the PDB.Atomic fluctuations (B-factors in the PDB data) are adequately reproduced.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Elastic network model,Normal mode analysis,Dihedral angle space,Protein Data Bank,Protein–DNA complex,Protein–tRNA complex,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We have developed a computer program, named PDBETA, that performs normal mode analysis (NMA) based on an elastic network model that uses dihedral angles as independent variables. Taking advantage of the relatively small number of degrees of freedom required to describe a molecular structure in dihedral angle space and a simple potential-energy function independent of atom types, we aimed to develop a program applicable to a full-atom system of any molecule in the Protein Data Bank (PDB). The algorithm for NMA used in PDBETA is the same as the computer program FEDER/2, developed previously. Therefore, the main challenge in developing PDBETA was to find a method that can automatically convert PDB data into molecular structure information in dihedral angle space. Here, we illustrate the performance of PDBETA with a protein–DNA complex, a protein–tRNA complex, and some non-protein small molecules, and show that the atomic fluctuations calculated by PDBETA reproduce the temperature factor data of these molecules in the PDB. A comparison was also made with elastic-network-model based NMA in a Cartesian-coordinate system.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Genetic information is expressed by translating a sequence into a functional protein structure. Protein function involves interactions with other proteins and molecules. In this paradigm, it has been emphasized that protein structure should be discussed from a dynamic, rather than a static, perspective. Information regarding protein dynamics is required to understand the structure–function relationship. Recently, normal mode analysis (NMA) has been recognized as a powerful method for elucidating the dynamics of biomolecules, particularly those listed in the Protein Data Bank (PDB), as data exist primarily of static structures. Although NMA has been used for over 3 decades to study the intrinsic flexibility of proteins (Brooks and Karplus, 1983; Gō and Noguchi, 1983; Levitt et al., 1985), interest in this approach increased after the development of NMA that was based on the elastic network model (ENM-based NMA), which proved to be accurate and robust in spite of its simplified model and the force field used (Bahar et al., 1997; Hinsen, 1998; Tirion, 1996). Its value in structural biology has been exploited through the observation that the collective motions of lower-frequency normal modes predicted by NMA bear functional significance (Alexandrov et al., 2005; Bahar et al., 2010; Dobbins et al., 2008; Krebs et al., 2002; Skjærven et al., 2011; Tama and Sanejouand, 2001; Tobi and Bahar, 2005; Wako and Endo, 2011).ENM-based NMA replaces standard potentials that are used in orthodox NMA, such as van der Waals and Coulombic ones, by a simple pairwise Hookean potential. Although precise energy minimization of a PDB structure is required in orthodox NMA, the PDB structure can be used as the energy-minimum conformation in ENM-based NMA. Consequently, NMA is free from not only the most time-consuming process of energy minimization, but also the side effects of energy minimization, including significant deviation of the energy-minimum conformation from the PDB structure. Although NMA has many intrinsic limitations that include the use of a harmonic approximation, neglect of solvent damping, and an inability to model multiple minima, many studies have shown that ENM-based NMA, using a coarse-grained model, can predict global conformational changes associated with the biological functions of proteins (Bahar and Rader, 2005; Ma, 2005). On the basis of these findings, NMA can be applied to a flexible docking problem (e.g., the three-dimensional structure prediction of a protein bound to another molecule, from its unbound conformation) (Cavasotto et al., 2005; Dietzen et al., 2012; Krüger et al., 2012; Mashiach et al., 2010).In this study, we have developed a computer program of ENM-based NMA in which dihedral angles are used as independent variables. The program was named PDBETA (normal mode analysis program for PDB data based on Elastic network model in Torsional Angle space). Most ENM-based NMA programs use Cartesian coordinates as independent variables and model a protein molecule with Cα atoms to represent individual amino acid residues. In contrast, we aimed to use a full-atom model for any molecule with PDB data, including non-protein molecules, such as DNA, RNA, and various ligands, to take advantage of the smaller number of variables required in dihedral angle space to describe molecular structures.In developing an ENM-based NMA program in dihedral angle space for PDB data, 3 key points were to be considered: (i) automatic conversion of molecular structure information from PDB data into a suitable form for performing NMA in dihedral angle space, (ii) potential energy functions, and (iii) the NMA algorithm in dihedral angle space. A potential energy function in ENM-based NMA in (ii) is simple, and the qualitative results are relatively independent of the function form and parameter values used. The NMA algorithm in dihedral angle space (iii) has already been established (Wako and Gō, 1987; Wako et al., 1995). Alternatively, point (i) requires algorithmic complexity in dihedral angle space if we aim to apply it to any molecule besides a protein. Accordingly, we describe in this paper the method for ENM-based NMA in dihedral angle space focused primarily on point (i).Here, we demonstrate the performance of PDBETA by applying it to 3 model systems: a protein–DNA complex, a protein–tRNA complex, and several non-protein small molecules. A comparison was also made with ENM-based NMA in a Cartesian-coordinate system.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
