@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Expression patterns of photoperiod and temperature regulated heading date genes in Oryza sativa

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Expression profiles of flowering genes were compared using a co-expression network approach.17 and 3 co-expressed photoperiod and temperature regulated flowering genes were detected.Strong evidence that temperature affects flowering time independently of photoperiod.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Arabidopsis thaliana,Expression profiling,Heading date,Oryza sativa,Photoperiod,Temperature,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In plants, flowering is a major biological phenomenon, which is regulated by an array of interactions occurring between biotic and abiotic factors. In our study, we have compared the expression profiles of flowering genes involved in the flowering pathway, which are influenced by conditions like photoperiod and temperature from seedling to heading developmental stages in two Oryza sativa indica varieties, viz., Zhenshan 97 and Minghui 63 using a expression network approach. Using the network expression approach, we found 17 co-expressed genes having the same expression profile pattern as three key photoperiod flowering genes Hd1, Ehd1 and Hd3a. We also demonstrated that these three co-expressed genes have a similar simulation pattern as temperature flowering genes. Based on our observations, we hypothesize that photoperiod and temperature regulate flowering pathways independently. The present study provides a basis for understanding the network of co-expressed genes involved in flowering pathway and presents a way to demonstrate the behavior of specific gene sets in specific cultivars.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Oryza sativa is classified as a short-day plant, which accelerates its heading date (HD), under short-day (SD) conditions and delays under long-day (LD) conditions (Garner and Allard, 1920). HD, which represents the heading or flowering time is controlled by heading date 1 (Hd1), an ortholog of CONSTANS (CO) family in Arabidopsis thaliana, which acts as a key switch molecule in controlling O. sativa heading. It controls the heading date by acting as a promoter under short-day (SD) conditions and as a repressor under long-day (LD) conditions and is controlled exogenously by the environment, or endogenously, by signaling molecules (Barth et al., 2006). Several comparative studies have shown the crucial role of Hd1 in promoting flowering under SD conditions (Yano et al., 2000; Kojima et al., 2002; Luan et al., 2009). Earlier, Luan et al. (2009) reported a slightly higher expression level of Hd1 under long day and under low temperature conditions. Recently it has been indicated that the Ehd1–Hd3a/RFT1 complex is conserved in both the photoperiodic and temperature flowering regulatory pathways based on the reduced expression of Ehd1, Hd3a and RFT1 at low temperature (23°C) (Song et al., 2012). A recent critical insight was demonstrated using wild and mutant varieties under different photoperiod and temperature treatments, which revealed two base pair insertions (129bp and 150bp in lf1132) and several single-base substitutions (in total 6 substitutions), which are mainly responsible for the reduction of the mRNA levels in mutant phenotype (Luan et al., 2009). It has also been demonstrated that up regulation of Ghd7 might be a crucial cause of delayed flowering under low temperature condition under LD conditions based on Ghd7 mRNA levels, which were promoted at low temperature (23°C) (Song et al., 2012).Another identified QTL for flowering, early-heading date 1 (Ehd1), which encodes a B-type response regulator (Doi et al., 2004), promotes flowering under both SD and LD conditions but it has been shown to be more active under SD conditions. It has been demonstrated that under SD conditions, Ehd1 promotes expression of heading date 3a (Hd3a) and a related FT-like gene; O. sativa FT1 (Doi et al., 2004). Temperature is an important environmental factor, which plays a significant role in the selective expression of the genes involved in flowering pathway. In A. thaliana variation at FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC) or FRI or a combinatorial variation involving both these genes, accounts for the major portion of the winter annual habit (Lee et al., 1993). However, very little is known about the role of the temperature-regulated genes in O. sativa flowering pathway. The most probable reason might be the absence of vernalization in this species. It has been observed in field and laboratory experimental conditions that temperature acts as an important factor, which influences the heading date of O. sativa var. indica rice varieties, viz., Zhenshan 97 (ZS97) and Minghui 63 (MH63). These species in particular displays a contrasting pattern of flowering time in accordance with the variation in temperature. However, the underlying molecular mechanism has not been yet identified (Luan et al., 2009; Kovi et al., 2011).This motivated us to undertake the presented research to understand and elucidate the underpinning complex interactions regulating the photoperiod. Gene expression network has played a important role in the elucidation of the protein–protein interactions, metabolite profiles and earlier predicted conserved gene interactions using a large-scale gene expression analysis or analyzing gene transcript levels (Lee et al., 2009; Childs et al., 2011; Hamada et al., 2011). Several highly correlated genes have been identified using large-scale co-expression in A. thaliana and O. sativa (Ficklin et al., 2010; Mutwil et al., 2010). In our study, we analyzed the gene expression patterns to identify the relative expression patterns of the O. sativa photoperiodic and temperature influenced flowering genes at different stages of development, in order to detect the commonly expressed genes (CEGs) for crucial photoperiod flowering genes Ehd1, Hd1 and Hd3a, as well as for ambient temperature dependent genes. Our analysis indicates that temperature flowering genes have relatively higher expression pattern as observed in the transition phase and photoperiod and temperature can independently regulate the flowering pathways. In addition, we demonstrate 17 photoperiodic and 3 temperature flowering candidate genes, which might play an important role in understanding the molecular mechanisms of the photoperiodic pathway and the ambient temperature pathway in O. sativa.For the identification of putative orthologs of photoperiod and temperature regulated genes, we first performed a systematic search of the A. thaliana flowering-time (photoperiod and temperature regulated) genes using the annotation and the previously described literature. On the basis of the obtained information, all the relevant genes were retrieved from TAIR database version 9 (http://www.arabidopsis.org/index.jsp) and subsequently used as query to find the putative orthologs in the O. sativa protein sequences downloaded from Rice Annotation Database version 6.1 (http://www.rice.plantbiology.msu.edu/) using reciprocal bi-directional best blast hit (RBH) approach encompassing BLASTX (Altschul et al., 1997) with a E-value threshold of 1e−20 and an alignment length >80 amino acids. Recently, A. thaliana has been used as a gold standard on the basis of the available well-annotated genome co-ordinates for identifying the orthologous probe sets for Affymetrix microarray datasets (Ouyang et al., 2012).We further performed a pattern search against the CREP (Collections of Rice Expression Profiling Database, http://www.crep.ncpgr.cn), which contains the systematic hybridization patterns of RNA samples pooled from 39 tissues of two main rice varieties ZS97 and MH63 containing 190 Affymetrix microarrays to quantify the variations in the in the expression patterns of the co-expressed genes in O. sativa photoperiod and temperature orthologs (Wang et al., 2010a). We restricted our expression search pattern to the developmental stages from vegetative to the reproductive phase. In total, we analyzed the hybridization data for 23 tissues from sowing to heading stages and are displayed in Table 1. Probe sets in the range of 100% identity compared to the corresponding genes were considered to be significant. In case of more than one probe set, data for only one probe for each gene was used for expression analysis. As previously described, in case of genes having the multiple probe hits, probes were selected on the basis of the higher signal value for further downstream analysis (Ouyang et al., 2012). Recently, this similar approach of probe selection on the basis of the higher signal intensity value has been used, validated and confirmed (Ouyang et al., 2012).Normalization of the cel files of microarray experiments was performed using the quantile normalization and summarization method using the robust multi-array average method in Bioconductor Affy package based on the customized chip description library (Collections of Rice Expression Profiling Database, http://www.crep.ncpgr.cn; Wang et al., 2010b). The expression values were log-transformed, and cluster analysis was performed using a software cluster with Euclidean distances and the hierarchical cluster method of complete linkage clustering. This method has been earlier described in Wang et al. (2010a). Multi-genes chronology (MGC) information was retrieved and expression values were log-transformed, and cluster analysis was performed with Euclidean distances and the hierarchical cluster method of complete linkage clustering. We further calculated Z-scores to validate the observed expression values. Heat maps were drawn using the calculated Z-scores and the color in the heat map corresponds to the intensity of the expression. All analysis was performed using R version 2.9.0 (http://www.r-project.org/).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
