@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Investigation on the isoform selectivity of novel kinesin-like protein 1 (KIF11) inhibitor using chemical feature based pharmacophore, molecular docking, and quantum mechanical studies

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Ligand based pharmacophore model was developed for kinesin like protein-1.Validity and predictability of model has been validated by various potent methods.Validated model used as query in virtual screening to retrieve potent candidates.Molecular interaction and binding mode of hits were studied by molecular docking.Electronic properties and charge transfer of lead candidates were studied by DFT.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Kinesin like protein-1,Pharmacophore modeling,Molecular docking,Density functional theory,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Kinesin-like protein (KIF11) is a molecular motor protein that is essential in mitosis. Removal of KIF11 prevents centrosome migration and causes cell arrest in mitosis. KIF11 defects are linked to the disease of microcephaly, lymph edema or mental retardation. The human KIF11 protein has been actively studied for its role in mitosis and its potential as a therapeutic target for cancer treatment. Pharmacophore modeling, molecular docking and density functional theory approaches was employed to reveal the structural, chemical and electronic features essential for the development of small molecule inhibitor for KIF11. Hence we have developed chemical feature based pharmacophore models using Discovery Studio v 2.5 (DS). The best hypothesis (Hypo1) consisting of four chemical features (two hydrogen bond acceptor, one hydrophobic and one ring aromatic) has exhibited high correlation co-efficient of 0.9521, cost difference of 70.63 and low RMS value of 0.9475. This Hypo1 is cross validated by Cat Scramble method; test set and decoy set to prove its robustness, statistical significance and predictability respectively. The well validated Hypo1 was used as 3Dquery to perform virtual screening. The hits obtained from the virtual screening were subjected to various scrupulous drug-like filters such as Lipinski’s rule of five and ADMET properties. Finally, six hit compounds were identified based on the molecular interaction and its electronic properties. Our final lead compound could serve as a powerful tool for the discovery of potent inhibitor as KIF11 agonists.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
“Kinesin-like protein (KIF11) is the member of kinesin superfamily, which move along the microtubule tacks in the cell with the help of nanomotors. Named from studies in the early days of discovery, it is also known as Kinesin-5(Eg5) (Mandelkow and Mandelkow, 2002). It has a variety of functions and is responsible for the transporter of vesicles and organelles (Miki et al., 2005). KIF11 is also required for establishment and maintenance of cell polarity, spatial organization of microtubules, chromosomes in the mitotic spindle, microtubule stabilization, and chromosome–microtubule interactions (Schmidt and Bastians, 2007). Removal of KIF11 prevents centrosome migration and it controls mitosis through bipolar spindle formation and chromosome separation (Huszar et al., 2009). KIF11 defects are linked to the disease of microcephaly with or without chorioretinopathy, lymphedema, or mental retardation (Kaestner and Bastians, 2010). KIF11 is over expressed in many proliferative tissues including leukemia as well as solid tumors such as breast, lung, ovarian, bladder and pancreatic cancers. Furthermore, Eg5 is not expressed in the adult peripheral nervous system; and hence Eg5 inhibitors may not cause neuropathic side effects commonly associated with agents that primarily target tubulin (Blangy et al., 1995; Ostergaard et al., 2012). Inhibitors of KIF11 have been developed as chemotherapeutic agents in the treatment of cancer. The first KIF11 inhibitor, monastrol was discovered in a chemical screen of a large library of cell permeable compounds (Sakowicz et al., 2004). Many specific inhibitors of Eg5 have been discovered including monastrol, S-trityl-l-cysteine (STLC) and ispinesib. These inhibitors exert their action through binding to an allosteric site located between helix α3 and loop 5 of the Eg5 domain (Jackson et al., 2007). A biphenyl-type inhibitor PVZB1194 binds to the helix α4/helix α6 allosteric pocket, which is located 15Å from the ATP binding pocket. Binding of the inhibitor to the allosteric pocket induces the deformation of the ATP binding pocket through the Tyr104 residue. The biphenyl-type inhibitor suppresses the binding of ATP, while the conventional Eg5 inhibitors inhibit the release of ADP (El-Nassan, 2013; Luo et al., 2007). Recent studies evidenced that the biphenyl-type inhibitor PVZB1194 binds to the α4/α6 allosteric pocket 15Å from the ATP-binding pocket that differs from conventional allosteric inhibitors that bind to the allosteric L5/α2/α3 pocket of Eg5. The conformations of α1, β3, P-loop, and α2 are unique for Eg5-PVZB1194. PVZB1194 binds to Eg5, the inhibitor pushes Tyr104 and conformations around the ATP binding site change to affect the binding of ATP (Yokoyama et al., 2015). The majority of human KIF11 inhibitors are selectively binds to a drug ‘hot spot’, composed of residues from the helix α2 and helix α3 helices and a flexible L5 loop on the surface of the motor domain. The L5 loop in KIF11 closes around the inhibitor and is open in the absence of inhibitor (Turner et al., 2001; Yan et al., 2004). For inhibitors that bind to the L5 pocket, the mechanism of inhibition is that they slow ADP release from the catalytic active site (Learman et al., 2009) and inhibit ATP-dependent directional motion (Ulaganathan et al., 2013). Other sites of inhibitor binding between helix α4 of the switch II cluster and helix α6 preceding have also been identified in the KIF11 domain. The compound had small changes in the nucleotide-binding pocket induced by ATP hydrolysis leads to the structural changes in switch II cluster and neck-linker region. It generates the molecular motion responsible for shifting two antiparallel Microtubules apart from the bipolar spindle (Cochran et al., 2005; Kwok et al., 2006). The binding site helix α4 of the switch II cluster and helix α6 had high affinity binding driven by network of aromatic interaction and hydrogen interaction with carboxylate group of Benzimadazole-8(BI8) when compare to interactions in helix α2, L5 loop and helix α3 helices binding site (Cochran et al., 2005).In our study describes the efforts to identify the essential structural requirements to inhibit KIF11 and thereby designing novel potent inhibitors as antimitotic therapeutics. Ligand based pharmacophore modeling approaches along with virtual screening of large chemical databases for novel scaffolds, molecular docking and density functional theory studies have been successfully employed to achieve our goal.Pharmacophore modeling approaches is the major tool to discover new and novel scaffold molecules for the specific target. It can be done either based on the ligands or on the active/binding site of proteins. For the ligand based pharmacophore model, HypoGen algorithm which uses the activity values of the compounds in the training set to generate the best hypotheses. In our present study, HypoGen have been successfully and extensively applied to build a 3D-QSAR pharmacophore model for KIF11 inhibitors using Discovery Studio 2.5 software (Accelrys Inc., San Diego, CA, USA).A set of 61 compounds with their experimentally known KIF11 inhibitory activity (IC50) obtained from the literatures (Cox et al., 2005, 2006, 2007; Fraley et al., 2006; Garbaccio et al., 2006, 2007; Coleman et al., 2007; Roecker et al., 2007). The agonistic activity of these compounds was expressed in terms of IC50 values as an expression of drug potency. For HypoGen pharmacophore model generation, a training set of 21 compounds (Fig. 1) were selected based on the principles of structural diversity and activity range from 0.1 to 10,000nM. In Pharmacophore modeling, the selection of training set compound is most important. The activity range of the compound must be at least four orders of magnitude, responsible for determining the quality of the generated pharmacophore. All structures in the training set were built and minimized to the closest local minimum based on a modified CHARMM force field within confirm module. In this study, the best option was used, specifying 255 as the maximum number of conformers with a constraint of 20kcal/mol energy. All other parameters used were default (DS).Ligand based pharmacophore approach; ligand pharmacophore mapping protocol were used to generate the pharmacophore modeling studies (Roecker et al., 2007). The BEST method was employed by performing energy minimization and optimizing the conformations in both torsional and Cartesian space using the polling algorithm (Mason et al., 2001). The pharmacophore generation assuming common features present in the studied compounds, chemical features such as hydrogen bond acceptor (HBA), hydrogen bond donor (HBD), general hydrophobic feature (H), hydrophobic aliphatic (HYA), hydrophobic (HY) and ring aromatic (RA) were included (Sprague, 1995). Here we set the uncertainty value for pharmacophore generation was set to 2, therefore the uncertain factor for each compound represents the ratio range of uncertainty in the activity value based on the expected statistical straggling of biological data collection (Pandey et al., 2014). Top ten pharmacophore hypotheses were generated using training set of KIF-11 agonists. Among the ten hypotheses, the best pharmacophore hypothesis was selected based on significant statistical parameters (high correlation coefficient (r2), lowest total cost, highest cost difference and low RMS values).The best pharmacophore model Hypo1 was further validated by different methods namely test set, Fischer’s randomization, decoy set methods based on accurate—predictive power, statistical significance and capability of identification of the active compound from inactive respectively.A test set consist 40 compounds of KIF11 agonists were validated by best pharmacophore hypothesis (Fig. S1). The weight cost, configuration cost and error cost was calculated during the pharmacophore generation process were initially used to validate the best pharmacophore hypothesis. Ligand pharmacophore mapping protocol with the flexible/BEST option was employed to map the test set compounds upon the best pharmacophore hypothesis. The IC50 value for each test set compound was also estimated.The statistical parameters were also used to check the quality of our model with correlation coefficient (R2), R2pred for internal validation and external validation (both scaled and unscaled versions). r2m(test) for external validation, r2m for overall validation and rm2(rank) values was calculated from the website http://aptsoftware.co.in/rmsquare/ to find out the rank order prediction of the test set molecules (Roy et al., 2012).Fischer’s technique is used to verify whether there is a strong correlation existing between the chemical structure and biological activities of compounds. The confidence level was set to 98%; to construct hypotheses using exactly the same features and parameters used in the original pharmacophore hypotheses generation. In addition that we calculate the squared correlation coefficient of the original model (R2) surpasses the average of the squared correlation coefficient of the randomized model (Rr2). Randomization examines the robustness of the model building process and examines the clarity of the developed model. Thus, to determine the extent of the difference in the values of R2 and Rr2 that signifies the reliability of the developed model, we used another parameter named as corrected correlation coefficient cRp2 to determine the reliability of the model. The corrected formula of cRp2, as proposed by Todeschini (Roy et al., 2012), is given by:cRp2=R2R2−Rr2R2=correlation coefficient of the original model.Rr2=correlation coefficient of the randomized model.The decoy set comprised 1500 molecules including 1475 non-KIF11 inhibitors and 25 known inhibitors of KIF11. These decoy molecules were obtained from the Database of Useful Decoys (DUD) (Walters et al., 1998). To assess the strength of decoy set validation, we calculated the statistical parameters like hit list (Ht), number of active percent of yields (%Y), percent ratio of actives in the hit list (%A), enrichment factor (EF), false negatives, false positives, and goodness of hit score (GH). Moreover, we used the ligand pharmacophore mapping protocol implemented in DS 2.5 with best/flexible option.Pharmacophore-based virtual screening can be efficiently used to discover novel lead identification stage of the drug discovery process. After the successful 3D pharmacophore model generation and validation methods, the commercially available databases such as Maybridge (http://www.maybridge.com) and Chembrige (http://chembridge.com) containing 59,652, and 50,000 respectively were screened to identify novel agonists. The database screening was carried out using Ligand Pharmacophore Mapping protocol implemented in DS with best/flexible search option. Sort out the molecules having the same Hypo1 pharmacophore features. The selections of compound were screened with the maximum fit values from the chemical databases. The hits were further screened by ADMET (absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion, and toxicity) properties of a molecule within an organism. The optimization of these properties in the early stage of drug design would be very helpful to diminish ADMET problems later in the development process. The drug-like property calculation was performed by applying Lipinski’s rule of five and ADMET properties. Mainly blood brain barrier (BBB), solubility and absorption criteria's were focused on ADME (Lipinski et al., 2001). The selected hit compounds were further analyzed by molecular docking studies.Hit molecules from the pharmacophore based virtual screening were then evaluated by docking simulation studies to identify the possible binding orientation within the KIF11 active site. We carried out docking experiments using the Genetic Optimization for Ligand Docking (GOLD) program to dock hit compounds into the active site of KIF11. GOLD uses a genetic algorithm for docking flexible ligand into the active site with partial flexibility. The ability of GOLD to produce original ligand binding orientations is greater than 70% (Verdonk et al., 2003). The active site in the KIF11 crystal coordinate was defined as a region with a radius of 10Å around the KIF11- Benzimidazole-8 (BI8) ligand. Preparation for docking process; water molecules were removed; hydrogen atoms were added in the receptor using GOLD. Reproducibility of docking program was checked by the KIF11-BI8 complex and compare with original crystal structure. It yields the RMS value of 0.95Å. This result conform the reproducibility of GOLD program. The early termination option was used to skip the genetic optimization calculation when any five conformations of a particular compound predicted above the rmsd value of 1.5Å. The best lead molecules were selected based on their binding orientation in the KIF11 active site and their corresponding GOLD score.“AutoDock Tools” was used to prepare, run, and analyze the docking simulations. It is designed to predict how small molecules, such as substrates or drug candidates, bind to a receptor of known 3D structure. In docking simulation method, all the heteroatoms were deleted. Polar hydrogens added and the water molecules removed from the crystal structure 3zcw.pdb of KIF11 for the docking preparation. Gasteiger charge was assigned and then non-polar hydrogens merged in the each atom type of ligand for the grid maps calculation. In our study, the binding site was selected based on the key amino acid residues which are involved in binding with BI8-KIF11 (PDB ID-3ZCW) would be considered as the best accurate active region. A three-dimensional grid box with dimensions X=48, Y=52 and Z=52 was created with grid-point spacing of 0.375Å. Before running docking calculation, a configuration file was generated with information about grid size and coordinates indicated the ligand and receptor files. The Lamarckian Genetic Algorithm (LGA) was chosen to search for the best conformers during the docking process. The reports for each calculation were analyzed based on affinity energy (kcal/mol) values for each ligand conformation in its respective complex.In our study, we carried out a DFT-based quantitative structure–activity relationship (QSAR) study for both experimentally known KIF11 inhibitors and final hits which were retrieves from the docking analysis. DFT is today one of the best methods to study medium size and larger molecular systems (Devereux et al., 2009). The best DFT methods achieve substantially greater precision than the Hartree–Fock theory at only a modest augment in cost (Panchmatia et al., 2010). They accomplish this task by incorporating few effects of electron correlation much less affluently than traditional correlated methods. A range of functional has been defined, generally distinguished by the manner that they treat the exchange and correlation components. The best known of the hybrid functional is Becke’s three-parameter formulation B3LYP (Lee et al., 1988) complete geometry optimization for data set compounds was carried out using DFT with B3LYP, using basis set 6-31G* level. Vibrational frequencies were computed at the same B3LYP/6-31G* level to characterize the stationary points on the corresponding potential energy surfaces (Arooj et al., 2013). Likewise, our final compound retrieved from databases, showed important results with respect to all properties like key molecular orientation and interactions with the active sites. Various quantum-chemical descriptors such as LUMO and HOMO were computed. All calculations were performed using the Gaussian 03 suite of programs.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Ligand based 3D pharmacophore hypotheses of KIF11 inhibitors have been successfully developed using 3D QSAR Pharmacophore Generation protocol existing in DS v.2.5. The best quantitative pharmacophore model, Hypo1 was characterized by the highest cost difference, best correlation coefficient and lowest RMSD respectively. The best Hypo1 consisted of two HBA, one HY and one RA features. Hypo1 was further validated by test set, Fischer randomization test and decoy set methods. The test set containing 40 compounds was used for investigating the predictive ability of Hypo1 and resulted with a correlation coefficient of 0.914. This was further validated Hypo1 was used as a 3D query in chembridge and Maybridge database screening. The hit compounds were then subjected to filtering by maximum omitted feature values greater than 10. The compounds were sorted by applying the drug-like filter such as ADMET and Lipinski’s rule of five. Further refine the retrieved hit compounds were carried out for molecular docking studies. Finally six structurally diverse compounds BTB01875, BTB09994, BTB14527, BTB14784, Compound 2479 and BTB06317 with high GOLD score and predicted auto dock binding energy were selected based on their molecular interaction. To confirm the inhibitors potencies, we calculated the orbital energies such as HOMO and LUMO, for all six hit compounds. Based on our study, we confirmed our six hit compounds satisfied all the pharmacophore features in Hypo1 and will help in the identification or a design of potent inhibitors for KIF11.