@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
In silico approaches for the identification of virulence candidates amongst hypothetical proteins of Mycoplasma pneumoniae 309

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Genome sequence of Mycoplasma pneumoniae was extensively analyzed.Functions of 83HPs were successfully predicted with high accuracy.We found 23 enzymes, 12 transporter, 27 lipoproteins and 10 binding proteins among HPs.Many new virulent factors and adhesions were identified and characterized.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hypothetical proteins,Mycoplasma pneumoniae,Function predictions,Sequence analyses,Virulence factors,Molecular dynamics Simulations,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Mycoplasma pneumoniae type 2a strain 309 is a simplest known bacterium and is the primary cause of community acquired pneumonia in the children. It mainly causes severe atypical pneumonia as well as several other non-pulmonary manifestations such as neurological, hepatic, hemolytic anemia, cardiac diseases and polyarthritis. The size of M. pneumoniae genome (Accession number: NC_016807.1) is relatively smaller as compared to other bacteria and contains 707 functional proteins, in which 204 are classified as hypothetical proteins (HPs) because of the unavailability of experimentally validated functions. The functions of the HPs were predicted by integrating a variety of protein classification systems, motif discovery tools as well as methods that are based on characteristic features obtained from the protein sequence and metabolic pathways. The probable functions of 83HPs were predicted successfully. The accuracy of the diverse tools used in the adopted pipeline was evaluated on the basis of statistical techniques of Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC), which indicated the reliability of the functional predictions. Furthermore, the virulent HPs present in the set of 83 functionally annotated proteins were predicted by using the Bioinformatics tools and the conformational behaviours of the proteins with highest virulence scores were studied by using the molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. This study will facilitate in the better understanding of various drug resistance and pathogenesis mechanisms present in the M. pneumoniae and can be utilized in designing of better therapeutic agents.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Mycoplasma pneumoniae is one of the smallest self-replicating bacteria which belong to the family of Mycoplasmataceae. It causes acute respiratory tract infection known as atypical pneumonia, and various types of neurological, cardiac, hepatic and hemolytic manifestations (Razin et al., 1998). M. pneumoniae infection occurs worldwide in an endemic fashion and is occasionally epidemic. It accounts for more than 40% of community acquired pneumonia cases in children, and 18% of cases require hospitalization (Ferwerda et al., 2001). The M. pneumoniae also causes several extra-pulmonary infections and the central nervous system (CNS) manifestations like meningoencephalitis, encephalitis, polyradiculitis and aseptic meningitis, which are more common among patients suffering from pneumonia caused by M. pneumoniae (Leonardi et al., 2005). It also induces several chronic disease conditions in which the clearance of organism from host is a very complex process (Waites et al., 2008).Infection of M. pneumoniae causes various chronic diseases such as juvenile idiopathic arthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, asthma and Crohn’s disease (Waites et al., 2008). M. pneumoniae is an obligate surface pathogen which develop adherence to mucosal epithelium of respiratory and urogenital tracts of the host by using varieties of specialized surface proteins (Hu et al., 1977). The key adherence proteins present in the M. pneumoniae are P1 adhesins (Hu et al., 1977) which are the primary cause of its virulence (Layh-Schmitt and Herrmann, 1994). These adhesins are also significant in defending the parasite from mucociliary clearance (Krause, 1996). The current study aimed at the annotations of uncharacterized adhesins and virulence causing proteins in the genome of M. pneumoniae.The genome of M. pneumoniae contains 8,17,176 base pairs that forms 750 genes, 36 tRNAs genes, 4 non-coding RNA genes, and 1 rRNA operon (Kenri et al., 2012). These genes are translated into 707 proteins (Kenri et al., 2012) which are involved in varieties of functions. Around 204 proteins in the respective set are listed as “Hypothetical Proteins (HPs)” as no biochemical functions were assigned to them (Galperin and Koonin, 2004; Hawkins and Kihara, 2007). In most of the sequenced genomes, approximately half of the proteins are uncharacterized, and the knowledge of their biological functions will be helpful in completing the available genomic and proteomic information present in the databases (Loewenstein et al., 2009; Nimrod et al., 2008). To complete this fragmentary knowledge, the precise annotations of these HPs are necessary as it may lead to the discovery of new structures with new functions, which will be helpful in bringing out a list of undiscovered protein pathways present in the organisms (Nimrod et al., 2008). This is an active area of research for which we are constantly looking for novel drug targets in different pathogens (Hassan et al., 2007a,b; Kumar et al., 2015a, 2014; Thakur and Hassan, 2011; Thakur et al., 2013, 2014). Moreover, during the course of drug design, discovery and screening of novel therapeutic agents, HPs may also serve as markers and pharmacological targets (da Fonseca et al., 2012; Lubec et al., 2005; Minion et al., 2004).In this study, varieties of bioinformatics tools were utilized for the robust function predictions of the HPs through sequence analyses and comparisons (Shahbaaz et al., 2015b). The sequence-based search tools such as BLAST (Altschul et al., 1990), FASTA (Pearson and Lipman, 1988) and HMMER (Finn et al., 2011) are commonly used for functional analysis of gene products by the recognition of related homologues in various biological databases (Kumar et al., 2015b; Naqvi et al., 2015a,b; Shahbaaz et al., 2015a, 2013; Sinha et al., 2015). Similarly, the functional domains characterization and motif analyses were also considered as the basis to identify the role of HPs in the biological processes.In the case of low sequence identities (<30%), detection of the conserved motifs and domains in protein sequences may provide a significant clues for the functional classification of HPs (Rost and Valencia, 1996). Therefore, domain and motif annotation tools such as Pfam (Bateman et al., 2002), CDART (Geer et al., 2002), SYSTERS (Krause et al., 2000), SBASE (Vlahovicek et al., 2003) and InterPro (Hunter et al., 2012) were explored for investigating functional sites in the sequences of the HPs. In a well-organized metabolic network, study of the protein interactions is crucial to comprehend the functional roles of proteins and can be studied by utilizing the tools such as STITCH (Kuhn et al., 2008) and STRING database (Szklarczyk et al., 2015). Furthermore, the putative virulence factors were identified and analyzed in the group of 204HPs by utilizing machine learning based tools and databases such as VirulentPred (Garg and Gupta, 2008), VFDB (Chen et al., 2005), DBETH database (Chakraborty et al., 2012), BTXpred (Saha and Raghava, 2007), Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance (CARD) Database (McArthur et al., 2013) and AlgPred (Saha and Raghava, 2006) servers. Moreover, the accuracy of the prediction methods were assessed by utilizing a set of proteins with known functions (Tables S6 and S7) in Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) analyses (Metz, 1978), which confirmed the reliability of the predictions. The functions of 83HPs were predicted successfully. In this set of annotated proteins, the putative virulence factors were classified. The HPs with highest virulence scores were subjected to MD simulations in order to understand their conformational behaviour in explicit water conditions.The computational framework for the functional annotations of HPs was established by using the knowledge obtained from previous in silico studies (Mazandu and Mulder, 2012; Shahbaaz et al., 2015c,d, 2013). The elementary steps of the adopted pipeline were illustrated in Fig. 1.The genome of M. pneumoniae contains 707 functional proteins and by utilizing the keyword searching in the NCBI database; around 204 proteins were classified as HPs (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/). The Uniprot IDs and amino acid sequences of each HP were retrieved by using the available ID mapping tools (http://www.uniprot.org/). In order to observe all the putative ORFs (Open Reading Frames) present in the hypothetical genes; we performed the six frame ORFs translation on the genomic sequence of M. pneumoniae. The minimum size of ORFs for putative encoding sequence was set to 102 nucleotides. The OrfPredictor (Min et al., 2005) analyze the genomic DNA and predicted the presence of 1224 ORFs in the hypothetical genes of M. pneumoniae. The OrfPredictor also predicted the Coding Sequence (CDS) and then translated to the respective proteins; which were compared with the deposited sequences of the HPs. Furthermore; the existence of 20HPs has been experimentally validated; while rest of the HPs were predicted at the biochemical level (illustrated in Table S1). On the basis of these analyses; we considered all the 204HPs for further analyses.The physiochemical properties such as isoelectric point, molecular weight, instability index, extinction coefficient, grand average of hydropathicity (GRAVY) and aliphatic index were predicted by using ProtParam server (http://web.expasy.org/protparam/) (listed in Table S1). The membrane proteins are considered as possible vaccine targets, while the proteins localized in the cytoplasm are the potent drug targets (Vetrivel et al., 2011). In the absence of any experimental information about the HPs localizations, the varieties of sub-cellular localization prediction tools such as PSLpred (Bhasin et al., 2005), PSORTb (Yu et al., 2010) and LocTree3 (Goldberg et al., 2012) can be used. The LocTree3 uses hierarchical systems of SVM (Support Vector Machines) in which predictions are made via searching k-consecutive residues in the proteins with experimentally validated cellular localizations (Goldberg et al., 2012). This server also include the functionality of PSI-BLAST that identify the protein localization by searching the homologs (Goldberg et al., 2012). Additionally, LocTree2 module is used in the absence of significant PSI-BLAST hits in the databases (Goldberg et al., 2012). Similarly, the PSLpred predicts the sub-cellular localization of proteins in the bacteria cells by using the SVM algorithms. The SignalP 4.1 (Emanuelsson et al., 2007) and SecretomeP (Bendtsen et al., 2005) servers were used to identify signal peptides in HPs and their involvement in non-classical secretory pathways respectively. Furthermore, TMHMM (Krogh et al., 2001) and HMMTOP (Tusnady and Simon, 2001) servers were used in order to identify the trans-membrane helices in HPs. The predictions of sub-cellular localizations of 204HPs are listed in Table S2.The primary step for functional annotations of proteins involved sequence similarity searches in diverse biological databases. The sequence similarity search methods such as BLAST (Altschul et al., 1990), FASTA (Pearson and Lipman, 1988) and HMMER (Finn et al., 2011) were used to identify functional homologues in the databases. In the BLAST searches, the HPs with low sequence identities (<20%) as well as low query coverage (<50%) were excluded. The proteins showed low sequence identities (<26%) were considered as remote homologues, while those with high sequence identities (>40%) were referred to as close homologues. In a search, if the desirable magnitudes of the respective parameters were obtained, then it is considered as the possible hit for a particular HP. We assumed the probable function to an HP, if the respective functionality appeared maximum number of times with e-value (<0.005). This procedure was adopted for every HP in order to obtain the reliable results in similarity search. Similarly, if FASTA search showed e-value (< 0.005) then it was considered as a reliable hit (Table S3). The HMMER uses pair-wise comparisons of profile HMMs for the detection of remote homologs in protein databases such as Pfam (Bateman et al., 2002), PDB (Bernstein et al., 1977; Bernstein et al., 1978) and INTERPRO. Furthermore, functional domains present in HPs were predicted by using various online databases such as Pfam (Finn et al., 2014), SUPERFAMILY (Gough et al., 2001), CATH (Orengo et al., 1997), SYSTERS (Meinel et al., 2005), CDART (Geer et al., 2002), SMART (Letunic et al., 2012) and SBASE (Vlahovicek et al., 2003) (Table S4). The SYSTERS is the collection of diverse clusters of protein families and functions of the HPs were predicted by placing them in a suitable cluster by using database searching tools such as BLAST. The SBASE server is an online compilation of protein domains and related prediction tools devised to ease the detection of functional homologues by using regular database search.After the evaluation of the outputs produced by BLAST searches and knowledge of biologically important similarities obtained from identified domain groups, the server performed the functional predictions and domain identifications. Likewise, SMART and CDART servers were used to perform the sequence similarity searches based on domain architecture and profiles. The SMART (Simple modular architecture research tool) server, searches the related domains in SP-TrEMBL (Bairoch and Apweiler, 2000), Swiss-Prot (Gasteiger et al., 2001) and stable ensemble (Hubbard et al., 2002) proteomes. Furthermore, the InterPro, a consortium of several integrated databases such as Pfam, SMART, SUPERFAMILY and CATH, was used to perform the motif discovery. The GPCRs (G-protein coupled receptors), being one of the leading super-families of membrane proteins which are considered as significant drug targets. The SVM based servers such as GPCRpred (Bhasin and Raghava, 2004) and the GPCRs class (Bhasin and Raghava, 2005) were used for predicting GPCRs’ families and subfamilies on the basis of the dipeptide composition of HPs.Since, in a biochemical network, the interacting proteins often modulate the activity and function of a protein. Therefore, knowledge about the behaviour of protein–protein interactions is considered as important information for predicting the function of the protein precisely. The STITCH (Kuhn et al., 2008) and STRING databases (version 9.05) (Szklarczyk et al., 2011) were used to predict functional partners of HPs in a biological network. The interaction data regarding experimental or co-expression, indirect (functional) and direct (physical) associations, are quantitatively integrated in STRING database for a large number of organisms, and the information between these organisms are transferred wherever applicable for the prediction of interacting proteins. Whereas, STITCH integrates data present in various database and literature about drug-target relationships, biological pathways and binding affinities in order to predict the interacting chemical and protein partners. Similarly, iPfam which is the collection of data regarding the interactions of 3D structures of protein families and domains submitted in the Pfam provided the insight about the interacting partner in the metabolic network.The virulence factors (VFs) are essential for severity of infection caused by the pathogen (Baron and Coombes, 2007), therefore, they are considered as potential targets in the drug discovery. A variety of uncharacterized VFs were classified by using VirulentPred server, that uses the SVM based methods in order to predict the putative bacterial VFs with an accuracy of 81.8%. Similarly, BTXpred and AlgPred servers were used for the prediction of the bacterial toxins and potential allergens respectively. The predictions of the BTXpred were complimented by the results obtained from DBETH server that identifies the possible exotoxins for the human beings. Furthermore, the VF-related proteins were identified in the VFDB (virulence factor database) by using BLAST database searches. Moreover, Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database (CARD) (McArthur et al., 2013) which is a collection of the antibiotic resistance genes, was searched for the identification of an antibiotic resistance protein in this set of uncharacterized proteins (Table S5).The HPs with the highest predicted virulence scores were selected for further structural analyses. The templates for the selected HPs were identified by using BLAST module of Discovery Studio (DS) (Accelrys, 2013). In case of low sequence homology (<25%), the 3-D structures were predicted by using the ab initio algorithms of the I-TASSER (Roy et al., 2010). The evaluations of the predicted models were performed by using TM scores (Zhang and Skolnick, 2005) and RMSD (root mean square deviations) values, calculated by the ITASSER. The best evaluated models were selected for the energy minimization and optimization processes performed by using the refinement modules of DS. The modelled structures of virulent HPs were simulated by using GROMACS package (Van Der Spoel et al., 2005) (version 4.6.5) in explicit solvent conditions at 300K. In order to improve the electrostatic interactions, the virulent HPs were solvated in the Single Point Charge (SPC) water model and simulated by using the Particle–Mesh–Ewald (PME) summation under Periodic Boundary Conditions (PBC). An initial structure of the protein was energetically minimized with a convergence criterion of 0.005kcal mol within 2000 steps of steepest descent algorithms. The minimized structures were equilibrated for the time scale of 200ps by using NVT and NPT ensemble conditions. The MD simulations were performed for 20ns time scale by using the LINCS algorithm of GROMACS with a time step of 2fs. All the resulting trajectories of the MD simulation were analyzed using the utilities present in the GROMACS package.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Using in silico pipeline, we successfully analyzed the sequences of 204 HPs from the genome of M. pneumoniae and predicted the functions and analyzed the virulence characteristics of 83 HPs. Due to the unavailability of the experimental validations and less precision of the available in silico methods, a high degree of uncertainty is present in the virulence and functional predictions of the HPs. These findings are complemented by the characterization of the proteins that may be involved in the signalling as well as secretory pathways. Although, the exact molecular function of an HP cannot be deduced computationally, but our study can provides a framework in order to allocate the probable molecular function by utilizing the sequences of the proteins. In this study, the conformational behaviours of the virulence factors were also analyzed by using the Molecular dynamics techniques, which were helpful in understanding the dynamical behaviour of virulent HPs under explicit water conditions. Our study further facilitates a rapid identification of the HPs that are potential therapeutic targets and may play a significant role in better understanding of host-pathogen interactions. Once these HPs are established as a novel drug/vaccine targets, further research for new inhibitors and vaccines can be conducted. Since these proteins may play a significant role in the host-pathogen interactions and can be considered as the putative drug targets for the design of better therapeutic agents, such information can be utilized to discover new inhibitor molecules and vaccines for the clinically important organisms.Authors declare no conflict of interest regarding any financial and personal relationships with other people or organizations that could inappropriately influence (bias) this work.