@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new method for predicting essential proteins based on dynamic network topology and complex information

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Dynamics is an important inherent character of protein–protein interaction (PPI) network.Compared with being applied to a static PPI network, topology-based methods for predicting essential proteins can achieve better effects when they are applied to a dynamic PPI network.We integrate the local average connectivity and the complex information and apply this integration to a dynamic PPI network to predict essential protein.Our method can discover more essential proteins than most of previous methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Centrality measures,Essential proteins,Dynamic network topology,Protein complex,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Predicting essential proteins is highly significant because organisms can not survive or develop even if only one of these proteins is missing. Improvements in high-throughput technologies have resulted in a large number of available protein–protein interactions. By taking advantage of these interaction data, researchers have proposed many computational methods to identify essential proteins at the network level. Most of these approaches focus on the topology of a static protein interaction network. However, the protein interaction network changes with time and condition. This important inherent dynamics of the protein interaction network is overlooked by previous methods. In this paper, we introduce a new method named CDLC to predict essential proteins by integrating dynamic local average connectivity and in-degree of proteins in complexes. CDLC is applied to the protein interaction network of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The results show that CDLC outperforms five other methods (Degree Centrality (DC), Local Average Connectivity-based method (LAC), Sum of ECC (SoECC), PeC and Co-Expression Weighted by Clustering coefficient (CoEWC)). In particular, CDLC could improve the prediction precision by more than 45% compared with DC methods. CDLC is also compared with the latest algorithm CEPPK, and a higher precision is achieved by CDLC. CDLC is available as Supplementary materials. The default settings of active threshold and alpha-parameter are 0.8 and 0.1, respectively.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Proteins undoubtedly play important roles in every organism’s cell. In particular, essential proteins are indispensable because deleting even one of them is lethal to an organism or renders it infertile (Winzeler et al., 1999; Kamath et al., 2003). Essential proteins can also be regarded as drug targets for new antibiotics because of their indispensability (Clatworthy et al., 2007).To find essential proteins, researchers have used several experimental approaches, such as single gene knockouts (Giaever et al., 2002), RNA interference (Cullen and Arndt, 2005) and conditional knockouts (Roemer et al., 2003), to discover essential proteins. Although many essential proteins have been identified this way, the process is time consuming and expensive. Therefore, with the fast accumulation of available protein–protein interaction (PPI) data, studies on computational methods for predicting essential proteins are attracting increased attention.In 2001, Jeong et al. pointed out that proteins highly connected with other proteins in PPI network have higher potential to be essential than randomly selected proteins (Jeong et al., 2001). This phenomenon is called the centrality–lethality rule (Jeong et al., 2001). In recent years, most investigators have proven the positive correlation between the essentiality of proteins and the topological centrality (Hahn and Kern, 2005; Batada et al., 2006; Vallabhajosyula et al., 2009; Estrada, 2006). Based on the latter finding, a variety of centrality measures for identifying essential proteins have been proposed. Among these centrality measures, Degree Centrality (DC) (Jeong et al., 2001), Betweenness Centrality (BC) (Freeman, 1977), Closeness Centrality (CC) (Wuchty and Stadler, 2003), Subgraph Centrality (SC) (Estrada and Rodriguez-Velazquez, 2005), Eigenvector Centrality (EC) (Bonacich, 1987) and Information Centrality (IC) (Stephenson and Zelen, 1989) are the most classic ones. Other useful centrality measures, such as Bottle Neck (BN) (Przulj et al., 2004; Yu et al., 2007), Local Average Connectivity (LAC) (Li et al., 2011) and Sum of ECC (SoECC) (Wang et al., 2012), are also designed to detect essential proteins. The performances of topology-based approaches are known to closely depend on the quality of PPI networks. However, many false positive and false negative interactions exist in PPI networks. To solve this problem, Li et al. (2010) constructed a relatively reliable weighted PPI network by taking advantage of gene annotations. In this weighted network, the performance of the topology-based methods could be optimized to a great extent. This result confirms that topological centrality is sensitive to the noise in PPI networks. To further improve the prediction precision, researchers attempt to combine biology information with network topology (He and Zhang, 2006; Zotenko et al., 2008; Chua et al., 2008). Consequently, several new methods have been proposed. For example, PeC considers both the edge clustering coefficient and gene expression data (Li et al., 2012), Co-Expression Weighted by Clustering coefficient (CoEWC) (Zhang et al., 2013) integrates clustering coefficient and gene expression data, and another integrated approach proposed by Luo and Ma (2013) combines edge clustering coefficient with complex centrality.Existing methods for identifying essential proteins all regard the PPI network as a static graph. Given that interactions in static PPI networks are obtained at different time points and under different conditions, a static graph can not completely reflect the real network (Chen and Yuan, 2006; Przytycka et al., 2010). In fact, PPI networks change over time, in different environments, and at different stages of cell cycle, which means that dynamism exists in PPI networks (Przytycka et al., 2010; Han et al., 2004; De Lichtenberg et al., 2005). Based on this fact, Tang et al. (2011) constructed a time-course network with gene expression data and the result indicated that the performance of identifying functional modules based on the time-course PPI network is better than that based on a static PPI network. Wang et al. (2013) built a new dynamic PPI network using a method similar to that adopted by Tang et al. (2011) and concluded that the dynamic PPI network can contribute to the discovery of protein complexes. The main difference between the two approaches is the process of selecting the active threshold of proteins.The discovery of functional modules and protein complexes is more effective when applying algorithms to a dynamic PPI network. Thus, we suppose that using a dynamic PPI network topology can enable better prediction of essential proteins than using a static PPI network. In other words, the effects of topology-based methods for discovering essential proteins can be improved by implementing these methods in dynamic PPI network. We elaborate the theoretical basis of our hypothesis as follows. At a certain time point, the dynamic PPI network can be represented as a temporal network (Tang et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2013). In these temporal networks, interactions form in the same situation and the included proteins are highly expressed (active). Therefore, dynamic PPI network is of higher quality. Given this high quality, topology centralities in dynamic PPI network are more reliable, which can contribute to a better identification of essential proteins. The proof of our hypothesis is shown in Section 3.6. Then to further enhance the effect of predicting essential proteins, we integrate dynamic network topology and biology information. The integration of dynamic local average connectivity and complex information is chosen to predict essential proteins and this new method is named Combine Dynamic LAC with Complex centrality (CDLC). To evaluate the effect of our CDLC method, we compare CDLC with five centrality methods (DC, LAC, SoECC, PeC and CoEWC). Considering that both LAC and SoECC can outperform all six classic methods (DC, BC, CC, SC, EC, and IC) (Li et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2012), we select only DC for comparison because it is the most accessible among the six methods. The comparison results suggest that CDLC performs better than the other five methods (DC, LAC, SoECC, PeC, and CoEWC). Particularly, CDLC can achieve more than 45% improvement in prediction precision compared with DC. We also compare CDLC with the latest essential protein predicting approach named CEPPK (Li et al., 2014), and results show that CDLC outperforms CEPPK.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
