@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A negotiation methodology for multidisciplinary collaborative product design

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Based on the in-depth analysis of negotiation characteristics in MCD, a novel negotiation method for MCD is proposed.An effective negotiation strategy to resolve the conflicts among multiple disciplines is given.A new negotiation model is given by introducing concepts of concession, satisfaction degree and strategy power exponent.Two types of satisfaction degree functions and the mapping method among multiple domains are given.Negotiation process and system framework are designed to assist multiple disciplines rapidly reach a compromise solution.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Collaborative design,MCD,Negotiation,Coordination,Conflict resolution,Agreement,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The collaborative design of a complicated mechanical product often involves conflicting multidisciplinary objectives, thus one key problem is conflict resolution and coordination among the different disciplines. Since the characteristics such as cooperative competition, professional dependence, compromise, overall utility and so on exist in multidisciplinary collaborative design (MCD), an effective way to gradually eliminate the conflicts among the multiple disciplines and reach an agreement is the negotiation by which a compromise solution that satisfies all parties is got. By comprehensively analyzing the characteristics in MCD and considering the benefit equilibrium among discipline individuals and team, a negotiation strategy is presented, which maximize the union satisfaction degree of system overall objective under the premise of ensuring the higher satisfaction degree level of each discipline’s local objective. A design action of a discipline is abstractly expressed as a concession in the negotiation strategy, and a negotiation model used for MCD is generated by establishing the relation between concession and satisfaction degree. By the relation between satisfaction degree and objective function, the mapping relationship between satisfaction degree domain and physical domain is built to get the design solution. A negotiation process is planned, and a negotiation system framework is designed to support the negotiation among multiple disciplines and assist the different disciplines rapidly reach a consistent compromise solution. A design example of automotive friction clutch is given to illustrate the proposed method.union satisfaction degree of multiple disciplines on design problem Psatisfaction degree of discipline i on design problem Pstrategy power exponentconcessionweighting factor assigned to discipline ithe threshold which means the accepted satisfaction degree of discipline ithe optimal solutionthe worst solutionintersection of design solutions of all disciplinesnegotiation termination conditionvolume of the clutch (mm3)unit friction power (W/mm2)intensity of pressure on friction surface (N/mm2)the biggest torque (Nm)maximum power (kW)total pressure (kN)reserve coefficient, 1.5number of friction plateouter diameter of friction plate (mm)ratio of inner radius to outer radiusminimum clearance (mm)thickness of friction plate (mm)coefficient of kinetic frictionallowable intensity of pressure on friction surface (N/mm2)allowable unit friction power (W/mm2)allowable stress (MPa)rotate speed of friction plate (r/min)

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The complicated mechanical product design often involves the multidisciplinary performance requirements, and needs the collaborative work of designers from different disciplines. Different disciplines concerned about different aspects of product, and their objectives to be achieved are different. Each discipline makes product design with its own professional knowledge and experience to satisfy its objective. Because they concern the different aspects of the same product, the interacting relationships among different disciplines must exist. Some discipline’s design action not only affects its own goal, but also affects the other disciplines’ goals, thus it is hard to avoid conflicts among different disciplines. One key problem of MCD is the coordination among multiple disciplines’ objectives, and its a common problem in product design.Single-level approach and bi-level approaches are widely used approaches in MCD. Single-level approach integrates all the decision-making responsibilities into a single system-level team which handles interdisciplinary communication, interaction and coordination. The other disciplinary teams are only responsible for providing disciplinary analyses. It requires solution and coordination of a system level encompassing at least all the coupling variables and this soon becomes too complex to be solvable [1–4]. Bi-level approaches [5–7] decompose the multidisciplinary problem into a set of discipline level sub-problems and one system level problem, and disciplinary teams are assigned the authority to make local decisions and solve sub-problems concurrently, but bi-level approaches require iterations among system level and disciplinary levels, the theoretical convergence remains an open question [8]. In addition, as an effective means of handling conflict, game theory is also for coordination and resolution of conflicts in MCD. Game theory is applied to model the interactions among multidisciplinary engineering teams’ decision-making and three kinds of protocols such as cooperative, non-cooperative and leader/follower are proposed [9–11]. The game theory was successfully applied in the multiple objective optimization design of mechanical product [12,13]. A game theory model that provides insights into conditions when two engineers collaborate on a design project which has both team and individual components was proposed [14].In practice, the coordination among multiple objectives in MCD is not entirely an accurate mathematical problem, instead, a flexible compromise decision problem involving subjective and objective factors of multiple disciplines. To the design problem involving multiple conflicting objectives in MCD, there is generally no absolute optimal solution, only exists satisfactory solution. Each discipline is more willing to make decisions independently within its own disciplines. The MCD is essentially a negotiation problem. Each discipline is a part of design team and wants its own utility as good as possible, and meanwhile is willing to make a concession to improve the overall utility. This is an iterative negotiation process. Through negotiation, multiple disciplines resolve the conflicts gradually and reach consensus eventually, the coordination among the disciplinary local goals and the team’s overall goal is achieved, and the compromise solution that all parties are satisfied is got.Negotiation was an effective approach for coordination and resolution of conflicts [15]. Complex design involves trade-offs and teamwork. To make collaborative design decisions, designers must negotiate with each other to resolve their discrepancies through exploring the design space, generating new ideas and compromising for agreement [16]. A negotiation method to resolve goal conflicts on the basis of constructing satisfaction degree function and adopting equivalent concession was discussed [17]. A negotiation method based collaborative design approach for component reuse in disparate products was proposed, and a fuzzy inference guided asymmetric negotiation mechanism reduced the efforts required in generating offers/counteroffers in the negotiation process was given [18]. Negotiation theory and Game theory was combined to develop a negotiation system supported by computer system [19]. An argumentation based engineering negotiation approach that provides a structured framework for designers to identify design situations, form arguments, and make joint decisions by following various strategies was proposed [20,21]. A multi-agent negotiation mechanism for distributed design based on price schedules decomposition was proposed. The mechanism allows self-interested collaborators to jointly make design decisions for the benefit of an overall design task without disclosing individual objectives or rationales [22].The complexity and specificity exist in negotiation in multidisciplinary engineering design, which involve multiple interrelated negotiations and multiple levels of negotiation among multi-functional disciplines (multiple disciplines come from different functional areas, do not understand each other well, and often involve multiple interrelated negotiations. Design negotiation is not merely about physical parameters, but about function requirements, design goals and designers’ preferences), and semi-structured and ill-structured design problems (design problems are often open-ended and not well represented, human involvement is inevitable), etc. Thus, the negotiation characteristics in multidisciplinary engineering design should be thoroughly researched to develop an effective negotiation model.In this paper, a novel negotiation methodology for multidisciplinary collaborative product design is given. The characteristics such as cooperative competition, professional dependence, compromise, multiple-domain, overall utility and so on in MCD under the distributed network are analyzed in detail, the negotiation mode and the negotiation strategy which are appropriate for multidisciplinary collaborative product design are explored. A formal description about negotiation strategy is given, and a negotiation model for MCD under a certain assumptive condition is generated. The negotiation process that assists the team to resolve conflicts and reach agreement quickly is studied. A design example of the automobile friction clutch is used to demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed method.Due to the differences in goal, professional background and design strategy, etc among different disciplines in MCD, there exist following negotiation characteristic (as shown in Table 1).This classification is multidisciplinary engineering design negotiation oriented and conducive to the build of a novel negotiation model to assist the different disciplines rapidly reach a consistent compromise solution.Some negotiation modes are as follows:•Direct negotiation mode: the conflicts are resolved by direct negotiations among multiple disciplines. As the characteristic of professional dependence, the mutual understanding among multiple disciplines is difficult, the negotiation iteration lengthy, and even an agreement impossible.Arbitration negotiation mode: the arbitrator controls negotiation process, gives orders and arbitration results to each discipline which joins in negotiation process. As the solution is decided by the arbitrator, so it may not fully reflect the design intends of the discipline and the characteristics of competitive cooperation and compromise. The communications among multiple disciplines are also lacked. Thus the arbitrated solution may be difficult to satisfy all disciplines.Assistant negotiation mode: an assistant role is introduced to guide the negotiation process, keep competitive cooperation and compromise among multiple disciplines, make them pay attention to overall utility, and tend to collaboration rather than completely degenerate to competition. The assistant role only gives the recommended solution, but the final decision is still made by the disciplines.In consideration of the characteristics of professional dependence, compromise, competitive cooperation, multi-domain, overall utility and geographical distribution, the negotiation efficiency and the negotiation efficacy, the assistant negotiation mode is adopted here.The conflict resolution in MCD can be based on physical domain or objective domain. The conflict resolution based on physical domain is the coordination in lower level, which is to maintain the consistency among the relevant physical parameters of product [23,24], but is not goal-oriented. The conflict resolution in objective domain is the coordination in higher level, and is goal-oriented. But it is also hard to fulfill the conflict resolution in objective domains due to the following reasons:(1)As the professional dependence, some discipline is hard to understand other disciplines’ design goals.The multiple disciplines maybe greatly differ in the dimension and the order of magnitude of their design objectives, so that their design objectives are hard to be compared.The MCD is a multiple objective problem, so that each discipline cannot obtain its own optimal objective value, and can only achieve a certain satisfaction degree level.In the satisfaction degree domain, the satisfaction degree of objective has been normalized to the dimensionless and same order of magnitude. The satisfaction degrees of different disciplines can be compared each other, so that negotiation can be efficient and move toward a right direction in the satisfaction degree domain, and then the acceptable satisfaction degree region can be got. By the mapping from satisfaction degree domain to physical domain, the intersection of design solutions of all disciplines will be got, the agreement can be reached at the acceptable satisfaction degree level and the conflicts are resolved (see Fig. 1). In Fig. 1, D1, D2 and D3 refer to discipline 1, discipline 2 and discipline 3.Negotiation strategy involves the discipline’s individual strategy and the system’s overall strategy. The individual strategy decides what action will be taken and what suggestion will be proposed by the discipline. Usually the discipline individual takes the appropriate strategy based on its own benefit, goal and knowledge. Meanwhile the disciplines participating in MCD also have the common goal, the overall strategy is to coordinate the discipline individuals, not only guarantee each discipline individual’s objective utility, but also guarantee system’s overall utility, and more emphasize the overall utility. Considering the characteristics of professional dependence, compromise and multi-domain, the concept of satisfaction degree is introduced, and the negotiation should proceed in satisfaction degree domain. Considering the characteristics of cooperation competitive and overall utility, negotiation should comprehensively take account of the discipline individuals’ satisfaction degree and the system’s overall satisfaction degree.Therefore the following negotiation strategy is proposed:To a multidisciplinary product design project, the multiple disciplines seek a design solution that the overall satisfaction degree is maximized on the premise that each discipline reaches its own higher satisfaction degree of objective by effective negotiation.The problem of multidisciplinary collaborative negotiation is defined in the following five-tuple model:(1)Γ=N,P,(Ti)i∈N,(Si)i∈N,(Wi)i∈N•N is the discipline set participating in collaborative design, and constitutes a collaborative design team, N={1, 2…i…n | n⩾2}.P is the negotiation problem.Tiis the design strategy set taken by discipline i on P. T is the combination of the strategy sets taken by all disciplines, T=×i∊NTi.Siis the function mapping T=×i∊NTito real number set R, indicates the satisfaction degree of discipline i on P, and is a scalar function.Wiis the weighting factor assigned to discipline i,∑i=1nWi=1.To a strategy combination in T: t=(t)i∊N, Si(t) is the satisfaction degree of discipline i in this round negotiation, and the union satisfaction degree of multiple disciplines on P is defined as Sp(t):(2)Sp(t)=∑i=1nWiSi(t)The multidisciplinary collaborative negotiation is to find an equilibrium point at which each discipline can get its hoped satisfaction degree. There are many ways to find the equilibrium point, and the equilibrium point is not unique. According to the negotiation strategy mentioned above, the overall union satisfaction degree should be emphasized besides considering the discipline individual satisfaction degree, and thus the equilibrium point can be got through making the overall satisfaction degree as large as possible. This way, the negotiation strategy mentioned above can be expressed as the following negotiation model:(3)MaxSp(t)s.t.Si(t)⩾αi,i∈Nwhere αiis the threshold of Si, indicates the lowest satisfaction degree of discipline i on P. To cooperative game, the disciplines participating in the game search a strategy combinationt∗=ti∗i∈Nthrough negotiation. Performing t∗, each discipline can get its higher satisfaction degreeSi(t∗)⩾αi, and meanwhile the overall union satisfaction degree Spis maximum, namely,Sp∗=Sp(t∗)=MaxSp(t).Considering the characters of the design problem P, the mapping relation among satisfaction degree domain, objective domain and physical domain can be established. By the mapping relation, the solution about P in the physical domain corresponding to the satisfaction degree value S∗pcan be got.The satisfaction degree of objective obtained by some discipline individual is related to the design actions (namely design steps, or “step” for short) adopted under guidance of its design strategy and intent, and not only depends on its own actions, but also on the actions of other disciplines, namely, “I have you with me and you have me with you”. Due to the design actions of different disciplines differed greatly, for conveniently describing the problem, here, the design action (“step”) is abstractly represented as a kind of concession, that can be viewed as one movement of some discipline from the its most optimal point to the overall compromise point and expressed as C (Concession). This way, the satisfaction degree is the function of concession, the multiple disciplines gradually reduce their own satisfaction degree level through concessions in order to generate the intersection of their design results, and the compromise solution which all disciplines satisfy are got.In order to establish a satisfaction degree function based on concession, C is defined a value between [0,1], 0 means no concession, 1 means full concession. In the multidisciplinary negotiation under multiple objective conflicts, each discipline needs to make certain compromise and concession so that the negotiation can go on. It will be meaningless without concession and compromise; on the side, it is unrealistic to require some discipline to make full concession, therefore C is usually not the limit value of 0 or 1.The relationship between C and S is further explored based on the following facts:•The first derivative of satisfaction degree function with respect to concession should be negative because the concession will cause discipline’s satisfaction degree to decrease.The second derivative of satisfaction degree function with respect to concession should be negative due to the loss of satisfaction degree caused by concession is iterative increase. It means the more the number of times some discipline makes concession, the more the loss of its satisfaction degree.Boundary condition: 0⩽C⩽1, 0⩽S⩽1. When C=0, it means there is no concession and the satisfaction degree is 100%, namely S=1; conversely, when C=1, it means full concession and the satisfaction degree is 0%, namely S=0.Based on these facts, it is easy to mathematically deduce the satisfaction degree function of discipline i on P:(4)Si(t,C)=1-CtHere, t is the strategy power exponent, t⩾1, and reflects the discipline’s design intent and strategy to some extent. Due to the difference of t value, different disciplines may get different satisfaction degree although they make the same concession. The larger t is, the more smooth the function curve of satisfaction degree changes, it means that considerable satisfaction degree can be still get when larger concession (see Fig. 2). So discipline designers can express their attitude and strategy through the selection of t, and determine own satisfaction degree function.Since some discipline’s satisfaction degree not only depends on its own action, but also on the other disciplines’ actions, there exists association relationships among the different disciplines’ actions. The association relationships can be expressed as the relationships among the different disciplines’ concessions. For simple, supposing the disciplines which participate in the negotiation process can be divided into two types. The perspectives hold by the two types of disciplines are opposite, so that their concession are complementary each other. The same types of disciplines are supposed to take equal concession C, so that the another types of disciplines which hold the opposite view will take the concessionC‾=1-C, and their satisfaction degree function can be expressed as:(5)S‾i(t,C‾)=1-(1-C)tHere, the satisfaction degree function in Eq. (4) is called Type I satisfaction degree function, and the satisfaction degree function in Eq. (5) is called Type II satisfaction degree function.Then, considering the differing degrees of importance of different disciplines, each discipline is assigned a weighting factor, and the overall union satisfaction degree of multiple disciplines on P in Eq. (2) is changed into the following form:(6)Sp(t,C)=∑i=1nWiSi(t,C)The negotiation model in Eq. (3) is changed into the following form:(7)MaxSp(t,C)=Max∑i=1nWiSi(t,C)s.t.Si(t,C)⩾αi,i∈Nwhere Wiis the weighting factor assigned to discipline i. The threshold αiis set as 0.6 (it means the accepted satisfaction degree of discipline i).Product is finally exhibited in the form of physical structure entity, and all property parameters about physical structure entity constitute the physical domain of product. After the equilibrium point in the satisfaction degree domain is determined by Eq. (7), the corresponding point in physical domain should be found to get design solution about problem P by the mapping between the satisfaction degree domain and the physical domain.Supposing that there are N disciplines, the design objective of discipline i is fi(X) (i∊N=[1,2,…, N]), the design variable set is X=(x1,…, xp), fi(Xo) and fi(Xw) are respectively the optimal value and the worst value of objective function fi(X), Xoand Xware respectively the optimal solution and the worst solution, which can be got by the singe objective optimization, then the satisfaction degree function of discipline i can be also expressed as:(8)Si(X)=1-di(X)(9)di(X)=fi(X)-fi(Xo)fi(Xw)-fi(Xo)Combining Eqs. (7)–(9), firstly the concession C∗ at equilibrium point is solved by negotiation model in Eq. (7), secondly the mapping relation between satisfaction degree domain and physical domain of discipline i is established by Si(ti,C)=Si(X), and then the design solutionXi∗of discipline i in physical domain is got. If there are n disciplines and multiple design variables with non-monotonic functions are considered, then multivariable nonlinear equations will be got, which can be solved with hybrid computational intelligent algorithms such as chaos particle swarm optimization (CPSO) algorithm, hybrid genetic algorithm (HGA), and hybrid niching genetic algorithm (HNGA). If the intersection of the design solutions of all disciplines is not empty, then the negotiation solution of multiple disciplines on design problem P is got. If the intersection is empty, each discipline needs to adjust their design strategy, continues to negotiate iteratively until the intersection is not empty, and then the agreement is reached and the compromise solution satisfied by all disciplines is got.The negotiation system of MCD under the distributed network environment is shown in Fig. 3. The system consists of discipline design modules, negotiation management module, and project management module, etc. Project management module is responsible for configuration of product design project. Negotiation management module supports the negotiation among multiple disciplines and assists them in reaching a consensus.In discipline design module, the discipline designer selects a suitable strategy from strategy set and gives own negotiation proposal based on its own knowledge, goal and preference, which is processed as the normative XML form and transmitted to negotiation management module by information communication module. Design knowledge is the professional knowledge used by the discipline designer to obtain own design solution. Local database stores design data and negotiation parameters of the discipline.The negotiation management module is three layers of architecture: presentation layer, logic layer and data layer. Presentation layer includes some JSP pages about negotiation problem, negotiation white board which is used to publish the necessary data information generated in negotiation process and help the discipline designers to see the progress status about negotiation, and information communication module which is used to process the XML documents containing negotiation parameters which is then transmitted to discipline design modules. Logic layer is a business logic module which processes the information provided by presentation layer, and mainly consists of negotiation model and corresponding algorithm program. Data layer mainly contains negotiation database which consists of some data tables storing negotiation information. The system is developed by Java, Java Web, XML, JDOM and MYSQL.Negotiation process begins with proposing the negotiation problem, and then related disciplines join in negotiation process. These disciplines will give their strategies and preferences based on their analysis and judgments on the negotiation problem, which include the preference type (usually the preferred value about some parameter in one discipline, which means the parameter’s desired change which enables this discipline’s objective toward improvement), the range of parameter value, the optimal value, the worst value and the strategy power exponent, etc, and upload them to the negotiation management module. After collecting all disciplines’ information about strategies and preferences, negotiation management module constructs negotiation model. Through maximizing the union satisfaction degree of the system overall objective under the premise of ensuring the higher satisfaction degree levels of each discipline’s local objective, the appropriate concession and the related disciplines’ satisfaction degree are determined and given feedback to the related disciplines. After receiving the feedback information, each discipline finds its own design solution and uploads it to the negotiation management module. Negotiation management module performs intersection operation of all disciplines’ design solutions. If the intersection exists, the system equilibrium solution is got, if not, next round of negotiation will be started. In this way, the negotiation is made iteratively until the equilibrium solution accepted by all disciplines is reached, or the given maximum iterative cycle number is reached. The negotiation process is essentially that the disciplines make constantly concessions and compromises from their expected optimal solution point until the consistent compromise solution point is got.The aforesaid negotiation process is briefly concluded as follows:(1)Each discipline determines its own design strategy and builds its own satisfaction degree function.Negotiation management module decides the appropriate concession through maximizing the union satisfaction degree of the system overall objective under the premise of ensuring the higher satisfaction degree levels of each discipline’s local objective, calculates each discipline’s satisfaction degree value and returns it to the related discipline.Based on the mapping between the satisfaction degree domain and the physical domain, each discipline gets its design solutionXi∗and preferred solution interval SIi=[Xi∗, Xio] or SIi=[Xio, Xi∗], and uploads them to the negotiation management module. Here, Xiois the optimal solution of discipline i.Negotiation management module determines the intersectionI=⋂i=1NSIiof design solutions of all disciplines.If the intersection I is not empty (I≠ϕ) and interval length‖I‖⩽ε(the negotiation termination condition, ε value is selected based on characteristics of the design problem), the compromise solution can be determined and returned to the related disciplines, then turn to step 7. This way, Eq. (7) should be revised as the following form:(10)MaxSp(t,C)s.t.Si(t,C)⩾αi,i∈NI=⋂i=1NSIi≠ϕ‖I‖⩽εIf ||I||>ɛ, the intersection I should be shrunk further, the related disciplines adjust its own design strategy exponent, then turn to step 2.If the intersection I is empty, each discipline adjusts its own design strategy, then turn to step 2; if the given maximum number of negotiation iteration is reached, then turn to step 7.End.To demonstrate our approach we consider the design of automotive friction clutch. The working conditions are as follows: compact car (engine capacity 2.0L), medium load, the biggest torque Temax=310Nm, maximum power Pe=121kW, the total pressure F=5kN, reserve coefficient β=1.5. Design of the friction plate in friction clutch involves three disciplines: discipline 1 (structure design discipline), discipline 2 (tribology design discipline) and discipline 3 (strength design discipline). The three disciplines should reach a consensus on the parameters such as the number of friction plate Z, the outer diameter of friction plate D, and the ratio of inner radius to outer radius C0. The preferred value about some parameter in one discipline means the parameter’s desired change which enables this discipline’s objective toward improvement. For simplified calculation, we suppose Z=4 (double-disk), C0=0.6 (recommended value for 0.55–0.65), minimum clearance G=0.5mm (recommended value for 0.2–1.0), thickness of friction plate h=2mm (recommended value for 1.2–3), coefficient of kinetic friction μ=0.25–0.3), so three disciplines mainly reach an agreement on the outer diameter of friction plate D[25,26].•Discipline 1 (Structure design discipline). It hopes the volume V of the clutch is as small as possible when the transmission torque is a certain value. The value of parameter D should be appropriate to make the volume of clutch minimum, that is, the preferred value of parameter D in structure design discipline should be the smaller the better. The objective function and constraint are as follows.According to the above given parameter values, the objective function can be simplified as:(13)f1(x)=minV=min(6.03D2)In Eq. (12), [p0] is the allowable value of Intensity of pressure on friction surface, for copper base material, usually 0.15–0.3MPa. From Eq. (12), D should be greater than 198 to ensure that Temaxcan reach 310Nm. In addition, in order to make clutch more compact, D is restricted to be less than 400. Then the range of D should be 198⩽D⩽400.•Discipline 2 (Tribology design discipline). It hopes the parameter D is as large as possible under the circumstance that unit friction power Pfis less than the allowable value. This will reduce slipping friction in starting phase, prevent higher temperature rise on surface of friction plate from affecting its performance and lifetime of clutch. Therefore, the preferred value of parameter D in tribology design discipline should be the bigger the better. The objective function and constraint are as follows.According to the above given parameter values, the objective function can be simplified as:(16)f2(x)=minPf=min60211.0D2In Eq. (15), [Pf] is the allowable unit friction power, for the single piece of diaphragm spring clutch, [Pf]=2.51W/mm2. From Eq. (15), D should be greater than 155 and be as large as possible, in order to decrease unit friction power, reduce surface temperature of friction plate, and avoid burning loss and cracking. In addition, D is restricted to be less than 450 to avoid oversize clutch. Synthetically, the range of D should be 155⩽D⩽450.•Discipline 3 (Strength design discipline). It hopes the parameter D is as large as possible in order to reduce the intensity of pressure p0 on friction surface under the circumstance that the tensile stress caused by the centrifugal force is less than the allowable value. Therefore, the preferred value of parameter D in strength design discipline should be the bigger the better. The objective function and constraints are as follows.According to the above given parameter values, the objective function can be simplified as:(20)f3(x)=minp0=min9952.2D2In Eqs. (18) and (19), allowable stress [σ]=9MPa, rotate speed ne=2300r/min, and [p0]=0.3MPa, then the range of D should be 182⩽D⩽420.Discipline 1 hopes the parameter D is as small as possible, but discipline 2 and discipline 3 hope the parameter D is as large as possible. The perspectives hold by discipline 2 and discipline 3 is opposite to the perspective hold by discipline 1, their satisfaction degree functions are respectively Type I and Type II:(21)S1(t1,C)=1-(1-Ct1),S2(t2,C)=1-Ct2,S3(t3,C)=1-Ct3The union satisfaction degree is(22)Sp=∑i=1nWiSi=W1*S1+W2*S2+W3*S3Weighting factor Wireflects the importance of discipline i and generally remains same in the negotiation process. Here, W1, W2and W3are respectively set as 0.4, 0.3 and 0.3, and then S is as follows:(23)Sp=∑i=1nWiSi=0.4*(1-(1-Ct1))+0.3*(1-Ct2)+0.3*(1-Ct3)The negotiation model is(24)MaxSps.t.Si⩾0.6,i=1,2,3By the negotiation model, the concession C∗ at equilibrium point can be got (see Fig. 4).In physical domain, each discipline establishes satisfaction degree function based on its objective function.•Discipline 1. The acceptable range of parameter D is 198⩽D⩽400d1(X)=f1(X)-f1(Xo)f1(Xw)-f1(Xo)=6.03D12-6.03×19826.03×4002-6.03×1982=D12-1982120,796The satisfaction degree function is:(25)S1(X)=1-d1(X)=1-D12-1982120,796Discipline 2. The acceptable range of the parameter D is 155⩽D⩽450d2(X)=f2(X)-f2(Xo)f2(Xw)-f2(Xo)=60211.0D22-60211.0450260211.01552-60211.04502=4502D22-145021552-1=202,500-D227.43D22The satisfaction degree function is:(26)S2(X)=1-d2(X)=1-202,500-D227.43D22Discipline 3: The acceptable range of the parameter D is 182⩽D⩽420d3(X)=f3(X)-f3(Xo)f3(Xw)-f3(Xo)=9952.2D32-9952.242029952.21822-9952.24202=4202D32-142021822-1=176,400-D324.33D32The satisfaction degree function is:(27)S3(X)=1-d3(X)=1-176,400-D324.33D32The mapping relation between satisfaction degree domain and physical domain in discipline i is built as follows:(28)Si(ti,C∗)=Si(Di∗)From Eq. (28), the design solutionDi∗in physical domain that corresponds to the equilibrium point in satisfaction degree domain can be got.The interactions between discipline design module and negotiation management module are shown in Fig. 5, which correspond to the negotiation system in Fig. 2. The detailed negotiation process is shown in Fig. 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In essence, the negotiation in MCD is a flexible compromise and coordination process. With the thorough analysis on the characters of negotiation in MCD, this paper synthetically considers the benefit equilibrium among discipline individuals and system team, proposes a negotiation strategy to maximize the union satisfaction degree of the system’s overall objective under the premise of ensuring the higher satisfaction degree of each discipline’s local objective. The relationship between concession and satisfaction degree is built based on some facts, and then the negotiation model of MCD is generated. The mapping relationship between satisfaction domain and physical domain is established through the relation between objective function and satisfaction degree, and the corresponding negotiation process is planned. The recommended solution is given by synthetically considering the views of all parties to assist multidisciplinary designers to quickly achieve a consistent compromise solution. A case study of the automotive friction clutch demonstrates that the proposed negotiation strategy, negotiation model and negotiation process planning can improve the efficiency of multidisciplinary negotiation and the rationality of negotiation results. The fuzzy and more sophisticated factors in negotiation process should be considered in further researches, the aforementioned negotiation model and method needs to be further improved to enhance the adaptation to more complex problems.