@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A comparative computational investigation on the proton and hydride transfer mechanisms of monoamine oxidase using model molecules

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Reaction profiles of proton and hydride transfer mechanisms were generated.Dispersion-corrected density functional theory methods were employed.Water-assisted polar nucleophilic mechanism was investigated for the first time.Water-assisted polar nucleophilic mechanism is not a favorable path.Hydride transfer mechanism is more plausible than proton transfer.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Monoamine oxidase,Enzyme mechanisms,Flavoenzymes,FAD,Water-assisted mechanism,DFT methods,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Monoamine oxidase (MAO) enzymes regulate the level of neurotransmitters by catalyzing the oxidation of various amine neurotransmitters, such as serotonin, dopamine and norepinephrine. Therefore, they are the important targets for drugs used in the treatment of depression, Parkinson, Alzeimer and other neurodegenerative disorders. Elucidation of MAO-catalyzed amine oxidation will provide new insights into the design of more effective drugs. Various amine oxidation mechanisms have been proposed for MAO so far, such as single electron transfer mechanism, polar nucleophilic mechanism and hydride mechanism. Since amine oxidation reaction of MAO takes place between cofactor flavin and the amine substrate, we focus on the small model structures mimicking flavin and amine substrates so that three model structures were employed. Reactants, transition states and products of the polar nucleophilic (proton transfer), the water-assisted proton transfer and the hydride transfer mechanisms were fully optimized employing various semi-empirical, ab initio and new generation density functional theory (DFT) methods. Activation energy barriers related to these mechanisms revealed that hydride transfer mechanism is more feasible.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
MAO is the outer mitochondrial membrane protein and catalyzes the oxidation of the various amines including several neurotransmitters and xenobiotics to corresponding imines; the oxidized products are hydrolyzed non-enzymatically to the respective aldehydes or ketones. The enzyme exists in two distinct isozymic forms known as MAO A and MAO B (Ives and Heym, 1989; Tetrud and Langston, 1989). The two enzymes share 70% amino acid identity and both contain a covalently-bound FAD cofactor attached to an enzyme cysteine via 8α-methylene of the isoalloxazine ring (Binda et al., 2002; Bach et al., 1988). MAO A metabolizes serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine, while MAO B preferentially oxidizes benzylamine, dopamine and phenylethylamine and only metabolizes norepinephrine and serotonin slowly. MAO B also forms the neurotoxin 1-methyl-4-phenyl-pyridinium, a causative agent of Parkinson's disease, from 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) (Chiba et al., 1984). Inhibitors of the monoamine oxidase have been used clinically for the treatment of depression, as well as Parkinson's, Alzheimer's and other neurodegenerative diseases (Cesura and Fletcher, 1992; Youdim et al., 2006). In order to design new classes of inactivator compounds that reversibly block the enzyme action for MAO, it is important to understand the catalytic mechanism of this enzyme. In an effort to explain the underlying phenomena, there has been a continuous and long lasting debate on the amine oxidation mechanism of the monoamine oxidase. However, which mechanism is actually operative is still controversial. Various mechanisms have been proposed by different researchers such as the carbanion (Silverman, 1992), the single electron transfer (SET) (Lu et al., 2002), the polar nucleophilic (Edmondson et al., 2004; Edmondson et al., 2007; Miller et al., 1995; Miller and Edmondson, 1999), the concerted hydride transfer (Kay et al., 2007; Ralph et al., 2007; Fitzpatrick, 2010; Can, 2007) and the two step hydride transfer mechanisms proposed by Vianello et al. (2012).SET mechanism is not validated, because of the failure to detect a radical intermediate species of catalytic significance in either MAO A or MAO B. Second negative evidence against SET is that a single electron transfer from the amine substrate to the flavin is thermodynamically unfavorable (Fitzpatrick, 2010; Vianello et al., 2012). Very recent work by Orru et al. (2013) proposes polar nucleophilic mechanism for MAO A and hydride transfer mechanism for MAO B suggesting differing mechanisms for the two isozymes. Thus, polar nucleophilic (proton transfer) and hydride transfer mechanisms remain as viable options for oxidation process.Polar nucleophilic mechanism was proposed based on quantitative-structure activity relationship of p-substituted benzylamines by Miller and Edmondson (1999). According to this mechanism (Scheme 1), oxidation starts with the nucleophilic attack of amine nitrogen to the flavin C4a and flavin N5 abstracts α proton from the amine, forming an unstable adduct between flavin C4a and amine nitrogen. The second step is the dissociation of the adduct to produce the imminium ion and the reduced flavin. The first step (α proton abstraction) of the mechanism is the rate determining step (Edmondson et al., 2004; Erdem et al., 2006). The criticism in the literature (Fitzpatrick, 2010; Vianello et al., 2012; Gaweska and Fitzpatrick, 2011) concerning the polar nucleophilic mechanism could be summarized as follows:-Amine N-flavin C4a adduct is very unstable.Benzylamine αH is not acidic enough with an approximate pKa of 25.There is no basic amino acid residue strong enough to abstract benzylamine proton in the active site.Flavin N5 atom is not basic enough to abstract αH of the amine substrate as a proton.Elucidation of the crystal structures of MAO A (Son et al., 2008; De Colibus et al., 2005) and of MAO B (Binda et al., 2003) provided important new insights into this discussion. In the high resolution X-ray structure of the MAO A enzyme, 8 H2O molecules were detected on the re-face of flavin (Son et al., 2008). We thought that water-assisted αCH bond cleavage might deal with some of the above criticisms toward the polar nucleophilic mechanism through following arguments: It has been reported that the necessary pKa value to detach benzylamine proton should be around 15 (Vianello et al., 2012). Thus, the H2O molecule situated in re-face of the flavin observed in the X-ray structure can act as a proton shuttle from αC to flavin N5. Therefore, the possibility of the polar nucleophilic mechanism running via H2O molecules as shown in Scheme 2has been investigated as well. In the water-assisted polar nucleophilic mechanism, the H atom of the H2O molecule (PDB/2z5y code is HOH730) is transferred to the N5 atom of the flavin as a proton and the resulting OH− abstracts α proton of the benzylamine. In the literature there are other examples where the proton transfer reaction mechanisms are proceeding through the assistance of water molecules (Vianello et al., 2012; Markov and Enchev, 2004; Chen et al., 2009; Guo et al., 2008).Concerted hydride mechanism (Scheme 3) was proposed based on the similarities to other flavoenzymes accepted to function via hydride transfer (Kay et al., 2007; Ralph et al., 2007; Fitzpatrick, 2010). In this mechanism, αH of the amine is transferred to flavin N5 as a hydride which is facilitated by the electron donation from amine nitrogen to αCN bond and gives rise to the reduced flavin and the imminium cation as products. In the two step hydride mechanism (Scheme 4) recently proposed by Vianello et al. (2012), the first step involves hydride abstraction from the αC of the substrate by flavin N5 atom to form the flavin N5-substrate αC adduct. In the second step, adduct decomposes to the final products, namely neutral imine and fully reduced flavin, FADH2, a reaction promoted by amine deprotonation by flavin N1 which is facilitated by two water molecules. In this study, we focus on the first step of this mechanism since the second step exhibits relatively low activation energy.We have been involved in application of computational methods to assist the elucidation of amine oxidation mechanism by MAO (Erdem and Yelekçi, 2001; Erdem et al., 2006, 2013a,b; Erdem and Büyükmenekşe, 2011; Akyüz et al., 2007; Akyüz and Erdem, 2013). In a recent computational study, we presented negative evidence for the biradical SET mechanism based on structure–activity relationship of p-substituted benzylamine substrates (Erdem and Büyükmenekşe, 2011). Although the earlier PM3 calculations on p-substituted benzylamines (Erdem et al., 2006) and the ONIOM study (Akyüz et al., 2007) by our group supported the polar nucleophilic mechanism, all our later efforts to optimize the proposed amine N-flavin C4a adduct by density functional B3LYP functional failed. Therefore, we focused our attention to hydride transfer mechanism and very recent ONIOM (QM/QM) calculations (Akyüz and Erdem, 2013) including large portion of the active site interestingly revealed that MAO A and MAO B might have different hydride transfer mechanisms. As a continuation of the previous computational studies, our purpose here is to investigate the proposed mechanisms in detail and compare the relative barrier heights for each mechanism predicted by the same computational method. This will provide new data that will help to answer the unsolved questions on MAO mechanism as well as other amine oxidizing flavoenzymes. For this purpose, we focus on the small model structures mimicking flavin and amine substrates to avoid time-consuming computations in applications of various quantum mechanical methods (Fig. 1).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
