@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
ISDTool: A computational model for predicting immunosuppressive domain of HERVs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A computational model for predicting ISD of HERVs is proposed.1002 new putative ISDs of HERVs in the 24 human chromosomes have been predicted.The model is also applicable to search for ISDs in HTLV, STLV and MLV.Software named ISDTool has been developed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Immunosuppressive domain prediction,Human endogenous retrovirus,ISDTool,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Human endogenous retroviruses (HERVs) have been found to act as etiological cofactors in several chronic diseases, including cancer, autoimmunity and neurological dysfunction. Immunosuppressive domain (ISD) is a conserved region of transmembrane protein (TM) in envelope gene (env) of retroviruses. In vitro and vivo, evidence has shown that retroviral TM is highly immunosuppressive and a synthetic peptide (CKS-17) that shows homology to ISD inhibits immune function. ISD is probably a potential pathogenic element in HERVs. However, only less than one hundred ISDs of HERVs have been annotated by researchers so far, and universal software for domain prediction could not achieve sufficient accuracy for specific ISD. In this paper, a computational model is proposed to identify ISD in HERVs based on genome sequences only. It has a classification accuracy of 97.9% using Jack-knife test. 117 HERVs families were scanned with the model, 1002 new putative ISDs have been predicted and annotated in the human chromosomes. This model is also applicable to search for ISDs in human T-lymphotropic virus (HTLV), simian T-lymphotropic virus (STLV) and murine leukemia virus (MLV) because of the evolutionary relationship between endogenous and exogenous retroviruses. Furthermore, software named ISDTool has been developed to facilitate the application of the model. Datasets and the software involved in the paper are all available at https://sourceforge.net/projects/isdtool/files/ISDTool-1.0.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Human endogenous retroviruses (HERVs) are remnants of ancient retroviral infections. Many insertions into the genome have taken place tens of millions of years ago (Blikstad et al., 2008). It's conservatively estimated that HERVs occupy 8% (Gifford and Tristem, 2003) of the entire human genome. Discovery, classification and nomenclature of HERVs followed an erratic path, which has led to different naming for the same sequences (Blomberg et al., 2009). In this study, the nomenclature (Kapitonov and Jurka, 2008; Smit et al., 1996) of RepBase/RepeatMasker (Jurka, 2000; Jurka et al., 2005) is used. Typical full-length HERVs are about 7–11kb in size and consist mainly of the coding regions for gag, pro, pol and envelope gene (env), flanked on both 5′- and 3′- ends by long terminal repeats (LTR). Most HERVs exist in the human genome with incomplete structure (Jern and Coffin, 2008), which contain multiple stop codons, insertions, deletions and frame shift mutations (de Parseval et al., 2001; Kim, 2001).HERVs have been found to act as etiological cofactors in several chronic diseases, including cancer, autoimmunity and neurological dysfunction (Kim, 2012). Evidence from recent studies indicated that the envelope proteins of some HERVs families were expressed preferentially in human placenta (Kamat et al., 2002; Venables et al., 1995) and several types of cancer cell lines, such as ovarian cancer cells (Wang-Johanning et al., 2007), prostate carcinoma tissues (Wang-Johanning et al., 2003a), breast cancer cell line (Wang-Johanning et al., 2003b) and so on. It has also been reported that a conserved region in env, named Immunosuppressive domain (ISD), was translated in neoplastic cells (Benit et al., 2001; Lindeskog et al., 1993). ISD is a highly conserved region of transmembrane protein (TM) in env of retroviruses and with a typical length of 17 Amino Acids (AA) (Naito et al., 2003). A synthetic peptide (CKS-17) which shows homology to ISD inhibits immune function in vitro (Cianciolo et al., 1981) and vivo (Nelson et al., 1985). ISD is closely related to the immunosuppressive properties of retroviral envelope proteins (Benit et al., 2001; Mangeney and Heidmann, 1998), probably a pathogenic element in HERVs (de Parseval et al., 2001; Lindeskog et al., 1993). However, only less than one hundred ISD annotations in HERVs have been annotated by researchers so far, and it is only available in limited HERVs families with much redundancy.In this paper, a computational model is proposed to identify typical ISD in HERVs based on genome sequences only. Among ten parameters of divided physicochemical property scores (DPPS) (Tian et al., 2009), hydrophobicity and hydrogen bond, that play important roles in immune system (Zhou et al., 2007), were selected for analysis. Combining position characteristic, hydrophobicity and hydrogen bond properties of amino acids with position-specific scoring matrix (PSSM), a new hybrid feature extraction approach is proposed. Then weighted support vector machine (WSVM) is used to solve the classification problem of unbalanced samples. As a predictive algorithm for ISD, the model is more specific, more accurate and practical than some universal models for domain position prediction, such as Dompro (Cheng et al., 2006) and PPM-Dom (Sun et al., 2013). The model has a high classification accuracy using Jack-knife test. Using this model, massive DNA sequences corresponding to coding regions and LTR of 117 HERVs families were scanned. In addition, the model can also be applied to search for ISD in human T-lymphotropic virus (HTLV), simian T-lymphotropic virus (STLV) and murine leukemia virus (MLV) because of the evolutionary relationship between endogenous and exogenous retroviruses (Antony et al., 2004). In order to facilitate the application of this model, software named ISDTool has been developed. This software consists of two modules, ISDFindera for amino acid sequences and ISDFindern for DNA sequences.Amino acid sequences of HERVs, HTLV, STLV and MLV with ISD annotations were collected from NCBI (Sayers et al., 2012) at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/index.html. Sequences of HERVs and HTLV which are associated with human beings were used to train the model. A large number of sequences without ISD annotation were downloaded from websites to search for new putative ISDs in them. DNA sequences corresponding to coding regions and non-coding LTR of 117 HERVs families were extracted from a RepeatMasker output file named ChromOut.tar.gz (hg19, GRCh37) in UCSC (Meyer et al., 2013), which is available at http://hgdownload.soe.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/hg19/bigZips. Sequences of HTLV-1 were obtained from the Molecular Epidemiology Database (MEDB) (Araujo et al., 2012) at http://htlv1db.bahia.fiocruz.br, which involve DNA sequences corresponding to env and LTR genomic regions. Amino acid sequences of env of STLV-1 and MLV were downloaded from the UniProt Knowledgebase (UniProtKB) (Magrane and Consortium, 2011) at http://www.uniprot.org/uniprot. All Datasets above are summarized in Table 1.Training samples were prepared from the amino acid sequences with ISD annotations. Repetitive and singular sequences were removed from these initial amino acid sequences. Sub-sequences corresponding to ISD region in the remaining were extracted and used as positive training samples. The negative training samples consisted of two parts. One was obtained from random sequences in the regions lack of ISD, the other from overlapping sequences of ISD. This training sample preparation process could probably improve the identification accuracy of the model.Because ISD is a highly conserved sequence and associated with inhibition of immune and inflammatory functions (Cianciolo and Pizzo, 2012), it is preferred that sequence position characteristic and several physicochemical properties of amino acids should be chosen as the candidate features. The DPPS descriptor, which involves electronic, steric, hydrophobic and hydrogen bond properties, is then chosen to characterize physicochemical properties of amino acids. In order to select appropriate physicochemical properties which have closer relationship with immunity, Fisher values of ten parameters in DPPS are calculated on the training sample sequences. In these parameters, V8 and V9 with larger Fisher values are chosen, which is consistent with known knowledge that hydrophobicity and hydrogen bond play important roles in immune system (Zhou et al., 2007).Combining position characteristic of sequences, hydrophobicity and hydrogen bond properties of amino acids with PSSM, a new hybrid feature space construction approach is proposed. Standard PSSM is an effective way of encoding fixed size motifs into descriptors capable of being used to search sequences (Maudling and Attwood, 2004; Naughton et al., 2006), not involve physicochemical properties. In this paper, the motif has a size of 17 AA, just the length of typical ISD in envelope proteins. Twenty kinds of typical amino acids are considered. V8 and V9 physicochemical parameters in DPPS are clustered according to value similarity to meet requirements of PSSM. By PSSM, the position characteristic, hydrophobicity and hydrogen bond properties of a motif are mapped to a point in a three-dimensional feature space.The support vector machine (SVM) is a supervised machine learning algorithm based on the statistical learning theory (Vapnik, 1999). The basic thought of SVM is to map the original data into a high dimensional feature space through a nonlinear mapping function and then construct a hyperplane as a discriminative surface between the positive and negative data (Cui et al., 2013). In this paper, feature data is normalized and weighted support vector machine (WSVM) (Chang and Lin, 2011) is employed to solve the classification problem of unbalanced samples (Fig. 1).The model has a classification accuracy of 97.9% using Jack-knife test. The test is a cross-validation examination (Yuan, 1999), which allows the separation of a test sequence from the entire sample sequence suite, so that the remaining samples constitute training sets. The separated one is subsequently predicted and compared with its true value. The operation goes through iterations until each sample sequence has been traversed once (Manel et al., 1999). Jack-knife test is given by Matthews (1975):(1)C(s)=p(s)n(s)−u(s)o(s)(p(s)+u(s))(p(s)+o(s))(n(s)+u(s))(n(s)+o(s))where p(s) is the number of true positives, n(s) is the number of true negatives, u(s) is the number of under-estimated and o(s) is the number of over-estimated sequences.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
