@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Genome-wide evidence of positive selection in Bacteroides fragilis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We identified 1275 orthologous gene clusters present in all eight Bacteroides genomes.52 genes were identified as being under positive selection in the Bacteroides fragilis lineage.Many genes involved in the cell surface/membrane exhibited positive selection.Positively selected proteins in B. fragilis might interact with host immune systems.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Bacteroides fragilis,Molecular evolution,Positive selection,Pathogenicity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We used an evolutionary genomics approach to identify genes that are under lineage-specific positive selection in six species of the genus Bacteroides, including three strains of pathogenic Bacteroides fragilis. Using OrthoMCL, we identified 1275 orthologous gene clusters present in all eight Bacteroides genomes. A total of 52 genes were identified as under positive selection in the branch leading to the B. fragilis lineage, including a number of genes encoding cell surface proteins such as TonB-dependent receptor. Three-dimensional structural mapping of positively selected sites indicated that many residues under positive selection occur in the extracellular loops of the proteins. The adaptive changes in these positively selected genes might be related to dynamic interactions between the host immune systems and the surrounding intestinal environment.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Bacteroides fragilis is a Gram-negative anaerobe and a component of the normal intestinal flora in humans. Although the viable cell number of B. fragilis in fecal isolates is 10- to 100-fold smaller than those of other intestinal Bacteroides sp. (Salyers, 1984), it is the pathogenic anaerobe most frequently isolated from intra-abdominal infections, abscesses, and blood (Finegold, 1989; Snydman et al., 2007). The pathogenic potential of B. fragilis has been linked to several virulence factors, such as the capsular polysaccharide (Kasper et al., 1977; Onderdonk et al., 1977), some proteases (Duerden, 1994) and the B. fragilis toxin (Sears et al., 2006). Moreover, factors contributing to the resistance of B. fragilis to oxidative stress and extreme aero-tolerance, each of which is an important virulence factor for extraintestinal infections, have also been reported (Sund et al., 2008). While these factors have been thought to be important for pathogenicity, at the present time their relative contributions are not known, and other possible mechanisms must be considered.In the evolution of many microorganisms, positive selection and recombination are important evolutionary driving forces (Aguileta et al., 2009; Perfeito et al., 2007). There are many reports suggesting that positive selection contributes to the evolution of virulence genes in bacterial pathogens (Suzuki and Stanhope, 2012) such as Escherichia coli (Peek et al., 2001), Neisseria meningitidis (Andrews and Gojobori, 2004; Urwin et al., 2002), Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Smith et al., 2005), Streptococcus pneumoniae (Stanhope et al., 2008), and Helicobacter pylori (Ogura et al., 2007). Thus, positive selection for the fixation of advantageous point mutations is an important force in the adaptation of pathogenic microorganisms to different environmental niches, in terms of both optimizing infection processes and escaping host immune responses (Toft and Andersson, 2010). Genome-wide studies on positive selection and recombination in bacterial whole genomes have further contributed to a comprehensive understanding of the evolution of important pathogens, including Streptococcus spp. (Lefebure and Stanhope, 2007), Salmonella serotype (Soyer et al., 2009), Campylobacter spp. (Lefebure and Stanhope, 2009), Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae (Xu et al., 2011), E. coli (Petersen et al., 2007), Staphylococcus (Guinane et al., 2010), and Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Zhang et al., 2011). No genome-wide analyses of positive selection in Bacteroides sp. have been reported to date.To improve our understanding of the evolutionary dynamics and functional differentiation of Bacteroides sp., we performed full genome analyses for positive selection using the completed and published genome sequences for six Bacteroides sp., including three strains of B. fragilis. We focused on the evolutionary characterizations of core genome genes that are shared by the eight Bacteroides genomes. The results of our analysis of site- and lineage-specific selection patterns provide insights into the evolution of the core genomes in these Bacteroides sp. and information regarding the potential functional diversification of genes related to bacterial pathogenicity.Eight available annotated Bacteroides genomes, representing six different species, were used in this study (Table 1). The genome sequences were downloaded from the Integrated Microbial Genomes (IMG) database in FASTA format (http://img.jgi.doe.gov/cgi-bin/w/main.cgi). Gene annotations with COG (Clusters of Orthologous Groups) functional classification were also retrieved from the IMG database. Protein coding sequences were extracted from FASTA files, and orthologs were determined using OrthoMCL (v1.4) (Li et al., 2003). Genes with premature stop codons or with a sequence shorter than 50 codons were excluded from the subsequent analyses. OrthoMCL uses reciprocal best BLAST scores in a normalized similarity matrix that is analyzed using an additional step of Markov Clustering to improve sensitivity and specificity. OrthoMCL was run with a BLAST E-value cut-off of 1e-05, and an inflation parameter of 1.5. The OrthoMCL output was used to construct a table describing the genome gene content. We used this table to plot Venn diagrams and to delimit the distribution of genes within the eight Bacteroides genomes included in this analysis. Venn diagrams were plotted with the Vennerable R package (http://r-forge.r-project.org/projects/vennerable).Core genes (core genome) were defined as the orthologous genes shared by all Bacteroides genomes. To increase the accuracy and power of the selection analyses, an ortholog cluster was excluded from the core genes if the length of any gene was lower than 50% of the maximum length or the cluster contained more than one gene from each genome.Core gene orthologs grouped in the same clusters were aligned using the program MUSCLE (Edgar, 2004) with default settings. Multiple sequence alignments were carried out on amino acid sequences from each orthologous group, followed by conversion to nucleotide sequence alignments using the PAL2NAL software package (Suyama et al., 2006). Since recombined fragments among aligned codon sequences have a profound effect on the detection of positive selection (Anisimova et al., 2003) and phylogenetic inference, we tested for recombination signals between sequences in the alignment of orthologous genes. The alignments were tested for intragenic recombination based on single breakpoint (SBP) analysis and KH test in the HyPhy package (Kosakovsky Pond et al., 2006; Pond et al., 2005; Suzuki and Stanhope, 2012).To investigate the phylogenetic relationships of the Bacteroides sp., we concatenated alignments of the 1214 ortholog clusters which were created by excluding the recombinant gene clusters from core gene clusters. The resultant 1199,271 nucleotide alignment was used to reconstruct a genome-wide tree (species tree) using PhyML (Phylogenetic Estimation Using Maximum Likelihood) (Guindon et al., 2010; Guindon and Gascuel, 2003) with the GTR+Gamma substitution model of nucleotide evolution, and the Subtree Pruning-Regrafting (SPR) branch-swapping method. Branch support was calculated using the non-parametric Shimodaira-Hasegawa-like (SH-like) approximate likelihood ratio test (aLRT) as implemented in the PhyML program.The maximum likelihood method was used to test for traces of positive selection and to infer amino acid sites under positive selection using the codeml program of PAML version 4.5 (Yang, 2007). We used the branch-site models, which allow the ω ratio to vary among sites and lineages (Zhang et al., 2005). Branch-site model A assumes the following four classes of codon sites: class 0 with 0<ω0<1 in all branches; class 1 with ω1=1 in all branches; class 2a with foreground ω2≥1 but background 0<ω0<1; and class 2b with a foreground ω2≥1 but background ω1=1. Null model A1 was the same as A but with the foreground ω2 constrained to 1.The model allowing positive selection (model A) was tested using a likelihood ratio test (LRT) that was compared to a χ2 statistic with one degree of freedom. Likelihoods were estimated based on the species tree, and each lineage leading to the six different Bacteroides sp. was tested as foreground. Genes for which significant positive selection was detected were inspected for alignment errors potentially affecting the results of this analysis. If necessary, the alignments were manually modified and the codeml analysis repeated. Gene-specific trees were constructed for each positively selected gene, and the codeml analyses were re-run if the gene-specific tree differed from the species tree. A PAML analysis with gene-specific trees confirmed all positive selections detected using the species tree. Correction for multiple testing was performed using the procedure reported by Benjamini and Hochberg (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995). For all genes tested for positive selection, we calculated q-values from p-values using the R package QVALUE with the proportion of true null hypothesis set to 1 (π0=1) (Storey and Tibshirani, 2003). A false discovery rate (FDR) of 2% was basically used for the positive selection analyses. A binomial test was used to estimate the associations between each COG category and the frequency of positive selection.In the case of alternative models that allow for positive selection, we used the Bayes Empirical Bayes approach to calculate the posterior probability (PP) that each codon evolved under positive selection (Yang et al., 2005). The codeml program was used to calculate the PP of each amino acid site that came from the ω>1 class. We used a cutoff of PP>0.95 to identify sites under positive selection.To construct the three-dimensional (3D) structure models of the proteins encoded by the genes that showed evidence of positive selection, homology modeling was performed by using the Phyre2 (Protein Homology/analogY Recognition Engine) server (http://www.sbg.bio.ic.ac.uk/phyre2/html/page.cgi?id=index) (Kelley and Sternberg, 2009). The amino acid sequences of the proteins were submitted to the Phyre2 server for modeling in the intensive mode, which is based on a profile–profile alignment algorithm using multiple templates. Six templates were selected based on heuristics to maximize confidence, percentage identity, and alignment coverage. The visualizations of the positively selected sites mapped onto the structure were created in the PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, version 1.3 (Schrödinger, LLC).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
