@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Genome level analysis of bacteriocins of lactic acid bacteria

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Identification of bacteriocin secretors lactic acid bacteria and biosynthetic gene with bioinformatic tools.Phylogenetic tree of LAB with 16S rRNA, rpoB and gyrB (housekeeping genes) by MEGA6 tool.Physiochemical and secondary structure analysis of putative strains by computational methodology.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Bacteriocins,BAGEL3,MEGA6,ProtParam,SOPMA,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Bacteriocins are antimicrobial peptides which are ribosomally synthesized by mainly all bacterial species. LABs (lactic acid bacteria) are a diverse group of bacteria that include around 20 genera of various species. Though LABs have a tremendous potential for production of anti-microbial peptides, this group of bacteria is still underexplored for bacteriocins. To study the diversity among bacteriocin encoding clusters and the putative bacteriocin precursors, genome mining was performed on 20 different species of LAB not reported to be bacteriocin producers. The phylogenetic tree of gyrB, rpoB, and 16S rRNA were constructed using MEGA6 software to analyze the diversity among strains. Putative bacteriocins operons identified were found to be diverse and were further characterized on the basis of physiochemical properties and the secondary structure. The presence of at least two cysteine residues in most of the observed putative bacteriocins leads to disulphide bond formation and provide stability. Our data suggests that LABs are prolific source of low molecular weight non modified peptides.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Bacteriocins are ribosomally synthesized antimicrobial produced by both Gram positive and Gram negative bacteria (Riley and Wertz, 2002). They have been shown to be active against pathogens including bacteria, either of the same species (narrow spectrum), or across genera (broad spectrum) (Bowdish et al., 2005). Thus the bacteriocins help the producer bacteria to gain a competitive advantage in its niche environment to reduce the competitors to gain resources and form an important component of chemical defense system. Bacteriocins are mainly small, cationic and are composed of more than 30% hydrophobic residues (Rodriguez et al., 2003). The cationic charge of these peptides ensures electrostatic affinity with the negatively charged bacterial outer membrane, while the hydrophobic part of the peptide interacts with the cell membrane and enters the double lipid membrane.Bacteriocins of Gram-positive bacteria are more diverse than the bacteriocins described for the Gram-negative bacteria. Among the Gram positive bacteria, bacteriocins produced by the lactic acid bacteria (LAB) have gained particular attention nowadays (Morgan and Hill, 2002). LABs are generally regarded as safe (GRAS) and so are their metabolic products, bacteriocins. These substances find application in the food industry as natural preservatives and can also prove to be an effective alternative to antibiotics.Bacteriocins produced by the LAB have been categorized into three different classes according to their biochemical and genetic properties. Class I (lantibiotics) contains small peptides and unusual post-translational modified residues. Class II bacteriocins are non lantibiotics, small in size (<10kDa) and heat stable. These are further classified into Class IIa containing pediocin like bacteriocin, Class IIb comprises of two component bacteriocin which means that two different peptides act synergistically to form active pore complex. Class IIc bacteriocins have circular structure and Class IId consists of the remaining linear, non-pediocin and single peptides. Class III large thermo sensitive peptides have been recently reclassified as bacteriolysins by Perez et al. (Perez et al., 2014). The differences in the properties result in large divergence between bacteriocins.Bacteriocins are produced from ribosomally synthesized precursor proteins that generally consist of a C terminal core peptide and a conserved N-terminal leader sequence. This leader sequence is recognized and cleaved by a processing peptidase giving rise to a mature bacteriocin (Oman and van der Donk, 2010). The core peptide may undergo further post-translational modifications such as lanthionine formation, dehydration, or cyclization (Willey and van der Donk, 2007). The proteins involved in the modification, export, and bacteriocins regulation are often encoded by the genes present in the vicinity of the gene encoding the precursor protein (Lee et al., 2008). These genes could be located on either chromosome, plasmid or on transposon (Rodríguez et al., 2002). Bacteriocin production is a species specific phenomenon and difference in the location of biosynthetic gene, for example, immunity and transporter gene, can result in the variant form of bacteriocin and impart novel properties to it (Cotter et al., 2010; Quadris et al., 1994).Identification of a bacteriocin is a time consuming and tedious process where bacteriocin producing bacteria are isolated, screened and identified at molecular level. Further the potential bacteriocin needs to be purified, identified, characterized and extensively tested for inhibition of growth of other bacteria (Migaw et al., 2014). Dirix et al. (2004), Wang et al. (2011) and Singh and Sareen (2014) have described the identification of putative bacteriocins by exploring genomic DNA sequence for the presence of bacteriocin genes and also for the biosynthetic genes, essential for the bacteriocin secretion and immunity, in the vicinity.The current study was undertaken to identify the putative bacteriocin cluster from 34 different species of lactic acid bacteria (LAB), for which no bacteriocin production has been reported till now. The web-based freely accessible software tool, BAGEL, was used for genome mining of bacteriocins and their biosynthetic clusters. Molecular evolutionary genetic analysis (MEGA6) tool was used to analyze the phylogenetic relationship between the selected strains. The physiochemical properties and the secondary structure of the identified putative bacteriocins were determined by using the bioinformatics tools ProtParam and SOPMA, respectively. Combining the bioinformatics approach with extensive wet lab techniques can provide an efficient method to identify and characterize the novel bacteriocins.BAGEL is a hidden Markov model (HMM)-based software tool which enables genome mining for bacteriocin and their biosynthetic clusters through a knowledge based data base (Kok et al., 2013). Genome sequences of the 34 identified species were retrieved from BACTIBASE and NCBI and used as a query for BAGEL3 to identify the putative bacteriocin operons. BAGEL3 uses DNA nucleotide sequences in FASTA format as input and these sequences are analyzed in parallel using two different approaches, one is based on finding the genes that commonly surround the bacteriocin genes and the other is based on finding the gene itself (Jong et al., 2006).11http://bagel.molgenrug.nl, last accessed: 9/2/2015.The phylogenetic analysis was conducted by MEGA6 tool using 16S rRNA and housekeeping (rpoB and gyrB) genes. Gene sequences of gyrB, rpoB and 16S rRNA of 34 identified species were retrieved from NCBI in FASTA format and were aligned by clustalW method using MEGA6 tool (Tamura et al., 2013). The phylogenetic tree was constructed from aligned sequences using maximum likelihood method.ProtParam, a computational tool, was used to calculate various physical and chemical parameters of bacteriocins. The computed parameters included the molecular weight, pI, number of amino acids and cysetine residues, estimated half-life, instability index, aliphatic index and grand average of hydropathicity (GRAVY) (Wilkins et al., 1999).22http://web.expasy.org/protparam/protparam-doc.html, last accessed: 9/2/2015.SOPMA (self-optimized prediction method with alignment) has been used for secondary structure prediction. The protein sequence of the predicted bacteriocin was used as a query to run SOPMA. Predictions were available by email and also on a web page (Geourjon and Deléage, 1994).33http://www.ibcp.fr/predict.html, last accessed: 9/2/2015.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
