@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Predicting human intestinal absorption of diverse chemicals using ensemble learning based QSAR modeling approaches

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Qualitative/quantitative QSARs developed for predicting HIA of chemicals.Structural diversity and nonlinearity in data tested using TSI and BDS statistics.QSARs validated through OECD recommended stringent parameters.Proposed QSARs precisely predicted HIA of diverse chemicals.Proposed QSARs can be useful tools in screening new drug molecules.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Human intestinal absorption,Ensemble learning,Structure–activity relationship,Diverse chemicals,Qualitative and quantitative models,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Human intestinal absorption (HIA) of the drugs administered through the oral route constitutes an important criterion for the candidate molecules. The computational approach for predicting the HIA of molecules may potentiate the screening of new drugs. In this study, ensemble learning (EL) based qualitative and quantitative structure–activity relationship (SAR) models (gradient boosted tree, GBT and bagged decision tree, BDT) have been established for the binary classification and HIA prediction of the chemicals, using the selected molecular descriptors. The structural diversity of the chemicals and the nonlinear structure in the considered data were tested by the similarity index and Brock–Dechert–Scheinkman statistics. The external predictive power of the developed SAR models was evaluated through the internal and external validation procedures recommended in the literature. All the statistical criteria parameters derived for the performance of the constructed SAR models were above their respective thresholds suggesting for their robustness for future applications. In complete data, the qualitative SAR models rendered classification accuracy of >99%, while the quantitative SAR models yielded correlation (R2) of >0.91 between the measured and predicted HIA values. The performances of the EL-based SAR models were also compared with the linear models (linear discriminant analysis, LDA and multiple linear regression, MLR). The GBT and BDT SAR models performed better than the LDA and MLR methods. A comparison of our models with the previously reported QSARs for HIA prediction suggested for their better performance. The results suggest for the appropriateness of the developed SAR models to reliably predict the HIA of structurally diverse chemicals and can serve as useful tools for the initial screening of the molecules in the drug development process.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The preclinical ADME (Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism, and Elimination) screening strategies are considered an important tool for the early identification of molecules as a potential candidate in the drug development process (Guerra et al., 2010). Human intestinal absorption (HIA) is one the most important ADME properties as it constitutes one of the key steps during the drugs transporting to their targets. Although, numerous in vitro assay methods have been developed for the HIA, the throughput capacity is very low as compared to the high-throughput (HT) activity assay and combinatorial synthesis, thus become a “bottle-neck’ in the drug discovery process. Moreover, these methods are still resource-intensive, time-consuming and inadequate to deal with the large number of molecules as the future drug candidates being developed worldwide. Therefore, it is desirable to develop robust and accurate computational methods for predicting the intestinal absorption of the drug molecules. Using in silico methods to evaluate the ADME properties has become a practicable alternative choice so far, which could break through the bottleneck in the HT drug discovery process (Talevi et al., 2011). Several qualitative and quantitative structure–activity relationships (SARs) based on the linear and nonlinear modeling methods, such as the multiple linear regression (MLR), partial least squares (PLS), artificial neural networks (ANN), support vector machines (SVMs), decision tree induction (DTI) and decision tree (DT) have been used for predicting the HIA of molecules (Hou et al., 2007a,b,c; Yan et al., 2008; Guerra et al., 2010; Shen et al., 2010; Obrezanova and Segall, 2010; Suenderhauf et al., 2011; Talevi et al., 2011; Ghafouriana et al., 2012). Although, some of these studies reported prediction results in acceptable ranges, most of these were based on a small dataset, and for a limited data, the statistical models often fail due to an over-fitting problem, resulting in a limitation on their use. Many QSAR studies have limitations of their low predictive power when applied to new chemicals not included in the model building phase. It may be due to the lack of external validation of the model, selection of inappropriate modeling method or irrelevant descriptors. Moreover, the experimental biological activity data generally exhibit nonlinear structure and linear methods fail to capture the nonlinear dependence (Singh et al., 2013a). Therefore, robust QSAR models based on the appropriate modeling approach, relevant set of descriptors, and validated through stringent criteria are required for predicting the HIA of the molecules.Ensemble learning (EL) methods have been considered as unbiased tools for modeling the complex relationships between the independent (predictor) and the dependent variables (Yang et al., 2010). These methods overcome the problems with weak predictors, alleviate the small sample size problem and reduce the over-fitting in the training phase (Dietterich, 2000). Bagged decision tree (BDT) and gradient boosted tree (GBT) implementing the bagging and the boosting techniques, respectively, improve the accuracy of a predictive function (Yang et al., 2010). These techniques are inherently non-parametric statistical methods and make no assumption regarding the underlying distribution of the values of the predictor variables and can handle numerical data that are highly skewed or multi-model in nature (Singh et al., 2014; Singh and Gupta, 2014). To our knowledge, EL methods have not yet been applied to the HIA prediction modeling.This work aimed to develop reliable qualitative and quantitative SAR models for predicting the HIA of chemicals using simple descriptors derived from the molecular structure. Accordingly, EL based GBT and BDT models were constructed using the HIA data to predict the intestinal absorption classes and the end-point values of the chemicals. The predictive and generalization abilities of the constructed SARs were evaluated using various stringent criteria parameters and the external predictive power of these models was established using the test data. The performances of the EL-based SAR models were also compared with the linear qualitative (linear discriminant analysis, LDA) and quantitative (multiple linear regression, MLR) models.The dataset used here consisted of the human intestinal absorption (%HIA) data for 578 compounds (Shen et al., 2010). The original data has been compiled by Hou et al. (2007b) from multiple literature sources (Palm et al., 1997; Wessel et al., 1998; Dollery, 1999; Zhao et al., 2001; Deretey et al., 2002; Hou et al., 2007c). According to the information available in the literature, the experimental HIA values of the chemicals are based on (i) the percentage of cumulative drug and its metabolites in urine following oral administration, (ii) indirect measurements, such as bioavailability, the excretion in urine and feces following oral administration, and (iii) the ratio of cumulative urinary excretion of drug-related material following oral and intravenous administration. The data has earlier been used in other modeling studies (Hou et al., 2007a,b; Shen et al., 2010). The compounds in the dataset belong to a wide variety of pharmacological and chemical classes. One of the molecules in the dataset (molecule-618 in Supplementary material of Shen et al., 2010) was not included in the present study due to non-availability of structure. Finally, 577 compounds were retained for SAR modeling here. The HIA (%) values of the selected compounds varied between 0 and 100 (Table S1, Supplementary material). A histogram of the experimental HIA values is plotted in Fig. 1. It is evident that the HIA values show a right skewed distribution pattern, which suggests that the majority of the molecules have high intestinal absorption.In this study, 104 2D molecular descriptors (constitutional, and topological) were calculated for each compound using the MOSES Descriptor Community Edition (http://www.molecular-networks.com/services/mosesdescriptors). For calculating the descriptors, SMILES (simplified molecular input line entry system) of the compound were converted into the sdf files and were used in the MOSES program. The SMILES of the compounds were obtained from the ChemSpider (www.chemspider.com). The chemical structures available in ChemSpider corresponding to the SMILES of the considered molecules were compared with those in the Pubchem (http://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/). The compounds for which the chemical structures were found different, the SMILES of such molecules were taken from the Pubchem for descriptor calculation. For the selection of the descriptors, those with low variation (<1) were excluded from the pool. Model fitting approaches were then adopted for the selection of the relevant descriptors for SARs development. Prior to the model fitting, the data were split into the training (70%), validation (15%), and test (15%) subsets using the random distribution approach. The random sampling approach allows an estimate of model prediction accuracy and provides an estimate of its variability. Previous studies have shown that this is a reliable approach to evaluate the model validity (Singh et al., 2013b). Such test sets are commonly accepted as the gold standard to assess the real predictivity of the QSARs (Benigni et al., 2007). The qualitative and quantitative SAR models were constructed with the training data using all the descriptors left (68) in the pool. The optimal values of the model parameters were determined using the respective scoring functions (misclassification rate and root mean squared error) to rank the contribution of features in the current data (training and validation). The lowest ranked features were then removed (Singh et al., 2013a) in the successive steps. The optimal features were retained and the corresponding prediction accuracy was computed by means of a 10-fold cross validation (CV). Finally, sets of four descriptors for the qualitative and quantitative SAR models were considered in this study (Table 1and Table S1). The basic statistics of the selected descriptors are given in Table 2.Since, both the nonlinearities in experimental data and structural diversity of the considered molecules are considered important factors in the selection of the appropriate modeling approach and to develop global predictive QSAR models (Zhao et al., 2006), these were evaluated using the Brock–Dechert–Scheinkman (BDS) statistics (Brock et al., 1996) and Tanimoto similarity index (TSI), respectively. The BDS test is a two-tail nonparametric method for testing the serial independence and nonlinear structure in a data based on the correlation integral. If the computed BDS statistics exceed the critical value at the conventional level, the null hypothesis of linearity is rejected, which reveals the presence of the nonlinear dependence in the data. In this study, the exceeding BDS statistics (p<0.01) suggest for severe nonlinearity in data structure and hence, a nonlinear model is required for developing appropriate QSAR models. TSI is an appropriate distance metric for topology-based chemical similarity studies, which calculates the Tanimoto similarity between the fingerprint of a chemical and a consensus fingerprint, which is 1024 bit fingerprint (Toxmatch, Ideaconsult Ltd.). The fingerprint generation is based on the fingerprint implementation of the open source Chemoinformatics library (Steinbeck et al., 2003). The distribution of the TSI values of the considered chemicals is plotted in Fig. 2. The TSI values of the compounds varied between 0.0002 and 0.297 with a mean of 0.017. A good cutoff for the biologically similar molecules is 0.7 or 0.8 (Singh et al., 2013a). The distribution of the TSI values (Fig. 2) suggests that the compounds considered in this work represent sufficiently high structural diversity and warrant model stability with the suitability of the external test set for assessing the predictive performance of the developed QSAR models.Criteria for the categorization of the compounds as good intestinal absorption (>30–100%) and poor absorption (≤30%) was used (Shen et al., 2010). In this study, a total 499 compounds belong to the category of good intestinal absorption (class 1) and the rest of the 78 as a poor absorption category (class 2). Further, in view of the highly imbalanced nature of the dataset (499 compounds in class 1, 78 compounds in class 2) in the qualitative SAR modeling, we attempted to construct the qualitative SAR models using a balanced dataset in the training phase (78 compounds in each of the two classes) and keeping the remaining 421 compounds (class 1) in the test set for prediction.Here, linear classification and regression models were established using the linear discriminant analysis (LDA) and multiple linear regression (MLR) methods, respectively. LDA, a classification method constructs a discriminant function (DF) for each group (Singh et al., 2004) as;f(Gi)=ki+∑j=1nwijpij,where i is the number of groups (G), kiis the constant inherent to each group, n is the number of parameters used to classify a set of data into a given group, wjis the weight coefficient assigned by LDA to a given selected parameter (pj). Here, two groups of chemicals (good and poor intestinal absorption) were considered and bilinear DFs were constructed to discriminate between these groups of chemicals.The MLR quantifies the relationship between several independent or predictor variables and a dependent variable (Bordbar et al., 2013). A set of coefficients defines the single linear combination of independent variables (molecular descriptors) that best describes the dependent variable. A MLR model can be represented as: y=β0+β1x1+β2x2+β3x3+···+βkxk, where, k is the number of independent (x) variables, β1… βk, the regression coefficients and y is the dependent variable. Regression coefficients represent the independent contributions of each input variable.Here, we constructed the EL-based qualitative and quantitative SAR models (GBT, BDT) for predicting the HIA of diverse drugs and drug like compounds. Accordingly, the qualitative SAR model to predict the category of the chemicals (good and poor intestinal absorption) and quantitative SAR model to predict the intestinal absorption (%HIA) of the diverse chemicals were established using the set of selected simple molecular descriptors.GBT, a non-parametric statistical methodology, combines the strength of the decision tree (DT) and boosting. The central idea behind boosting is the combination of many weak models into a powerful ensemble with a greatly improved performance (Friedman, 2002). Initially, it selects a certain tree population and the first tree is fitted to the data. The residuals from the first tree are then fed into the second tree and repeating the process through a chain of successive trees. The final predicted value is formed by adding the weighted contribution of each tree (Singh et al., 2014). The size of the tree is an important consideration for the model accuracy. Here, the optimal size of the tree was decided using the criteria of minimal cross-validation error. Boosting improves the accuracy of a predictive function by applying it repeatedly in a series and combining the output of each function with weighting, so that the total error of prediction is minimized (Friedman, 2002). The GBT uses the Huber M—regression loss function which makes it highly resistant to the outliers. The number and depth of the trees are the method’s parameters which can be adjusted for a data set at hand. It controls the maximum allowed level of interaction between the variables in the model.BDT, an ensemble of DTs, combines the individual predictions. It generates an ensemble of individual trees by bootstrap sampling of the training dataset. Multiple samples from the training set are generated by sampling with replacement from the training data. Separate models are produced and used to predict the entire data from the aforesaid sub-sets. Then various estimated models are aggregated by using the mean for regression problems or majority voting for classification problems (Pino-Mejias et al., 2008). The BDTs gaining strength from the bagging technique use the out of bag data rows for model validation. The stochastic element in BDT algorithm makes it highly resistant to over-fitting. The number of trees in a random forest and depth of individual trees are the method’s parameters which need to be adjusted for an optimal model selection.The HIA data were split into the training, validation and test sets and the qualitative (binary) and quantitative SAR models based on the linear (LDA, MLR) and EL approach (GBT, BDT) were established with the training and validation data, while keeping the test data for the external validation of the constructed SARs. The optimal parameters of the models and the number of relevant descriptors were determined following the k-fold CV procedure. In CV, the data D are divided into k non-overlapping subsets, D1, D2,….Dk. At each iteration i (i=1 to k), the model is trained with D–Diand tested on Di. This approach has an advantage that each test set is independent of the others (Singh et al., 2013a). The optimal models were selected on the basis of the misclassification rate (MR) and the root mean squared error (RMSE) in the training and validation data.Randomization tests were performed to avoid any possible inclusion of the fortuitous correlations in the proposed SAR models. New models were recalculated for randomly shuffled target values with original independent descriptors matrix. The models, thus obtained from the training set with randomized target values should have significantly lower predicted accuracy values than the proposed ones because the relationship between the structure and the property has been broken (Xu et al., 2011).External validation of the constructed SAR models was performed by using the test set composed of the data not used in the model building phase. Various stringent criteria for validation of the QSAR models recommended in the literature were considered. The concordance correlation coefficient (CCC) in the external validation measures the precision and accuracy of the predictive model (Lin, 1992). Since, it does not involve the training set information, it is considered a true external validation measure independent of the sampled chemical space. Other criteria, such asQF12,QF22, andQF32have also been proposed in the literature for external validation of the predictive models (Shi et al., 2001; Schuurmann et al., 2008; Consonni et al., 2009). Further, Roy et al. (2013) proposed additional criterion based on the correlations between the observed and model predicted values of the target property with (r2) and without (ro2) intercept for the least-square lines. The performance of the proposed quantitative SAR models in predicting the intestinal absorption of the chemicals was also assessed by calculating the R2 and the RMSE values in the training, validation, test and complete data arrays. Tests based on the Cooper’s statistics (Cooper et al., 1979) were used to evaluate the predictive performance of the qualitative SAR models for binary discrimination of the compounds. Accordingly, the values of the sensitivity, specificity, accuracy and Matthew’s correlation coefficient (MCC) were enumerated for the prediction results.Modelling was performed using DTREG (http://www.dtreg.com). All other computations were done in Excel 97. The TSI values were calculated using Toxmatch (https://eurl-ecvam.jrc.ec.europa.eu/laboratoriesresearch/predictive_toxicology/qsar_tools/toxmatch).For a predictive SAR model aimed for screening new molecules, it is very important to define its applicability domain (AD), which is a theoretical region in the space defined by the descriptors used in the model building and the modeled response. In the present study, the AD of the constructed SARs was determined by the range of the individual descriptors in the training and external sets, as well as by the leverage approach. In the leverage approach, Williams plot was drawn using the standardized residuals and the leverages. The leverage value, hi for each ith compound is calculated (Puzyn et al., 2011) from the descriptors (i×j) matrix (X) as,hi=xiT(XTX)−1xi,where xiis a raw vector of the molecular descriptors for a particular ith compound. The obtained Williams plot was used to detect both the response outliers and the structurally influential chemicals in the model. The warning leverage h* is, generally, fixed at 3(p+1)/n, where p is the number of variables in the model, and n is the number of training compounds. The value of higreater than the critical h* value indicates that the structure of the compound differs from those used for the calibration. The leverage can be used as a quantitative measure of the model AD suitable for evaluating the degree of extrapolation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
EL-based qualitative and quantitative SAR models were established for the HIA prediction of the diverse molecules. Accordingly, the SAR models based on GBT and BDT methods were developed for the binary classification of the compounds and prediction of their HIA using simple molecular descriptors. The novelty of this work relies on the robustness of the developed models evaluated using several stringent external validation parameters, such as the classification accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, CCC,QF12,QF22,QF32andrm2, which rendered highly reliable results. Moreover, the EL-based SAR models performed relatively better than the linear classification (LDA) and regression (MLR) models. A comparison of our models with the previously reported QSARs for HIA prediction also stresses their characteristics. The excellent predictive power of the proposed EL-based SARs models may be attributed to their ability for capturing the nonlinear dependence in the data; producing more robust models through combining the predictions from the ensemble of weak learners. Overall, the proposed SAR models may be a useful prediction tool in the initial screening of compounds in the drug development process.