@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A multilayer screening approach toward the discovery of novel Pf-DHFR inhibitors

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
300 xanthones were docked against Pf-DHFR-TS.Size effect on potency was considered.Contact footprints were generated.X5, X113A and X164B were hits with contact footprints similar to known actives.Final selection of 11 compounds from ZINC database.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Contact footprint,Docking,Size normalization,Re-ranking,MolDock,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A small yet diverse xanthone library was build and computationally docked against wild type Pf-DHFR by Molegro Virtual Docker (MolDock). For analysis of results an integrated approach based on re-ranking, scaling (based on heavy atom counts), pose clustering and visual inspection was implemented. Standard methods such as self-docking (for docking), EF analysis, average rank determinations (for size normalization), and cluster quality indices (for pose clustering) were used for validation of results. Three compounds X5, X113A and X164B displayed contact footprints similar to the known inhibitors with good scores. Finally, 16 compounds were extracted from ZINC data base by similarity based screening, docking score and drug/lead likeness. Out of these 16 compounds, 11 displayed very close contact footprints to experimentally known inhibitors, indicating there potential utility in further drug discovery efforts.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
From antiquity, diseases like malaria have been a challenge for human civilization. Last decade has witnessed millions of deaths due to this devastating disease, especially in tropic and sub-tropics (World Malaria Report, 2013; Machado et al., 2009). It imposes a great socio-economic burden on the poor economies of third world and is a major contributor of mortality and morbidity (Machado et al., 2009).Present malarial chemotherapies mainly rely on a very few chemotypes or their allied structures such as quinolines, anti-folates and some cyclic endo-peroxides (Nayyar et al., 2012). Over the last few decades, the extensive and repetitive deployment of these drugs has stimulated resistance in the pathogen and has seriously compromised the effectiveness of current antimalarial arsenal (Rastelli et al., 2011). This selection pressure on present chemotherapies has underlined the need of testing/screening for diverse scaffolds from Available Chemical Space (ACS)/New Chemical Entities (NCEs) of small molecules.The above-mentioned screening can be performed by “actual biochemical” or “virtual in-silico” routes. No doubt, the progress in robotics, automation and miniaturization has greatly improved the efficiency of traditional biochemical screening; nevertheless these methods have become more expensive and are still labor intensive (Durrant and McCammon, 2010).On the other hand, screening based on “virtual platform” such as molecular docking are particularly suitable for most of the academic setup, with limited time and resources (Shoichet, 2004). Moreover, the increasing availability of 3D structure of proteins/macromolecules and advancements in NMR and X-ray, are expected to assist the development of these virtual platforms one step further. If utilized with caution and proper validation, these methods can be a very fruitful and many previous reports have shown the strength of this approach (Shoichet, 2004; Walter et al., 1998).Consistent with this theme, we undertook a multilayer screening of xanthones like natural products (Xanthone-NPs) against Pf-DHFR (Plasmodium falciparum dihydrofolate reductase). Pf-DHFR is a well known and validated target in antimalarial chemotherapy. It specifically catalyzes the conversion of dihydrofolate to tetrahydrofolate, which is a precursor to important nitrogenous bases such as thymidine, hence plays an essential role in cell cycle and survival of the pathogen (Toyoda et al., 1997a; Abbat et al., 2015; Oliveira et al., 2011; Bhat et al., 2013; Cunha et al., 2005).The selection of xanthones and related scaffolds was not arbitrary, but was based on the following observations/facts:(1)Nature provides thousands of diverse xanthones and many of them have established medicinal efficacy (Fukai et al., 2003; Don et al., 2004; Hay et al., 2004; Ignatushchenko et al., 1997; Massimine et al., 2006; Kumar et al., 2014; Warhust, 1998).Some of the xanthones have previously shown to possess anti-malarial properties, but there are very scarce reports of underlying molecular mechanism (Hay et al., 2004; Ignatushchenko et al., 1997). One such study was performed by Massimine group (Massimine et al., 2006). They have shown xanthone dyes such as eosin B and fluorescein (Fig. 1), inhibit Pf-DHFR in both enzymatic and cell line based studies (average IC50=320μM) (Massimine et al., 2006). These xanthone dyes also shown to be inhibit the same enzyme of other related apicomplexan organism such as Toxoplasma gondii. This investigation further revealed that the action of these oxygenated dyes is multifaceted and may involve other damage to pathogen or inhibition of other important enzymes.In a previous in silico study based on diverse natural products, xanthones and related scaffolds have shown remarkable affinity to wild type Pf-DHFR (Kumar et al., 2014).Like some known Pf-DHFR inhibitors e.g. triazinobenzimidazole Inh I and a pyridoindole Inh II, typical xanthone scaffold is a fused, rigid and a planar structure (Warhust, 1998). Conversely, some conjugated xanthones such as glycopyranosylxanthones are also structurally similar to flexible inhibitor like WR99210. This flexibility in an otherwise rigid scaffold primarily arises because of the central etheric oxygen joining two halves (Fig. 2) (Warhust, 1998).The binding mode of xanthones in Pf-DHFR active site may be similar to other antifolate drugs. While the main rigid core may interact well with the overall hydrophobic lining of the binding cavity, the carbonyl oxygen of the central ring and polar groups at side chains may get involve in hydrogen bonding interactions with key residues such as Ile14, Asp54, Ile164 and Tyr170, if located at optimal place (Warhust, 1998).Due to their unmatched complexity, abundant structural diversity and broad medicinal spectrum, xanthone like natural products are important for drug discovery efforts. Unfortunately, from last two decades their utility remained underrepresented in drug discovery, because of difficulty in synthesis and structural modification, lower natural availability, low drug likeness, problems in further optimization etc (Harvey et al., 2015; Molinari, 2009).Here we have attempted to address this problem by developing a framework using sequential filtering of xanthone like natural products and then applying this framework for screening of small molecules. We believe that this approach benefitted from the natural efficacy and higher diversity of natural products, while retaining higher lead/drug likeness of small molecules.Proposed multi-layer screening approach uses a collective knowledge of “in silico”, “statistical” and “experimentally driven” results. The one obvious advantage of this multilayer screening approach is that hits are not the results of a mere computational work, but statistical factors such as molecular weight were also taken into account. Finally the interaction footprints of poses, satisfied by both docking and statistical criteria, were compared with that of well known and experimentally validated antifolates, emphasizing interactions with key residues of the protein. We believed that these hits would have a greater chance of success in actual biochemical screening and would be helpful in designing better candidates for future anti-malarial drug discovery ventures.Detail of all the filter and validation methods used in multi-layer screening is as follow:Filter 1: Computational Docking (in silico origin)Validation: Results are validated by “control docking/self validation” experiment.Filter 2: Pose clustering/Size Normalization (statistical origin)Validation 2: Output is judged by comparing the “enrichment factor (EF experiments)” and “average ranking of active compounds” for different scaling scheme.Filter 3: Interaction foot-prints (Experimental origin, from experimentally established inhibitors)Validation 3: Results are counter-examined by “cluster quality indices” and “visual inspection with particular emphasis on interactions of ligands with key residues”.All docking simulations were performed using Molegro Virtual Docker (MVD 6.0) (Thomsen and Christensen, 2006). The crystal structure of wild type Pf-DHFR-TS (PDB code 1J3I) (Yuvaniyama et al., 2003) complexed with WR99210 was retrieved from Protein data bank (RCSB PDB). Protein structure was dissect at Asn231, which correspond to DHFR portion of Pf-DHFR-TS and side chain B was chosen, because of the presence of missing residues in chain A from Asp187 to Asn190. In protein preparation step all the crystallographic water molecules and inhibitor were removed. Inclusion of NADP in docking simulation didn’t create any significant change in cross validation and re-rank score of the WR99210, but it increased the computational time (from 158s to 298s). Considering the higher flexibility (17 acyclic rotatable bonds), this change in re-rank score didn’t seem practical at the cost of computational time, specially for fast docking software such as MolDock, hence NADP was removed from further consideration. Finally, this structure was examined for its connectivity, charge and protonation state to remove any structural error (see also Table S4–S6, ESI).A ligand data base (300 candidates) of xanthones was constructed from literature (Hui et al., 2012; Vieira and Kijjoa, 2005). This in-house library contained a wide range of diverse xanthones of natural origin (for detail see ESI). Before automated docking, all the structures were energy minimized and geometry optimized.In defining the binding site of Pf-DHFR, WR99210 was used as a reference with search radius of 10Å. MolDock Optimizer search algorithm, which is a kind of evolutionary algorithm (EA), was implemented to explore the search space. Final ranking was done on the basis of MolDock score (grid) and Re-rank score. The selection of this particular set of search algorithm and scoring function was based on control docking experiment (see self-docking, in Results and Discussion). The following default parameter setting was used: Population size=50, Cross over rate=0.9 and scaling factor=0.5. Maximum no. of iterations=2000 and maximum no. of poses=5. The pose with best Re-ranked score was used in final ranking.The validity and robustness of the docking engine was judged by self docking experiment taking into consideration all the available set of algorithms and scoring function.The energy based scoring function has a tendency to give higher weightage to higher molecular weight compounds due to their greater surface area. This tendency of scoring function toward higher molecular weight is generally undesirable, because it lower the chances of many fragment-like/lead-like/drug-like hits in final ranking. The present trends based on pharmaceutical industry show that candidates with optimal physiological properties should be prioritized over hits having high potency but lower suitability. So to remove this “size effect” a heavy atom counts (HACs), based strategy was employed (Pan et al., 2003). For this purpose various power of ‘N’ (no. of heavy atoms or HACs) was tested first and finally, N4/5 was identified as an optimal value for desired MW distribution of top scorers.All the ranking schemes were judged by their enrichment factor at different threshold limits. To calculate the EF, Known and experimentally validate DHFR inhibitors were first added in the data set and then the ability of different Schemes to identify these inhibitors, within the set limit was determined.AuPosSOM online was used to identify the contact footprints of the top scorers (Bouvier et al., 2010). This is a relatively new approach based on the concept of “contact fingerprint similarity”. There are three basic step of the operation (1) A Kohonen self organizing map (SOM) is generated for training phase using drug-protein contact description (2) An unsupervised cluster analysis is performed in the second step (3) finally; a newick file is generated for visualization purpose. The ligands and known inhibitors are arranged in the hierarchical tree/dendogram with respect to the similarity of binding mode. The ligands/Poses present in the cluster having the maximum known inhibitors, represent the “hits”.Two programs viz. Discovery Studio Visualizer (DSV) and Molegro Molecular Viewer (MMV) were used for visualization and inspection of docking results (Anon, 2016a,b).A novel python based algorithms called BINANA (BINding ANAlyzer) was employed in order to extract all the interactions between a ligand and the receptor such as close contacts, hydrophobic counts, number of hydrogen bonds, salt bridges and п interactions. In brief, this algorithm provided useful information about binding interactions (Durrant and McCammon, 2011).Finally, a similarity based screening was performed using PharmaGist-ZINCpharmer integration. The common features of the selected xanthones were identified by PharmaGist, which were then subjected to ZINCpharmer server to explore the purchasable chemical space available in ZINC database (Schneidman-Duhoyny et al., 2008; Dror et al., 2009; Koes and Camacho, 2012). The adopted methodology is depicted in Fig. 3.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In Summary, a multilayer screening of xanthones of natural origin (Xanthone-NPs) was undertaken against Pf-DHFR. The Re-rank score of screened compounds was size normalized and interaction profile was generated using experimentally known inhibitors. Three compounds X5, X113A and X164B have contact footprints similar to known inhibitors included in the study. Based on common features of three compounds, good docking score and interaction profile to experimentally known inhibitors, 11 purchasable compounds were screened from ZINC database. We hope that these findings would be helpful in providing deeper insight to DHFR binding and in designing new and more potent inhibitors against malaria.The authors declare no conflict of interest.