@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Exploring the inhibitory potential of bioactive compound from Luffa acutangula against NF-κB—A molecular docking and dynamics approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
NF-κB signaling is a major target for anticancer drug development.Bioactive compound was isolated form Indian traditional medicinal plant L. acutangula.The binding affinity of isolated bioactive compound and NF-κB was investigated by in silico approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
NF-κB,DHMA,Molecular docking,Dynamics,DFT,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) is a transcription factor, plays a crucial role in the regulation of various physiological processes such as differentiation, cell proliferation and apoptosis. It also coordinates the expression of various soluble proinflammatory mediators like cytokines and chemokines. The 1, 8-dihydroxy-4-methylanthracene-9, 10-dione (DHMA) was isolated from Luffa acutangala and its in vitro cytotoxic activity against NCI-H460 cells was reported earlier. It also effectively induces apoptosis through suppressing the expression NF-κB protein. Based on experimental evidence, the binding affinity of compound 1 with NF-κB p50 (monomer) and NF-κB-DNA was investigated using molecular docking and its stability was confirmed through molecular dynamic simulation. The reactivity of the compound was evaluated using density functional theory (DFT) calculation. From the docking results, we noticed that the hydroxyl group of DHMA forms hydrogen bond interactions with polar and negatively charged amino acid Tyr57 and Asp239 and the protein-ligand complex was stabilized through pi-pi stacking with the help of polar amino acid His114, which plays a key role in binding of NF-κB to DNA at a site of DNA-binding region (DBR). The result indicates that the isolated bioactive compound DHMA might have altered the binding affinity between DNA and NF-κB. These findings suggest that potential use of DHMA in cancer chemoprevention and therapeutics.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
NF-κB is one of the most important transcription factors that belong to the Rel family, which regulates various physiological processes including inflammation, innate and adaptive immune responses, cell survival, proliferation and apoptosis. It has also been shown to play a vital role in cellular transformation and tumorigenesis. NF-κB is frequently exists as a p65-p50 heterodimer in the cytoplasm in an inactive state complex with inhibitor of kappa B protein (IκB) (Sullivan et al., 2007; Pande et al., 2003). Binding of IκB protein to the NF-κB prevents its translocation to the nucleus and modulates its transcriptional function. All IκB proteins contains six ankyrin repeat domain (ARD) that is responsible for interaction surface around the NF-κB dimer and a signal responsive domain (SRD) that contains phosphorylation and ubiquitination sites for signal responsive degradation. Degradation of IκB regulates specific phosphorylation by activating IκB kinase (IIK) proteins results in activation or translocation of NF-κB to nucleus. The mammalian transcriptional factor (NF-κB) family consist of five major members such as RelA (p65), RelB, c-Rel, p50 (NF-κB1) and p52 (NF-κB2..All five members are characteristic by a conserved Rel homology domain (RHD). The dimer binds to the κB sites in DNA of their target genes and form homo or heterodimeric DNA-binding complexes (Kawai and Akira, 2007). RHD is divided into two subclasses; first class consist of active and short DNA binding proteins includes p105-p50 and p100-p52, which have long C-terminal domain that contain multiple copies of ankyrin repeats that are effectively involved in masked translocations. The second class (Rel proteins c-Rel, RelB and RelA) contain C-terminal transcription activation domain that are critical for nuclear translocation and DNA binding of NF-κB p65/p50 (Fan et al., 2013).NF-κB plays a key role in blocking apoptosis by regulating the expression of the antiapoptotic proteins such as Bcl-XL, c-IAP1, c-IAP2, XIAP, TRAF-2. It promotes cell survival by desensitizing the cells to apoptosis induced by various relevant stimuli, which is constitutively active in several tumor types, including prostate, breast, cervical and lung cancer. Although, high levels of NF-κB activation is found in both small cell lung cancer (SCLC) and non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and was significantly associated with poor survival in lung cancer patients (Chen et al., 2011). Therefore, NF-κB signaling is a major target for the development of novel anticancer drugs. The dysregulation of NF-κB cascade has been associated with the development and progression of several cancers. Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop potent inhibitors targeting NF-κB for better chemoprevention and treatment strategies for human cancers (Tang et al., 2006).From ancient years, nature has been a major source of medicinal agents to treat various pathological diseases. A significant number of compounds have been isolated so far from plant origin with anticancer properties. The compounds identified and reported by researches are with the availability of bioassay guided fractionation and in house screening. Currently used anticancer drugs such as taxol, vinblastin, vincristin and epipodophyllotoxin were isolated from plant origin. In our previous study, we have isolated the quinone derivative 1, 8-dihydroxy-4-methylanthracene-9, 10-dione from Luffa acutangula through bio-assay guided isolation (Vanajothi and Srinivasan, 2014). The compound shows anti-apoptotic property on lung cancer cell lines by enhancing the expression level of p53 and p21 and significantly decreasing the expression level of NF-κB (Vanajothi and Srinivasan, 2014). In this study, we investigated the molecular interaction of DHMA with DNA binding domain of NF-κB homodimer (1NFK) through three different docking protocol such as extra precision (XP), induced fit docking (IFD) and quantum polarized ligand docking (QPLD). Furthermore, molecular dynamics simulation and molecular mechanics generalized Born/surface area (MM/GBSA) are conducted to explore the molecular basis of the binding.The 2D structure of DHMA was drawn using Marvin sketch. The 3D conversion and minimization were performed using Ligprep (OPLS-2005 force field). Up to 32 stereoisomers were generated per ligand and all possible ionization was generated at pH of 7.0. Conformer generation of each ligand was carried out using Confgen with default parameters. A maximum of 1000 conformers per ligand were searched (Chen and Foloppe, 2010; Selvaraj et al., 2011). Each minimized conformer was filtered through a relative energy window of 10kcalmol−1 and a minimum atom deviation of 1.0Å. This value (10kcalmol−1) sets an energy threshold relative to the lowest energy conformer. Conformers having higher energy than threshold are discarded. Distances between all pairs of corresponding heavy atoms must be below 1.00Å for two conformers to be considered identical. This criterion is applied only after the energy difference threshold and only if two conformers are within 1Kcalmol−1 (Reddy et al., 2012).Qikprop (2013)(Qikprop, version 3.8. Schrodinger LLC) module of the Schrodinger was used to predict the absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion (ADME) properties of isolated bioactive compound (DHMA). It predicts both physically significant descriptors and pharmaceutically relevant properties. The drug-like properties of a compound was evaluated using the Lipinski rule of five (number of violations of Lipinski's rule of five) which is based on a set of property values, like the number of hydrogen-bond donors and acceptors, the molecular weight and the logP. It also evaluates the chemical behavior of a compound through the analysis of pharmacokinetic parameters required for ADME property. The percentage of their human oral absorption was also predicted to determine the toxicity levels.The crystal structure of NF-κB (PDB ID: 1NFK) p50 homodimer with the resolution of 2.30Å was retrieved from Protein Data Bank. Chain A (monomer p50 subunit) and Chain A complexes with DNA was used for docking studies. It consists of 325 amino acid and 11 base pair of DNA molecule. All crystallographic water molecules were deleted and hydrogen atoms were added to the structure. Next, the orientation of amide, hydroxyl and thiol groups and the protonation, tautameric state of His residues were optimized. Partial atomic charges were assigned according to the OPLS-2005 force field (Kaminski et al., 2001). The structures were then subjected to impact minimization with a cut off RMSD of 0.3Å.The active sites are usually a pocket or cleft at the surface of the protein that contains residues responsible for substrate specificity which often act as proton donors or acceptors (Brindha et al., 2009). The active site of the protein was investigated using the Site Map program. This software generates information on the binding site’s characteristics using novel search and analytical facilities. SiteMap calculation begins with an initial search step that generates site points on a grid surrounding the protein surface that may be suitable for binding ligands to the receptor. Contour maps are then generated, and analyzed for hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions spanning the active site.Molecular docking was carried out to find out the molecular interaction of the small molecule in the active site of protein by using Grid-Based Ligand Docking with Energetic (Glide) from Schrodinger (Friesner et al., 2004). To investigate, whether DHMA can tightly fit into the DNA binding domain, crystal structure of NF-κB (PDB ID: 1NFK) with and without DNA were used for this study. Prior to the molecular docking simulation, the binding site of protein is analyzed and the receptor grid generation panel generated the grid map for the receptor. The grid-enclosing box was centered to the active sites of the corresponding 3D-structure of the receptor so as to enclose them within 3Å from the centroid of these residues. A scaling factor of 1.0 was set to van der Waals (VDW) radii of those receptor atoms; with the partial atomic charge less than 0.25. Docking calculations were performed with XP mode it performs through a conformational search for a ligand. Glide XP mode determines all reasonable orientation for each low-energy conformer in the designated binding site. In the process, torsional degrees of the ligand are relaxed, though the protein conformation is fixed. During the docking process, glide performs a complete search of conformational, orientational and positional space of the docked ligand molecule and scoring function (G-score) was used to select the best conformation of ligand molecules. Bond order of both ligand and protein were adjusted and minimized up to 0.30Å RMSD. The OPLS-AA force field was used for the refinement of docking results including torsional and rigid-body movements of the ligand. The final energy evaluation is done with Glide score (Gscore) and a single best pose is generated as output for a particular ligand (Halgren et al., 2004; Sengupta et al., 2007).Gscore = a×vdW+b×Coul+Lipo+Hbond+Metal+BuryP+RotB+Sitewhere, vdW is van der Wall energy; Coul is Coulomb energy; Lipo is lipophilic contact term; Hbond is hydrogen-bonding term; Metal is metal-binding term; BuryP is penalty for buried polar groups; RotB is penalty for freezing rotatable bonds; Site is polar interaction at the active site; and the coefficients of vdW and Coul are: a=0.065, b=0.130.The isolated bioactive compound DHMA with NF-κB p50 subunit and NF-κB-DNA complex was used as an initial geometry for the IFD protocol implemented in the Schrodinger suite. IFD is a more robust and accurate method to account for both ligand and receptor flexibility (Zhong et al., 2009). In this method, the flexibility of the receptor is taken into account by combining a series of Glide and Prime processes. For this method, first the ligand was docked to the rigid protein with van der Waals radii scaling of 0.5 and a maximum of 20 poses per ligand were retained (Wang et al., 2008). Residues within 5Å of the ligand poses were subjected to a conformational search and minimization (Sherman et al., 2005). The initial docking was carried out using standard prediction mode and the numbers of poses generated were set to be 20 for protein refinements. Each 20 structure from the previous step was subjected to prime side chain and backbone refinements. Refined complex was ranked by Prime energy and the receptor structures within 30 Kcal/mol of the minimum energy structure were passed through for a final round of Glide docking and scoring. In the final step, each ligand was redocked into every refined low-energy receptor structure produced in the second step using Glide XP at default settings. An IFD score that accounts for both the protein-ligand interaction energy and the total energy of the system was calculated and used to rank the IFD poses (Friesner et al., 2004).In order to find the probable binding mode between ligand and receptor, QM/MM docking was employed by the QPLD protocol implemented in Schrodinger. In this method, the initial docking was conducted using Glide in standard precision (SP) mode followed by XP refinement with default settings. The output docking poses from Glide docking were submitted to the second docking to calculate the atomic charges of the ligands using QM/MM approach at B3LYP/6-31G* level within the protein environment. Finally, the ligand with new QM/MM modified charges was redocked by Glide with XP mode.The binding free energy of receptor-ligand complexes were predicted using Prime MM-GBSA calculation available in Prime 3.4 module. MM-GBSA is an acronym for a method that combines OPLS-AA (optimized Potential for Liquid Stimulation-All Atom) molecular mechanics energies (EMM), an SGB solvation model for polar solvation (GSGB), and a nonpolar solvation term (GNP) composed of the nonpolar solvent accessible surface area and van der Waals interactions (Moran et al., 2013). Binding energy was calculated by the following formula:ΔE=Ecomplex−Eprotein−EligandWhere, Ecomplex is energy of the protein-inhibitor complex, Eprotein is energy of protein and Eligand is energy of ligand.Molecular dynamics simulation of NF-κB monomer (NF-κB p50), NF-κB-DNA and its complex with ligands were carried out using Desmond (Maestro-Desmond, 2013, Maestro-Desmond version 3.6) with OPLS-2005 force field. The system was solvated by TIP3P orthorhombic water box keeping 10Å distance away from each edge of the box (Jorgensen et al., 1996). The salt concentration of the system was set to 0.15M Na+/Cl− for neutralizing the system and 12Å cut-off value was used for the non-bonded interactions. Then the system was equilibrated with the NPT ensemble at 300K using Nose-Hoover thermostats while the pressure was maintained using Berendsen thermostats and barostats method. All production-phase MD simulations were run with a time step of 2.0 femto-seconds (fs) with far time step size of 6.0fs using RESPA integrator for bonded and non-bonded interaction (Jatana et al., 2011; Pradhan et al., 2014). RMSD and root mean square fluctuation (RMSF) were analyzed to evaluate the structural changes for both apo (without ligand molecule) and complex structure of NF-κB receptor.Bioactive compound DHMA was subjected to DFT calculation to obtain the highest occupied (HOMO), lowest unoccupied (LUMO) molecular orbital and energy gap (Homo-Lumo). All the DFT calculation was carried out using Jaguar (2013) (Jaguar, version 8.2 Schrödinger). Geometry optimization of DHMA was performed using hybrid density functional theory method, with B3LYP based on Becke's three parameter exchange potential and Lee-Yang-Parr correlation functional with basis set 3-21G* level (Lee et al., 1988; Becke, 1993; Binkley et al., 1980; Gordon et al., 1982).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
