@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Computational prediction and biochemical characterization of novel RNA aptamers to Rift Valley fever virus nucleocapsid protein

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A family of RNA aptamers selected for their ability to bind to a viral protein, but whose secondary structures were uncharacterized, was folded and numerically scored in silico.The predicted structural characteristics of randomly generated RNA sequences were pairwise compared to those of the bona fide aptamers.The novel in silico aptamers that clustered structurally using multidimensional scaling with the bona fide aptamers were synthesized in the laboratory for further investigation.The in silico aptamers displayed good binding characteristics to Rift Valley fever virus nucleocapsid protein in vitro.Several of the in silico aptamers exhibited antiviral activity when transfected into cells prior to infection with RVFV.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
RNA structure prediction,Aptamers,Rift Valley fever virus,Nucleocapsid protein,Viral inhibition,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV) is a potent human and livestock pathogen endemic to sub-Saharan Africa and the Arabian Peninsula that has potential to spread to other parts of the world. Although there is no proven effective and safe treatment for RVFV infections, a potential therapeutic target is the virally encoded nucleocapsid protein (N). During the course of infection, N binds to viral RNA, and perturbation of this interaction can inhibit viral replication. To gain insight into how N recognizes viral RNA specifically, we designed an algorithm that uses a distance matrix and multidimensional scaling to compare the predicted secondary structures of known N-binding RNAs, or aptamers, that were isolated and characterized in previous in vitro evolution experiment. These aptamers did not exhibit overt sequence or predicted structure similarity, so we employed bioinformatic methods to propose novel aptamers based on analysis and clustering of secondary structures. We screened and scored the predicted secondary structures of novel randomly generated RNA sequences in silico and selected several of these putative N-binding RNAs whose secondary structures were similar to those of known N-binding RNAs. We found that overall the in silico generated RNA sequences bound well to N in vitro. Furthermore, introduction of these RNAs into cells prior to infection with RVFV inhibited viral replication in cell culture. This proof of concept study demonstrates how the predictive power of bioinformatics and the empirical power of biochemistry can be jointly harnessed to discover, synthesize, and test new RNA sequences that bind tightly to RVFV N protein. The approach would be easily generalizable to other applications.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Rift Valley fever is a zoonotic disease caused by Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV) found primarily in sub-Saharan Africa. However, the observation that RVFV has recently become endemic on the Arabian Peninsula (CDCMMWR, 2000; Elfadil et al., 2006), and its ability to be transmitted by many different mosquito species (Turell et al., 2008) underscores its potential for spread beyond its historical boundaries. Transmission of RVFV most often occurs via the bite of a mosquito, although agricultural workers who handle infected animals or animal products are also at risk. The RVFV genome is a tripartite, negative-sense RNA encapsidated by a nucleocapsid protein (N). N is important at several points in the virus life cycle (reviewed in (Ruigrok et al., 2011)) and disruption of the interaction of N with RNA could lead to a possible antiviral therapeutic treatment. An important step toward exploiting N as a target for antiviral chemotherapy involves understanding how N preferentially recognizes RVFV genomic RNA.In an effort to understand the molecular determinants of how N recognizes its target RNA in the cellular milieu where non-viral RNA vastly outnumbers viral RNA, we previously carried out an in vitro evolution (SELEX) scheme that selects and amplifies RNAs that bind strongly to N from a starting random library comprising 1014 different RNA sequences synthesized in vitro (Ellenbecker et al., 2012). The output of that study was a partially degenerate list of about 100 RNA sequences that were observed empirically to bind with high affinity to N. These tight binding RNAs are called aptamers. Understanding the common structural or primary sequence features of these aptamers would be useful for future efforts to understand viral replication and to develop antiviral strategies that interfere with N’s ability to bind viral RNAs. Although we observed several short sequence motifs that were repeated in several aptamers, we were not able to propose a set of general sequence or secondary structural rules that could be used to predict RNA binding characteristics.We reasoned that we could use the data contained within the sequences of known aptamers to develop an algorithm to recognize good N-binding RNAs and, further, to discover new RNA sequences that are potentially good binders. Initial in silico analysis of the known aptamer sequences and their computationally predicted secondary structures was carried out using FOLDALIGN (Havgaard et al., 2007; Havgaard et al., 2005). FOLDALIGN uses both energy minimization folding of RNA sequences and sequence similarity to identify RNAs with similar structures (and by extension, similar functions) even when the primary sequences are not highly related. Local and global pairwise folding guides alignment of different RNA by identifying similar secondary structure motifs. This algorithm is particularly useful for the present application, as aptamer RNAs have in common high affinity binding characteristics, but they may have completely unrelated primary sequences. The FOLDALIGN output data demonstrated a conspicuous clustering of the numerical scores, which were based on structural similarity, on a multidimensional scaling (MDS) plot. Although the plot did not reveal the primary sequence and/or secondary structural features that these sequences have in common, we hypothesized that this method could discriminate potentially good binders from poor binders among a new, randomly generated in silico population of RNA sequences depending on whether or not they cluster with the known binders on the MDS plot.Here, we implemented an algorithm that combines energy minimization based RNA folding, a pairwise structural scoring distance matrix, and multidimensional scaling to graphically visualize the clustering of RNA sequences with a common experimentally determined property. We then injected novel randomly generated sequences and selected several that spatially clustered with the known binders. We enzymatically synthesized these novel RNAs whose sequences were generated in silico and tested their binding properties compared to those of known N-binding RNAs. Finally, we show that introducing these novel in silico aptamers into cells in culture inhibits viral replication, providing proof of concept that this combined bioinformatic and biochemical approach can lead to experimentally and physiologically useful outcomes.The underlying concept for generating candidate aptamers in silico is a simple one. By chance, a small subset of randomly generated sequences of appropriate length should adopt a similar secondary structure to known N-binding RNA aptamers (Ellenbecker et al., 2012). If a mechanism by which N binds a particular RNA involves specific recognition of a structural feature, those in silico aptamers whose structures are similar to the structure(s) of the family of known aptamers potentially represent good binders of N themselves. To screen for new in silico derived aptamers, we generated random RNA sequences (within a Python script, randomly drawing from the four nucleotides at each position) 30 nucleotides in length. A pairwise comparison was performed of the structures of these random sequences with those of the known aptamers.FOLDALIGN (Havgaard et al., 2007; Havgaard et al., 2005), a tool for aligning RNA structures, was utilized to determine similarity between aptamers. The output of the tool is an alignment score, but our approach, including some of the clustering and visualization techniques, requires a dissimilarity metric. For this reason the alignment score was converted to a distance using Equation 1 where x is the alignment score, d is distance, and max and min are the maximum and minimum encountered alignment scores, respectively. In this way, the maximum encountered score becomes a zero distance and the minimum becomes one (largest distance associated with smallest alignment score).(1)d=max−xmax−minMost alignments were so dissimilar that FOLDALIGN yielded no alignment score. For these, the distance was set at two times the maximum distance of known aptamers prior to normalization. While it is clear that this distance metric does not represent complete coverage of the search space, it serves our purposes in that it is bounded by the arbitrary 2X no-alignment scores and it maintains the relative distances between aptamers.In order to set an appropriate threshold for an in silico generated RNA sequence to be considered a potential novel high affinity RNA aptamer, all pairwise distances between the known aptamers characterized in Ellenbecker et al. (2012) were first calculated and then the aptamer that had the largest average distance from all other aptamers was identified. In fact, the known aptamers formed a cloud of points in a multidimensional vector space whose inter-point distances match those of the FOLDALIGN-determined distances. The known aptamer with the largest average pairwise distance was found to reside on the periphery of that cloud (Fig. 1).Any in silico generated candidate aptamer that has a smaller average distance to all known true aptamers would reside inside the “cloud” of true aptamers. Such a randomly generated aptamer proved so rare (the non-constant region of the aptamers is 30nt in length, therefore there are 430 possible random aptamers) that a threshold of five times this maximum average pairwise distance was set in order to consider the in silico generated aptamer a candidate for further study. The five virtual sequences that clustered most closely with the known aptamers using this process were named AS1–AS5. Their sequences are shown in Table 1.The synthesis of novel RNA molecules that were predicted by the algorithm above to be aptamer-like was carried out essentially as previously described (Ellenbecker et al., 2012). Briefly, we constructed DNA templates of the predicted in silico aptamers that contained an EcoR1 restriction site at the 5’ end followed by the promoter sequence for T7 RNA polymerase, followed by the predicted aptamer sequence, followed by an XbaI restriction site. DNA oligomers to make these constructs were purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies (Coralville, IA). The DNA fragments were cloned into pUC19 and resulting plasmids were amplified in E. coli. Plasmids were cut with XbaI and RNA run-off transcriptions were performed using MegaShortscript T7 RNA transcription kit according to the manufacturer's instructions (Ambion/Life Technologies).Purified recombinant N protein was serially diluted to varying concentrations in a binding buffer (10mM HEPES pH7.3, 150mM NaCl, 20mM KCl, and 5mM MgCl2 final concentration). Nine μL of various dilutions of N were added to each tube along with 1μL of 5’ end-labeled RNA that had been denatured at 90°C for two minutes followed by snap cooling on ice. In each experiment 25,000cpm/μL of reference RNA (wild type) was added. After incubation at 30°C for one hour, reactions were diluted to 100μL with ice-cold binding buffer and filtered through pre-soaked nitrocellulose filters (Millipore HAWP). The filters were washed twice with 500μL ice-cold binding buffer, dried, and the radioactivity retained on filters was measured by scintillation counting.Human 293 cells were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified eagle medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), penicillin and streptomycin. Vero cells were maintained in minimum essential medium (MEM) alpha medium supplemented with 10% FBS, penicillin and streptomycin. The Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV) vaccine strain, MP-12, was provided by Brian Gowen (Utah State University, Logan, UT). A Rift Valley fever reporter virus containing the gene for Renilla luciferase was provided by Richard Elliott (University of St. Andrews, St. Andrews, United Kingdom). The Renilla luciferase open reading frame was inserted in place of the NSs gene encoded by the S segment of Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV) and is known to not be required for viral infection. During infection, human 293 cells and virus were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 2% FBS, penicillin and streptomycin. Incubations were carried out at 37°C and 5% CO2.Confluent monolayers of human 293 cells grown in 24-well plate were transiently cotransfected with 15pmol RNA/well and 0.5μg plasmid DNA/well using the Lipofectamine 2000 kit (Life Technologies). The next morning transfected cells were harvested, counted and reseeded in 96-well plate format.Confluent monolayers of transfected human 293 cells grown in 96-well plate format were infected with RVF-luc virus using a MOI of three. Cells were harvested at eight hours post infection by removing the growth media, adding 20μL of lysis buffer and rocking the cells for 15min at room temperature. The cell lysate was diluted (5–20x) in reagent buffer and 20μL was transferred to a white 96-well plate. A Biotek Synergy 2 plate reader was used to autoinject each sample well with 100μL of Renilla luciferase assay reagent (Promega) and measure the luminescence.Confluent monolayers of transfected human 293 cells grown in 96-well plate format were infected with RVF MP-12 virus using a MOI of 0.1, centrifuged at 2500 RPM for 100min and incubated for 1h. After incubation the media was removed and replaced with DMEM supplemented with 2% FBS, penicillin and streptomycin. Supernatants of virus infected cells were harvested at 3 days post infection. The supernatants were serially diluted in MEM and subsequently used to infect confluent Vero cells grown in 6-well plate format. After a 2h incubation the cells were overlaid with MEM containing 1% agarose and incubated for 7 days. Cells were fixed with 9.25% formaldehyde and plaques revealed using crystal violet stain.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Here we demonstrate that secondary structure data from a collection of aptamers derived from a SELEX protocol can be used to guide in silico prediction of novel N-binding RNAs. We used numerical scoring of secondary structure similarity among aptamers, representation of these scores on multidimensional scaling plots, and subsequent calculations of distances between the cluster of known aptamers and potential new aptamers derived from randomly generated sequences in silico. Potential in silico aptamers whose structure scores placed them within a threshold distance from the cluster of known aptamers were then selected for synthesis in the laboratory and their N-binding properties were assessed through biochemical and virological methods. We found that the in silico derived aptamers were indeed recognized by N protein in vitro, as measured by a nitrocellulose filter binding assay, and they inhibited viral function when they were introduced into live cells prior to infection with RVFV, suggesting that they competitively bound to N in infected cells and interfered with viral replication.These results are significant for several reasons. First, they demonstrate that it is possible to predict new RNA sequences that have desired functional characteristics based on secondary structure and alignment scores and relative distances of these scores to those of known aptamers. Using this approach, detailed sequence analysis of individual aptamers is not necessary. Rather the matrix distance of the scores of new proposed aptamers from the scores of all of the known aptamers is sufficient to select which sequences will be good binders. Our original SELEX dataset was not amenable to direct sequence alignment because of very limited primary sequence similarity (Ellenbecker et al., 2012), the present method of plotting secondary structure scores using multidimensional scaling represents a powerful tool for the analysis of SELEX results. In the present case, we can conclude that RNA secondary structure is a powerful determinant for recognition by N, since the in silico aptamers were selected by their structural scores. It is notable that all five of the potential aptamers that were identified in the in silico screen bound to N with higher affinity than random or un-selected RNAs. These in silico aptamers were rare; it took several weeks of pairwise distance calculations of approximately 2.5 million random RNAs to find these five sequences that clustered with the true aptamers. It is also intriguing that the aptamers bound to N with different affinities. We suspect that the presence of the GAUU motif, which was also seen to be overrepresented in the original aptamer dataset, in aptamers AS1 and AS4 contributed to the higher binding affinity along with subtle differences in structure among the aptamers.Second, these results show that N is an attractive potential target for antiviral therapeutic interventions. When aptamer RNAs were transfected into cells and subsequently infected with either RVFV or with a mutant RVFV that expresses the reporter protein luciferase, the robustness of the infection and the production of virally-encoded protein were dramatically reduced. Transfection of an RNA that does not bind to N did not have the same effect. These data suggest that the aptamer RNAs competitively bind to N in infected cells, and thereby interfere with N's normal functions in viral replication. Nucleocapsid protein has been regarded as a potential antiviral target in many viruses (Ellenbecker et al., 2014; Jiao et al., 2013; Chapman et al., 2007; Challa et al., 2014), these results emphasize that perturbing N function is an effective way to inhibit viral replication.Finally, this work represents a proof of concept for a synergistic bioinformatics/ biochemical partnership that allows direct testing of in silico predictions in the laboratory. In turn, results from laboratory experiments could be used to inform and refine algorithms used to make the next generation of predictions. While many bioinformatics studies consist wholly of analysis and extraction of patterns from large datasets, this system enables iterative and direct testing of the hypotheses derived from bioinformatic analysis. This partnership forms the basis for a model system for future bioinformatics/laboratory endeavors in the future.Although the present approach to screening randomly generated RNA sequences for similarity to known aptamers gave intriguing and apparently biologically relevant results, this undirected screening was computationally expensive and time consuming. We are currently exploring the use of Evolutionary Computation techniques to iteratively evolve initially random RNA sequences to become similar in secondary structure to the known aptamers. To iteratively select ‘desirable’ secondary structure characteristics in silico we propose using a genetic algorithm to fix the desirable secondary structure elements regardless of sequence, while allowing the rest of the nucleotides in the RNA molecule to vary in a subsequent generation of in silico aptamers. This evolutionarily directed approach should yield exact matches in secondary structure (as predicted using UNAFold (Markham and Zuker, 2008)) much faster than screening randomly generated RNA sequences for structures that are, by chance, identical to a target structure. This approach will also allow for the forced inclusion of specified motifs, making it possible to test more directly whether structure or sequence of the RNA, or both, are primary drivers of the affinity of nucleocapsid protein for its cognate RNA.