@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Probabilistic model based error correction in a set of various mutant sequences analyzed by next-generation sequencing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Sequences analyzed by next-generation sequencing contain many errors.We proposed a method of error correction of heterogeneous sequences.We performed a computer experiment of error correction.We confirmed the effectiveness of our method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Base call error,Image restoration,Quality score,Quasispecies,Sequence analysis,SMRT,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
To analyze the evolutionary dynamics of a mutant population in an evolutionary experiment, it is necessary to sequence a vast number of mutants by high-throughput (next-generation) sequencing technologies, which enable rapid and parallel analysis of multikilobase sequences. However, the observed sequences include many errors of base call. Therefore, if next-generation sequencing is applied to analysis of a heterogeneous population of various mutant sequences, it is necessary to discriminate between true bases as point mutations and errors of base call in the observed sequences, and to subject the sequences to error-correction processes. To address this issue, we have developed a novel method of error correction based on the Potts model and a maximum a posteriori probability (MAP) estimate of its parameters corresponding to the “true sequences”. Our method of error correction utilizes (1) the “quality scores” which are assigned to individual bases in the observed sequences and (2) the neighborhood relationship among the observed sequences mapped in sequence space. The computer experiments of error correction of artificially generated sequences supported the effectiveness of our method, showing that 50–90% of errors were removed. Interestingly, this method is analogous to a probabilistic model based method of image restoration developed in the field of information engineering.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Many kinds of evolutionary experiments, by using bacteria (Barrick et al., 2009), viruses (Meyer et al., 2012) or self-replicating molecular systems (Kita et al., 2008; Ichihashi et al., 2013), have been conducted over the world, and then it becomes more and more necessary to analyze an evolutionary dynamics and statistical properties of fitness landscapes by sequencing a vast number of mutants in the evolving population (Betancourt, 2009; Pitt, and Ferr-D’Amar, 2010; Steinbruck et al., 2011; Otwinowski et al., 2013). This can be realized by high-throughput deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) sequencing (called the “next-generation” sequencing) technologies (Eid et al., 2009; Quail et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2012), which enable rapid and parallel analysis of multikilobase sequences. However, the observed sequences include many errors of base call. Therefore, if next-generation sequencing is applied to analysis of a heterogeneous population of various mutant sequences, it is necessary to discriminate between true bases as point mutations and errors of base call in the observed sequences, and to subject the sequences to error-correction processes.Many studies of error correction methods for next-generation sequencing have been reported (e.g. Wijaya et al., 2009; Zhao et al., 2010; Ilie et al., 2011; Yang et al., 2011). Several groups reported error correction methods of next-generation sequencing data to estimate the genetic diversity in quasispecies of viruses, that is, the occurrence-frequency distribution of mutant sequences in quasispecies (Zagordi et al., 2010a, 2011; Prosperi et al., 2011; Prosperi and Salemi, 2012; Astrovskaya et al., 2011; Skums et al., 2012). For example, in Zagordi et al. (2010b), each of the sequenced fragments (called the “reads”), which contain point mutations and base-call errors, is classified into several clusters by using a model-based probabilistic clustering algorithm. This clustering algorithm is based on a Bayesian statistics using the “Dirichlet process mixture (DPM)”. Then, the consensus sequence of each cluster represents the true (original) sequence.We have developed a novel method of error correction based on the Potts model and a maximum a posteriori probability (MAP) estimate of its parameters corresponding to the “true sequences”. Our method of error correction utilizes (1) the “quality scores” which are assigned to individual bases in the observed sequences and (2) the neighborhood relationship among the observed sequences mapped in sequence space. The quality scores are encoded by Ascii code in FASTQ files (Cock et al., 2010). Based on the concept of sequence space (Eigen and Winkler-Oswatitsch, 1990), several mutant sequences which are similar to an arbitrary sequence X are located near the sequence X in sequence space. These mutant sequences are called the “neighborhoods” of the sequence X. Error correction of the sequence X is conducted by referring to the sequence information in the neighborhoods. For example, let us consider that a letter at the ith position on the sequence X is “A”, while letters at the same position on other sequences in the neighborhoods are “T”. If the quality score assigned to “A” takes a high value and those assigned to “T” take low values on average, the “A” is likely to be the true letter. If the quality score assigned to “A” takes a low value and those assigned to “T” take high values on average, the “A” is likely to be an error and should be replaced with “T”. The purpose of this study is to develop a method to implement these processes automatically in a rational way. A marked difference between our method and other ones resides in that our method does not perform the clustering of reads based on their similarity, but utilizes the quality scores which are transformed to the error probabilities of base call.Our method of error correction is analogous to a probabilistic-model-based method of image restoration developed in the field of information engineering (Bilbro et al., 1992; Pryce and Bruce, 1995). Therefore, we can obtain several useful ideas from this field. To evaluate the performance of our method, we carried out computer experiments of error correction by generating 1024 artificial DNA sequences in a simulated evolving population. The results of the computer experiments supported the effectiveness of our method. This paper reports a novel approach toward a systematic error correction in a set of various mutant sequences through next-generation sequencing.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
