@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Image-based retro-reflectivity measurement of traffic signs in day time

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A vision method that remotely measures traffic sign retro-reflectivity in daytime.The method simulates nighttime visibility from images taken during daytime.The impact of time of day and distance on measurements are studied.The method with accuracy of 95.24% is cheaper, faster and safer than current practice.The method satisfies FHWA measurement requirements on accuracy and granularity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Retro-reflectivity,Traffic sign,Image-based,Remote sensing,Computer vision,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The visibility of a traffic sign at night depends on its retro-reflectivity, a property that needs to be frequently monitored to ensure transportation safety. In the U.S., Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) maintains regulations to ensure minimum retro-reflectivity levels. Current measurement techniques either (a) use vehicle mounted device during the night, or (b) use manual handheld devices during the day. The former is expensive due to nighttime labor cost. The latter is time-consuming and unsafe. To address these limitations, this paper presents a computer vision-based technique to measure retro-reflectivity during daytime using a vehicle mounted device. The presented algorithms simulate nighttime visibility of traffic signs from images taken during daytime and measure their retro-reflectivity. The technique is faster, cheaper, and safer as it neither requires nighttime operation nor requires manual sign inspection. It also satisfies FHWA measurement guidelines both in terms of granularity and accuracy. The performance of the presented technique is evaluated under various testing conditions. The results are promising and demonstrate a strong potential in lowering inspection cost and improving safety in practical applications on retro-reflectivity measurement.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Maintaining and improving the performance of high-quantity low-cost roadway assets such as traffic signs, mile markers, and guardrails is critical to safety of the existing transportation systems. The first step in managing these assets is monitoring their as-is conditions and involves evaluating placement, message clarity, line-of-sight, redundancy, daytime color, and nighttime visibility [4]. Due to the significance of the nighttime visibility, the U.S. Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) has enacted new regulations on minimum acceptable level of retro-reflectivity for all traffic signs. As of January 2015, all agencies are required to inspect this material property and comply with retro-reflectivity requirements for red/white “regulatory” signs such as Stop and Speed Limit signs, yellow “warning” signs, and green/white “guide” signs. By January 2018, these requirements will be applicable to overhead guide signs and street name signs as well [11].Enforcing these regulations requires agencies to frequently measure the current levels of retro-reflectivity and devise replacement plans. Two major measurement techniques are commonly used today: (a) using remote retro-reflectivity measurement device mounted on inspection vehicles. This device automatically measures retro-reflectivity, though the process needs to be done at night; (b) a practitioner using a hand-held device to measure retro-reflectivity. This device must physically touch the sign so the practitioner needs to perform this operation manually and sign-by-sign. This process can be performed during daytime, however, it is time-consuming, unsafe, and expensive [6,23].To address current limitations, this paper proposes a new technique which is similar to (a) as it performs remote measurements and is similar to (b) as it can be used during daytime. More precisely, computer vision techniques are used to reconstruct nighttime images using images taken during the day. Then, the reconstructed night images are used to measure retro-reflectivity similar to (a).Retro-reflectivity is a property of surface materials that reflect light transmitted by a distant source [2]. Retro-reflective materials are commonly used for traffic signs to enhance their visibility during night. However, a perfect retro-reflector reflects all the incoming light back toward the headlights, and can cause a safety hazard for the drivers. To create optimum visibility and to divert the reflected light from the driver’s direct line of sight, signs are coated with certain matt sheeting materials that have prismatic and micro-prismatic patterns. This coating mechanism allows the signs to be located safely out of the incoming light’s line of travel and yet be visible to the drivers at night. Fig. 1illustrates the role of retro-reflective material in sign visibility.According to the FHWA’s Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) [16], minimum retro-reflectivity requirement depends on the color combination of a sign (Table 1). These guidelines – current as of January 2015 – require retro-reflectivity to be measured in (cd/lx/m2) at an observation angle of 0.2° and an entrance angle of −4.0°. Here cd is candela – the unit of luminous intensity, which is the power that is emitted by the light source in a particular direction (brightness of a display devices) and lx is the unit of illuminance, which is a measure of how much the incident light illuminates the surface (hits and passes through a surface).The latest MUTCD recommends two approaches for retro-reflectivity management (Fig. 2):(1) Management methods which are primarily based on the life expectancy of the overall sign inventory. In these methods, life expectancy is estimated based on a number of factors including warranties, demonstrated performance, or control sign assessments; (2) Assessment methods involving regular nighttime visibility measurements. The MUTCD permits the combination of these methods in any responsible program that reasonably assures compliance.There are several commonly used management methods which are as follows:Expected sign life method – Using various measures of demonstrated sheeting life, signs are replaced when they reach a certain age. This method requires agencies to track the installation dates using stickers on the back of the signs, bar codes, or computerized sign management systems. However, manually inspecting these stickers or barcodes can be very time-consuming, especially if the stickers or barcodes are not easily visible on the sign.Blanket replacement method is similar to expected sign life method, except that individual signs are not tracked. Instead a group of signs are replaced at the same time based on the location and/or the type of the signs. In this method, as shown in Fig. 2, an agency divides their jurisdiction into corridors and/or zones where the number of areas is related to replacement cycles. Then all signs are replaced in each zone/corridor according to their replacement cycles.In Control Signs Method, for groups of similar signs, a single representative sign is placed at a controlled location. The control sign is measured for retro-reflectivity periodically. When the control sign is near minimum retro-reflectivity requirement, its in-service companions are replaced. This method has a low cost and does not require labor-intensive processes. However, a large set of control signs and adequate space are required to create statistically significant results.Even though in management-based methods, signs are assigned a life expectancy at installation, yet their degradation speed varies based on location and environmental conditions. Thus, management methods which replace signs according to a schedule, will result in replacement of many signs that are still fully functional.Compared to management methods, the assessment methods lead to less frequent sign replacements and improve efficiency. These methods could be performed through visual inspection during nighttime (Nighttime Visual Inspection Method) or using retro-reflectometer devices during daytime (Retro-reflectivity Measurement Method). Through these methods, retro-reflectivity could be measured more regularly, and recommendations can be provided on the best timing for replacing a sign based on degradation levels. Manual visual inspections involve some degree of subjectivity, yet research has shown that trained observers can reasonably identify signs with marginal retro-reflectivity [10]. Measuring sign retro-reflectivity through a systematic process provides the most direct means of monitoring the maintained retro-reflectivity levels and removes subjectivity.Currently, the most objective method to measure retro-reflectivity is to use handheld retro-reflectometers [9,21]. A single handheld retro-reflectometer costs over ten thousand dollars [31]. Because this device needs to be in direct contact with a sign surface to take measurements – even for the overhead signs and those ground mounted signs that are out of reach (see Fig. 3) its application can be labor-intensive, expensive, and potentially unsafe for the inspectors [5,27]. A bigger challenge is that these devices can only take measurements on pre-defined geometries which are not the best representatives of the actual driving geometries [3,8,20]. For example, measurements from twisted and leaning signs can result in retro-reflectivity above the minimum levels, while the actual luminance of the sign under nighttime conditions may be lower than the requirements [33]. Overall, all of the management or assessment methods, even those that are standardized by FHWA [16], are costly and/or labor intensive. In the past decade, research has proposed several measurement techniques to address these shortcomings. These techniques are discussed in Section 2.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
