@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#


@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
NF-Y TFs encoded by HAP gene family bind to the CCAAT-containing promoter sequences.We characterize duplicated HAP genes in Selaginella moellendorffii.Evolutionary relationships of LEC1-type of HAP3 genes have been studied.Detect thermodynamically stable conserved RNA secondary structures.Identified several conserved motifs in LEC1 proteins among all plant lineages during evolution.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Gene duplication,HAP gene family,In silico characterization,Molecular evolution,Selaginella moellendorffii,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
NF-Y transcription factors encoded by HAP gene family, composed of three subunits (HAP2/NF-YA, HAP3/NF-YB and HAP5/NF-YC), are capable of transcriptional regulation of target genes with high specificity by binding to the CCAAT-containing promoter sequences. Here, we have characterized duplicated HAP genes in Selaginella moellendorffii and explored some features that might be involved in the regulation of gene expression and their function. Subsequently, the evolutionary relationships of LEC1-type of HAP3 genes have been studied starting from lycophytes to angiosperm to reveal the details of conservation and diversification of these genes during plant evolution. Computational analyses demonstrated the variation in length of cis-regulatory region of HAP3 duplicates in S. moellendorffii containing three thermodynamically stable and evolutionarily conserved RNA secondary structures. The homology modeling of NF-Y proteins, secondary structural details, DNA binding large positive patches, binding affinity of H2A–H2B interactive residues of NF-YC subunits on the duplicated NF-YB subunits, conserved domain analyses and protein structural alignments indicated that gene duplication process of HAP genes in S. moellendorffii, followed by structural diversification, provide specific hints about their functional specificity under various circumstances for the survival of this lycophytic plant. We have identified several conserved motifs in LEC1 proteins among all plant lineages during evolution.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
CCAAT box-binding factor (CBF/NF-Y) is a conserved heterotrimeric transcription factor distributed in all eukaryotes and is found to modulate gene expression in a highly controlled manner (Siefers et al., 2009; Laloum et al., 2013). NF-Y is comprised of three different subunits: NF-YA (HAP2 or CBF-B), NF-YB (HAP3 or CBF-A) and NF-YC (HAP5 or CBF-C), that interact to form a heterotrimeric complex, each subunit of which is required for DNA binding, subunit association and transcriptional regulation of target genes (Laloum et al., 2013). The previous report suggested that the NF-Y complex in vascular plants is generally encoded by gene families (Riechmann and Ratcliffe, 2000). A complete functional plant NF-Y complex remain yet to be resolved elaborately, but the individual subunits were proposed to play crucial roles in a number of important physiological processes, such as specific developmental processes and in response to environmental stimuli (Siefers et al., 2009; Laloum et al., 2013).Duplication of individual genes, chromosomal segments or entire genomes (polyploidization) followed by the subsequent modification of duplicated genes that have undergone natural selection are considered as crucial driving forces of plant evolution (de Bodt et al., 2005). These processes produce novel genetic variants that stimulate genetic innovation (Conrad and Antonarakis, 2007). The fate of a gene that suffers duplication events include its functional category (Kondrashov and Koonin, 2004), degree of conservation (Jordan et al., 2004; Braybrook and Harada, 2008), sensitivity to dosage effects (Kondrashov and Koonin, 2004), as well as its regulatory and architectural complexity (He and Zhang, 2005). Recent duplication events have occurred independently within different plant lineages, especially in vascular plants, resulting in the variation of the number of genes encoding different NF-Y subunits. The appearance of multiple genes for each subunit in the plant genome has been positively selected during evolution, pointing towards the specificity of subunit interaction that would be ascertained by preferential protein–protein interaction, tissue or cell-specific expression of each gene or a combination of both (Yazawa and Kamada, 2007). The existence of the large number of possible combinations of plant NF-Y complexes demonstrated that they might act in a more intricate system than in vertebrates and yeast, which have only one gene that encodes each HAP subunit (Yazawa and Kamada, 2007). More importantly, occurrence of multiple copies for each NF-Y subunit has evoked a question whether a particular NF-Y subunit interacts with any other two NF-Y subunits or with only specific member(s) of the other two subunits (Thirumurugan et al., 2008).Selaginella (spike moss) is an extant genus of the lycophyte clade that have diverged immediately while the plants colonized the terrestrial environment, in course of which they have gone through intensive selection pressure, thereby adopting numerous important features (Banks, 2009; Saha et al., 2013). Xie et al. (2008) recognized ten HAP3-like sequences in the Selaginella moellendorffii genome, which were grouped into 5 pairs with high level of sequence similarity and were also assumed to be the products of two different alleles of HAP3 gene. When we searched for the Expressed Sequence Tags (ESTs) for the HAP gene in the S. moellendorffii, we noticed that duplicated genes of HAP family was isolated from the mixed tissues (whole juvenile plants with roots and reproductive stems with developing strobili of S. moellendorffii) depicting their influential role in adaptation to the changing environment (Hughes, 2005). Our in silico molecular characterization of HAP gene family within S. moellendorffii enlightens the fact as to how selective constraint has been operative during evolution in regulating their expression and function. In addition, the structural features that we have predicted in these analyses provide clues regarding their functions that can be used by the future researchers to proceed further to investigate their specific roles that are essential to regulate various physiological and developmental processes involved in lycophytic growth.We retrieved the mRNA and amino acid sequences of HAP gene family in lycophytic genome (S. moellendorffii) from National Centre for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Genbank/index.html). To explore the divergent pattern of LEC1-type gene evolution we searched for the existence of LEC1-type gene in various plant genomes, including 7 pteridophytic genera (Selaginella davidi, Selaginella sinensis, S. moellendorffii, Isoetes sinensis, Isoetes yunguiensis, Isoetes orientalis, Adiantum capillus-veneris), 3 gymnosperm genera (Picea abies, Pinus sylvestris and Pseudotsuga menziesii), 6 dicot genera (Pistacia chinensis, Dimocarpus longan, Jatropha curcas, Arabidopsis thaliana, Brassica napus, Kalanchoe daigremontiana) and 3 monocot genera (Zea mays, Glycine max and Oryza sativa Indica cultivar). The GenBank accession numbers and the length of nucleotide and amino acid sequences are given in supplementary Table S1. Multiple sequence alignment was executed using ClustalW software (http://www.genebee.msu.su/services/phtree_reduced.html) to perform optimum alignment for sequences. For each codon of HAP3 duplicated genes in S. moellendorffii, we have investigated the number of synonymous (s) and non-synonymous (n) substitutions which are presented along with the number of sites that are estimated to be synonymous (S) and non-synonymous (N). There were a total of 125 positions in the final dataset. These were produced using the Joint Maximum Likelihood reconstructions of ancestral states under a Muse–Gaut model (Muse and Gaut, 1994) of codon substitution and Hasegawa–Kishino–Yano model (Hasegawa et al., 1985) of nucleotide substitution.5′ and 3′ untranslated region of HAP3 mRNA sequences of S. moellendorffii were obtained using UTRdb and UTRsite (Grillo et al., 2010). We performed RNAz analysis to detect thermodynamically stable and evolutionarily conserved RNA secondary structures using multiple sequence alignments of HAP3 sequences of S. moellendorfii with default parameters (Gruber et al., 2007). Three-dimensional structure of NF-Y proteins were predicted with the help of PS2 server (Chen et al., 2006) and the structural alignment between protein pairs were performed using TM-align: a protein structure alignment algorithm based on the TM-score (Zhang and Skolnick, 2005). Positively charged electrostatic patches on 3D protein surfaces were determined as an indicator of nucleic acid binding interfaces using PFplus server (Shazman et al., 2007). The peptide binding sites of HAP3 proteins for the HAP5 subunits were detected using PEPsite (Petsalaki et al., 2009). The conserved domain structures of proteins and the secondary structural details were predicted using Scan-Prosite (http://prosite.expasy. org/scanprosite/) and ProFunc (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/thor-nton-srv/databases/profunc/index. html) respectively.Multiple sequence alignment obtained from ClustalW were used to construct Neighbor-Joining phylogenetic tree for LEC1-type CCAAT binding protein on the basis of the number of amino acid substitutions per site between sequences within different plant genomes using MEGA 5.05 software (Tamura et al., 2011; Saha et al., 2013) with a Poisson correction model (Zuckerkandl and Pauling, 1965) and bootstrap test using 1000 replicates (Felsenstein, 1981). We have searched for the conserved motif of LEC1 type protein among the plant lineages using MEME package (Bailey et al., 2009).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
