@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A mathematical model of insulin resistance in Parkinson’s disease

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Inflammation and oxidative stress cause insulin resistance in Parkinson’s disease.Parkinson’s disease is accentuated by insulin resistance.A combination of treatment options proves effective against Parkinson’s disease.Delayed treatment states provide a more realistic view of drug efficacy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Parkinson’s disease,Insulin resistance,Computational biology,Neurodegenerative disease,Type-II diabetes mellitus,Delayed treatment,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper introduces a mathematical model representing the biochemical interactions between insulin signaling and Parkinson’s disease. The model can be used to examine the changes that occur over the course of the disease as well as identify which processes would be the most effective targets for treatment. The model is mathematized using biochemical systems theory (BST). It incorporates a treatment strategy that includes several experimental drugs along with current treatments. In the past, BST models of neurodegeneration have used power law analysis and simulation (PLAS) to model the system. This paper recommends the use of MATLAB instead. MATLAB allows for more flexibility in both the model itself and in data analysis. Previous BST analyses of neurodegeneration began treatment at disease onset. As shown in this model, the outcomes of delayed, realistic treatment and full treatment at disease onset are significantly different. The delayed treatment strategy is an important development in BST modeling of neurodegeneration. It emphasizes the importance of early diagnosis, and allows for a more accurate representation of disease and treatment interactions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
PD is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by dopaminergic neuron death in the substantia nigra pars compacta and results in physical symptoms such as tremors, rigidity, and bradykinesia as well as psychological symptoms such as an increased risk of dementia, depression, and anxiety. Insulin resistance, a precursor of T2DM, is a result of a diet high in fats and sugars. Insulin signaling pathways and PD pathogenesis have been experimentally proven to converge (Morris et al., 2008, 2011), yet clinical data is inconsistent (Bosco et al., 2012). The model includes production of ROS and RNS, p38 phosphorylation, tau protein hyperphosphorylation, inflammation, and dopamine synthesis, degradation, and transport. This paper presents a mathematical model that details the interactions between these processes and how they can combine to influence neuronal death.This disease simulation makes use of a modeling strategy know as BST, which was established by Savageu in 1969 and developed further by Voit in 2000. BST uses ODEs to model changes in reaction rates and species concentrations throughout the progression of the disease. This model includes a baseline state, which depicts a healthy cell, a disease state, modeling a cell with PD and insulin resistance, and a treatment state, which is a disease state cell including several treatment options. The disease state was created by activating trigger points within the baseline model that initiated disease development, and the treatment state was created by introducing a mixture of drugs at two times: the onset of the disease, and halfway through the disease progression. These treatments target reactions the models shows are important in PD pathogenesis where it converges with insulin signaling pathways.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
