@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Identification of miR159s and their target genes and expression analysis under drought stress in potato

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
stu-miR159s and their target genes were identified in potato.stu-miR159s regulate GAMyb-like genes in potato.GAMyb-like genes belong to R2R3 MYB domain TFs.stu-miR159s drive over-expression of GAMyb-like TFs under drought stress in potato.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
MircoR159,GAMyb-like gene,Expressional analysis,Potato,Drought stress,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The MYB proteins comprise one of the largest families of plant transcription factors (TFs) and many of MYB families, which play essential roles in plant growth, development and respond to environmental stresses, and have yet been identified in plant. Previous research has shown that miR159 family members repressed the conserved plant R2R3 MYB domain TFs in model plants. In the present research, we identified three potato novel miR159 family members named as stu-miR159a, stu-miR159b and stu-miR159c based on bioinformatics analysis. Target prediction showed that they have a bite sit on the three GAMyb-like genes (StGAMyb-like1, StGAMyb-like2.1 and StGAMyb-like2.2) of potato. Those GAMyb-like genes also have been selected and cloned from potato, which belong to R2R3 MYB domain TFs. We further measured expressional levels of stu-miR159s and potato GAMyb-like genes during the different periods of drought treated samples using quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). The results showed that they had a opposite expression pattern, briefly, three stu-miR159 members showed similar expressional trends which were significantly decreased expression after experiencing 25 days of drought stress treatment, while the potato GAMyb-like family members were greatly increased. Therefore, we suggested that stu-miR159s negatively regulated the expression of potato GAMyb-like genes which responsible for drought stress. The findings can facilitate functional studies of miRNAs in plants and provide molecular evidence for involvement process of drought tolerance in potato.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Drought is one of the most frequently occurring environmental stresses that limit the growth, development, and production of crops (Sahi et al., 2006). Plants sense the loss of water and adapt the drought stress mainly dependent on the regulated expression of drought-related genes. The expression of various stress-response genes is mediated by a number of transcription factors (TFs). The TFs interact with specific cis-acting elements existing in target gene promoters and regulate elaborate networks of drought-responsive genes and associated biochemical and physiological adaptations (Yamaguchi-Shinozaki and Shinozaki, 2006).Recently, roles of various TFs members have been widely documented in drought stress response and signaling cascades (Kang et al., 2002; Abe et al., 2003; Fujita et al., 2004; Tran et al., 2004; Seo et al., 2009), of which MYB TFs appear to play significant roles, which are the largest plant transcription factor gene family and are composed of one, two, or three imperfect helix-turn-helix repeats that recognize the major groove of DNA (Chen et al., 2006). They have been widely found in many organisms, including animals, fungi and plants, and divided into four types, MYB1R, R2R3-MYB, R1R2R3 MYB (MYB 3R), and 4R MYB, based on the number of adjacent imperfect repeats. However, in plant, MYB TFs are mainly of the R2R3-MYB type, which contain two repeats of the MYB domain (Du et al., 2009), and have been proved to be involved in the control of a variety of plant-specific processes, including primary and secondary metabolism, cell fate and identity, developmental process and responses to biotic and abiotic stresses (Dubos et al., 2010).MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are classes of small, non-coding, endogenous RNAs that are known to play important regulatory roles in plant stress response by negatively affecting gene expression at the post-transcriptionally (Voinnet, 2009). Until now, thousands of miRNAs have been found and majority of their target genes have been identified encoding TFs or important enzymes that play important roles in plant development and responses to various biotic and abiotic stresses (Jones-Rhoades et al., 2006), which including leaf development, floral development (Palatnik et al., 2003), stem development (Mallory et al., 2004), root development (Guo et al., 2005), and auxin responses (Wang et al., 2005), signal transduction (Rhoades et al., 2002), phase change (Lauter et al., 2005), responses to disease stress (Chapman et al., 2004) and different environmental stresses. Despite of this, main research of them was focused on model plants such as Arabidopsis thaliana and rice (Oryza sativa) (Bartel and Bartel, 2003; Bonnet et al., 2004; Griffiths-Jones et al., 2006). Enthusiastically, previous researches have shown that miR159 family members regulated the conserved plant MYB-like genes that encode R2R3 MYB domain TFs (Tsuji et al., 2006; Fahlgren et al., 2007; Millar and Gubler, 2005; Allen et al., 2007). MYBs have been proved to be involved in the control of a variety of plant-specific processes, including primary and secondary metabolism, cell fate and identity, developmental processes and responses to biotic and abiotic stresses (Abe et al., 2003; Seo et al., 2009). However, none of miR159 family members have been identified in potato. Moreover, the detailed regulating mechanism of MYB family of TFs by miR159 in potato is completely unknown.In the present research, to make a good understand the regulating mechanism of MYB family members whether they are regulated by miR159s under drought stress in potato, we identified three miR159 family members and their targeted GAMyb-like TFs in potato using bioinformatics analysis and experimental verification. The findings can help us to make a good understand of the roles of miRNAs in regulation of plant response to drought and provide molecular evidence for involvement process of drought tolerance in potato.All of plant mature miRNA sequences were obtained from the miRNA registry miRBase (http://microrna.sanger.ac.uk/) (miRBase Release 20.0, June, 2013) (Saini et al., 2008). Potato EST, GSS, and nr databases were obtained from NCBI GenBank nucleotide databases (http://www.ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) and the Potato Genome Sequencing Consortium Browser Server (http://potatogenome.net/index.php/Main_Page). UNAFold (http://www.bioinfo.rpi.edu/applications/mfold/) was used to online predict the secondary structure and stability of RNAs. Online program psRNATarget (http://plantgrn.noble.org/psRNATarget/) (Dai and Zhao, 2011) was used to predict miRNA target genes. Sequences of potato and Arabidopsis MYB family TFs were retrieved from plant transcription factor database (http://planttfdb.cbi.pku.edu.cn/) (Jin et al., 2014). CluxtalX 1.8 and MEGA 5.0 program were used to alignment analysis and phylogenetic tree construction.miR159 family members in potato were identified using the method described by Zhang et al. (2006a,b, 2007),),). The procedure and general strategy for the potential RNA prediction was shown in Fig. 1. Briefly, mature sequences of previously known plant miR159s were obtained from the miRNA registry database (http://www.mirbase.org/search.shtml) (miRBase Release 20.0, June, 2013). To avoid the redundant or overlapping miRNAs, the repeated sequences of miRNAs within the different species were removed, and the remaining sequences were used as query sequences for search potato EST, GSS, and nr databases. Adjusted the parameter settings were as follows: select potato EST, GSS or nr database; max target sequences were set at 1000; expect values were set to 1000; the remainder parameters were default. All of the repeat EST, GSS and nr sequences were removed from the resulting hits which were obtained from the blast search. All of remainder sequences were saved for further secondary structure analysis.The selected non-redundant EST and GSS sequences with 2 or fewer mismatches with known plant miR159 in other plants were then carefully predicted and generated by the secondary structures using the web-based software UNAFold, which was publicly available at the website (http://www.bioinfo.rpi.edu/applications/mfold/old/rna/). The combination of blast parameters were as following: the folding temperature was fixed at 37°C; the other parameters were used the default parameters. The sequences were then further screened with the following criteria: (1) pre-miRNA sequence can fold into an standard hairpin secondary structure that contained the mature miRNA sequence within one arm of the hairpin structure; (2) mature miRNAs were allowed to have only 0–2 nucleotide mismatches in sequence with all previously known plant mature miRNAs; (3) miRNAs had less than six mismatches with the opposite miRNA* sequence in the other arm; (4) the secondary structures of predicted pre-miRNA had higher MFEI and negative MFE; MFEI more than 0.85 and greater than 6nt with a minimum free energy (MFE) of lower than −15kcal/mol were accepted as being potential miRNA precursor sequences (Zhang et al., 2006a,b, 2007); (5) no loop or break in miRNA sequences was allowed; (6) an A+U content filter and a loop-length filter were applied to the hairpin structures obtained only hairpins with 20–22 mature nucleotide sequences with a C+G content of 50% or less were analyzed further. If one sequence has met all of these criteria, we considered it as a precursor of miR159 family members in potato. The putative target genes for miRNAs were predicted using the plant miRNA target prediction online software psRNATarget (http://plantgrn.noble.org/psRNATarget/) (Dai and Zhao, 2011) with default parameters.Target prediction showed that 3 potato mRNA sequences similar with plant MYB TFs were predicted as the potential target genes of three stu-miR159 members from potato genome (Solanum tuberosum group phureja DM1–3) (Table 1). To identify function of those sequences, sequence similarity approach was adopted. Briefly, they were used as query sequences to blast against the no-redundant protein sequences (nr) database (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi?PROGRAM=blastx&PAGE_TYPE=BlastSearch&LINK_LOC=blasthome) with Blastx algorithm with default parameters in NCBI. Additionally, BLASTP and TBLASTN (basic local alignment search tool: http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) obtained from NCBI were used with the e-value cutoff set to 1e-003 (Altschul et al., 1990). Moreover, those potential potato MYB-like gene sequences were manually corrected after carefully checked the alignment with known MYB TFs from other plant species. The MYB domain of each potential MYB gene protein sequences was predicted using Pfam (protein family: http://pfamSanger.ac.uk/) with the default cut off parameters (Bateman et al., 2002). Protein sequences with two repeats in the MYB domain were recognized as members of the R2R3-MYB subfamily.To clone the full length cDNA of identified sequences, total RNA was extracted from potato leaves using TRIzol Reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The quality and quantity of RNA was measured by both electrophoresis and optical absorbency (Nanophotometer, Implen). The cDNA was synthesized from the total RNA following the instruction of the Kit cDNA MMLV (Sangon). The full length cDNA was amplified by reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) and appropriate primers (Table 2). The PCR products were inserted into pGEM-T easy cloning vector and propagated in Escherichia coli DH5α for sequencing and conservation.The cloning sequences and previously known sequences of MYB transcription factor family members from Arabidopsis (http://planttfdb.cbi.pku.edu.cn/) were used to further phylogenetic tree analysis. The chromosomal locations and gene structures were retrieved from the potato genome data that were downloaded from the PGSC database (http://potatogenome.net/index.php/Main_Page). The phylogenetic tree was constructed using the neighbor-joining (NJ) method in MEGA 5.0 program (Tamura et al., 2011). Bootstrap analysis was performed using 1000 replicates in MEGA 5.0 program to evaluate the reliability of different phylogenetic groups. The pI/Mw and physicochemical property of the deduced polypeptide were predicted using the programs listed in Expasy (www.EXPASY.org). The genomic sequences were identified from Potato Genome Sequencing Consortium database (http://potatogenome.net/index.php/Main_Page). The gene structures (exon and intron) were analyzed with Splign (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sutils/splign) (Kapustin et al., 2008).Potato variety ‘Longshu 3’ was grown in pot in standard greenhouse facility of Gansu Agricultural University. Six pots of each type were grown in parallel. Three replicate pots per treatment were arranged in a completely randomized block design. When the plants were 20cm long, deficit irrigation treatments were applied by withholding watering on the stressed pots while the other three pots were grown under normal condition. Fresh leaves were collected from drought-treated potato plants every 5 days, and lasted for 5 times, and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and were stored at −80°C for further RNA extraction and miRNAs and target gene expression analysis.Total RNA was extracted from samples using TRIzol Reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. RNA sample was quantified and assessed for quality using Nanophotometer (Implen) and then stored at −80°C for further use. For miRNA expressional analysis, reverse transcription was carried out in 20μl reaction mixture. Briefly, 1μg of total RNA of each sample was used to generate a single-stranded miRNA cDNA using One Step PrimeScript® miRNA cDNA synthesis kit (TaKaRa). SYBR® Premix Ex Taq™ II (TaKaRa) was used to detect and quantify potato miRNAs according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The expression levels of stu-miR159s were analyzed in different treated samples using qRT-PCR. The PCR amplification was set at 40 cycles of denaturation at 95°C for 10s, annealing at 60°C for 30s, and extension at 72°C for 1min (Feng et al., 2009). St18sRNA was used as an internal control for each sample. Reverse primers and Uni-miR qPCR primers were provided with the kit, and the miRNA-specific primers and internal control primers were listed in Table 2. For expressional analysis of GAMyb-like family members, qRT-PCR was performed with SYBR® Premix Ex Taq™ II (TaKaRa). Briefly, 20μl PCR reaction contained about 100ng cDNA, 10ml SYBR® Premix Ex Taq™ II solution, 0.8μl each primer. The reactions were mixed gently and incubated at 94°C for 2min, followed by 40 cycles of 94°C for 30s, 60°C for 34s and 72°C for 30s. All samples were performed in three biological replicates with two technical replicates. ef1a was used as an internal control for each sample. These reactions were performed using the ABI3000 (Applied Biosystems 3000 Real-Time PCR System). The relative level of miRNAs and target genes were detected using the 2–ΔΔCt method. The standard deviations of the data were obtained from the three independent experiments. Statistical significance of expression differences of individual genes upon treatment by drought stress was analyzed with one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) using statistics software SPSS version 13.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, USA).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
