@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Simulation-based heuristic method for container supply chain network optimization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a novel idea that considers optimization problem of multi-echelon container supply chain network.We develop a mixed integer programming model to minimize the total container supply chain service cost.We propose a simulation-based heuristic method to efficiently solve the problem.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Container supply chain,Network architecture,Simulation-based heuristic method,Genetic algorithm,Particle swarm optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
With the emerging of free trade zones (FTZs) in the world, the service level of container supply chain plays an important role in the efficiency, quality and cost of the world trade. The performance of container supply chain network directly impacts its service level. Therefore, it is imperative to seek an appropriate method to optimize the container supply chain network architecture. This paper deals with the modeling and optimization problem of multi-echelon container supply chain network (MCSCN). The problem is formulated as a mixed integer programming model (MIP), where the objective is subject to the minimization of the total supply chain service cost. Since the problem is well known to be NP-hard, a novel simulation-based heuristic method is proposed to solving it, where the heuristic is used for searching near-optimal solutions, and the simulation is used for evaluating solutions and repairing unfeasible solutions. The heuristic algorithm integrates genetic algorithm (GA) and particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm, where the GA is used for global search and the PSO is used for local search. Finally, computational experiments are conducted to validate the performance of the proposed method and give some managerial implications.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Container supply chain is an integrated system including transportation, packing, container storage, container loading, container transshipment, container unloading and unpacking. Container supply chain is essentially logistics service supply chain, which has characteristic features of service supply chain. However, there are some differences between them. (1) The structure of the container supply chain is more complex than that of logistics service supply chain. The container supply chain is made up of all the activities required to deliver containers to customers, such as inventory, transportation, loading/unloading, distribution, cargo and shipping agency, and customer service. However, the structure of logistics service supply chain is functional logistic service provider-logistics service integrator – manufacturers or retailers. (2) In the cost structure fold, container supply chain is also more complex, which refers shortage cost, transportation cost, handling cost, storage cost overstock cost. The logistics service supply chain generally only considers service cost. In all the activities, container supply chain is a network for satisfying value increment of the entire chain. The integration and collaboration of the container supply chain management processes and systems are more evident and become more necessary. The most necessary condition for maximizing economical, security and social benefits of the entire supply chain is the coordination of all nodes in container supply chain. With the mushroom development of the service economy in the world, the optimization and coordination of container supply chain network have become the mainstream in this research area.With the emerging of free trade zones (FTZs) in the world, many manufacturing, service, logistics, port and shipping enterprises gather in FTZs, which does not only bring about huge logistics, but also bring about diversified product supply chain and service supply chain, such as container supply chain. FTZs have further requirements for higher efficiency and lower cost of global supply chain. Thus, the service level of container supply chain plays an important role in the efficiency, quality and cost of the world trade. The performance of container supply chain network directly impacts its service level.In order to reduce costs, minimize inventories and of course, improve profits, effectively integrating the information flow, logistics, commerce flow and cash flow within the demand and supply process plays a very key role. For most node enterprises of container supply chain, such as inland yards, container terminals and shipping lines, two major and very interdependent issues must be simultaneously addressed. The first issue is delivering containers with very short lead times at a customer-acceptable cost. The second issue is sharing the effective, high-quality and timely information. Regardless of anyone in container supply chain, more effective supply chain network will be a prerequisite to win–win cooperation. In fact, effective container supply chain management must become an integral part of competitive and survival strategy. Therefore, we must seek appropriate method to optimize the network architecture of container supply chain from the entire chain perspective.This rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, relevant literatures are reviewed. In Section 3, mathematical models are formulated for our problem. Section 4 proposes a simulation-based heuristic for resolving our problem. Numerical experiments for evaluating the proposed model and heuristic are performed in Section 6, and some concluding remarks and future research are given in the last section.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Motivated by how to improve service level of container supply chain, the optimization problem of multi-echelon container supply chain network is addressed in this paper. The main goal is to optimize the total container supply chain service cost. The major contributions of the study are as follows:(1)The MCSCN problem is formulated as a MIP model, which aims at minimizing the total supply chain service cost (including shortage cost, transportation cost, handling cost, storage cost and overstock cost), while capturing all the essential constraints in practice. The MIP model can be solved by commercial solvers for small size instances, and can be used to obtain lower bounds for large size instances. Therefore, it provides benchmarks for evaluating the proposed solution method.As the MCSCN problem is NP-hard, a novel simulation-based heuristic method is proposed to efficiently solve the problem, where the heuristic is used for searching near-optimal solutions, and the simulation is used for evaluating solutions and repairing unfeasible solutions. The heuristic algorithm integrates genetic algorithm (GA) and particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm, where the GA is used for global search and the PSO is used for local search. We find that GA–PSO–SIM performs the best among all variants of the simulation-based heuristic method. Expensive numerical experiments validate that our proposed simulation-based heuristic method can obtain high quality solutions in reasonable time for practical MCSCN problems. Some managerial implications are also obtained by investigate the influences of some parameters.There are also limitations in this study. In the current study, operating time has not been considered as a performance indicator of the MCSCN. The uncertainty factors, such as demand, supply and transportation time have not been considered in this study. All of these issues are valuable research directions in the future.