@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Gene expression patterns combined with network analysis identify hub genes associated with bladder cancer

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We identified 332 global DEGs and DEGs in different stages and grades of BC.Hub genes of complex networks were explored based on these DEGs.UBE2C, ACTA2, FABP4, CKS2, FN1 and TOP2A were hub genes of networks.ECM-receptor interaction and focal adhesion were the significant pathways.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Bladder cancer,Hub genes,Co-expression network,Bioprocess,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectivesTo explore molecular mechanisms of bladder cancer (BC), network strategy was used to find biomarkers for early detection and diagnosis.MethodsThe differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between bladder carcinoma patients and normal subjects were screened using empirical Bayes method of the linear models for microarray data package. Co-expression networks were constructed by differentially co-expressed genes and links. Regulatory impact factors (RIF) metric was used to identify critical transcription factors (TFs). The protein–protein interaction (PPI) networks were constructed by the Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins (STRING) and clusters were obtained through molecular complex detection (MCODE) algorithm. Centralities analyses for complex networks were performed based on degree, stress and betweenness. Enrichment analyses were performed based on Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) databases.ResultsCo-expression networks and TFs (based on expression data of global DEGs and DEGs in different stages and grades) were identified. Hub genes of complex networks, such as UBE2C, ACTA2, FABP4, CKS2, FN1 and TOP2A, were also obtained according to analysis of degree. In gene enrichment analyses of global DEGs, cell adhesion, proteinaceous extracellular matrix and extracellular matrix structural constituent were top three GO terms. ECM-receptor interaction, focal adhesion, and cell cycle were significant pathways.ConclusionsOur results provide some potential underlying biomarkers of BC. However, further validation is required and deep studies are needed to elucidate the pathogenesis of BC.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Radical radiotherapy of bladder cancer (BC) is associated with a relatively high rate of incomplete response or local recurrence with salvage cystectomy for treatment failures. While synchronous chemotherapy combined with radio-therapy improve locoregional control of BC (James et al., 2012), it may be time to further clinical trials and considered for certain specific patient groups (Stenzl et al., 2011). Although radical surgical removal of the bladder is considered as the standard treatment, many BC patients have a substantial number of coexisting illnesses that pose risks for radical surgical approaches (James et al., 2012).Numbers of studies have been performed to explore molecular markers along progression of BC. For example, Sanchez-Carbayo et al. (2003) identified gene expression changes of early stage bladder tumors based on cDNA microarrays. FGFR3 and TP53, which associated with change of tumor grade, tumor stage, and recurrences, were confirmed as molecular markers of urothelial neoplasms and recognized as key genetic pathways in the carcinogenesis (Cheng et al., 2011). PCNA is a 36kDa nucleic–acidic protein essential for nuclear proliferation and appeared to increase gradually when the grade and stage of the tumor escalated (Yıldırım et al., 2014). When comparing BC vs. controls, as well as in non-muscle invasive vs. muscle invasive tumors and in low vs. high grade tumors, osteopontin (OPN, SPP1) are with at least 2-fold differential expression due to its multiple biological functions (Zaravinos et al., 2011). Besides Hung and Chiu (2015) have suggested potential pathways and potential gene fragments of pathways related to progress of BC based on protein networks with gene expression changes. These genes and pathways were promising cancer markers for early detection of BC, but mechanism of BC development and genes associated with the process were still unclear.In this paper, we identified global differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and DEGs in different stages and grades of BC by empirical Bayes method of the linear models for microarray data package. Next, co-expression networks were constructed by differentially co-expressed genes and links based on these genes and regulatory impact factors (RIF) metric was introduced to identify critical transcription factors (TFs). Afterwards, protein–protein interaction (PPI) networks were constructed based on the Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins (STRING) database. We selected molecular complex detection (MCODE) algorithm to analyze the subsets of PPI network. Centralities analyses of complex networks were performed mainly based on degree, stress and betweenness. Meanwhile, Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis were performed based on Expression Analysis Systematic Explorer (EASE) test to illuminate the biological pathways and processes which generally affected BC patients. We may light the further insight of BC development at molecular level.The microarray expression dataset from the study conducted by Lindgren et al. (2010) was used for identifying DEGs of BC. A total of 57 BC samples existed in the dataset (ArrayExpress online database, E-TABM-147). We selected gene expression profiles (52 BC samples and 10 normal samples) from only one platform (Affymetrix GeneChip Human Genome U95A) which contained healthy controls in E-TABM-147 to avoid the bath effects between the different platforms. In this dataset, BC patients could be divided into 5 groups according to invasive depth stage (Ta, T1–T4) or 3 groups relied on malignancy grade (G1–G3) of the tumor.The probe-level data in cell files were converted into expression measures. Background correction was performed by the robust multi-array average (RMA) algorithm (Irizarry et al., 2003). Quantiles method was carried out for normalization and “median polish” method for summarization (Kim et al., 2007). The platform annotation files provided by Affymetrix Company were used to map the relationship between the probes and gene symbols. A probe would be filtered if there is no corresponding gene symbol. We obtained the average value of gene symbol with multiple probes.Genes differently expressed between BC patients and normal subjects were identified using the empirical Bayes method of linear models for microarray data package (Smyth, 2004). The approach could be used for the analysis of factorial data with high density oligonucleotide microarray data. The false discovery rate was controlled by Benjamini-Hochberg test (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995). Only the genes which met our criterion (P<0.05, |log fold change|>2) were selected as DEGs in this study. We identified the global DEGs between all the BC patients and normal subjects. Subsets of the global DEGs were also obtained by intersection of the global DEGs and DEGs between different groups (different stages or grades, respectively) and normal subjects.In this work, co-expression networks were constructed by differential co-expression genes and links (Yang et al., 2013) and visualized by Cytoscape (Smoot et al., 2011). Briefly, a typical differential co-expression analysis workflow involves three successive procedures: gene filtration, link filtration and identification of differentially co-expressed genes and links. For gene filtration, it was carried out based on the expression level (only global DEGs were retained). For link filtration, the co-expression values, associated with corresponding P-values (Student’s t-test of the zero nature of the Pearson correlation coefficient), was wrapped in link filtration module to filter gene co-expression links in co-expression networks. Then, the P-values were sorted and transformed to q-values (false discovery rates) under each of the two experimental conditions. In this way, each gene link was associated with a pair of q-value, and those links with q-values in two conditions higher than the threshold (P=0.05) were filtered out. Co-expression network based on global DEGs was constructed. Moreover, co-expression networks at different stages and grades were also constructed respectively based on expression profiles of global DEGs in different stages and grades.The key TFs in the network were identified by RIF metric. RIF metric was originally developed to identify causal regulators from gene expression data contrasting 2 conditions (Reverter et al., 2010). The threshold of P<0.05 was considered significant for the RIF metric. RIF could combine the change in co-expression between the TFs and the DEGs. The expression for PIF was shown in Eq. (1).(1)RIF(TFi)=1nde∑j=1j=nde[(e1j×rij)2−(e2j×r2ij)2]where nde is the number of DEGs; e1 and e2 is the expression value of DEGjin condition 1 and condition 2, respectively; r1ijand r2ijis the correlation of TFiand DEGjin condition1 and condition 2, respectively. Then, co-expression network of the DEGs with the value of RIF was constructed. The threshold of P<0.05 was considered significant for the RIF metric.We identified the global TFs using the gene expression profiles of DEGs between all BC patients and normal subjects. The subsets of TFs in different stages or grades were also identified.PPI networks may represent molecular complexes. For protein interaction data, we utilized a human PPI dataset from STRING. Besides, the molecular complex in the global PPI network was obtained by the MCODE, which theoretically cluster algorithm that selects densely connected regions in large PPI networks (Bader and Hogue, 2003).The MCODE algorithm mainly includes three stages: vertex weighting, complex prediction and optional post-processing. At the stage of vertex weighting, all vertices based on their local network density were weighted using the highest k-core of the vertex neighborhood. At the stage of complex prediction, the vertex weighted graph was taken as input, a complex with the highest weighted vertex was seeded, and moved outward from the seed vertex recursively. It owned vertices in the complex whose weight was above a given threshold, a given percentage away from the weight of the seed vertex. Complexes with the core less than 2 (graph of minimum degree 2) are filtered, ‘fluff’ option and ‘haircut’ option may be run as options. ‘Fluff’ option was used to increase the size of the complex according to a given ‘fluff’ parameter between 0.0 and 1.0. ‘Haircut’ option could remove the vertices which were connected to the core complex singly, and the complexes obtained were 2-cored in all. Both the options were performed, fluff run first, then haircut. In our experiment, we set degree cutoff=2, k-core=5, max. depth=100 as the parameters in MCODE for the detection of clusters in co-expression network. In addition, clusters with nodes fewer than 5 were discarded. Besides, the PPI networks were also visualized by Cytoscape (Smoot et al., 2011).We identified the global PPI network and molecular complex in the global PPI network using the DEGs of all BC patients and normal subjects. Moreover, the PPI sub-networks of different stages or grades using DEGs between corresponding BC patients and normal subjects were also identified.To evaluate DEGs in a biological network, three centrality parameters of the networks were computed.The degree of a node (gene or protein) is the average number of edges (interactions) incident to this node. Degree quantifies the local topology of each gene, by summing up the number of its adjacent genes (Haythornthwaite, 1996). It gives a simple count of the number of interactions of a given node. The genes at the top of degree distribution (≥90% quantile) in the significantly perturbed sub-networks (including global network or sub-networks) were defined as hub genes.Stress centrality is considered as the number of nodes in the shortest path between two other nodes, the stress is a node centrality index (Fekete et al., 2005). Stress is calculated by measuring the number of shortest paths passing through a node. The “stress” (Cstr(v)) of a node v is calculated as follow:(2)Cstr(v)=∑s≠v∈N∑t≠v∈Nσst(v)To calculate the Cstr(v) of a node v, all shortest paths in a graph G are calculated and then the number of shortest paths passing through v is counted. A “stressed” node is a node traversed by a high number of shortest paths.Betweenness centrality is another topological metric in graphs for determining how the neighbors of a node are interconnected (Freeman, 1982). It is considered as the ratio of the node in the shortest path between two other nodes. The betweenness centrality of a node v is given by the expression:(3)CB(v)=∑s≠v≠t∈Nσst(v)σstTherefore, the calculation may be rescaled by dividing the number of pairs of nodes not including v, so thatCB(v)∈[0,1]. σst is the total number of shortest paths from node s to node t and σst(v) is the number of those paths that pass through v.To investigate the biological functions of global DEGs and DEGs in different stages and grades, GO enrichment analysis and KEGG pathway enrichment analysis were performed by Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) (Huang et al., 2008). DAVID bioinformatics resources could systematically extract biological meaning from a large number of genes or proteins. GO terms with P-value<0.01 and KEGG pathways with P-value<0.05 were chosen based on EASE test applied in DAVID. EASE analysis of the regulated genes indicated molecular functions and biological processes unique to each category (Ford et al., 2006). The EASE score was used to detected the significant categories. In both of the functional and pathway enrichment analysis, the threshold of minimum number of genes for the corresponding term >2 were considered significant for a category.(4)p=(a+ba)(c+dc)(na+c)where n=a′+b+c+d, is the number of background genes; a′ is the gene number of one gene set in the gene lists; a′+b is the number of genes in the gene list including at least one gene set; a′+c is the gene number of one gene list in the background genes; a′ is replaced with a=a′−1.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
