@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Developing taxonomy for the domain ontology of construction contractual semantics: A case study on the AIA A201 document

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An ontological model is developed from definitions found in a contract.A synthesized methodology for taxonomies for contractual semantics is established.The taxonomy is validated using a case study for a standard construction contract.Developed enhanced ontology-based application for sharing contract domain knowledge.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Ontology,Semantics,Taxonomy,Contractual management,Construction claims,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In construction contractual management, sharing experts’ domain knowledge through ontology is a good way to narrow the knowledge gap between the domain experts and the construction team. However, little work has been done on ontology taxonomy development in this domain. Based on a literature review on sharing domain knowledge, taxonomy development methods and the essence of construction contracts, this study proposes a synthesized methodology for taxonomy development in the domain of construction contractual semantics. This methodology is based on an ontological model extracted from definitions found in the contract, and uses common root concepts as the initial root concept classes, and includes the iterative development and competency questions approaches as well. In the case study, using the research results from pilot studies, the proposed methodology was applied to the AIA A201 General Conditions of the Contract for Construction (2007) document at the textual level. As a result, a taxonomy was developed which was used to determine the validity of the proposed methodology. The taxonomy development methodology and the developed taxonomy itself are both valuable contributions in the quest to further develop ontology-based applications for sharing domain knowledge about construction contract semantics.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The development of more sophisticated buildings and building systems has led to more complex and consequently, more risky projects in the Architecture/Engineering/Construction (AEC) industry. This trend has made project contract management much more difficult, and consequently, claims and legal issues have become more and more unpreventable due to the increasing complexity and uncertainty involved in construction projects [25]. Further, for the project contractual parties, the performance of contract management duties and avoidance of contractual claims have an important impact on project success. Contract management requires domain experts’ with comprehensive contract knowledge and professional insight. However, due to the restrictions of the project jobsite, a knowledge gap exists between the domain experts and the construction project team. For example, in practice, the personnel given the role for managing claims are in most cases, because of the uncertainty of a claim arising, selected in an ad-hoc manner, as opposed to having dedicated personnel in that role similar to estimators, planners and accountants [45]. Therefore, it is fairly common to find that in most cases, these claim clerks are lacking in claim-related professional knowledge and experience and consequently substantial errors and omissions often occur in the claim preparation process. For example, an inexperienced clerk might easily miss or ignore some facts or proofs which can have impacts on the outcome of certain type of claim cases. Those mistakes usually lead to a loss of the claim. In other words, the aforementioned knowledge gap heavily impacts the performance of project contract management duties. Narrowing this knowledge gap, by representing the experts’ knowledge through ontology and sharing it with the contract management team is a good way to solve this problem [34]. At the initial phase of building this domain ontology, a solid taxonomy is necessary to classify and organize the related concepts in the contractual relationships between project parties. Currently, there exist some legal ontologies at the general level, however, little work has been done on building the taxonomy for the domain construction claim analysis. Considering the significant amount of particular engineering and management background knowledge involved, which is out of the boundary of purely general law, the existing legal ontologies have very limited applicability in this scenario. Therefore, the decision was made to start with creating a domain taxonomy from scratch for this study.According to the conceptualization process in the two prevailing ontology developing methodologies [38,17], the task following the building of a glossary of terms is building a concept taxonomy (often referred to as “define the classes and the class hierarchy”). This task is the most important one in the ontology development process, since taxonomy is a Knowledge Organization System (KOS) serving as the “backbone” of the domain knowledge for organizing concepts. To develop the taxonomy for the domain knowledge of construction contractual semantics, this study proposes a synthesized methodology. This taxonomy development methodology starts from an ontological model generalized from fundamental contract law principles; and then utilizes the common major root concepts to categorize the concepts that appear in the target contract documents. In order to preserve the capability to collaborate with other taxonomies, the major root concepts used in popular top level taxonomies and/or classifications (e.g. IFC) are utilized to initialize the development of this taxonomy. In order to determine the scope limitations of the taxonomy and to assure consistency of its terms, the following two approaches are also used: competency questioning [22] and iterative development [21]. Finally, the validity of the proposed methodology is tested through a case study that applies it to the textual content of the clauses of the AIA A201 General Conditions of the Contract for Construction document [1]. Furthermore, based on the taxonomy developed in this research, together with a rule-based NLP methodology, a particular application was developed to semantically interpret impact factors for construction claim cases.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
