@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Mode of action classification of chemicals using multi-concentration time-dependent cellular response profiles

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The time-dependent cellular response profiles of 65 chemicals are measured using the xCELLigence real-time cell analysis high-throughput system with treatment on human hepatocellular carcinoma cells.A new classification method for chemicals using time-dependent cellular response profiles is proposed.The classification results of chemicals are validated by examining common chemical mechanisms of actions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mode of action,Time-dependent cellular response profiles,Principal component analysis,Functional data analysis,Hierarchical classification,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we present a new statistical pattern recognition method for classifying cytotoxic cellular responses to toxic agents. The advantage of the proposed method is to quickly assess the toxicity level of an unclassified toxic agent on human health by bringing cytotoxic cellular responses with similar patterns (mode of action, MoOA) into the same class. The proposed method is a model-based hierarchical classification approach incorporating principal component analysis (PCA) and functional data analysis (FDA). The cytotoxic cell responses are represented by multi-concentration time-dependent cellular response profiles (TCRPs) which are dynamically recorded by using the xCELLigence real-time cell analysis high-throughput (RTCA HT) system. The classification results obtained using our algorithm show satisfactory discrimination and are validated using biological facts by examining common chemical mechanisms of actions with treatment on human hepatocellular carcinoma cells (HepG2).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The development of methods for quick, efficient, and accurate cytotoxicity screening has been motivated by the continually increasing number of chemical compounds produced by industrial processes which impose serious consequences on human health and environment. Many chemicals may cause diverse changes in cellular morphology and growth rate if they are presented with sufficient concentration levels. Some may cause toxic effects to cells such as apoptosis and necrosis (Raffray and Gerald, 1997) while others may induce uncontrolled cellular proliferation (Butterworth et al., 1992). In the past, several methods have been used to assess the toxicity of chemicals (Pan et al., 2013a). One common method is the use of in vivo assays. In vivo assays investigate the toxic effects of chemicals on living organisms and explain detailed mechanistic understanding of the molecular targets (Houck and Kavlock, 2008). However, performing in vivo assays is time consuming and expensive, and usually requires a large number of samples to be observed. Furthermore, biological contamination and the ethics of causing distress and pain on living organisms are potential concerns (Institute for Laboratory Animal, 1999).As an alternative to in vivo assays to effectively screen chemicals, cell-based in vitro assays play an integral role in today's drug discovery (Hosseinkhani et al., 2006). They have become a key component of research fields such as chemical screening, and safety assessment (Przyborski, 2011) and are now compatibly adopted for automated high-throughput screening (HTS) of large chemical libraries, providing in situ analysis for a variety of biological targets due to the use of multi-well plates (González et al., 1999; Silverman et al., 1998). Quantitative high-throughput assays have become a crucial and effective tool in drug discovery and development, because they can be used for the existing chemicals and even be expanded to cover new chemicals that need to be evaluated for human health risk assessment (National Research Council, 2007). The main advantages of bio-activity profiling using high-throughput assays are to reduce the cost and time required for toxicological screening of environmental chemicals and the need for animal testing (Judson et al., 2008).For some current multi-dimensional phenotypic profiling approaches, such as gene expression profiling and cell line cytotoxicity-based profiling, only a single time point is usually chosen to assess the toxicity of chemicals. Therefore, the results are based upon the time instant at which samples are processed. Consequently, other activities that may exist outside the selected time instant may be neglected. As a crucial factor in cell-based kinetic profiling approaches, time plays a key role in assessing chemical activities because it is related to the modulation of the target by the chemical or consequent manifestation of the cellular response (Abassi et al., 2009).The xCELLigence real-time cell analysis high-throughput (RTCA HT) system is used as a non-invasive and effective tool to perform long-term cytotoxicity assays. It generates multi-concentration time-dependent cellular response profiles (TCRPs) that provide an interpretation of dynamic cytotoxicity effects of toxicants on cells (Hartigan and Downey, 2010; Abassi et al., 2009; Limame et al., 2012; Xing et al., 2005). Compared with conventional endpoint cell-based assays, the real-time and continuously monitoring system allows label-free assessment of cell responses, such as cell adhesion, spreading, proliferation, and death, and further allows for the calculation of time-dependent physiological values. It can give more information than single-value endpoints of classical toxicity testing such as the XTT-based viability assays (Öztürk et al., 2011). This system has been used in cytotoxicity assessment (Pan et al., 2013a), analysis of cell invasion and migration (Bird and Kirstein, 2009), etc.The TCRPs reflect series of physiological events such as changes in cell population, cell morphology, and cellular functions that characterize an adverse biological response. These series of physiological events are referred to as mode of action (MoOA) (Escher and Hermens, 2002; Nowicki and Scatton, 2008; Gies and Landry, 2008). As the patterns of TCRPs indicate physiological responses of the living cells to given toxic chemicals and reveal key biochemical events at the cellular level which characterize MoOA, TCRPs can be considered as a novel means in the classification and discovery of chemicals (Xing et al., 2005; Simmons et al., 2009).Supervised and unsupervised classification algorithms (clustering analysis) have been studied for many years in statistics and widely applied in many areas. By being separated into densely populated regions termed as clusters, a multi-dimensional dataset is decomposed into smaller components (Chen et al., 1996). There are extensive applications of clustering in the fields related to biology including DNA microarray data analysis (Tibshirani et al., 1999; Brown et al., 2000), protein–protein interaction (Brohee and van Helden, 2006), clustering of biological networks (Fung et al., 2011), etc. In these applications, each object (e.g., gene, protein) to be classified is represented by a time series as a datum in the classification. To the best of our knowledge, the clustering problems of chemicals represented by time-dependent cellular response profiles are not fully explored. In this study, each object (i.e., chemical) to be classified is represented by a group of time series as a datum. At the same time, the number of time series is different from an object to another. Specifically, due to the design of the experiments using xCELLigence RTCA HT system, multiple concentrations are tested in order to fully elucidate cellular behaviors to different chemicals and further the information about Mode of Action. The data through the novel experiments are multi-dimensional. Because some of TCRPs for chemicals do not indicate distinguishable cellular responses with respect to the control line profiles, to effectively classify chemicals into clusters where chemicals with similar TCRP patterns are grouped together, a TCRP selection procedure is used to screen out profiles close to control profiles. Different numbers of profiles are retained for different chemicals after the selection. Traditional clustering algorithms cannot address this complicated case because those methods are used to classify data points represented by a sole time series. However, in our case, not only are there multiple time series representing each data point, but also the number of retained TCRPs for the data point varies after the selection. The proposed algorithm in this paper addresses this particular complexity in the problem.In this paper, to utilize the dynamic response of cells following exposure to chemicals and further classify chemicals based on profile similarity, human hepatocellular carcinoma cells (HepG2) were treated in vitro with 65 chemicals, with 11 levels of concentration each and monitored over 75h continuously. A large information-rich dataset of TCRPs is then collected and treated with a 4-step data preprocessing method to remove disturbance from the experiments and generate informative data with better quality. Afterwards, a systematic model-based hierarchical classification approach incorporating principal component analysis (PCA) and functional data analysis (FDA) for feature extraction is proposed to classify chemicals into groups based on the similarity of the patterns of TCRPs. The advantage of the proposed method is to quickly assess the toxicity level of an unclassified toxic agent on human health. The classification results obtained using our proposed method are validated using biological facts by examining common biological processes known as mechanism of action (MeOA) explained in the discussion section. By this validation, we can consider that TCRPs can be used to classify and interpret Mode of Action of chemicals.Human hepatocellular carcinoma cells (HepG2) (Order # HB-8065, Cat # 30-2003) were obtained from ATCC (Manassas, VA, USA) and grown in an incubator with a set temperature at 37°C, with 95% relative humidity and a CO2 level of 5%.Stock solutions of 65 chemicals obtained from Sigma–Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA) were prepared using water (H2O), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), or ethanol (EtOH) separately. Solutions were diluted into eleven working concentrations in a serial ratio 1:3. Information about chemicals including their solutions and concentration ranges is provided in Table 1.The experiments of chemical assays were performed using the xCELLigence RTCA HT system with HepG2 cell line exposed to the 65 chemicals. The principles behind RTCA HT system are described by Abassi et al. (2009), Slanina et al. (2011), and Xing et al. (2005). Briefly, all the cells were grown in the E-plates initially for 24h and treated with chemicals in 11 concentrations afterwards. Additionally, 75h were used to monitor and record the cellular responses to the chemicals. In order to achieve robust and reliable data, each experiment for each chemical was repeated 4 times. The median time series of all replicated experiments were selected as the representative one (Pan et al., 2013b).As the collected raw data contain noise that may possibly affect the classification results, a 4-step data preprocessing method is presented to generate informative data with better quality as follows:Step 1: Calculation of normalized cell index To reduce the variational effects from inter-experiments and compare the assays in the same baseline, the TCRPs are normalized by dividing cell index (CI) at each time instant by CI(0) which is the cell index at the exposure time. Only the initial 72h are taken into consideration (Pan et al., 2013b). Therefore, normalized cell index (NCI) equals to 1 at the exposure time point.Step 2: Denoising technique Before using the collected data in the proposed classification approach, a denoising technique is necessary in order to cope with noise and outliers that may disturb and affect further analysis. We employed a denoising algorithm introduced by Pan et al. (2013b) to detect and interpolate the abnormal “velocity of cell population change” termed as ΔNCI.Step 3: Calculation of relative normalized cell index After denoising the TCRPs, in order to reduce the impact induced by different batches of experiments and to distinguish the TCRP patterns of chemicals from the control lines, the relative NCI (termed as RNCI) is calculated by dividing NCI of the chemical compound (termed as NCId(k)) by the NCI of the negative control or vehicle control if DMSO is the solvent for test solution (termed as NCIc(k)) at the corresponding time point (k), namely(1)RNCI(k)=NCId(k)NCIc(k),k=1,2,⋯,K.An example of computing RNCI is shown in Fig. 1(a) and (b).Step 4: Eligible TCRP selection An eligible TCRP is a cellular response to a specific concentration of a toxicant that indicates distinguishable toxicity effect with a clearly different shape from the TCRP of the control which is a toxic-free cellular response. We measure this “distinguishability” of a TCRP from the TCRP of the control (a unity line in the normalized frame) by a screening index which is expressed as(2)Ξm=∑k=1Kξm(k)ξm(k)=0|RNCIm(k)−1|≤δ1otherwisewhere m=1, 2, ⋯, M is the mth TCRP at the corresponding concentration, M is the total number of TCRPs recorded in the experiments (here, M=11), k=1, 2, ⋯, K is the sampling instant within a TCRP, and δ is an adjustable default empirical threshold for evaluating eligible TCRPs (here, δ=0.2). The Ξ is a statistical index to measure variability of a TCRP with respect to the negative control line. An eligible TCRP is selected for further analysis if discrete samples{RNCI(k)}k=1Kexceed the upper and lower boundaries 1±0.2 more than 10 times (shown in Fig. 2).Thus, we have the following condition on the inclusion of mth TCRP based on the initial screening index:(3)includemth TCRPifΞm>10excludemth TCRPifΞm≤10A chemical will be excluded from being used in our proposed classification if at most two TCRPs are selected as eligible TCRPs. In this case, we consider the chemical illegible and without meaningful patterns, possibly because of experimental disturbance or design. For this reason, the inclusion of such chemicals may be misleading. In our classification method we categorize the illegible chemicals into “unclassified group”.After ineligible TCRPs and chemicals are excluded, each retained chemical is then represented by different numbers of eligible TCRPs which are formulated as columns in its RNCI matrix X(j) where j=1, …, N is the serial number of chemicals; N is the number of eligible chemicals. The number of columns of X(j) is different from one chemical to another.Several clustering algorithms such as K-means, self-organizing map have been well-studied and applied in unsupervised classification of time series data or functional data in various applications. The functional data ranges from time-course gene expression data in biomedical application to geostatistical data in an engineering application (Romano and Verde, 2012; Warren Liao, 2005; Ma et al., 2006; Tarpey and Kinateder, 2003). In these cases, each functional data point is represented with one feature vector which is subsequently used in above mentioned clustering algorithms. In this paper, chemicals are represented by several TCRPs viewed as functional data. There are two main challenges involved in the classification problem of chemicals based on TCRPs. First, each chemical is represented by several TCRPs corresponding to various concentrations. That is, we have a multi-dimensional functional data as opposed to one-dimensional functional data generally discussed in the literature. Further, after data preprocessing, the ineligible TCRPs are screened out for each chemical. Thus, each chemical is now represented by different number of TCRPs, making the clustering problem more challenging.A two step feature extraction procedure is now explained which addresses both the challenges encountered in the present application. In this first step, principal component analysis (PCA) is employed to compress the information in the RNCI matrix X(j) into principal component (PC) space. By selecting the first PC score for{X(j)}j=1N, the information in each chemical is compressed into a one dimensional PC space. That is, each chemical can now be represented as a vector s(j) of length K where K is the number of sampling instants. In the second step of feature extraction, functional data analysis (FDA) is used to represent the data points s(j) with feature vectors of length smaller than K. Here, each PC score s(j) is represented as a linear combination of B-spline basis functions. The advantage of this two step feature extraction strategy is that each chemical is now represented by a feature vector (with fewer entries than K) capturing the characteristics of the original TCRPs. Finally, an agglomerative model-based hierarchical clustering algorithm is applied to the obtained feature vectors. The agglomerative model based hierarchical clustering is an iterative clustering procedure in which clusters are merged based on the maximization of likelihood function at each iteration. Each of these steps is now explained in brief below. Fig. 3illustrates briefly how this approach realizes the classification of chemicals.Principal component analysis (PCA) is a technique to reduce dimension by extracting the essential data patterns out of a set of correlated variables using orthogonal transformation (Wold et al., 1987). This technique can retain the dominant patterns of the original data with a fewer number of latent variables. The projected variables, termed as principal components, construct a new coordinate system in a way that the largest variance is determined by the first principal component, the second largest variance on the second principal component, and so on. The coordinate values in the new system, termed as principal component scores, are used to represent the projected data and can reflect the similarity among the data points. Therefore, the main advantages of PCA lie in the simpler description of the data covariance structure and the smaller dimension of data points (Nomikos and MacGregor, 1994).After excluding ineligible TCRPs (see step 4 in Section 2), each chemical is represented by different number of eligible TCRPs. This makes the comparison (based on similarity of TCRPs) among the chemicals difficult. To uniformly evaluate the characteristics of all the data matrices{X(j)}j=1N, PCA is employed to project each X(j) into its principal component space. The first PC score of each X(j), termed ass(j)=[s1(j),s2(j),…,sK(j)]T, is extracted as the synthesized information from each RNCI matrix. The extracted PC score captures the major profile tendency from the original TCRPs for each eligible chemical. Thus, each chemical is consistently represented by its first PC score. All the chemicals with different numbers of TCRPs are able to be compared uniformly.Functional data analysis (FDA) is a statistical means to interpret data from a functional perspective. Instead of treating observed values at sampling instants as the units of data in traditional statistical methods, functions are considered as the data units in FDA (Song et al., 2007). As a way to reduce the dimensionality of data, FDA can describe the tendency of profiles with fewer parameters while retaining much information about the curve shape. This technique has been applied in many areas such as modeling of gene expression data (Song et al., 2007), life course data in criminology (Ramsay and Silverman, 2002), etc. The significance of FDA in analyzing time-dependent cellular responses lies in two main aspects: to reduce the dimension of time series data after applying PCA and to make full use of the information in the slopes and curvatures of curves (Ramsay et al., 2009).A set of basis functions which are functional building blocks{ϕi}i=1nare specified first. According to the fact that the RNCI data matrices are non-periodic, B-spline basis functions are chosen. As piecewise cubic polynomials are able to approximate the characteristics of a curve with satisfactory performance, they are usually chosen to construct the basis functions. The smoothing function form x(j) of the jth chemical is therefore defined as a linear combination of the basis functions written as(4)x(j)=∑i=1nci(j)ϕi=c(j)′ϕwhereci(j)'s are coefficients of the expansion for the jth chemical. c(j) is the vector of all coefficientsci(j)'s.ϕis the vector of all basis functions ϕi's.ci(j)'s are estimated by using regression analysis given the basis functions as follows:(5)SSE(s(j),c(j))=∑k=1K[sk(j)−x(j)]2=∑k=1K[sk(j)−c(j)′ϕ]2The smoothness of fit can be better controlled by attaching an additional term to the regression objective function. The value of the smoothing parameter λ determines the degree of smoothness (Ramsay et al., 2009). In our study, the value of λ is suggested as 10.The significance of FDA lies in smoothing curves and further removing noise from the measurements. Meanwhile, as long as basis functions are given, data can be expressed with fewer coefficients (Ramsay et al., 2009; Coffey and Hinde, 2011).After feature extraction via PCA and FDA, the feature matrix which is the coefficients of the first principal component score of{X(j)}j=1Nis input to an agglomerative model-based hierarchical clustering algorithm developed via Gaussian finite mixture models and the MCLUST algorithm by Fraley and Raftery (2002). The algorithm is aimed to build the hierarchical relationships among the columns of the feature matrix, i.e., feature vectors. From the situation where each feature vector is in its own cluster, the feature vectors are iteratively combined until all of them are connected altogether. Different from the traditional hierarchical clustering methods which merge two closest branches using some distance metric (e.g., Euclidean distance, City Block distance, Mahalanobis distance), the agglomerative model-based hierarchical clustering algorithm merges branches such that a likelihood function is maximized at each iteration given a model structure (Martinez and Martinez, 2004).As a separate function in Model-based Clustering Toolbox in MATLAB® (R2011b, Mathworks, Natick, MA, USA) developed by A. Martinez and W. Martinez, “agmbclust” is used to achieve the agglomerative model-based clustering of the feature matrix for convenience purposes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, a PCA and FDA based hierarchical classification method was developed and implemented on TCRPs of chemicals which were measured by the xCELLigence RTCA HT system in in vitro assays. Experiments in which HepG2 cells were exposed to 65 chemicals with 11 concentrations each were used for the proposed classification method. By using biological facts, it was concluded that the designed classifier was able to distinguish chemicals based on the similarity of TCRPs and had the potential in classifying chemicals by their behavior at the cellular level.