@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Terrestrial laser scanning and continuous wavelet transform for controlling surface flatness in construction – A first investigation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a novel approach to surface flatness control in construction.It combines terrestrial laser scanning with the continuous wavelet transform.Experiments conducted on real-life data highlight the potential of the approach.It outperforms the Waviness Index method (current state of the art).

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Laser scanning,Quality control,Tolerance,Flatness,Wavelet transform,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We propose a novel approach to surface flatness characterization in construction that relies on the combination of Terrestrial Laser Scanning (TLS) and the Continuous Wavelet Transform (CWT). The former has the advantage over existing measurement technologies of providing both accurate and extremely dense measurements over surfaces. The latter provides the means to conduct frequency analysis with high resolution in both the spatial and frequency domains. This novel approach is tested using two real concrete floors and the results compared with those obtained with the Waviness Index method. The results show a high level of correlation. In fact, the proposed approach delivers a higher level of precision in the frequency and spatial domains. We also show what seems to be a weakness of the Waviness Index method in the detection of undulations with short periods. Finally, although not experimentally demonstrated here, the proposed method has the interesting additional advantage of being applicable in 2D, that is over an entire surface instead of sampled survey lines (1D).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In construction, errors in the geometry of built components can have detrimental effects on the subsequent construction stages and/or the operation of completed facilities [1]. As a result, geometric tolerance control must be frequently conducted during construction projects.Surface flatness, or surface regularity, is “the deviation in height of the surface […] over short distances in a local area”[2]. The level of flatness may be specified for surfaces that are horizontal, vertical or slopped, and/or that are made of different materials. But, surface flatness is most commonly considered for concrete slabs/floors or screeds. Three main methods are generally considered for the control of surface regularity: the Straightedge method, the F-Numbers method, and the Waviness Index method. They are reviewed in the following paragraphs.Straightedge method[2–5]. This is the oldest and least accurate method, but it is still commonly used due to its ease of application. In the Straightedge method, the surveyor lays a straightedge at different locations on the surface and measures the maximum deviation under it, preferably using a stainless steel slip gauge [2]. The deviation is then compared to a specified tolerance to accept or reject the level of flatness of the surface (e.g. see specifications BS EN 13670 [3], BS 8204 [2,4] in the UK; ACI 117 [6] in the USA). A long straightedge (2m in Europe, 3m in the USA) is used to control global flatness (i.e. larger deformations, like bending), while a smaller ruler (0.2m in Europe, 0.3m in the USA) can be used to control local flatness (little gaps or bumps).The Straightedge method is simple to understand and inexpensive, and thus still used for controlling surfaces with low-level flatness specifications. However, it presents important deficiencies including: the difficulty of testing large areas of floors in reasonable times; the poor precision of the measurements; and the inability to reproduce results. For these reasons, alternative approaches for floor profiling have emerged that make use of modern measurement technologies and are somewhat simpler to implement, such as: the F-Numbers method and the Waviness Index method.F-Numbers method[5–7]. The F-numbers method may be seen as a modern extension of the Straightedge method, making use of modern and more precise measurement technology, such as optical levels, total stations, inclinometers or longitudinal differential floor profilometers [6,7].The F-Numbers measurement method is described in detail in ASTM E 1155-96 [7]. It consists in: defining a grid of floor profile survey lines (separated by at least 4ft) on the surface of each floor section; measuring point elevation at regular 1ft (∼0.3m) intervals along each line; and finally calculating theFFandFLvalues that summarize the floor profile:•FFis a statistically calculated number that takes into account the mean and standard deviations of sample measurements of 12 in (∼0.3m) incremental curvatures.FFis used to estimate the floor’s flatness; andFLis a statistically calculated number that takes into account the mean and standard deviations of sample measurements of 120 in (∼3m) elevation differences.FLis used to estimate the floor’s levelness.While the F-Numbers method is a clear improvement over the Straightedge method, its downside is that it is mathematically more complex, and the reported F-Numbers are unitless and are therefore difficult to comprehend. Additionally, the F-Numbers method does not readily provide information on the location of defects on the floor. Last, but not least, it has been shown to react to floor undulations (i.e. defects) with period 1.5–4ft (FF) and 15–80ft (FL), which constitutes a fairly incomplete analysis of the surface waviness. This is particularly problematic when forklifts are to be operated on the floor (a very common case). Indeed, it has been theorised that surface undulations that can affect the operation of forklifts range between 50% and 100% of their wheelbase length [8,9], which typically translates into the 2–10ft range.Waviness Index (WI) method[10]. This method was conceived as a result of the lack of responsiveness of the F-Numbers method to floor undulations of periods between 2ft and 10ft [8,9]. The WI method follows essentially the same measuring procedure as the F-Numbers method. Measurements are conducted at regular 1ft intervals along floor survey lines, and deviations are calculated from the midpoints of imaginary chords defined by pairs of measured points along the survey line. In its standard form, the method considers chords of lengths2kft wherek∈1,2,3,4,5, that is lengths of 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10ft (60, 120, 180, 240 and 300cm) [9]. Another advantage of the WI method is that its results express the deviation from flatness in inch (or centimetre), and are thus much simpler to comprehend than the F numbers.The three methods above show an evolution over time that aimed to address the limitations of previous methods and make use of new measuring technologies. The Waviness Index method can be seen as the current state-of-the-art method, particularly for its consideration for a range of undulation periods, as opposed to just one or two [9]. Yet, the Waviness Index method still presents three main limitations:1.Like all its predecessors, the WI method is still based on sparse measurements conducted along survey lines that are themselves sparsely spaced. As a result, the overall flatness assessment results may be inaccurate, with defective floors/slabs not being detected. The use of sparse measurements was motivated by (1) the lack of measuring device that could deliver both dense and accurate measurements across slabs in a timely manner, and (2) the significant human input required for measuring and later calculating the flatness characterization values.The WI method considers five different waviness periods in its analysis. Although these are homogeneously spread from 2ft to 10ft, one could argue that this presents an additional level of sparsity in the analysis that can further impact the reliability of the flatness characterization. In fact, we will show later through experimental results that the WI method is actually quite imprecise in detecting undulations with short periods, in particular 2ft.The WI method, like the F-Numbers method, does not readily report the locations of the defects along the survey lines. Information is available about the elevation profile and undulations of different periods, but their relative impact on the overall floor flatness value cannot be easily identified.Terrestrial Laser Scanning (TLS) is a modern measurement technology that is revolutionizing dimensional surveying in the Architectural, Engineering, Construction and Facilities Management industry (AEC&FM). As highlighted in numerous previous research works (e.g.[11,1,12,13]), TLS provides surveyors with the means to conduct accurate and extremely dense 3D measurements in relatively short times, which should in turn lead to more reliable dimensional control results. Focusing on flatness control, dense measurements over an entire surface should enable the assessment of flatness more comprehensively and reliably. This would be a significant advantage over the traditional methods discussed earlier that are based on sparse measurements.Many researchers have developed approaches to compute and display the deviations of laser scanned points from reference surfaces for visual inspection of surfaces [1,12,14,15]. However, these works focused on visualization and did not consider the issue of detecting and characterizing surface flatness defects.Tang et al. [13,16] then developed three algorithms to detect and characterize flatness deviations in TLS data. Their main algorithm works in three stages: (1) Apply Gaussian noise filtering to the point cloud; (2) fit a plane against the overall point cloud; and (3) calculate the distance between each point and the overall plane. Two other variant algorithms are also considered. Although analyzed with a certain level of detail, the methods presented by Tang et al. focus on detecting picks in the deviations, i.e. undulation amplitudes, as opposed to characterizing surface waviness, i.e. frequencies. As discussed earlier, waviness assessment is central to surface flatness characterization. Therefore, while the work of Tang et al. certainly contributes to demonstrating the potential of TLS for conducting surface flatness assessment, their proposed methods would provide insufficient results to draw full conclusions on surface flatness.Bosché and Guenet [17] digitally encoded the Straightedge and F-Numbers methods so that they can be automatically applied to TLS point clouds of floors. A comparison of the results obtained by the encoded Straightedge method with those obtained by manually applying the Straightedge method on the slab also confirmed that TLS data appears to provide point clouds that are sufficiently accurate and precise for detecting and characterizing subtle defects like small floor flatness undulations. The advantage of the work of Bosché and Guenet is that it employs existing survey methods (applied digitally) so that practitioners can better assess the value of TLS for such measurements. But, the limitations inherent to those methods remain, that is:1.They are designed to be conducted with only sparse measurements and therefore provide incomplete analysis. Although Bosché and Guenet show that this limitation can be overcome in their method by increasing the number of ‘virtual’ straightedge measurements or F-Numbers survey lines around the floor.They characterize surface waviness by considering only one or two surface undulation periods (1.5–4ft and/or 15–80ft).All existing methods characterize surface waviness by analysing waviness along lines, i.e. in 1D. While this may be justified in the case of floors with defined wheel-track traffic (narrow aisles), floors with random traffic should preferably be assessed in 2D.The F-Numbers method enables the detection of flatness defects, but does not naturally report their location on the surface.As we show later, applying the Waviness Index method to TLS point cloud data would partially address the second limitation, because that method considers a set of five undulation periods. However, the third and fourth limitations remain for all methods.We propose a new method for conducting surface flatness control using TLS data. The method aims to address all the limitations of existing methods identified above. The idea is to conduct a frequency analysis of the TLS points associated to a surface, using Wavelet Transforms, more specifically the Continuous Wavelet Transform.As discussed earlier, all existing methods (Straightedge, F-Numbers, Waviness Index, etc.) are in some way based upon frequency analysis, but are significantly simplified due to the limits of the sensing technologies available at the time when they were designed, in particular the impossibility to conduct very dense accurate measurements. TLS has now changed this situation entirely, so that new ways of conducting flatness control can be devised that take advantage of the density and quality of measurements provided by TLS to deliver more precise results in terms of flatness defect detection, characterization and localization.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 first reviews different frequency analysis methods leading to the selection of the Wavelet Transforms, and more particularly the Continuous Wavelet Transform. The proposed approach and implemented system are then presented in Section 3. Results of the experiments conducted to test and validate the proposed approach are reported and discussed in Section 4. Conclusions are finally drawn and recommendations for future research suggested in Section 5.In the case of surface flatness control, one can assimilate the measured elevation profile along a survey line as a discrete 1D surface waviness ‘signal’. More generally, the elevation profile over the entire surface can be assimilated to a discrete 2D ‘signal’. In both cases (1D and 2D) frequency analysis techniques can be considered to detect the presence of undulations with certain frequencies (i.e. periods), and thereby detect construction defects.It is well-known that any continuous signal can be re-written, or decomposed, as the sum of sinusoidal functions with varying amplitudes and frequencies, altogether known as the frequency spectrum. This process, when applied to continuous signals, is known as the Fourier Transform (FT). In engineering practice, signals are not continuous but discrete, in which case the corresponding Discrete Fourier Transform is applied.The FT gives information on frequency components over the entire length of the signal. Thus, while it permits to estimate in which ‘quantities’ different frequencies exist, it is unable to provide the location along the signal where they are present. FT is thus suitable for stationary signals where frequency content does not change in time, but is not suitable for non-stationary signals where frequency content changes over time (in our case, over space). Since surface waviness is a non-stationary signal, applying the FT to elevation profiles could enable the detection of defects (i.e. undulations of certain periods and amplitudes) but would not enable their localization along the signal; the latter being critical information to correct the defects.The idea of the Short Time Fourier Transform (STFT) is to process non-stationary signals in segments that are themselves assumed to be stationary. To isolate individual segments of the input signal, the signal is multiplied by a square function that is incrementally translated along the signal – a process called windowing; note that the STFT uses a window of fixed width. The FT is then computed for each windowed signal segment. The output of the STFT is a 3D diagram representing amplitude responses for different frequencies at different locations along the signal.In our context, the multiplication of the original signal by a translated square function should a priori support the localization of the different frequencies. However, signal windowing using a fixed square function with fixed width has some significant downsides. First, the process results in some loss of accuracy in the frequency domain. Then, it prevents it from achieving good resolution in time and frequency simultaneously. As discussed in Section 1.1, surface flatness assessment requires a fairly wide range of frequencies to be analysed – periods between 2ft and 10ft. With a 10ft window, the STFT would achieve the detection and localization of a signal with period 10ft with the best accuracy possible. However, it would be fairly poor for the localization of undulations of period of 2ft – i.e. if such a 2ft period is detected, the user will only know that it is somewhere within this 10ft window. In contrast, a 2ft wide window would enable the detection and localization of undulations with period 2ft with great accuracy, but would not support the detection of undulations with period 10ft. This illustrates the difficulty, in fact the impossibility, to simultaneously achieve good precision in space/time and frequency; a problem known as the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.Nonetheless, this impossibility is not necessarily critical in practice. Indeed, it has been observed that for many real-life problems, including that of surface flatness control, the precision required for localizing low frequency signals is generally lower than that required for high frequency signals. This important observation has motivated the development of new methods, in particular the Wavelet Transform.The Wavelet Transform (WT) is presented in detail in countless publications, including [18,19]. While we provide a summary of it in the following, we invite the reader to explore such publications for more detail.The WT analyses a signal by convolving it with a function, called the wavelet, at incremental locations along the signal and at incrementally increased scales. The wavelet is designed/selected to detect a certain type of pattern/frequency (see Fig. 2). The incremental increase in scale can be seen as a simultaneous increase in the ‘window’ of signal considered and decrease of frequency examined. In other words, low frequencies are only examined at large scales (i.e. with large windows) and high frequencies are only examined at small scales (i.e. with narrow windows), thereby optimally dealing with the Heisenberg uncertainty principle. This is commonly illustrated with the diagrams reproduced in Fig. 1,The output of the WT when applied to a 1D signal is a 3D representation of the response of the convolution of the signal with the wavelet for different values of translation τ and scale a. The scale a in WT bears some equivalence with some characteristic frequency f (a∼1/f). This is discussed further later.The wavelets used at the different scales are all obtained by dilating a mother wavelet. To ensure a strong response of the convolution, the mother wavelet should present a shape similar to that searched in the signal. As a result, many mother wavelet functions have been proposed for different applications. Some commonly used ones include: the Mexican Hat, the Morlet, the Daubechies or the Bior functions (see Fig. 2).For surface flatness control, the type of ‘defect’ to be examined typically has a shape of a ‘smooth bump’ or, from a signal viewpoint, one period of a sinusoidal signal. In this context, the Mexican Hat wavelet (Fig. 2a) appears quite well suited.In parallel to the selection of mother wavelets, various WT methods can be distinguished, in particular: the Continuous Wavelet Transform (CWT), Stationary Wavelet Transform (SWT), and Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT).As illustrated in Fig. 3, the CWT aims to analyse the input signal with full resolutions in both translation and scale. On the other end, the DWT applies a two-dimensional dyadic decomposition that results in ‘skipping’ levels of precision in translation and scale. In-between lies SWT that ‘skips’ levels of precision in scale using the same dyadic decomposition approach as the DWT, but retains the same precision in localization (translation) as the CWT.The difference between these three WT approaches actually goes beyond their resolution in localization and frequency; they actually employ different types of wavelets. The reason is that they have actually been developed for totally different purposes. The CWT is aimed at detecting a (wavelet) pattern/frequency accurately in both location (translation) and scale. In contrast, the DWT aims to capture as much as possible of the information contained in a signal at the least cost possible; it is mainly used for signal compression (e.g. the JPEG2000 format in image compression). The SWT provides a trade-off that has a practical value in some engineering problems where the detection and localization of a pattern in a signal needs to be known with sufficient accuracy, but the scale of the searched pattern (frequency) may not be known with great precision. Focusing on the context of floor flatness assessment, it can be concluded that the CWT appears to be the most appropriate approach — although the SWT may still apply. In contrast, the DWT does not suit this kind of problem at all.Note that, of the wavelets shown in Fig. 2, the Mexican Hat or Morlet wavelets are used for the CWT, while the Daubechies or Bior wavelets are used for DWT and SWT.As pointed earlier, there is a relation between the scale a at which a wavelet is applied and a characteristic frequency f that it reacts to. This relation depends on the mother wavelet and is given by the formula [19]:(1)f=fcδpawherefcis the center frequency of the mother wavelet (i.e. the main frequency component of the FT of the mother wavelet) andδpis the point sampling period along the signal. A strong response of the convolution of the wavelet at scale a thus indicates the presence of an undulation with frequency f.The characteristic periodT of the signal is easily derived from Eq. (1) as:(2)T=1f=δpafcTable 1provides the center frequency and the resulting characteristic frequency and period for different wavelets, for a=1 andδp=1cm.The WT, like the FT and STFT, can be applied to multi-dimensional signals, not just one-dimensional ones. In the context of floor flatness assessment, this means that the WT could be applied not just to elevation profile data along survey lines (1D signals), but also to 2D elevation profile data for an entire surface at once [20].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
