@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Molecular dynamics study-based mechanism of nefiracetam-induced NMDA receptor potentiation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Nefiracetam-induced N-methyl-d-aspartic acid (NMDA) receptor signaling was investigated.Nefiracetam-induces NMDA receptor ligand binding domain conformation which favors glycine dissociation.Nefiracetam replaces glycine within glycine-binding pocket upon dissociation.The modulatory effect of nefiracetam on NMDA receptor intra-subunit communication and gating properties are discussed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
NMDA receptor,Nefiracetam,Threonine-647,Gauche trap,Molecular dynamics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Plastic changes in the brain required for memory formation and long-term learning are dependent on N-methyl-d-aspartic acid (NMDA) receptor signaling. Nefiracetam reportedly boosts NMDA receptor functions as a basis for its nootropic properties. Previous studies suggest that nefiracetam potentiates the NMDA receptor activation, as a more potent co-agonist for glycine binding site than glycine, though the underlying mechanisms remain elusive. Here, using BSP-SLIM method, a novel binding site within the core of spiral β-strands-1-5 of LBD-GLUN1 has been predicted in glycine-bound GLUN1 conformation in addition to the glycine pocket in Apo-GLUN1. Within the core of spiral β-strands-1-5 of LBD-GLUN1 pocket, all-atom molecular dynamics simulation revealed that nefiracetam disrupts Arg523-glycine-Asp732 interaction resulting in open GLUN1 conformation and ultimate diffusion of glycine out of the clamshell cleft. Open GLUN1 conformation coerces other intra-chain domains and proximal inter-chain domains to sample inactivate conformations resulting in closure of the transmembrane gate via a novel gauche trap on threonine 647 (chi-1 dihedral (χ1)=−45° instead of +45°). Docking of nefiracetam into the glycine pocket reversed the gauche trap and meditates partial opening of the TMD gate within a time-scale of 100ns as observed in glycine-only state. All these results suggest that nefiracetam can favorably complete with glycine for GLUN1-LBD in a two-step process, first by binding to a novel site of GLUN1-LBD-NMDA receptor followed by disruption of glycine-binding dynamics then replacing glycine in the GLUN1-LBD cleft.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The biochemical interplay between the nervous tissues and nefiracetam has continued to receive considerable research attention. Some of the key findings include: inhibition of neuronal death modes via interference with cellular Ca2+ dynamics (Ueda et al., 2004; Fujita et al., 2002), analgesic actions through stimulation of (supra)-spinal nicotinic cholinergic system (Rashid and Ueda, 2002), and nootropic actions through direct interaction with dentate polysialylated neurons circuitry (Murphy et al., 2005). Indeed, nootropic action of nefiracetam has been most frequently studied, while the underlying mechanisms have been under intense debate. The notion that N-methyl-d-aspartic acid (NMDA) receptor may be one of the key cellular targets for nefiracetam nootropic actions was conceived from two observation: low NMDA receptor expression is a key feature in Alzheimer’s disease (Rison and Stanton, 1996; Newcomer et al., 2000) and that drugs such as glycine, d-cycloserine and milacemide have successfully been used in animals as memory enhancer (Hanndelmann et al., 1989) via NMDA receptor-mediated memory formation and long-term potentiation. Likewise, nefiracetam is now recognized as a nootropic agent acting partly as NMDA receptor ligand (Newcomer et al., 2000; Murphy et al., 2005). Indeed, Moriguchi et al. (2003) presented strong evidence in support of NMDA receptor-nefiracetam interaction via NMDA receptor-GLUN1-LBD (ligand-binding domain). First, 3μM glycine-mediated NMDA receptor current was abolished at 100nM nefiracetam (Moriguchi et al., 2003), but 10nM nefiracetam-induced NMDA receptor current was not reversible by high concentration of glycine. Similarly, 7-chlorokynurenic acid a known NMDA-receptor-GLUN1-LBD glycine-site antagonist abolished nefiracetam-induced current. The authors concluded that nefiracetam is a high-affinity NMDA-GLUN1-LBD agonist. From the study of Moriguchi et al. (2003) the mechanism of nefiracetam-induced glycine-LBD dissociation, and replacement is still unanswered.Here, using all-atom molecular dynamics simulation, we have provided further insight into NMDA receptor-nefiracetam interacting. Our findings strongly support a multi-step NMDA receptor potentiation mechanism by nefiracetam; first, nefiracetam binds to spiral β-strands-1-5 of LBD-GLUN1 in glycine-bound state and weakens critical interaction network causing an opening of the closed clamshell LBD, resulting in diffusion of glycine out of the cleft, and paving a way for replacement by nefiracetam.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
