@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The frequency of poly(G) tracts in the human genome and their use as a sensor of DNA damage

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The frequency of occurrence of poly(G) sequences was determined in the updated human genome.There was an exponential increase in the frequency of poly(G) sequences for lengths above eight nucleotides.Could poly(G) sequences be a sensitive sensor of cellular DNA damage?

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cisplatin,DNA damage sensor,Exponential increase,Poly(G),Poly(A),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Tandem repeats of short DNA sequences are commonly found in human DNA. These simple sequence repeats or microsatellites are highly polymorphic in the human genome. Since the anti-tumour agent cisplatin preferentially forms DNA adducts at runs of consecutive guanine nucleotides (poly(G)), the position and frequency of occurrence of poly(G) sequences in the updated human genome was investigated. There are more runs of consecutive guanines than would be expected by random chance. This especially true for poly(G) sequences longer than approximately n=9. A plot of poly(G) length against log(observed/expected) frequency produced a straight line for n>9. A similar observation was also found for poly(A) DNA sequence repeats. This data implied that the increase in observed/expected frequency is directly related to length of DNA repeat. It was proposed that long runs of consecutive guanine nucleotides could be a sensitive sensor of cellular DNA damage since a number of DNA damaging agents cause lesions at poly(G) sequences.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Microsatellites or simple sequence repeats are a feature of the human genome. Simple sequence repeats are tandem repeats with a very short repeat unit of 1–13 nucleotides (Lander et al., 2001). Approximately 3% of the human genome is thought to consist of simple sequence repeats with dinucleotide repeats being most common (Lander et al., 2001).Variations in the number of tandem repeats are common at simple sequence repeats and lead to a high frequency of polymorphisms at these sites. These polymorphisms are thought to be caused by slippage during replication (Ellegren, 2004; Bhargava and Fuentes, 2010). Alternatively recombination-based unequal crossing-over could also contribute to the production of these polymorphisms (Charlesworth et al., 1994; Bhargava and Fuentes, 2010).Runs of consecutive nucleotides (repeat unit of one) are common in the human genome especially for poly(A) and poly(T) sequences. Poly(A) repeats are very frequent due to the re-integration of processed genes into the genome from mRNA with an attached poly(A) tail (Lander et al., 2001). Poly(G) and poly(C) repeats are less common than poly(A) or poly(T) repeats in the human genome since they are not part of this integrative mechanism.The anti-tumour drug, cisplatin, preferentially forms DNA adducts at runs of consecutive guanines (Murray et al., 1992a,b, 2012; Murray, 2000; Murray and Kandasamy, 2012). As part of examining the frequency of occurrence of runs of consecutive guanines, we wished to observe the position and extent of poly(G) DNA sequences in the human genome. During this study, it was noticed that there are more runs of consecutive guanines than would be expected by random chance (Ellegren, 2004; Bhargava and Fuentes, 2010), and we explored the impact of the larger than expected poly(G) tracts on the DNA damage caused by cisplatin and other G-targeting DNA damaging agents.The updated human hg19 DNA sequence was analysed to ascertain the frequency of occurrence of consecutive nucleotides. This was accomplished using Perl scripts where the frequency of occurrence of consecutive G, A, T or C nucleotides was determined. The use of repeat masker programs (Chen, 2002) did not reveal all of the poly(G) and poly(A) DNA sequences in the human genome.The expected frequency of occurrence of a run of consecutive guanines is: (1−x)xn(1−x) where x is the fraction of G in the human genome, and n is number of consecutive Gs. If xnis the frequency of occurrence of consecutive Gs, then at each end of a run of consecutive nucleotides, there must be a non-G nucleotide that has a frequency of occurrence of 1−x. A similar equation is utilised for the expected frequency of A, C and T. Since poly(G) sequences are equivalent to poly(C) on the complementary strand of DNA, the poly(G) and poly(C) frequencies were combined and described in the text below as poly(G) sequences; similarly the poly(A) and poly(T) frequencies were combined and described as poly(A).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
