@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Structural and functional impact of missense mutations in TPMT: An integrated computational approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Pathogenecity of TPMT mutations could be predicted by an integrative approach.Most of the mutations resulting in no enzyme activity are in conserved positions.Missense mutations have different effects on TPMT structure and function.Residue interaction network of approximately 85% of the alleles are different from wild type.Cytoscape is a robust program for visualization of residue interaction network in TPMT.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Bioinformatic analysis,TPMT,Missense mutations,Structure-function relationship,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundThiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT) detoxifies thiopurine drugs which are used for treatment of various diseases including inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), and hematological malignancies. Individual variation in TPMT activity results from mutations in TPMT gene. In this study, the effects of all the known missense mutations in TPMT enzyme were studied at the sequence and structural levelMethodsA broad set of bioinformatic tools was used to assess all the known missense mutations affecting enzyme activity. The effects of these mutations on protein stability, aggregation propensity, and residue interaction network were analyzed.ResultsOur results indicate that the missense mutations have diverse effects on TPMT structure and function. Stability and aggregation propensities are affected by various mutations. Several mutations also affect residues in ligand binding site.ConclusionsIn vitro study of missense mutation is laborious and time-consuming. However, computational methods can be used to obtain information about effects of missense mutations on protein structure. In this study, the effects of most of the mutations on enzyme activity could be explained by computational methods. Thus, the present approach can be used for understanding the protein structure-function relationships.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
TPMT is a cytoplasmic enzyme catalyzes the S-methylation of thiopurine drugs used for treatment of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), hematological malignancies, and as immunosuppressant after organ transplantation. 6-Mercaptopurine, 6-thioguanine and azathiopurine are the drugs which their metabolism is affected by the low and intermediate TPMT enzyme activity (Wang et al., 2010).TPMT gene is located on chromosome 6 (6p22.3) and contains 10 exons (Szumlanski et al., 1996). TPMT enzyme contains 8 helices and 9 sheets shown by letters (A–H) and number (1–9), respectively (Fig. 1) (Wu et al., 2007; Stivala et al., 2011). Genetic polymorphisms in TPMT enzyme result in decreased or absence of enzymatic activity in individuals carrying these alleles (Weinshilboum, 2001). To date, 43 alleles of TPMT designed from *1 to *37 are identified in human population (Appell et al., 2013). TPMT*1 is the wild type form of the enzyme which has the normal activity. Reduced enzyme activity was observed in individuals carrying a normal allele and a defective allele (Relling et al., 2013).Despite the introduction of TPMT as a drug metabolizer for approximately half a century, there is no information about the natural substrate of this enzyme. To date, four substrates of TPMT in the metabolic pathway of thiopurine drugs are identified (Zaza et al., 2010). 6-Mercaptopurine (6MP), 6-thioguanine (6-TG), thioguanine monophosphate (6-TGMP) and thioinosine monophosphate (6TIMP) are identified as methyl acceptor and S-adenosyl-l-methionine (SAM) as methyl donor (Ujiie et al., 2008; Peng et al., 2008). Considerable progress has been made in understanding the effects of several TPMT alleles on protein activity using heterologous expression systems (Ujiie et al., 2008; Garat et al., 2008; Salavaggione et al., 2005; Hamdan-Khalil et al., 2005). However, there are only a few reports illustrating the effects of most common mutations on TPMT enzyme structure using in vitro and computational approaches (Wu et al., 2007; Garat et al., 2008; Wennerstrand et al., 2012; Rutherford and Daggett, 2008). Bioinformatic analysis of point mutations is used routinely by researchers and clinicians to advise the pathogenecity of mutations in combination with other evidence in a variety of diseases (Heineman et al., 2015; Nouri et al., 2014; Keivani et al., 2015). There are different approaches used by researchers, but the most reliable results can be obtained by applying an extensive set of prediction programs. Most of the programs accept both sequence and structure as input; however, using structure information when one is available yields a more complete prediction. For example, structural and functional effects of missense mutations in GJB2 gene was predicted by several in silico tools using both sequence and structure information of the human Connexin 26. Researchers can use the results obtained by this study in their in vitro studies to provide further insights into molecular mechanisms of deafness (Yilmaz, 2015). In the present study, we used bioinformatic tools to study the effects of TPMT variants on protein structure. With the exception of M1V and M1T which result in lack of TPMT translation, all the missense mutation identified in TPMT were modeled onto the corresponding structure and their effects on protein structure were evaluated. In addition, sequence-based analysis of TPMT was used for illustration of the effects of TPMT variants on protein aggregation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study we showed that most of the missense mutations resulting in low enzyme activity are located in strictly conserved positions. Mutations causing severe clashes have less enzyme activities in contrast to the mutations with few clashes. In addition, changes in residue contacts could be used to illustrate the effects of mutations. The data of enzyme activity in in in vitro is not available for a few missense mutations in TPMT; therefore, our results obtained from computational methods cannot be verified with experimental evidence. G117R and G144R were two only substitutions that their deleterious effects on TPMT enzyme could be defined by none of the prediction tools used in this study. Clearly, more biochemical assays are required to understand the effect of the remaining TPMT variants on enzyme activity. In addition, computational methods, especially prediction of aggregation prone regions, need to be improved so that can be used to precisely illustrate the TPMT structure-function relationship.The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.