@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Structure-based grafting and identification of kinase–inhibitors to target mTOR signaling pathway as potential therapeutics for glioblastoma

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A protocol is described to graft inhibitors from their cognate kinases to non-cognate mTOR.The grafted inhibitor–mTOR affinity is virtually evaluated using a consensus scoring strategy.A number of identified inhibitors are assayed to determine their inhibition against mTOR.Diverse nonbonded interactions are found at mTOR–inhibitor complex interface.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Rational drug design,mTOR,Kinase–inhibitor,Glioblastoma,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), a key mediator of PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway, has recently emerged as a compelling molecular target in glioblastoma. The mTOR is a member of serine/threonine protein kinase family that functions as a central controller of growth, proliferation, metabolism and angiogenesis, but its signaling is dysregulated in various human diseases especially in certain solid tumors including the glioblastoma. Here, considering that there are various kinase inhibitors being approved or under clinical or preclinical development, it is expected that some of them can be re-exploited as new potent agents to target mTOR for glioblastoma therapy. To achieve this, a synthetic pipeline that integrated molecular grafting, consensus scoring, virtual screening, kinase assay and structure analysis was described to systematically profile the binding potency of various small-molecule inhibitors deposited in the protein kinase–inhibitor database against the kinase domain of mTOR. Consequently, a number of structurally diverse compounds were successfully identified to exhibit satisfactory inhibition profile against mTOR with IC50 values at nanomolar level. In particular, few sophisticated kinase–inhibitors as well as a flavonoid myricetin showed high inhibitory activities, which could thus be considered as potential lead compounds to develop new potent, selective mTOR–inhibitors. Structural examination revealed diverse nonbonded interactions such as hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic forces and van der Waals contacts across the complex interface of mTOR with myricetin, conferring both stability and specificity for the mTOR–inhibitor binding.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Glioblastoma is one of the most aggressive solid cancers and the most common primary brain tumor, which invades the surrounding brain, making complete surgical excision highly improbable. They are also among the most radiotherapy- and chemotherapy-resistant cancer types with a median survival duration of 12–15 months after initial diagnosis (Stupp et al., 2005). Thus, new therapeutic approaches for glioblastoma are needed. Recently, the efficacy of small-molecule kinase–inhibitors has been changed as standard clinical practice for several solid tumors (De Witt Hamer, 2010). The glioblastoma represents a compelling disease for kinase–inhibitor therapy because the majority of these tumors harbor genetic alterations that result in aberrant activation of growth factor signaling pathways (Mellinghoff et al., 2012).The PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway regulates several normal cellular functions that are critical for tumorigenesis of glioblastoma, including cellular proliferation, growth, survival and mobility (Morgensztern and McLeod, 2005). The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), a serine/threonine protein kinase, is a key mediator of the pathway; signaling functions of mTOR are distributed between at least two distinct mTOR–protein complexes: mTORC1 and mTORC2. The mTORC1 is an association of mTOR with a number of proteins such as PRAS40 and the rapamycin-sensitive adapter protein of mTOR (Raptor), whereas the mTORC2 consists of mTOR and a separate protein complex including the rapamycin-insensitive companion of mTOR (Rictor) (Fan and Weiss, 2012). The rapamycin and its analogs (rapalogs) are the well established first generation mTOR–inhibitors, which serve as allosteric mediators to irreversibly regulate the conformation and activity of mTOR. However, the response rate in solid tumors where these first generation inhibitors have been used as a single-agent therapy have been modest, due to partial mTOR inhibition that rapamycin and rapalogs are not sufficient for achieving a broad and robust anticancer effect (Brachmann et al., 2009). Currently, a new generation of ATP-competitive inhibitor that targets the catalytic site of mTOR–kinase domain exhibits potent efficacy and are in early clinical trials (Benjamin et al., 2011).In this study, we considered to perform a systematic virtual screening against a large pool of kinase–inhibitors to identify those that may potentially target mTOR. The kinase–inhibitors have been shown to have a broad specificity across protein kinase family members due to their high conservation in sequence, structure and function. Recently, Shao et al. (2015) demonstrated that certain existing inhibitors that were originally designed for their cognate kinase targets can also bind efficiently to protein kinase C. Thus, some non-cognate ligands are thought to be the promising lead candidates and could be further optimized to develop new selective, potent mTOR–inhibitors for glioblastoma therapy. We also performed kinase inhibition assay to solidify the findings obtained from computational modeling and virtual screening.Patel and Doerksen (2010) have developed a protein kinase–inhibitor database that contains 755 unique, curated and annotated PDB protein kinase–inhibitor complexes. We have systematically examined these complex crystal structures, from which only those with high resolution (<3Å) and low thermal motion (R-factor<0.25) were considered. In addition, the kinase active sites should be complete; it was required that no missing atoms or other chemical components such as the functional moieties of backbones and side chains nearby the sites were found in the crystal structures. Next, the absent hydrogen atoms of kinase proteins were added using REDUCE program (Word et al., 1999), and the chemical attributes of cocrystallized ligand molecules such as atomic hybridization state and bond order type were assigned with I-INTERPRET program (Zhao et al., 2007).In order to ensure the reliability of consensus scoring used in this study, we herein employed a set of kinase–inhibitor binding data to test virtual scoring functions. The set contains 77 crystal structure-solved, affinity-known kinase–inhibitor complexes that were compiled by Wang et al. (2014) to develop a quantitative structure–activity relationship predictor for structure-based evaluation of inhibitor interaction with their kinase targets. The crystal structures and binding affinity of these kinase–inhibitor complexes were retrieved from the PDB (Berman et al., 2000) and PDBbind (Wang et al., 2005) databases, respectively. This nonredundant set is structurally diverse in ligand chemicals and represents a wide range of kinase–inhibitor binding affinities.A method proposed by Lu et al. (2014) was modified here to carry out computational modeling of non-cognate mTOR–inhibitor complex structures. Briefly, ligand molecule is assumed to adopt a similar binding mode to interact with different kinase receptors since the kinase family members are highly conserved. Hence, the inhibitor binding mode can be directly grafted from crystal complex template into the active pocket of mTOR. As shown in Fig. 1, the crystal structure of mTOR–kinase domain in apo state was obtained from the PDB database (Berman et al., 2000) under the accessible code 4JSV; the structure has only a moderate resolution so that it was first refined with a FoldX minimization procedure (Schymkowitz et al., 2005) to eliminate those unreasonable phenomena involved in the coarse-grained structure, such as atomic collisions and bond distortions. The refined mTOR–kinase domain was then superposed onto the crystal template of inhibitor complex with its cognate kinase target, resulting in mTOR/inhibitor/kinase system. The superposition was simply carried out by least-squares fitting of the backbone Cα atoms between the two kinase proteins using SPDBV program (Johansson et al., 2012). Subsequently, the kinase template was removed manually from the system to obtain an artificial mTOR–inhibitor complex structure model, which was further optimized using the FoldX force field (Schymkowitz et al., 2005).A number of widely used scoring functions were considered to derive consensus scoring for the structure-based evolution of non-cognate mTOR–inhibitor binding potency, including ChemScore (Eldridge et al., 1997), X-Score (Wang et al., 2002), DrugScore (Velec et al., 2005), DFIRE (Zhang et al., 2005), DOCK score (Meng et al., 1992) and Autodock score (Goodsell et al., 1996). The ChemScore and X-Score are knowledge-based potentials derived from statistical observations of close contacts between certain types of atoms or functional groups that occur more frequently than one would expect by a random distribution. The DrugScore and DFIRE are empirical potentials that count the number of various types of interactions in a protein–ligand complex. The DOCK score and Autodock score are force field-based potentials that describe protein–ligand affinity by summing the strength of intermolecular van der Waals and electrostatic interactions between all atoms of the protein and ligand. Here, the Autodock score, DOCK score, ChemScore and X-Score were calculated using stand-alone programs AutoDock, DOCK, GOLD and X-Score™, respectively. The DrugScore and DFIRE were computed with online servers DSX-ONLINE and dDFIRE/DFIRE2, respectively.A supervised strategy was employed to derive consensus evaluation for kinase–inhibitor systems from above six scoring functions. The strategy performed least-squares fitting of the six scores to experimental affinity based on the 77 structure-solved, affinity-known kinase–inhibitor complex samples, resulting in a linear regression formula:(1)pKd=c0+(c1×Score1)+(c2×Score2)+(c3×Score3)+(c4×Score4)+(c5×Score5)+(c6×Score6)where the pKd is the negative logarithm of kinase–inhibitor dissociation constant Kd (affinity), Score1, Score2,…, Score6 are the calculated score values separately using the six scoring methods, the c1, c2,…, c6 are corresponding weight terms that determine the relative contributions of the six scores to kinase–inhibitor affinity, and c0 is the constant term that reflects those additional factors that are not included in the six scores, such as flexibility and entropy effect.The kinase assay for mTOR inhibition was as described previously (Knight et al., 2006; Feldman et al., 2009). Briefly, the assay was performed in a volume of 30μL buffer containing 1μg PHAS-I, 120mM NaCl, 40mM HEPES pH 7, 0.3% CHAPS, 4mM MnCl2, 10mM DTT, 1X Roche inhibitor cocktail-EDTA, 2μg/mL heparin, 100μM ATP, 2μCi γ-32P ATP. Inhibitors were tested in a four-fold dilution series from 10μM to 600pM, and four measurements were made at each concentration. The kinase reaction was terminated by spotting onto nitrocellulose, which was washed several times with NaCl phosphoric acid. The radioactivity remaining on the nitrocellulose sheet was quantified by phosphorimaging, and IC50 values were determined by fitting the data to a sigmoidal dose–response curve.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Glioblastoma is the most common and most aggressive malignant primary brain tumor in humans, and the mTOR signaling pathway has long been considered as a promising target for glioblastoma therapy. In the current study, we developed an integrated protocol to systematically profile the inhibitory potency of kinase–inhibitors against mTOR, from which a number of active compounds were identified to show a moderate or high inhibition profile for mTOR. In particular, the INSR inhibitor GS3 and IKKβ inhibitor Bay 65-1942 as well as a flavonoid compound exhibited very high activities, which could be considered as potential lead compounds to develop new potent, selective mTOR–inhibitors. Further, complex structure analysis was performed to dissect the structural basis and energetic property of intermolecular interaction between the mTOR–kinase domain and identified inhibitors, revealing a complicated network of nonbonded interactions across the tightly packed interface of non-cognate mTOR–inhibitor complexes.Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2015.01.001.The following are Supplementary data to this article: