@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Genome-wide identification and expression analysis of WNK kinase gene family in rice

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Identified 9 members of WNK in rice, that showed resemblance to Arabidopsis and human WNK.Phylogenetic analysis of all WNK was performed and categorized into five main clades and subclades.Their gene expression pattern of tissue specific and under various abiotic stresses reveals differential expression pattern.The presences of various abiotic stress responsive cis-elements in the promoter region of OsWNK also predict their importance in providing basal tolerance to rice during critical conditions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
WNK,With no lysine kinase,Rice,Gene expression,Abiotic stress,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Eukaryotic protein kinases represent one of the largest gene families involved in diverse regulatory functions. WNK (With No Lysine) kinases are members of ser/thr protein kinase family, which lack conserved catalytic lysine (K) residue at protein kinase subdomain II and is replaced by either asparagine, serine or glycine residues. They are involved in regulation of flowering time, circadian rhythms and abiotic stresses in Arabidopsis thaliana. In the present study, we have identified 9 members of WNK in rice, showed resemblance to Arabidopsis and human WNK and clustered into five main clades phylogenetically. The predicted genes structure, bonafide conserved signature motif and domains strongly support their identity, as members of WNK kinase family. We have analyzed their chromosomal distribution, physio-chemical properties, subcellular localizations and cis-elements in the promoter regions in silico. Further, transcript analysis of OsWNK by qRT-PCR revealed their differential regulation in tissue specific and abiotic stresses libraries. In conclusion, the identification of nine OsWNK and transcript level expression pattern under abiotic stress using qRT-PCR in rice will significantly contribute towards the understanding of WNK genes in monocots and thus provide a set up for functional genomics studies of WNK protein kinases.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Protein kinases are one of the largest superfamilies, broadly classified into nine groups, 134 families and 196 subfamilies in eukaryotes (Manning et al., 2002). They are capable of transferring gamma phosphate group of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to phosphorylate serine, threonine or tyrosine residues of protein (Hanks and Hunter, 1995). They are essential regulator of various cellular processes such as development, cell cycle and signal transduction. The catalytic domain of protein kinases are 250–300 amino acid residues in length and demarcate as 12 conserved regions, referred to as subdomains (Hanks and Quinn, 1991). With No lysine (WNK) kinase (hereafter referred to as WNK), a subfamily of serine/threonine protein kinases related to the STE20/PAK-like family is found in higher organisms (Xu et al., 2002). A unique feature of WNK subfamily is marked by the absence of catalytic lysine (K) residue in kinase subdomain II, which is essential for the coordination of ATP in the active center and conserved among all other kinases (Xu et al., 2000; Wilson et al., 2001; Xu et al., 2002). In contrast, the catalytic lysine of WNK kinases is shifted towards sub-domain I and replaced by cysteine (C) residue in human. The WNK homologues have been recorded in various eukaryotes except yeast and it is proposed that they may be restricted to multicellular organisms (Verissimo and Jordon, 2001). They are involved in diverse physiological function such as regulation of ion balance, cell signaling, proliferation and organ development in animals.In plants, WNK members are involved in various physiological processes, such as regulation of flowering time by modulating the photoperiod and maintaining circadian cycle (Kahle et al., 2006; Uchida et al., 2014). In Arabidopsis thaliana 11 members of WNK have been reported and among them only two members have so far been well characterized (Huang et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2008). An in vitro study proved that AtWNK1 phosphorylate to the circadian clock component APRR3 and suggested that it may be involved in circadian rhythms (Nakamichi et al., 2002; Kojima et al., 2002). AtWNK8 interacted with vacuolar H+-ATPase (V-ATPase) subunit C through C-terminal domain and postulated that it might be involved in regulating ion transport in plants (Hermesdorf et al., 2006). Further MALDI-TOF MS analysis confirmed that AtWNK8 autophosphorylate as well as phosphorylates the vacuolar H+-ATPase subunit C at multiple sites. AtWNK8 mutant study showed that, it improves tolerance against salt and osmotic stresses through modulating proline content and activities of catalase and peroxidase (Zhang et al., 2013). AtWNK8 protein interacts with receptor of activated C kinase1 (RACK1) scaffold protein and phosphorylates at two residues, Ser122 and Thr162 (Urano et al., 2015). Another member of WNK family AtWNK9 plays a positive role in ABA signaling cascade and enhances drought tolerance in transgenic Arabidopsis (Xie et al., 2014). Other than Arabidopsis WNKs, very few reports are available on plant WNK members. Soybean WNK1 was characterized and observed that it may be involved in regulation of stress responsive abscisic acid signaling in the root system (Wang et al., 2010). Further constitutive over expression study of GmWNK1 in A. thaliana proved that it altered the sensitivity against salt and osmotic stresses (Wang et al., 2011). Rice OsWNK1 expression pattern was observed and suggested its involvement in regulation of biological circadian cycle and their possible role in abiotic stresses (Kumar et al., 2011). Interestingly, OsWNK family members have been shown significant transcript level regulation in rice seedlings when subjected to potassium (K+) deficiency (Ma et al., 2012). Furthermore, few reports are available on the involvement and the role of WNK in abiotic stresses.In the present study, putative WNK homologues were identified and confirmed by absence of catalytic lysine (K) residue in the kinase subdomain II which is replaced by asparagine/serine/glycine residue. We constructed phylogenetic tree for all WNKs and categorized into five major clades (I–V) and six subclades. The current study was mainly focused on rice WNK family, consisting of nine putative members distributed on 5 different chromosomes. Furthermore, we analyzed protein domain, phylogenetic relationship and gene structure of OsWNK. Moreover, we performed tissue specific gene expression patterns of rice OsWNK genes under the normal growth condition and against various abiotic stresses (drought, salt, heat and cold), exhibited differential regulation pattern. It underscored functional importance of OsWNK in the different tissues and might be involved in regulation of various abiotic stresses.With No lysine (WNK) kinase protein sequences were obtained from the NCBI (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/‎) protein database with WNK protein as the query search. The search for plant WNK gene was carried out using BLASTP and 50% identity was taken as the threshold (Altschul et al., 1990). The obtained sequences were searched in various plant genome databases such as TAIR (http://www.arabidopsis.org/), NCBI (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/‎), Gramene (http://www.gramene.org/), rap-db (http://rapdb.dna.affrc.go.jp/), TIGR (http://rice.plantbiology.msu.edu/), Phytozome (http://www.phytozome.net/) and Medicago genome project (http://www.jevi.org/medicago). 155 WNK sequences from various plant species viz. Cyanidioschyzon merolae, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Physcomitrella patens, Amborella trichopoda, Selaginella moellendorffi, Brachypodium distachyon, Sorghum bicolor, Zea mays, Oryza sativa, Hordeum vulgare, A. thaliana, Medicago truncatula, Solanum lycopersicum, Populus trichocarpa, Brassica rapa and Glycine max were retrieved. All WNK sequences were aligned and HMM profile was constructed (Sievers et al., 2011). Non redundant protein database was searched using HMMER 3.0 (hmmer.janelia.org) (Finn et al., 2011). HMMER and BLAST hits were compared and manually edited to avoid redundant sequences. Plant WNKs were aligned and submitted to weblogo, which is a web based tool to make of sequence logos (http://weblogo.berkeley.edu/logo.cgi) (Crooks et al., 2004).All WNK amino acid sequences were aligned using Clustal W (multiple sequence alignment) tool and a phylogenetic tree was constructed by neighbor joining (NJ) as well maximum likelihood tree. The NJ tree with following parameters: p-distance, pairwise deletion, and bootstrap analysis with 1000 replicates. The maximum likelihood tree was constructed with JTT model and evaluated based bootstrap 1000 replicates and both trees were constructed using MEGA 6.06 tool (Tamura et al., 2013).Rice OsWNK amino acid sequences were analyzed for the presence of protein kinase domain using Interproscan 5 (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/pfa/iprscan/), Prosite (http://prosite.expasy.org/) and SMART databases (Schultz et al., 2000; Zdobnov and Apweiler, 2001; Sigrist et al., 2013). Physiochemical data were generated from the ExPASy ProtParam server (http://web.expasy.org/protparam/) including sequence length, molecular weight and theoretical isoelectric point (pI) values (Gasteiger et al., 2005). Protein subcellular localization was predicted by LOCTREE3 and plant mPLoc predictive system (https://www.rostlab.org/services/loctree3) (Chou and Shen, 2010; Goldberg et al., 2014). Gene structure, exons and introns were obtained by comparing open reading frame (ORF) and genomic sequences. Gene structures were displayed using a GSDS 2.0 (http://gsds.cbi.pku.edu.cn) (Guo et al., 2007).Rice seeds (O. sativa ssp. Indica cultivar IR64) were surface sterilized with 5% sodium hypochlorite and imbibed in water in the dark at 28°C for 2 days. Germinated seeds were planted in plastic trays and grown hydroponically in Hoagland solution with a 16h light/8h dark cycle. After three weeks, the seedlings were subjected to the abiotic stress treatments. For salt and drought treatments, seedlings were treated with Hoagland solution containing 200mM NaCl and 20% PEG-6000 respectively. For cold and heat shock treatments, seedlings were exposed to 4°C and 45°C respectively. After stress treatment, samples were collected separately at 0, 0.5, 3, 6 and 12h intervals. For tissue specific expression young leaf, flag leaf, culm, panicle and roots were collected from pot grown rice plants. Three replicates for each experiment were performed in this study. After harvest samples were immediately flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C until RNA extraction.Total RNA was extracted using the RNeasy plant mini-kit (Qiagen) and quantified by nanodrop (Thermo scientific). Specific primer pairs were designed for all the nine OsWNK genes (Supplementary information Table S1) and their specificities were confirmed by running the RT-PCR product in agarose gel, before they were used for qRT-PCR analysis. The amplicon size of each of them was around 200bp. qRT-PCR was performed in an eppendorf realplex 2.2 PCR system (Eppendrof) using SYBR Green master mix (DyNAmo ColorFlash SYBR Green qPCR kit F-416L, Thermo scientific). The dissociation curve was used to detect the presence of primer dimer or other nonspecific amplified products that would produce a detectable CT value and negatively skew the results. Eukaryotic elongation factor (eEF1α) was used as housekeeping genes for normalization. The relative expression change of OsWNK in response to abiotic stresses and tissue specific expression was quantified using the 2−ΔΔCT method (Livak and Schmittgen, 2001).Rice qRT-PCR tissue specific and abiotic stress data were used for heatmaps construction using CIMminer online tool (http://discover.nci.nih.gov/cimminer) (Weinstein et al., 1994, 1997). We retrieved A. thaliana microarray expression values from AtGenExpress visualization tool database using respective gene IDs (http://jsp.weigelworld.org/expviz/expviz.jsp). The heatmaps were generated for tissue specific and abiotic stress values using CIMminer tool.The promoter regions of OsWNK (−1500 to −1bp) were retrieved from NCBI O. sativa Genome map viewer database. Sequence analysis was performed using different databases including PlantCARE (http://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/webtools/plantcare/html) (Lescot et al., 2002). The cis-acting elements were searched in both forward and reverse strands. Eight cis-elements were predicted in this study: dehydration responsive element (MBS:TAACTG), abscisic acid responsive element (ABRE:TACGTG), circadian control responsive element (circadian: CAANNNNATC), light responsive element (G-box: CACGTG), heat shock responsive element (HSE: AAAAAATTTC), auxin responsive element (TGA: AACGAC), ethylene responsive element (ERE: ATTTCAAA), anaerobic induction regulatory element (ARE: TGGTTT).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
