@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A two-level parser for patent claim parsing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The adaptability of a conventional parser to patent claim parsing is improved.Six claim syntax peculiarities that increase the difficulty of claim parsing are highlighted.New dependency syntax is proposed to handle Long Distance Dependencies.The efficiency of parsing is obviously improved with a segmentation strategy.The improvement on effectiveness of parsing is also promising in a model extraction problem.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Patent search,Product design,Patent claim,Parsing,Dependency syntax,Parser,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Patent claim parsing can contribute in many patent-related applications, such as patent search, information extraction, machine translation and summarization. However, patent claim parsing is difficult due to the special structure of patent claims. To overcome this difficulty, the challenges facing the patent claim parsing were first investigated and the peculiarities of claim syntax that obstruct dependency parsing were highlighted. To handle these peculiarities, this study proposes a new two-level parser, in which a conventional parser is imbedded. A patent claim is pre-processed in order to remove peculiarities before passed to the conventional parser. The process is based on a new dependency-based syntax called Independent Claim Segment Dependency Syntax (ICSDS). This two-lever parser has demonstrated promising improvement for patent claim parsing on both effectiveness and efficiency over the conventional parser.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Patent analysis approaches are generally classified as patent mining or visualization [1]. The rapid growth of published patents has made a call for more sophisticated patent analysis tools. Patent parsing is an essential operation in many patent mining approaches such as function-behaviour-state information extraction [2], concept-based patent search [3] and conceptual graph extraction [4]. However, patent claim parsing is considered very difficult [5]. The claim section of a patent defines the scope of Intellectual Property (IP) protection granted by the patent. In a patent, the claim section is the only part that are examined and conferred for IP protection. In contrast, other parts like the description section or drawings are used for understanding and interpreting the claims, but do not provide any IP protection themselves. Semantic patent claim analysis can examine patents for possible infringements and identify which needs to be manually perused [6]. Moreover, patent claims are important to the value of the patent [7], especially claims in essential patent i.e. those patents that are indispensable for designing and manufacturing products [8]. Besides, the number of claims a patent makes has significant effects on the duration that a patent is under consideration [9]. It is expected that the improvement on patent claim parsing can promote more sophisticated patent analysis and therefore tackle the challenges of the rapid growth of published patents.The patent claim syntax follows exactly common English grammar but is peculiar [10]. These peculiarities are usually not considered when designing a conventional natural language parser. Therefore, conventional natural language parsers may fail to correctly parse patent claims [5].To design a completely new data-driven parser, it is necessary to prepare both the training data and a data-driven model that can handle the peculiarities of patent claim syntax. In this way, existent natural language resources are discarded. In contrast, a smarter way is to utilize existent natural language resources by improving the adaptability of a conventional parser. This study applies the latter approach and proposes a two-level parser for patent claim parsing. At the top level, patent claims are pre-processed so that a conventional parser e.g., Stanford parser [11] can be more adaptable to them; while at the bottom level, the conventional parser is evoked to parse the pre-processed claims.To build such a two-level parser, the peculiarities of the claim syntax that lead to challenges of claim parsing were investigated. A new dependency-based syntax, called Independent Claim Segment Dependency Syntax (ICSDS), was then proposed in order to address these challenges. The two-level parser was finally build based on the proposed dependency-based syntax.The rest of this paper is organized as the following. The related works are reviewed in Section 2. The Section 3 highlights the challenges facing the patent claim parsing. The Section 4 introduces the proposed approach, including the new dependency-based syntax and the parser system. The Section 5 evaluates both the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed parser. Lastly, the Section 6 addresses conclusions and gives recommendations for future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, six claim syntax peculiarities that increase the difficulty of parsing are highlighted. They are (1) claim template, (2) post attribute past participle, (3) parenthetical sentence, (4) complex noun phrase as sentence, (5) recursion, and, (6) coordination. These peculiarities cause long claims. Especially, the last four peculiarities lead to Long Distance Dependencies. A new two-level parser is proposed for patent claim parsing. It is designed to improve the adaptability of a conventional parser, e.g. Stanford parser. The conventional parser (in the first level) is evoked by a higher-level (in the second level) parser, which can handle the peculiarities of claim syntax. With respect to peculiarity (1), a trimming process is adopted to filter non-informative content. With respect to peculiarity (2), a POS correction process is adopted to change past form into past participle. With respect to last four peculiarities, a new dependency syntax called Independent Claim Segment Dependency Syntax (ICSDS) is proposed. To guarantee the efficiency of the proposed parser, a segmentation strategy is adopted. The segmentation and consequent assembly is executed by the ICSDS-based parser. The conventional parser is only evoked when processing each claim segment. Theoretically, the distance (in terms of segments) between two segments is much smaller than the distance (in terms of words) between two words within these two segments, respectively. Thus, the distance of the dependency becomes shorter and is easier to be captured.The evaluation results show that ICSDS-based parser is much effective than Stanford parser. This is because its segmentation strategy. Moreover, ICSDS-based parser is much efficient than Stanford parser in a model extraction problem. This is because ICSDS-based parser can parse correctly more LDD relations.To our best knowledge this work is a pioneer work in claim parsing. Compared to previous works, this study has shown an obvious improvement on effectiveness of patent claim parsing. With the ICSDS-based parser, patent claims can be automatically processed in a larger number and in a short time. This research contributes to patent users who are looking for technological details. For example, it saves time for product designers and allows them to focus on creative work. This research also contributes general patent users. It can support and enhance many patent-related applications, such as patent valuation, technology relatedness and competitor analysis, patent strategy development, and technology management.In the future, ICSDS can be expanded by defining more dependency relationships between segments. Current ICSDS only focuses on verb–noun relation and adjective–noun relation. This is because these two relations are the most common and critical relations. However, for completeness, other relations such as preposition–noun, verb–preposition and adverb–verb should also be defined. Moreover, an evaluation with larger scale is expected to be carried out for testing the effectiveness and the efficiency of the enhanced ICSDS parser.