@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Study of early stages of amyloid Aβ13-23 formation using molecular dynamics simulation in implicit environments

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Early stages of amyloid Aβ13-23 formation were studied using MD simulation.Initial α-helical conformations of peptides were changing into coil and β-sheets.A knowledge about Aβ13-23 aggregation might be useful for design of novel drugs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
β-Amyloid,Aggregation,Alzheimer’s disease,MD simulation,Implicit environment,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
β-amyloid aggregation and formation of senile plaques is one of the hallmarks of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). It leads to degeneration of neurons and decline of cognitive functions. The most aggregative and toxic form of β-amyloid is Aβ1-42 but in experiments, the shorter forms able to form aggregates are also used. The early stages of amyloid formation are of special interest due to the influence of this peptide on progression of AD. Here, we employed nine helices of undecapeptide Aβ13-23 and studied progress of amyloid formation using 500ns molecular dynamics simulation and implicit membrane environment. The small β-sheets emerged very early during simulation as separated two-strand structures and a presence of the membrane facilitated this process. Later, the larger β-sheets were formed. However, the ninth helix which did not form paired structure stayed unchanged till the end of MD simulation. Paired helix–helix interactions seemed to be a driving force of β-sheet formation at early stages of amyloid formation. Contrary, the specific interactions between α-helix and β-sheet can be very stable and be stabilized by the membrane.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Extracellular senile plaques and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles are the main hallmarks of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) (Gandy and DeKosky, 2013; Guo and Lee, 2011). They disturb proper functioning of neurons, leading to neuronal loss and neurodegeneration (Musiek and Holtzman, 2012). The plaques are composed of fibrils, containing β-amyloid (Aβ) peptides of different length. A single Aβ chain usually contains from 38 to 43 residues and is prone to aggregation in aqueous environment (Dubnovitsky et al., 2013; Cohen et al., 2013). Two forms of β-amyloid such as Aβ1-42 and Aβ1-40 are dominant, but the longer one shows higher tendency towards aggregation and greater toxicity (Gu and Guo, 2013). It was revealed that propensity for creating aggregates mainly depended on KLVFF motif from the middle part of the sequence and hydrophobic C-terminal region (Gazit, 2002, 2005). β-Amyloid is produced from amyloid precursor protein (APP) as a result of sequential cleavage by β- and γ-secretase (Tan and Evin, 2012; Sathya et al., 2012; Panza et al., 2011). APP is a 695-770 amino acid glycoprotein, built of three domains: the extracellular N-terminal region, a single transmembrane domain and the intracellular C-terminal region (Chasseigneaux and Allinquant, 2012; O’Brien and Wong, 2011). Due to the large influence of β-amyloid on development of Alzheimer’s disease, many efforts have been undertaken to fully understand the aggregation process and thus, a lot of experimental and computational studies have been reported (Tycko, 2011; Lu et al., 2013; Crescenzi et al., 2002; Luhrs et al., 2005; Shea and Urbanc, 2012; Lee and Ham, 2011; Hochdorffer et al., 2011; Minicozzi et al., 2014). It was shown that the conformation of β-amyloid strongly depended on the experimental conditions (Crescenzi et al., 2002). Some analyses were performed in different environments that could mimic the interface between polar and hydrophobic phases (e.g., micelles (Shao et al., 1999)) or in solvents which provided non-polar microenvironment (e.g., mixtures of trifluoroethanol or hexafluoroisopropanol (HFIP) with water (Crescenzi et al., 2002)). HFIP was able to dissolve Aβ1-42 and promote transition into helical form and thus, it was noted that aggregation process was reversible. α-Helical form dominates in apolar environment while β-sheet conformation appears in aqueous solutions. The structure of helical Aβ1-42 (α-helix-kink-α-helix), obtained by NMR spectroscopy, was deposited in Protein Data Bank (PDB, code: 1IYT) (Protein Data Bank, 2012). It has been recently reported that the fibrillogenesis involves an oligomeric α-helical intermediate (Kirkitadze et al., 2001). Moreover, the 3D structure of the fibrils was determined by NMR spectroscopy (Luhrs et al., 2005). The N-terminal residues 1–17 were unorganized while residues 18–42 created β-strand-turn-β-strand motif. This structured fragment was deposited in PDB (code: 2BEG) as a pentamer. Each monomer occurs in β-hairpin conformation, with residues 18–26 and 31–42 creating β-sheet parts (β1 and β2, respectively). A whole structure is stabilized by intermolecular backbone hydrogen bonds in β-sheets and intermolecular interactions between side chains: salt bridge D23-K28, π–π stacking F19–F19 or F20–F20, as well as intermolecular knob–hole contacts in pairs F19–G38 and A21–V36. Some recent studies showed also that metal ions, especially Zn2+ and Cu2+ could bind with β-amyloid, forming complexes with histidine residues (Stellato et al., 2006; Silva and Saxena, 2013). This can lead to increased toxicity due to engagement of metal cations in production of reactive oxygen species and oxidative stress.Apart from the laboratory experiments, a couple of computational studies have been performed (Shea and Urbanc, 2012; Cecchini et al., 2006; Zheng et al., 2007; Urbanc et al., 2006). They included mainly MD simulations of many amyloid structures of different lengths (Cecchini et al., 2006; Zheng et al., 2007; Naldi et al., 2012) and different initial conformation in various environments, including aqueous solutions, micelles and water/organic solvent mixtures (Lee and Ham, 2011; Zhao et al., 2011). The influence of different membranes on aggregation process was also studied (Davis and Berkowitz, 2009a,b; Lemkul and Bevan, 2013). Such analyses showed important factors, responsible for aggregation of β-amyloids. Davis et al. (2009a) revealed that during umbrella sampling MD simulations the Aβ1-42 was attracted by the surface of DPPC and DOPS lipids, and the binding energy to the membrane depended on charges of the peptide and the lipid bilayer. His further studies did not show any significant formation of β-structure for 42-residue Aβ peptide except of a small hairpin (Davis and Berkowitz, 2009b) during 80ns replica exchange MD simulation using explicit membrane and all atom representation for lipids and peptides. Lemkul and Bevan (2013) tested by MD whether an aggregation could proceed in different environments, including aqueous solutions and membranes, and it was shown that aggregates were formed and stayed close to the membrane of each kind. Nikolic et al. (2011) studied β-sheet self-organization at water-hydrophobic interfaces. The used octapeptides (Gly-Ala)4 and (Gly-Val)4 spontaneously formed β-structures at the octane–water interface, and the progress of changes was dependent on hydrophobicity of the peptide. Wang et al. (2010) analyzed Aβ17-42 adsorption on the self-assembled monolayers (SAM), terminated with hydrophobic (CH3) or hydrophilic (OH) groups. The results showed that CH3-SAM stronger bound β-amyloid. This observation highlighted the role of hydrophobicity in an aggregation. On the other hand, Yu et al. (2012) revealed in the course of MD simulation that due to hydrophobic nature of graphite, it could be treated as surface with properties facilitating the Aβ fibril formation. Recent works (Ono et al., 2009; Bernstein et al., 2009) have demonstrated the fundamental role of the Aβ dimer as a unit in Aβ aggregation process. Giannozzi et al. (2012) showed that the presence of zinc ions led to the formation of complexes with three or four histidine residues and in consequence the peculiar structural pattern of β-amyloid. On the other hand, Miller et al. (2010) analyzed by MD interactions of Zn2+ cations with oligomers of Aβ17-42 and found out that except histidines, aspartate and glutamate residues could form complexes with the ions. Zinc ions could simultaneously coordinate inter- and intramolecularly and bridge two peptides.In our previous experimental studies, we used short, 11-amino acid fragment of β-amyloid to test whether the newly synthesized chemical compounds were able to inhibit the aggregation process (Ignasik et al., 2012). Although the Aβ13-23 was proved to form fibrils and could be used in such kind of experiments the mechanism of aggregation was still not known (Alptuzun et al., 2010). To elucidate details of a transformation of α-helices into β-strands and β-sheets, we applied united atom molecular dynamics simulations in implicit membrane–water environments to accelerate structural changes. We employed Aβ13-23 fragments containing the amyloid-prone motif KLVFF. The peptides were initially in α-helix conformation forming a square of nine parallel helical structures. During the simulation we also observed influence of the membrane on the amyloid formation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A 500ns molecular dynamics simulation was performed for the system consisting of nine helices of Aβ13-23. The initial α-helical conformations of the peptides were changing into coil and β-sheets and, upon 100ns, about 90% of peptides lost their starting conformation. During the simulation both parallel and antiparallel β-sheets were creating. At the beginning of simulation the four independent small β-sheets were created involving eight peptides, suggesting important role of helix–helix pair interactions in β-sheet formation. The final structure of the largest and the most regular β-sheet was stabilized by hydrophobic interactions and π–π stacking in the middle of β-sheet flanking by salt bridges. A single peptide preserved its helical conformation till the end of MD simulation, apart from the extensive contacts with multiple β-strands. A knowledge about interactions between peptides during formation of oligomeric form might be useful for design of novel ligands which possess the ability to stop aggregation by disturbing the early amyloid intermolecular interactions.