@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Understanding the lid movements of LolA in Escherichia coli using molecular dynamics simulation and in silico point mutation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Molecular dynamic analysis of open to close conformation for two LolA derivatives, LolA(R43L) and MsL43R.In silico point mutation of Leu43 to Arg43 induced conformational changes leading complete closed conformation of protein.Conformational changes from open to close observed for the first time in absence of lipoprotein of LolA.In addition to Arg43, residue Asn45 identified to play a central role in stability of protein by hydrogen bond formation.Closure of hydrophobic cavity takes place at two levels: closing of lid at the interface and loops at the entrance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Molecular dynamics,Lid movements,LolA,Lipoproteins,GROMACS,Escherichia coli,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The Lol system in Escherichia coli is involved in localization of lipoproteins and hence is essential for growth of the organism. LolA is a periplasmic chaperone that binds to outer-membrane specific lipoproteins and transports them from inner membrane to outer membrane through LolB. The hydrophobic lipid-binding cavity of LolA consists of α-helices which act as a lid in regulating the transfer of lipoproteins from LolA to LolB. The current study aims to investigate the structural changes observed in LolA during the transition from open to closed conformation in the absence of lipoprotein. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations were carried out for two LolA crystal structures; LolA(R43L), and in silico mutated MsL43R for a simulation time of 50ns in water environment. We have performed an in silico point mutation of leucine to arginine in MsL43R to evaluate the importance of arginine to induce structural changes and impact the stability of protein structure. A complete dynamic analysis of open to closed conformation reveals the existence of two distinct levels; closing of lid and closing of entrance of hydrophobic cavity. Our analysis reveals that the structural flexibility of LolA is an important factor for its role as a periplasmic chaperone.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Gram-negative bacterial cells consist of four compartments; cytoplasm, inner (cytoplasmic) membrane, periplasmic space and outer membrane. In Escherichia coli, lipoproteins that are constituents of the outer membrane are synthesized in the cytoplasm and then transported towards the outer membrane through Lol (localization of lipoproteins) system of proteins (Okuda and Tokuda, 2011; Narita et al., 2004; Tokuda and Matsuyama, 2004). Lol system of proteins essentially contains five proteins namely LolA, LolB, LolC, LolD and LolE (Narita et al., 2004; Lto et al., 2007; Nakada et al., 2007). Lipoprotein transfer to outer membrane occurs through a series of steps; the LolCDE complex which is present in inner membrane binds to lipoprotein and transfers it to a periplasmic chaperone LolA by an ATP dependent process (Matsuyama et al., 1995; Davidson et al., 2008). LolA transports the lipoprotein across the periplasmic space to the outer membrane protein LolB and this transfer has been shown to be an ATP independent process (Tokuda and Matsuyama, 2004; Taniguchi et al., 2005.LolA is a soluble protein known to be functional in its monomeric form. In the Lol system of proteins, several crystal structures of LolA have been identified and solved by various groups (Okuda and Tokuda, 2011; Takeda et al., 2003a,b; Tokuda, 2009). Among all the crystallographic representations of LolA available in PDB, we have chosen an open conformation comprising a monoclinic form, LolA(R43L) as our starting crystal structure. An in-silico point mutation of leucine to arginine at position 43 has been performed on LolA(R43L) to attain a new conformational form MsL43R. This choice of an open monoclinic form was driven by our motivation to elucidate the dynamics of closure to reach the wild type closed conformation (PDB ID-1ua8).Earlier crystallographic studies have established that LolA exists as a closed conformation in its native unbound form. Crystallographic and NMR studies have also postulated that the LolA structure undergoes a transformation from open to closed conformation consequent to the binding and release of lipoproteins respectively (Oguchi et al., 2008). The structure of LolA from E. coli is characterized by a novel fold, containing eleven antiparallel β-strands forming an incomplete β-barrel and two loops covering the barrel (Tokuda, 2009). The lid comprises three α helices α1, α2 and α3 attached to the concave side of the β-strands. The β-barrel, α-helices and the loops are known to form a hydrophobic cavity, which consists of aromatic residues clustering around the entrance (Takeda et al., 2003a,b). These residues are conserved throughout all the conformational changes observed in LolA and are also known to be present in LolA homologues of other Gram negative bacteria (Takeda et al., 2003a,b; Oguchi et al., 2008; Okuda et al., 2008). The convex side of the β-barrel is fully exposed to solvent environment, whereas the concave side is partially exposed. Therefore, this concave side of the protein is speculated to be a binding site for the lipoprotein (Okuda and Tokuda, 2009).Previous studies have established that the three α-helices act as “lids” for the cavity and they undergo opening and closing upon the binding and release of lipoproteins (Watanabe et al., 2005; Takeda et al., 2003a,b). Miyamoto et al. (2001) showed that replacement of Arg43 to Leu43 disrupted the transfer of lipoproteins to LolB. The importance of Arg43 in the transportation of lipoprotein and subsequent closing of lid covering the hydrophobic cavity was addressed by biochemical and crystallographic studies. Hydrogen bond formation of Arg43 with residues residing in α1 and α2 helices seem to play an important role in the mechanism of lid closure (Watanabe et al., 2005; Takeda et al., 2003a,b; Remans et al., 2010). Structural analysis performed by Tokuda et al. on a mutated structure where Arg43 residue was mutated to Leu43 showed that the molecule can exist in both open and closed conformation, while the open conformation is the most predominant form (Oguchi et al., 2008). It was also shown that LolA exhibits higher flexibility than LolB, which is an outer membrane bound protein (Nakada et al., 2009).Despite the fact that crystal structures of the closed and open conformations of LolA are well characterized, the complete dynamic studies of protein movements are still lacking. In order to understand the importance of closing of interface by the α2 helix (lid) and closing of entrance of the hydrophobic cavity, amino acid residues expected to be involved in these structures are the focus of our analysis. In the present molecular dynamics study, an in silico point mutation of leucine to arginine at position 43 has been performed to investigate the conformational changes occurring in LolA to elucidate the closing mechanism of the protein. To our knowledge, this is the first detailed computational study which aims to review the dynamic properties of LolA by long MD simulation of an in-silico mutant MsL43R and starting crystal structure LolA(R43L). The novelty of this work resides in the fact that dynamics of open to closed conformation has been studied in the absence of lipoprotein in water environment. This work provides insights about the novel conformations and binding sites on the surface of the protein which will further help in more effective structure based drug design.Our starting crystal structure for molecular dynamics simulation was an open conformation of LolA(R43L) which is a mutant structure crystallized by Oguchi et al. (2008). The structure of LolA(R43L) was taken from Protein Data Bank (PDB:2ZPD) as shown in Fig. 1a (Berman et al., 2000). This LolA derivative was obtained by replacing Arg43 with Leu43 in the native form of LolA. The structure was resolved at 1.85Å and consists of one hundred and eighty three amino acid residues. Takeda et al. (2003a,b) proved that the crystal structure of the molecule is a monomer with 3 α-helices and 11 antiparallel β-strands.In order to elucidate the closing mechanism of LolA, we have performed an in silico mutation to replace Leu43 with Arg43 using SPDBV (Steward, 2001) on crystal structure LolA(R43L). Crystallographic water molecules and hetero atoms were removed from the structures using the software Chimera (Pettersen et al., 2004). This in silico mutated structure will henceforth be referred to as “MsL43R” as shown in Fig. 1b. These two structures, in silico mutated MsL43R and open crystal structure LolA(R43L) were subjected to MD simulation for 50ns in water to mimic a periplasmic environment.MD simulations were carried out with two structures MsL43R and LolA(R43L) using GROMACS 3.1 (Lindahl et al., 2001) run on an Apple G5 cluster. G43a1 GROMOS force field was chosen for the simulation. Four Na+ ions were added as counter ions to neutralize the charges in the system. LolA was solvated in water and centered in a cubic box containing water molecules. The box dimensions for LolA were 60nm×60nm×60nm with 26108 SPC water molecules. This system was subjected to energy minimization for 500 steps by using steepest descent algorithm. The minimized system was equilibrated for a short MD run (200ps) with position restraints until the potential energy converged and stabilized at 300K. The MD simulation was performed with periodic boundary conditions set to the XYZ coordinates to ensure that the atoms stayed inside the simulation box. Berendsen temperature coupling was turned on with temperature set to 300K. The leap-frog algorithm was used for integrating Newton's equation in MD simulation. LINCS constraints were used on protein covalent bonds to maintain constant bond lengths (Hess et al., 1997). Finally, the equilibrated systems were subjected to MD simulations for 50ns at 300K and all atoms were permitted to move freely.The simulation trajectories were analyzed using tools from the GROMACS package and were viewed using PyMOL software (Delano, 2002). The RMSD was calculated using g_rms. The radius of gyration (Rg) of the protein was calculated using g_gyrate. RMSF graph was generated using Xmgrace plotting software (http://plasma-gate.weizmann.ac.il/Grace/). Accessible surface areas were calculated using WHAT IF web server (Vriend, 1990). Non covalent interactions were calculated by PIC SERVER (Tina et al., 2007).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Molecular dynamics simulations of periplasmic chaperone LolA was performed on two structures, LolA(R43L) and in silico mutated MsL43R for 50ns in water environment. In this work, conformational changes were found to occur within a short time signifying the flexibility of the entire soluble protein structure. In order to understand the mechanism of “open to close” transition, an in-silico mutation was performed on LolA(R43L) by replacing residue Leu43 by Arg43 in the β3-strand of the hydrophobic cavity.Earlier studies have hypothesized that opening and closing of LolA occur in the presence of lipoprotein; however, the closing conformational changes observed in our study have their origin in hydrophobic interactions and occur in the absence of a lipoprotein. We have shown that the residue Phe90 in the α2 helix interacts with aromatic residues sealing the hydrophobic cavity and plays a pivotal role in closing of lid. On the other hand, the entrance of the hydrophobic cavity also undergoes major displacement in the presence of water due to loop movements causing a decrease in solvent accessible surface area. The conserved residues present in the lid and the entrance of hydrophobic cavity are involved in closing of the cavity and are identical to the ones described in previous experimental study (Takeda et al., 2003a,b). We propose that the closure of hydrophobic cavity takes place at two levels: closing of the lid found at the interface of β-strands and α-helices and closing of loops found in entrance of the hydrophobic cavity.The present work also highlights the importance of non-covalent interactions that typically characterize the movement and stability of protein. Aromatic interactions in level I enable the proteins to undergo transition towards the closed conformation. In both level I and level II, hydrophobic interactions and hydrogen bonds are responsible for the structural stabilization. In addition to Arg43, the residue Asn45 has been identified to play an important role in the stability of the protein via hydrogen bond formation. We conclude that both levels of closing of hydrophobic cavity have been observed in MsL43R in a simulated periplasmic environment (Water). In LolA(R43L), only level II closing is observed in a consistent manner resulting in a semi closed conformation. This study reveals that conformational change is associated with the α2 helix and the loop movements which were identified to be highly mobile throughout the simulation and are responsible for the complete closure of the protein. We believe that the conserved flexible regions observed during our dynamic analysis are also important regions for protein–protein interactions and identification of drug binding sites.