@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Comparative analysis of plant lycopene cyclases

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Plants have two types of lycopene cyclase (β-LCY and ϵ-LCY).In this study, we analyzed plant lycopene cyclases (LYCs).Phylogenetic analysis revealed that β-LCYs and ϵ-LCYs were classified within β and ϵ groups.Sequence analysis also elucidated V/IXGXGXXGXXXA motif which is common for both type of LYC.In addition to lycopene cyclase domain, V/IXGXGXXGXXXA motif can be used for exploring LYCs proteins and to annotate the function of unknown proteins.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Lycopene cyclase,Carotenoid,Rossmann fold domain,Beta carotene,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Carotenoids are essential isoprenoid pigments produced by plants, algae, fungi and bacteria. Lycopene cyclase (LYC) commonly cyclize carotenoids, which is an important branching step in the carotenogenesis, at one or both end of the backbone. Plants have two types of LYC (β-LCY and ϵ-LCY). In this study, plant LYCs were analyzed. Based on domain analysis, all LYCs accommodate lycopene cyclase domain (Pf05834). Furthermore, motif analysis indicated that motifs were conserved among the plants. On the basis of phylogenetic analysis, β-LCYs and ϵ-LCYs were classified in β and ϵ groups. Monocot and dicot plants separated from each other in the phylogenetic tree. Subsequently, Oryza sativa Japonica Group and Zea mays of LYCs as monocot plants and Vitis vinifera and Solanum lycopersicum of LYCs as dicot plants were analyzed. According to nucleotide diversity analysis of β-LCY and ϵ-LCY genes, nucleotide diversities were found to be π: 0.30 and π: 0.25, respectively. The result highlighted β-LCY genes showed higher nucleotide diversity than ϵ-LCY genes. LYCs interacting genes and their co-expression partners were also predicted using String server. The obtained data suggested the importance of LYCs in carotenoid metabolism. 3D modeling revealed that depicted structures were similar in O. sativa, Z mays, S. lycopersicum, and V. vinifera β-LCYs and ϵ-LCYs. Likewise, the predicted binding sites were highly similar between O. sativa, Z mays, S. lycopersicum, and V. vinifera LCYs. Most importantly, analysis elucidated the V/IXGXGXXGXXXA motif for both type of LYC (β-LCY and ϵ-LCY). This motif related to Rossmann fold domain and probably provides a flat platform for binding of FAD in O. sativa, Z mays, S. lycopersicum, and V. vinifera β-LCYs and ϵ-LCYs with conserved structure. In addition to lycopene cyclase domain, the V/IXGXGXXGXXXA motif can be used for exploring LYCs proteins and to annotate the function of unknown proteins containing lycopene cyclase domain. Overall results indicated that a high degree of conserved signature were observed in plant LYCs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With more than 600 different structures, carotenoids are common isoprenoid pigments synthesized by various organisms including plants, certain algae, fungi and bacteria (Alquezar et al., 2009). These are structurally localized in the thylakoid membrane and play a key role as accessory molecules for harvesting light, prevention from photo damage, and as antioxidants under stress conditions (Gao et al., 2010; Demmig-Adams et al., 1996; Cui et al., 2011). Carotenoids also provide the yellow, orange or red coloration characteristic of many flowers and fruits to attract animals and insects for pollination or for the dispersal of seeds (Bartley and Scolnik, 1995). The attractive colors and beneficial health effects of caretonoids, especially β-carotene, have received attention (Alquezar et al., 2009). In addition, β-carotene is a substrate for the biosynthesis of other carotenoids such as zeaxanthin, xanthphylls, neoxanthin, violaxanthin (Hugueney et al., 1995). Vitamin A is also synthesized from β-caroten (Rock and Zeevaart, 1991). Thus, vitamin A is not only fundamental for plants but also beneficial for human and animal nutrition.Toward the end of metabolic processes of carotenoids, they are commonly cyclized at one or both ends of backbones by lycopene cyclase (Mohamed and Vermaas, 2006). Lycopene cyclization is a crucial branching point in the carotenogenesis (Alquezar et al., 2009). Lycopene cyclization is caused by β-LCY (EC:5.5.1.19) using NADP(H) or FAD as a co-factor (Hornero-Méndez and Britton, 2002; Yu et al., 2010). β-LCY alone produces β-carotene whereas two enzymes, β-LCY and ϵ-LCY (EC: 5.5.1.18), together form α-carotene (Beyer et al., 1991; Hornero-Méndez and Britton, 2002; Moreno et al., 2013).β-LCYs of plants and bacteria have a conserved dinucleotide binding motif. Furthermore, several conserved domains such as conserved region β-LCY’s, β-LCY specific motif, cylase motif I and II (CMI and CMII), β-LCY CAD (catalytic activity domain) and a charged region are highly conserved in plants (Moreno et al., 2013; Hugueney et al., 1995). β-LCY CAD is essential for β-LCY activity (Moreno et al., 2013). Cyclization of lycopene is formed by LYCs and conserved in various organisms (Armstrong et al., 1990). Due to integrity of such biological process maintained in many organisms, it was observed that β-LCY and ϵ-LCY share high similarity in their amino acid sequences and likely evolved from the same ancestor (Sandmann, 2002; Cui et al., 2011).This study represents a comparative genomic analysis of β-LCY and ϵ-LCY from various seed plants. Although previous studies have demonstrated that two types of LCY exist in plants, the structural and conserved motif analyses of LCYs are lacking. Moreover, despite the importance of LYCs, the crystal structures of β-LCY and ϵ-LCY has not been solved yet. This required us to work on structural analysis of LYCs accompanied with predicted ligand binding through in silico approaches. It is well known that Z. mays is the model monocot and important food resource (Suwarno et al., 2015), O. sativa is the model monocot (Garg et al., 2010), and S. lycopersicum is sequenced genome and model organism for caretenoid studies (Pecker et al., 1996; Ronen et al., 1999; Rosati et al., 2000; Liu et al., 2015). Furthermore, V. vinifera is recently sequenced genome (Velasco et al., 2007; Jaillon et al., 2007) and carotenoid content of grapevine berries has received much attention (Young et al., 2012). For the reasons mentioned above, O. sativa Japonica Group and Z. mays of LYCs as monocot representatives and V. vinifera and S. lycopersicum of LYCs as dicot representatives were used for structural analysis.The sequences of proteins corresponding to β-LCY and ϵ-LCY proteins were obtained from the NCBI protein database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein/). A total of 40 β-LCY proteins and 26 ϵ-LCY protein sequences were analyzed. Initially, the sequences were searched for the lycopene cyclase domain. To do this, all the proteins were investigated in the SMART and PFam databases to confirm the presence of lycopene cyclase domain. The sequences were selected as predicted LYC proteins if their e value satisfied E≤e−10 in both databases and redundant sequences were removed. O. sativa and Z. mays as monocotyledonous plants, S. lycopersicum and V. Vinifera as dicotyledonous plants were selected for further analyses. Subsequently, β-LCY and ϵ-LCY proteins were searched in the O. sativa, Z. mays, S. lycopersicum, and V. Vinifera genomes at the Joint Genome Institute (http://www.phytozome.net) to assess lycopene cyclases of four plants by BLOSUM matrix. The LYC proteins in O. sativa, Z. mays, S. lycopersicum, and V. Vinifera were identified by using BLASTP searches against their annotated proteomes. The sequences were selected as predicted proteins if their e value satisfied E≤e−10 and redundant sequences were removed. All β-LCY and ϵ-LCY gene sequences were analyzed with DnaSP 5.1 (Librado and Rozas, 2009), including estimates of genetic diversity π (Nei, 1987).Physicochemical analyses were computed by using ProtParam tool (http://web.expasy.org/protparam/) (Gasteiger et al., 2005). The putative conserved protein motifs were identified by using MEME (Multiple Em for Motif Elicitation) software (Timothy et al., 2009). The amino acid sequences of O. sativa and V. vinifera LYC proteins were analyzed for subcellular localization by WoLF PSORT (Horton et al., 2007) servers. In addition, interacting partners of LYCs and its co-expressed genes were predicted by using String software (http://string-db.org/) (Franceschini et al., 2013). We should note that since putative protein interacting partners for Z. mays, and S. lycopersicum LCYs were not available in the String database, we could not obtain interacting partners for both plants.Forty β-LCY protein sequences and twenty six ϵ-LCY protein sequences were used for phylogenetic analysis. Multiple sequence alignment were performed by using the ClustalW program by BLOSUM matrix to perform optimum alignment for whole protein sequences without manual alignment (http://www2.ebi.ac.uk/clustalw). Phylogenetic analysis was evaluated with MEGA6 software (Tamura et al., 2011) by bootstrap analyses with 1000 replications. The evolutionary history was inferred by using the Neighbor–Joining (NJ) methods based on the JTT (Jones–Taylor–Thomton) matrix-based model (Jones et al., 1992). The evolutionary distances were computed with the Poisson correction method (Zuckerkandl and Pauling, 1965).The predicted 3D structures of O. sativa β-LCY (Hereafter, Os β-LCY- Acc. no BAD16478.1), Z. mays (Hereafter, Zm β-LCY- Acc. no AAO18661.1), S. lycopersicum (Hereafter, Sl β-LCY1- Acc. no NP_001234226.1, Sl β-LCY2- Acc. no NP_001234445.1), V. vinifera β-LCY (Hereafter, Vv β-LCY1- Acc. no AFP28803.1, Vv β-LCY2- Acc. no AFP28799.1), O. sativa ϵ-LCYs (Herefater, Os ϵ-LCY- Acc. no BAC05562.1), Z. mays (Hereafter, Zm ϵ-LCY- Acc. no NP_001146840.1), S. lycopersicum (Hereafter, Sl ϵ-LCY- Acc. no NP_001234337.1), and V. vinifera ϵ-LCY (Hereafter Vv ϵ-LCY- Acc. no NP_001268093.1) were generated by using 3D LigandSite server (http://www.sbg.bio.ic.ac.uk/3dligandsite/) (Wass et al., 2010) and I-TASSER server (Roy et al., 2010). Also, the predicted binding sites and heterogens existing in the predicted binding site were analyzed with these servers. Structural evaluation and stereochemical analyses were performed by using Rampage Ramachandran plot analysis (http://mordred.bioc.cam.ac.uk/∼rapper/rampage.php).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
