@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Identification of potential drug targets by subtractive genome analysis of Bacillus anthracis A0248: An in silico approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We identified potential drug target for Bacillus anthracis A0248 strain.We selected non-human homolog essential proteins involved in metabolic pathways.PSORTb, ngLOC, and CELLO are used to predict membrane-bound proteins.17 proteins in unique pathways and 28 membrane-bound proteins are identified.These findings from this current study will pave the way for further extensive in wet lab experiments and in that way assisting to drug design against anthrax.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Bacillus anthracis,Anthrax,Biological weapon,Computational approach,Therapeutic drug,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundBacillus anthracis is a gram positive, spore forming, rod shaped bacteria which is the etiologic agent of anthrax – cutaneous, pulmonary and gastrointestinal. A recent outbreak of anthrax in a tropical region uncovered natural and in vitro resistance against penicillin, ciprofloxacin, quinolone due to over exposure of the pathogen to these antibiotics. This fact combined with the ongoing threat of using B. anthracis as a biological weapon proves that the identification of new therapeutic targets is urgently needed.MethodsIn this computational approach various databases and online based servers were used to detect essential proteins of B. anthracis A0248. Protein sequences of B. anthracis A0248 strain were retrieved from the NCBI database which was then run in CD-hit suite for clustering. NCBI BlastP against the human proteome and similarity search against DEG were done to find out essential human non-homologous proteins. Proteins involved in unique pathways were analyzed using KEGG genome database and PSORTb, CELLO v.2.5, ngLOC – these three tools were used to deduce putative cell surface proteins.ResultsSuccessive analysis revealed 116 proteins to be essential human non-homologs among which 17 were involved in unique metabolic pathways and 28 were predicted as membrane associated proteins. Both types of proteins can be exploited as they are unlikely to have homologous counterparts in the human host.ConclusionBeing human non-homologous, these proteins can be targeted for potential therapeutic drug development in future. Targets on unique metabolic and membrane-bound proteins can block cell wall synthesis, bacterial replication and signal transduction respectively.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Bacillus anthracis, the causative agent of anthrax in both human and animal is a gram positive, spore forming, aerobic, non-motile bacterium. B. anthracis is the most renowned and obligate pathogen of the bacillus genus (Spencer, 2003). Unlike most other bacillus species, entry of B. anthracis spores into mammals through respiratory, gastrointestinal or cutaneous routes can result in systemic infection and lethal disease (Koehler, 2009). Systemic infection resulting from the inhalation of the organism has a mortality rate approaching 100 percent and death usually occurs within a few days after the onset of symptoms (Terry et al., 1999). Consumption of contaminated meat which is usually cooked insufficiently causes gastrointestinal anthrax. More than 95% of incidents are cutaneous anthrax that affects 20,000–100,000 human annually. Regular infection outbreaks on the wild animal caused by anthrax spores have been reported after decades of animal interment (Siddiqui et al., 2012; Chakraborty et al., 2012).Recently an outbreak episode of anthrax created much havoc and dreadful clinical outcome from April to August, 2011 in Bangladesh. But this incident has its history back in 1980–1984 with a broader manifestation on human and cattle in 2009–2010. This outbreak hit 12 districts and affected 607 people which led Bangladesh government to declare a red alert (Siddiqui et al., 2012). Far from this tropical region, anthrax outbreak also occurred in the western territory. In Canada, anthrax outbreak had been occurred since 1962 in domestic cattle (Dragon et al., 1999). B. anthracis had also been weaponized in World War I and in World War II and threats are marked presently for possible use of B. anthracis in Bioterrorism. Anthrax mail attack in USA in 2001 is an alarming example of bioterrorism that disclosed the drastic utilization of the pathogen (Spencer, 2003; Ahn et al., 2014).Presently advocated drugs for post-exposure of cutaneous and inhalation anthrax are ciprofloxacin, doxycycline, penicillin G and amoxicillin (Chen et al., 2004; Athamna et al., 2004). Ciprofloxacin carries out its function by inhibiting DNA replication enzymes, DNA gyrase and topoisomerase IV which induce negative supercoils to relieve the strain of positive supercoils and decatenation of DNA (Choe et al., 2000; Drlica et al., 1997). Doxycycline being in tetracycline antibiotic class is a broad-spectrum antibiotic that binds with 30s ribosomal subunit at A site in the translational complex and thus inhibits the binding of aminoacyl-tRNA at the A site. So protein synthesis is stopped due to the failure of incorporation of amino acids (Chopra et al., 2001). On the other hand penicillin binds to DD-transpeptidase enzyme (also called penicillin binding protein-PBP) through β-lactam ring that inhibits the cross-linking between bacterial peptidoglycan chain causing disruption of the cell wall and cell death (Georgopapadakou and Liu, 1980; Waxman, 1980; Tipper and Strominger, 1965). But extensive repeated exposure of bacteria to these drugs caused the evolution of resistant strains. Naturally B. anthracis exhibits resistance to penicillin. Moreover in vitro resistance to ciprofloxacin, doxycycline, quinolone, and fluoroquinolone and other β-lactam antibiotics has been reported (Chen et al., 2004; Athamna et al., 2004; Choe et al., 2000).All these major incidences have provoked a necessity for developing potential drugs against this dreadful pathogen. Identification of novel therapeutic targets ultimately leads to novel drug designing. There are various strategies for potential drug designing, among them comparative genomic can be considered worthy as newer genes, genomes and protein databases are available online.In this proposed work, subtractive genome analysis has been used where subtraction of similar gene set is done after comparing human and pathogen genome. With the help of entire genome of B. anthracis, a minimum set of genes required for the survival of the organism is identified as essential genes (Zhang and Lin, 2009). In the consecutive work computational approach through subtractive genomics using necessary databases has been adopted to find out unique proteins in the metabolic pathways and proteins associated with the membrane. Membrane bound proteins are selected because 60% of the therapeutic drugs are targeted to membrane proteins (Hossain et al., 2013; Arinaminpathy et al., 2009). This approach is successfully used in many other bacteria such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Sakharkar et al., 2004), Helicobacter pylori (Dutta et al., 2006), Burkholderia pseudomalleii (Chong et al., 2006) etc. Therefore in the current study, we have simultaneously approached a goal to identify the potential drug targets in two ways – screening through the essential non-human homolog proteins in unique pathways and proteins characterized as membrane-bound, which can be valid target for drug designing by further research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
