@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
BIMTag: Concept-based automatic semantic annotation of online BIM product resources

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Present a concept-based automatic semantic annotation method for online BIM documents using the IFC ontology.A word-level annotation algorithm is developed for word-sense disambiguation.A document-level annotation algorithm is proposed to discover the relationships.Evaluate our method on the document collection and the result outperforms existing tools.Apply our method to a search engine.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Building Information Modeling (BIM),Industry Foundation Classes (IFC),Semantic annotation,Latent semantic analysis (LSA),Information retrieval,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
With the rapid popularity of Building Information Modeling (BIM) technologies, BIM resources such as building product libraries are growing rapidly on the World Wide Web. However, numerous BIM resources are usually from heterogeneous systems or various manufacturers with ambiguous expressions and uncertain categories for product descriptions, which cannot provide effective support for information retrieval and categorization applications. Therefore, there is an increasing need for semantic annotation to reduce the ambiguity and unclearness of natural language in BIM documents. Based on Industry Foundation Classes (IFC) which is a major standard for BIM, this paper presents a concept-based automatic semantic annotation method for the documents of online BIM products. The method mainly consists of the following two stages. Firstly, with reference to the concepts and relationships explicitly defined in IFC, a word-level annotation algorithm is applied to the word-sense disambiguation. Secondly, based on latent semantic analysis technique, a document-level annotation algorithm is proposed to discover the relationships which are not explicitly defined in IFC. Finally, a prototype annotation system, named BIMTag, is developed and combined with a search engine for demonstrating the utility and effectiveness of our method. The BIMTag system is available at http://cgcad.thss.tsinghua.edu.cn/liuyushen/bimtag/.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Building Information Modeling (BIM) technology has been receiving an increasing attention in the AEC (Architecture, Engineering and Construction) industry [1]. Compared with the traditional Computer Aided Design (CAD) technology, BIM is capable of restoring both geometric and rich semantic information of building models, as well as their relationships, to support lifecycle data sharing. With the rapid popularity of BIM technologies in the AEC field, BIM resources such as building product libraries are growing rapidly on the World Wide Web (WWW). For instance, the well-known Autodesk Seek [2] is an online system, which provides a large repository of building products on its website and allows users to search for a large variety of BIM products from manufactures. Currently, it contains more than 65,000 commercial and residential building products from nearly 1000 manufacturers, and is still growing daily. BIMobject [3] is another widely visited website containing over 450,000 BIM models with the product data and properties. Other online libraries (e.g. National BIM Library [4] and SmartBIM [5]) and many active online communities (e.g. RevitCity [6]) also have a large amount of information content of BIM-related building products.The typical libraries of online BIM resources (e.g. [2,4,5]) contain BIM models associated with product documents (e.g. specifications and descriptions of the objective products). The BIM models are normally in their native file format dependent on various software vendors (e.g. Autodesk Revit, Bentley Architecture and Graphisoft ArchiCAD) or in industry-neutral file format (e.g. IFC/ifcXML). The relevant product documents are the textual content for describing BIM models including their functions, dimensions, materials, performances, manufacturers, etc. These product documents are independent of the file format of BIM models. In particular, much of knowledge is embedded in textual BIM documents generated during design and construction phases [7]. Most of BIM documents are unstructured, in contrast to structured content (e.g. BIM models or database tables) following the strict schema.However, numerous BIM documents are often obtained from heterogeneous systems or generated by various manufacturers, which are written in unstructured and ungrammatical format possibly with ambiguous expressions and uncertain categories for product descriptions. As a result, this also increases the difficulty for users in retrieving most relevant and accurate information through traditional keyword-based search engines. To overcome this issue, a possible way is to manually annotate the BIM documents to help classify them with specific labels or tags, which is very labor-intensive and subjective. Therefore, there is an increasing need for automatic semantic annotation to reduce the ambiguity and unclearness of natural language in BIM documents.Semantic annotation is about attaching additional information (e.g. names, attributes, comments, descriptions) to a document or to a selected part in the text [8], thereby providing metadata about an existing piece of data. It could help reduce the ambiguity and unclearness of natural language through expressing the notions and their relationships in a more formal language. Many studies have contributed in semantic annotation [9–12], which lower the barrier of linking shared data with the Web resources in various areas. However, the lack of commonly accepted domain-specific formal knowledge still limits the utilization of semantic annotation in the BIM-related area. Therefore, the crucial problem is how to build the BIM-oriented formal knowledge and use the formal knowledge to annotate the Web content of textual BIM documents in different semantic levels.Based on Industry Foundation Classes (IFC) [13] which is a major standard for BIM, this paper presents a concept-based automatic semantic annotation method for online BIM documents. The method mainly consists of the following two stages. Firstly, with reference to the concepts and relationships explicitly defined in IFC, a word-level annotation algorithm is applied to handle the word-sense disambiguation explicitly. Secondly, by combining the latent semantic analysis technique [14], a document-level annotation algorithm is proposed to discover the relationships that are not explicitly defined in IFC. Finally, a prototype semantic annotation system, named BIMTag, is developed and combined with a search engine for demonstrating the utility and effectiveness of our method. Compared with conventionally manual annotation/tagging approaches, which are time consuming and subjective, our method can automatically derive the intended meaning of terms and their underlying concepts embedded in the content of documents. This also enriches the content of unstructured BIM documents with their contexts which are further linked to the knowledge of BIM-specific domain.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
