@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Involvement of non-polyalanine (polyA) residues in aggregation of polyA proteins: Clue for inhibition of aggregation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Aggregating residues in polyA proteins.NonpolyA residues.Hydrophobic interaction.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
PolyA aggregation,Hydrophobic interaction,Docking,HSP40,HSP70,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Presence of polyalanine (polyA) stretches in some proteins is found to be associated with their aggregation, which causes disorders in various developmental processes. In this work, inherent propensities towards aggregation of some residues, which are not part of the polyA stretches, have been identified by using the primary sequences of seven polyA proteins with the help of Betascan, PASTA and Tango programs and explored unambiguously. This provides a basis for proposing molecular mechanism of this type of aggregation. Reported suppression of aggregation of polyA proteins by chaperones like HSP40 and HSP70 is substantiated through molecular docking. The hydrophobic residues of identified aggregating region are found to be interacting with hydrophobic surface of chaperones. This suggests a crucial clue for possible way to inhibit the aggregation of such proteins.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Expansion of trinucleotide repeats has been found to lead various human diseases like neurodegenerative and developmental disorders (Ranum and Day, 2002; Cummings and Zoghbi, 2000). Although the most common and well-known trinucleotide expansions are translated to polyglutamine (polyQ), several earlier findings also reported the expansion of polyalanine (polyA) stretches in various developmental abnormalities summarized in Table 1(Goodman et al., 1997, 2000; de Baere et al., 2001; Mundlos et al., 1997; Stromme et al., 2002; Laumonnier et al., 2002; Brais et al., 1998). In all these cases, polyA expansion occurs in transcription factors having fundamental role in early development with an exception of PABPN1 (polyadenylate-binding protein 2). PABPN1 (Fig. 1) is basically a polyadenylation factor and found to be involved in regulation of transcription in skeletal muscle (Kim et al., 2001). Expansion of alanine stretch was first reported as involved in the disease synpolydactyly syndrome (SPD) (Muragaki et al., 1996). Further, comprehensive reviews on polyA expansions and associated diseases were published elsewhere (Amiel et al., 2004; Albrecht and Mundlos, 2005). Two different mechanisms namely polymerase slippage and equal allelic homologous recombination were suggested behind polyA aggregation diseases (Amiel et al., 2004). From the previous works on polyA, a correlation was also noticed between the size of alanine stretch expansion and phenotype severity in case of SPD (Goodman et al., 1997). PolyA tract expansion beyond a certain threshold can induce protein misfolding, which may lead to unusual protein aggregation resulting partial to complete loss of function or other dominant negative effects (Messaed and Rouleau, 2009).A recent study pointed out that the formation of coiled-coil structure by polyA repeats can start protein aggregation and thereby related toxicity (Pelassa et al., 2014). Another in silico simulation study suggested various structural rearrangements and transitions are involved during aggregation of polyA peptide to form its fibril structure (Phelps and Hall, 2012). In general, polyA peptides have a tendency to form insoluble protein assembly such as amyloid fibrils (Blondelle et al., 1997; Shinchuk et al., 2005; Giri et al., 2007). Even under physiological conditions, in vitro, polyA aggregates show extreme stability against chemical denaturation and enzymatic degradation (Forood et al., 1995). Most of these studies consider the aggregation of only polyA peptides and not the full proteins. The molecular mechanism of aggregation occurred in polyA proteins is still largely unknown and is not very clearly understood from existing literature. This paper aims to provide a basis of mechanistic view point on these diseases for future experimental studies.In this context it may be considered that in polyA proteins, there may be a significant involvement of the domains other than polyA to control and promote the aggregation process. It is evident from some earlier results that over-expression of PABPN1, which lacks entire polyA in N-terminus, can also induce protein aggregation in vivo and in vitro (Chartier et al., 2006). Missense mutation in another polyA protein FOXL2 also results protein aggregation in vitro, which is completely independent of polyA expansion (Beysen et al., 2008). These observations definitely indicate the presence of some non-polyA residues in those proteins, which have intrinsic propensity towards aggregation. This makes the basis of our study to predict the molecular mechanism of aggregation of different polyA proteins. In an earlier report by our group (Ghosh, 2013), it was also shown that in six different aggregating proteins, the flanking residues attached to polyQ have inherent propensities towards aggregation. These non-polyQ flanking residues were found to play critical role in stimulation of protein aggregation (Thakur et al., 2009; Ignatova et al., 2007; de Chiara et al., 2005; Ellisdon et al., 2006; Lakhani et al., 2010; Liebman and Meredith, 2010). Considering all these findings PASTA, Betascan and Tango programs have been used to find out the regions having propensity towards aggregation in PABPN1 and six other polyA proteins. Application of these programs for predicting residues involved in protein aggregation were also employed earlier (Sahin et al., 2011), where the predictions match well with the experimental observations.It is also reported that the protein aggregates formed by different polyA proteins such as PABPN1, ARX, etc. can sequester ubiquitin, proteosome and molecular chaperones (Abu-Baker et al., 2003; Nasrallah et al., 2004). Molecular chaperones like HSP70 and HSP40 independently or in conjugation can significantly reduce the aggregation of polyA protein like PABPN1 and its associated cellular toxicity (Abu-Baker et al., 2003; Wang et al., 2005). On the other hand, chemical chaperone like trehalose can also delay the pathological toxicity in a transgenic mouse model of oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD), associated with PABPN1 aggregation (Davies et al., 2006). Our results clearly indicate the role of non-polyA residues in aggregation and the hydrophobic residues among them are found to be interacting with the hydrophobic patch on the surface of chaperones and thereby the chaperones are able to show the inhibition activity.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
