@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Gene expression patterns combined with bioinformatics analysis identify genes associated with cholangiocarcinoma

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Microarray technology was used to find biomarkers for early detection and diagnosis.204 differentially co-expressed genes (DCGs) in CC patients were identified.Providing a set of targets for molecular biomarker studies.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cholangiocarcinoma,Differentially coexpressed gene,Regulatory network,Bioinformatics analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
To explore the molecular mechanisms of cholangiocarcinoma (CC), microarray technology was used to find biomarkers for early detection and diagnosis. The gene expression profiles from 6 patients with CC and 5 normal controls were downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus and compared. As a result, 204 differentially co-expressed genes (DCGs) in CC patients compared to normal controls were identified using a computational bioinformatics analysis. These genes were mainly involved in coenzyme metabolic process, peptidase activity and oxidation reduction. A regulatory network was constructed by mapping the DCGs to known regulation data. Four transcription factors, FOXC1, ZIC2, NKX2-2 and GCGR, were hub nodes in the network. In conclusion, this study provides a set of targets useful for future investigations into molecular biomarker studies.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cholangiocarcinoma (CC) is a highly malignant neoplasm originating from the neoplastic transformation of cholangiocytes, the epithelial cells lining the intrahepatic and/or extrahepatic biliary system (Ahrendt et al., 2001; Blechacz and Gores, 2008). CC accounts for an estimated 15% of liver cancer worldwide and is the second most common primary liver cancer after hepatocellular cancer (Wise et al., 2008; Srivatanakul et al., 2010). For non-resectable cases, the overall survival following diagnosis is less than 12 months (Sirica, 2005) and the 5-year survival rate is 0% where the disease is inoperable because distal lymph nodes show metastases (Yamamoto et al., 1999). The poor prognosis of CC highlights the need for increased efforts in understanding the pathogenesis of this primary liver cancer.The diagnosis of CC remains a challenge. The most widely used circulating markers for CC currently are carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9 and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) (Nehls et al., 2004; Reddy and Patel, 2006). However, these markers harbor limitations, such as the false positive results (Ong et al., 2008) and the possibility of elevated levels due to the presence of other types of cancer, such as gastric cancer and gynecologic malignancies (Vestergaard et al., 1999; Van Beers, 2008). Tumor specific genetic alterations have been shown to play important roles in cancer development (Hanahan and Weinberg, 2011). Several genes have been identified to be biomarkers for CC, such as CDO1 (cysteine dioxygenase, type I), DCLK1 (doublecortin-like kinase 1), SERP1 (stress-associated endoplasmic reticulum protein 1), ZSCAN18 (zinc finger and SCAN domain containing 18) and LCN2 (lipocalin 2) (Srisomsap et al., 2010; Andresen et al., 2012).DNA microarray enables investigators to study the gene expression profile and gene activation of thousands of genes and sequences simultaneously. Although microarrays have been used recently to profile global changes in gene expression in liver samples obtained from patients with CC (Hass et al., 2008; Seok et al., 2012; Sia et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2013), genomic studies of CC have been limited (Andersen and Thorgeirsson, 2012) in comparison with other cancers. The purpose of this study was to explore the molecular mechanisms of CC using microarray technology to possibly find markers for CC initiation that may improve the diagnosis of CC. The availability and integration of high-throughput gene expression data and the computational bioinformatics analysis may shed new lights on molecular biomarker identification of CC.The gene expression profiles of CC patients with normal controls were downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) with accession number of GSE31370. This dataset was based on the platform of Illumina humanHT-12 v4.0 expression beadchip and deposited by Seok et al. (2012). In their study, Seok et al. focused on comparing molecular features of scirrhous hepatocellular carcinoma with those of hepatocellular carcinoma and CC. The original dataset included 26 genechips and we extracted 11 genechips of them for further analysis, including 6 genechips from CC cancer tissue and 5 genechips from the surrounding normal liver.UCSC (http://genome.ucsc.edu) is an interactive website offering access to genome sequence data from a variety of vertebrate and invertebrate species and major model organisms, integrated with a large collection of aligned annotations. We downloaded the human transcription factors (TFs) and their target chromosome region from UCSC (Downloads→Human→Annotation database→tfbsConsSites.txt.gz). Then, we downloaded the chromosome annotation information from NCBI and analyzed the relationships between TFs and their target genes.From the perspective of systems biology, functionally related genes are frequently coexpressed across a set of samples (Stuart et al., 2003; Bergmann et al., 2004; Lee et al., 2004). The R program Differentially Coexpressed Genes and Links (DCGL) is designed for identifying differentially coexpressed genes and links from gene expression microarray data (Liu et al., 2010).For GSE31370, we used the DCGL package (Liu et al., 2010; Yu et al., 2011) in R (Team, 2011) to identify differentially coexpressed genes (DCGs) and links in CC patients compared to normal controls. There are two methods in DCGL package to identify DCGs: differential coexpression profile (DCp) and differential coexpression enrichment (DCe). These two methods mainly differ in the measure of differential coexpression (dC) of a gene.We calculated the Pearson correlation coefficients (PCCs) between the expression profiles of all gene pairs. For gene i, the PCCs between itself and its n neighbors in the filtered set form two vectors, X=(xi1, xi2,…,xini) and Y=(yi1, yi2,…,yini) for the two conditions, which are referred to as ‘coexpression profiles’. The dC measures of different methods are given in the following equations (detailed information were shown in Liu et al., 2010; Yu et al., 2011):(1)dCi(DCp)=(xi1−yi1)2+(xi2−yi2)2+⋯+(xin1−yin1)2ni(2)dCi(DCe)∑x=kiniCnixKNx1−KNni−xwhere xi1 is the PCC of gene i and gene 1 in condition 1 (CC patients), yi1 is the PCC of gene i and gene 1 in condition 2 (normal controls), N and K indicate the numbers of total links and total DCL links in the coexpression network, respectively, and niand kiindicate the links and DCLs connected to gene i.In order to facilitate the functional annotation and analysis of large lists of genes in our result, we inputted all the DCGs into DAVID (The Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery) for GO term enrichment analysis. The DAVID is a program that checks for an enrichment of genes with specific GO, KEGG, and SwissProt terms (Huang da et al., 2009). We chose p-value<0.05 as the cut-off criterion.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
