@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A structural comparative approach to identifying novel antimalarial inhibitors

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We have used a computational structural comparative approach to identify compounds that can selectively target an essential malaria protein.We have used AutoDock Vina to compare the binding affinities of potential inhibitors against an essential enzyme in Plasmodium falciparum and its human homolog.We were able to identify two inhibitors of P. falciparum in the ng/mL range.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Virtual screen,Structural comparative approach,Malaria,Inhibitors,PfUCHL3,Computational,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Malaria continues to affect millions of people annually. With the rise of drug resistant strains, the need for alternative treatments has become increasingly urgent. Recently, PfUCHL3 was identified as an essential deubiquitinating enzyme. The increasing number of drug target structures being solved has increased the feasibility of utilizing a structural comparative approach to identifying novel inhibitors. Using AutoDock Vina, we recently screened the NCI library of about 320,000 compounds against the crystal structure of PfUCHL3. The top hits were subsequently screened against its human ortholog UCHL3 as to identify compounds that could specifically target the PfUCHL3 over its human counterpart. This method was used to identify small molecule inhibitors that can preferentially inhibit the parasitic enzyme. Several compounds were identified that demonstrated significant binding affinity preference for the malaria target over the human enzyme. Two of these compounds demonstrated ng/mL activity.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Malaria infects over 250 million people a year and claims the lives of nearly a million people annually (Global status report on road safety. Geneva W.H.O., 2009). Malaria is a severe infectious disease that continues to plague millions of people, with a large portion of the victims being from underprivileged areas (Fidock, 2010). Since the disease is most prominent in disadvantaged areas it has been under studied. Thus, no new antimalarial compounds with a novel mechanism have been approved for use since 1996, which has not kept up with Plasmodium's progression in drug resistance (Gamo et al., 2010). The two main drugs used to treat malaria are chloroquine and pyrimethamin-sulphadoxine. Both of these drugs have been efficacious against the most virulent strain of Plasmodium, P. falciparum (Snow et al., 2005). However, the emergence of strains resistant to these first line antimalarial drugs has increased the urgency for the development of novel therapeutics. While much of the focus has been on the identification of quinoline analogs, the need for therapeutics with a novel mode of action has desirable, as the enzyme P. Falciparum Chloroquine Resistance Transporter (Pfcrt) has made chloroquine much less effective at treating malaria (Zishiri et al., 2011; Bray et al., 2005; Djimde et al., 2001; Fidock et al., 2000).Traditionally, researchers have targeted proteins with no human homologs. While this method has been very advantageous, the rise of drug resistant strains has resulted in the need for novel drug targets (Ekland and Fidock, 2008). An alternative strategy is the structural comparative analysis method, where structural insight is used to selectively target homologous proteins or proteins within a family. Using high-resolution structures, subtle structural differences can be exploited for the identification of selective inhibitors, even between highly conserved proteins (Eswaran et al., 2006). It has previously been shown that inhibitors can have drastically different inhibitory profiles even among isoforms (Frederick et al., 2009). Other researchers have emphasized the importance of being able to use computational methods to selectively target an enzyme or a set of enzymes. Two approaches that have previously been utilized to compare the binding affinities of ligands with various structures are serial docking, and in situ cross-docking (Fernandes et al., 2004; Cosconati et al., 2009). Serial Docking sequentially docks ligands into a series of enzymes and based on its predicted binding affinity the compounds is either passed to the next enzyme for docking or eliminated from the screen (Chang et al., 2007; Muller et al., 2006; Kairys et al., 2006). In situ cross-docking sets a group of enzymes to have similar search areas so that they can quickly be screened as a set (Sotriffer and Dramburg, 2005; Zentgraf et al., 2006). Comparing ligands’ binding affinity has been used for various applications, such as identifying off target binding, which would lead to unwanted side effects, repurposing current therapeutics, for the identification of a single ligand that can synergistically target multiple enzymes in a pathway, and for screening compounds against high flexible targets (Keiser et al., 2009; Rockey and Elcock, 2002; Oprea and Matter, 2004; McInnes, 2007). This supports the idea that evenly highly homologous proteins can be selectively targeted. This approach aims to identify selective leads at the beginning of the drug discover process. Currently there are 86,487 protein structures in the protein data bank (PDB) and the number of structures deposited annually continues to increase at an astonishing rate (8368 in 2012 alone). With this structural insight, it has become increasingly feasible to utilize a structural comparative approach to exploit structural discrepancies in homologous or closely related proteins for therapeutic applications. In addition, the increasing accessibility to computing power allows for thousands, if not millions of compounds to be screened in a matter of days. This method was employed herein to identify two novel antimalarial compounds.An enzyme that has shown promise as a drug target is PfUCHL3, a deubiquitinating enzyme that was recently shown to have strong evidence of being essential for the parasite's survival. Using endpoint reactions PfUCHL3 was identified to have dual activity as a deubiquitinating and deNeddylase (neural precursor cell expressed, developmentally down-regulated 8). A mutagenesis study, converting the catalytic Cys 92 to an Ala rendering the enzyme inactive, and had a dominate negative affect on expression making it highly likely that the enzyme is essential for the parasites survival. Previous work has been shown that enzymes with deubiquitinating activity could be essential for host-targeted immune invasion as well as general interaction with its host (Isaacson and Ploegh, 2009). Previous studies have shown proteasome inhibitors can have a lethal effect on malaria parasites (Artavanis-Tsakonas et al., 2010). While these promiscuous inhibitors validate the viability of target proteasomes their lack of selectivity prohibits their feasibility a drug candidate. The crystal structures for both PfUCHL3 and its only human ortholog, UCHL3, have been solved, allowing a structural comparative analysis approach to be implemented to identify inhibitors that can selectively target PfUCHL3.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
