@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Improved homology model of cyclohexanone monooxygenase from Acinetobacter calcoaceticus based on multiple templates

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We build an improved model of cyclohexanone monooxygenase from Acinetobacter sp.The developed homology model includes the nicotinamide cofactor for the first time.We examine the enzymatic mechanism describing key residues during the reaction.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus,Cyclohexanone monooxygenase,Homology models,Baeyer–Villiger reaction,Enzymatic oxidation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A new homology model of cyclohexanone monooxygenase (CHMO) from Acinetobacter calcoaceticus is derived based on multiple templates, and in particular the crystal structure of CHMO from Rhodococcus sp. The derived model was fully evaluated, showing that the quality of the new structure was improved over previous models. Critically, the nicotinamide cofactor is included in the model for the first time. Analysis of several molecular dynamics snapshots of intermediates in the enzymatic mechanism led to a description of key residues for cofactor binding and intermediate stabilization during the reaction, in particular Arg327 and the well known conserved motif (FxGxxxHxxxW) in Baeyer–Villiger monooxygenases, in excellent agreement with known experimental and computational data.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The Baeyer–Villiger (BV) reaction of ketones to yield esters or lactones is a valuable synthetic methodology, which can be applied in the preparation of building blocks, pharmaceutical intermediates and final products (Renz and Meunier, 1999; Strukul, 1998). The traditional chemical BV reaction is carried out with an organic peroxyacid. The use of such reactants is not considered environmentally friendly. In addition, the chemical oxidation using peroxyacids does not always lead to asymmetric esters and lactones. Therefore, the development of an enzymatic BV oxidation scheme is extremely attractive. The enzymatic rearrangement is catalyzed by flavin-dependent monooxygenases known as Baeyer–Villiger monooxygenases (BVMOs) (Turfitt, 1948). These enzymes introduce one atom from molecular oxygen into the substrate, whereas the other oxygen is reduced to water at the expense of NAD(P)H (Roberts and Wan, 1998; Walsh and Jack Chen, 1988). Among the BVMOs, the enzyme cyclohexanone monooxygenase (CHMO) from Acinetobacter calcoaceticus NCIMB 9871 (EC 1.14.13.22) (Donoghue et al., 1976; Donoghue and Trudgill, 1975), is the most extensively studied (Kamerbeek et al., 2003; Leisch et al., 2011; Mihovilovic, 2006; Mihovilovic et al., 2002; Stewart, 1998). The currently accepted enzymatic mechanism is shown in Fig. 1(Leisch et al., 2011; Ryerson et al., 1982; Sheng et al., 2001).The initial state involves the tightly bound FAD prosthetic group (1). NADPH binds to the enzyme (2) and transfers a hydride ion to FAD to yield the NADP+·FADH−·E complex 3 (where E stands for enzyme). This complex reacts with molecular oxygen to form a flavin-peroxide intermediate (C4a-peroxiflavin intermediate 4), which accepts the ketone substrate (cyclohexanone) (5) and finally undergoes nucleophilic attack on the carbonyl group to produce the tetrahedral intermediate 6. This intermediate rearranges to the corresponding hydroxyflavin and ɛ-caprolactone (7). After the release of both water and lactone (8 and 9) the catalytic cycle is finally closed by NADP+ release. It is worth mentioning that CHMO is strictly NADPH-dependent, meaning that the use of the isolated enzyme in organic synthesis would require an efficient coenzyme recycling system, as NADPH is extremely expensive to use in stoichiometric amounts (Koeller and Wong, 2001; Woodyer et al., 2004). In fact, NADPH is more expensive and less stable than NADH (Wu et al., 1986).In order to increase the synthetic value of CHMO by changing the substrate profile, enantioselectivity, stability, and also the coenzyme specificity (from NADPH to NADH), the analysis of the three-dimensional structure of the enzyme becomes essential. The first crystal structure of a BVMO was reported by Malito et al. (2004), corresponding to the so-called phenylacetone monooxygenase (PAMO) from the thermophilic actinomycete Thermobifida fusca (Fraaije et al., 2005). However, the coenzyme is missing in the determined crystal structure of PAMO (PDB ID: 1W4X), hampering a detailed analysis of NADPH–enzyme interactions. More recently, two crystal structures of CHMO from Rhodococcus sp. strain HI-31 in complex with NADP+ were reported by Mirza and co-workers (PDB ID: 3GWD and 3GWF), providing valuable structural information (Mirza et al., 2009). Several crystal structures of wild-type and mutated PAMO in complex with NADP+ were described in 2011 (PDB ID: 2YLR, 2YLW, 2YLZ and 2YLX) (Orru et al., 2011), allowing the investigation of the structural basis of the enzymatic mechanism. Finally in 2012, a new crystal structure of CHMO from Rhodococcus sp. strain HI-31 was reported (PDB ID: 3UCL) (Yachnin et al., 2012). This structure represents the first crystal structure of CHMO bound to cyclohexanone, as well as NADP+.Even though CHMO from A. calcoaceticus NCIMB 9871 is the most employed BVMO, both in academia and in industry, there is no crystal structure available for this enzyme. Thus, it becomes essential to determine the 3D structure employing different approaches, such as homology modeling, based on the assumption that the tertiary structure and folding of two proteins are similar if the sequences are related (Krieger et al., 2003). A homology model of CHMO from Acinetobacter sp. NCIMB 9871 has been described (Bocola et al., 2005). However, this model also lacks the NADPH cofactor. Therefore, it is not possible to analyze the role of the coenzyme in the mechanism using this model. The use of good quality models, in particular of the active site, is essential for reliable predictions.Prompted by the need of more accurate models, we have carried out homology modeling of CHMO from Acinetobacter sp. NCIMB 9871 using multiple templates in order to improve the quality of the models. In addition, starting from the best homology model calculated in this work, we built, refined, and analyzed the different steps of the enzymatic mechanism (see Fig. 1). In particular, we have focused our attention on the substrate–enzyme and cofactor–enzyme interactions.The crystallographic coordinates of phenylacetone monooxygenase (PAMO) from T. fusca wild type (1W4X) and mutations (2YLR, 2YLW, 2YLZ and 2YLX) and of cyclohexanone monooxygenase (CHMO) from Rhodococcus sp. (3GWF and 3UCL) were obtained from the RSBC Protein Data Bank (PDB). The protein sequence (FASTA sequence) of CHMO from A. calcoaceticus was also obtained from the NCBI server (no. 6277322).Homology model of CHMO was built using crystal structures of selected templates employing the YASARA program (Krieger, 2004; Krieger et al., 2009). When using multiple templates (i.e.2YLR, 2YLW, 2YLZ, 2YLX and 3GWF), alternative alignments were created for each available template through a stochastic approach (Mückstein et al., 2002), and the models built from these. When templates contain ligands (such as FAD and NADP+), these were parameterized and considered in the homology modeling procedure. After the side-chains were built in, the loops were optimized by exploring a large number of different conformations. Loops and side-chains were then subjected to a combined steepest descent and simulated annealing minimization (i.e. the backbone atoms were kept fixed). Finally, a full unrestrained simulated annealing minimization was run for the entire model.The final models were evaluated employing different programs, such as Verify 3D (Bowie et al., 1991; Lüthy et al., 1992), ERRAT (Colovos and Yeates, 1993), ProSA-web (z-score) (Sippl, 1993; Wiederstein and Sippl, 2007) and PROCHECK analysis (Laskowski et al., 1993), which allow checking the stereochemical quality (local and overall) of the models and calculating the percentage of conformations in favored regions obtained from Ramachandran plots (Ramachandran and Sasisekharan, 1968).All structures of ligands, CHMO and enzymes in complex with ligands were energy minimized using the AMBER03 (Duan et al., 2003) molecular mechanics force field to within an rms gradient of 0.1kcalmol−1Å−1. Each system was solvated in a periodic box with TIP3P (Jorgensen et al., 1983) water molecules extending 10Å outside the enzyme, followed by simulated annealing minimization. The solvated system was neutralized by randomly adding sodium and chloride atoms to reach a NaCl concentration of 0.9% (corresponding to physiological solution). Protonation states were assigned according to the pKa values and a simulation pH of 7 (Krieger et al., 2006). Independent MD simulations were conducted for each intermediate in the reaction mechanism (model structures 3–7 and 9; cf. Fig. 1) to obtain relaxed geometries, as well as to check the quality of the homology model, and were followed by a final energy minimization step. The MD simulations were performed for each system for 10ns at 298K, using the canonical ensemble (NVT) and the AMBER03 force field. Partial atomic charges of the ligands were initially calculated using AM1 charges with the COSMO solvation model (Klamt, 1995), and improved by the application of AM1-BCC (Jakalian et al., 2002) (AM1-Bond Charge Correction) which takes into account the electrostatic potential around the molecule to calculate charges (such as RESP charges). Long-range electrostatics were calculated using the particle mesh Ewald (PME) (Essmann et al., 1995) summation method with a cutoff of 7.86Å. The simulations were carried out with multiple time steps, namely 1.25 and 2.54fs for intra- and intermolecular forces, respectively. The MD trajectories were sampled every 10ps, resulting in 1000 snapshots per simulation. The RMSD of Cα atoms for the protein was monitored for each simulation trajectory.Docking studies were performed using the Molecular Operating Environment 2009.10 program (MOE). Cyclohexanone was docked computationally into the active site of the CHMO model (model structure 4 in Fig. 1), assigning the appropriate ionization state at pH 7. 500 poses were retained using the alpha triangle placement methodology with affinity ΔG as scoring function, as implemented in MOE. In the docking studies, flexible ligand structures were generated using a Monte Carlo algorithm, whereas the receptor was held fixed according to its minimized geometry. The best scored orientation for the ligand was selected, the whole system was energy minimized and then subjected to MD simulation in YASARA using the same settings as above.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have developed an improved homology model of CHMO from A. calcoaceticus, aiming to provide a reliable structure with which to study the key structural features of the BV catalyzed mechanism, and to investigate the role of a range of residues in the cofactor preference and stereochemical outcome of the reaction. The new model has a high acceptance profile for each structural analysis performed.In particular, we have evaluated the critical amino acids in the CHMO-catalyzed BV reaction. Our results show that Arg327 is a key residue in several steps of the enzymatic mechanism, stabilizing the oxidized nicotinamide cofactor, the negatively charged peroxide group, the substrate in the active site (i.e. cyclohexanone) and the Criegee-like intermediate. Furthermore, we found structural evidence for the role of the fingerprint motif in CHMO catalysis, particularly in positioning both NADP+ and FAD for their catalytic roles. The results are in complete agreement with available experimental information on similar systems.Further studies regarding the substrate and cofactor specificities, and detailed exploration of the enzymatic mechanism, are currently in progress.