@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A representation scheme for digital product service system definitions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Identifies information requirements for the representation of service elements of PSS from literature.Proposes a representation scheme for PSS that addresses these requirements.Validates the scheme through population with case study data and application in a PSS definition system.Defines a benchmark PSS for the evaluation of PSS representation schemes.Uses the benchmark to compare the scheme in this paper with previously published PSS meta-models and ontologies.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Service definition,Product service systems (PSS),PSS representation,PSS development,Computer-aided engineering,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The growing trend for delivering physical products to customers as parts of product service systems (PSS) is creating a need for a new generation of Computer Aided Design (CAD) system to support the design of PSS: so-called “PSS-CAD”. Key research issues in the development of such systems include building understanding of the kinds of applications that designers of PSS might need and the establishment of well-founded representation schemes to underpin and support communication between PSS-CAD systems. Recent literature includes numerous descriptions of integrated PSS development processes, PSS-CAD tools to support these processes and early meta-models to provide information support. This paper complements this work by proposing a representation scheme that is a key prerequisite to achieving the interoperability between PSS-CAD systems which would be necessary to support the deployment of integrated PSS development processes in industry.The representation scheme, a form of meta-model, draws on learning from the product definition community that emerged in the 1970s in response to a need for interoperability between the different shape-based CAD systems that were being developed at the time. The initial focus on shape representation has developed to digital product definitions that define the design of a product coupled with meta-data recording details of processes by which the design was created and, more recently, supported through-life. Similarly, PSS-related information includes both PSS definitions, to support the lifecycles of physical products and associated services, and meta-data needed to support the management of PSS development processes.This paper focuses on information requirements for the definition of service elements of PSS and relationships with product elements and service actors. These requirements are derived from earlier work on the use of service blueprinting for the visualisation and mapping of service activities to deliver different types of service contract. Key information requirements addressed include the need to represent service process flow and breakdown structures, relationships between service and product elements, substitution relationships, and service variants. A representation scheme is proposed and demonstrated through application to a PSS case study. The representation scheme is built on a generic information architecture that has already been applied to problems of product definition; as such there is an underlying compatibility that offers real promise in the future realisation of integrated PSS development processes.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The transition from the delivery of products to product service systems (PSS) is driving companies to focus on the performance of not only the products they develop and deliver to customers but also the services used to provide through-life support for these products. A consequence of this transition is that the role of the physical product is changing. Where once the development of products was a goal in its own right, increasingly products are parts of PSSs where the goal is to support and operate products through their lifecycles. This has led to an increasing interest in both the integration of products and services [64] and innovation in service offerings [37,53]. In response, the description of integrated service development processes is growing [20,30,47,59] and the need to consider both product and service lifecycles, and interactions between them, early in PSS development processes when the cost of change is at its lowest, is increasingly recognised [31,72]. In their broadest sense, PSS-CAD systems will support PSS developers in understanding these issues and many authors describe service design and development tools [23,51].Like product development processes, integrated PSS development processes will require underlying information architectures through which the integration of these tools can be achieved. A key to the realisation of such architectures lies in the establishment of well-founded representation schemes to support the definition of PSS through their lifecycles. This paper introduces such a representation scheme for service elements of PSS. It has been validated through application to case studies on the definition of contracted services in high value manufacturing systems [34]. The resulting digital service definitions have been used to support risk management of an industrial service [35] and the articulation of information requirements in the defence sector [14]. In the future such definitions could increase the use of computer-based evaluations of service concepts, for example by integrating them with simulation models [15], and more human-centred service design activities such as those discussed by Meiren et al. [47].The representation scheme draws on learning from product definition both on the kinds of functionalities that might be required in PSS development processes and how such information might be represented. Parallels between the definition of product and service elements of PSS are introduced in Section 2.1 and used to inform requirements for digital service definition. The model has been implemented to support the definition of a range of industrial services that are subject to confidentiality restrictions. For this reason, a fragment of a fictitious case study that exhibits key characteristics of these real-world PSS, a coffee making machine repair service with two types of contract (spares only and availability [71]), is introduced in Section 3. The representation scheme, in the form of an information model, is introduced in Section 4 and its efficacy demonstrated through application to the coffee maker case study through population (in Section 4) and through implementation in a prototypical PSS definition system (in Section 5). An analysis of its efficacy in comparison to PSS meta-models available in the literature is provided in Section 6 and areas for further research are outlined in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
