@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Operations on network-based space layouts for modeling multiple space views of buildings

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Novel operations for modeling multiple space views of buildings are described.Operations generate space layouts that model spatial relations as networks.Signatures and processing of fundamental operations are defined and illustrated.Processing of some fundamental operations involves network traversal.Operations may be composed into expressions to model domain-specific space views.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Space modeling,Building information modeling,Spatial query languages,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Space layouts are created by designers to model a building’s spaces and related physical objects. Building services designers commonly reuse space layouts created by architectural designers to develop their designs. However, reuse tends to be limited due to differences in designers’ space views. In order to address this issue of modeling multiple space views, we define a set of novel operations that can be used by designers to generate new space layouts from existing layouts. Fundamental operations includeselect,aggregate, and decompose operations. The select operation facilitates reuse of space layouts created in building information modeling (BIM) authoring systems. Signatures and processing of these operations are defined. We use an existing schema for network-based space layouts to represent space layouts. In a network-based space layout, specific spatial relations between layout elements are explicitly modeled as a directed, weighted graph or network. Processing of certain operations involves traversal of a spatial relation network with graph algorithms to determine layout modifications. Symmetric difference and overlay operations are defined as additional operations. They are composed ofunion,intersect, and subtract operations, which are fundamental operations. Fundamental and additional layout operations may be composed into expressions to model domain-specific space views. We have extended an existing layout modeling system with implementations of these layout operations. The system relies on geometric and solid modeling as well as graph libraries to represent layouts and process operations. The feasibility of modeling of multiple space views with layout operation expressions is shown with an example in which a security lighting layout of a floor of an existing office building is automatically generated from an architectural layout.“is adjacent to” relationlayout element“is near” relation“overlaps” relation“partially bounds” relation“partially encloses” relationspace boundary elementspace elementspace element contained in a whole spacespace element partially enclosing a whole spacespatial relation elementspatial relation networksubspace“touches” relationwhole space

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Space layouts are created by designers to model a building’s spaces and related physical objects, such as walls, windows, furnishing and technical equipment elements. Designers increasingly use building information modeling (BIM) authoring systems to develop space layouts [1]. Sharing of space layouts is facilitated by data exchange methods. The space schema in the Industry Foundation Classes (IFC), for example, defines rich data structures for spaces, space boundaries, and space enclosures [2].It is common practice for building services designers to reuse space layouts created by architectural designers to develop their designs. However, reuse tends to be limited due to substantial differences in designers’ space views. This issue of multiple, domain-specific views of objects is well-known in BIM [3,4]. For an architectural designer, a space typically includes space boundaries, windows, doors, as well as visually relevant furnishing and equipment elements. By contrast, in the space view adopted by an indoor climate control system designer, spaces are often zones that span multiple rooms with similar orientation, function, or thermal requirements. Space enclosure elements with high thermal flux, air inlets/outlets, or indoor air temperature sensors are of concern. A lighting designer in turn is usually interested in zones within rooms that are related to luminaires, shades, walls, windows, illuminance sensors, or occupancy sensors.While BIM authoring systems and IFC provide general space data modeling and exchange capabilities, support for automated generation of space layouts that model multiple, domain-specific space views, as outlined above, is limited. Building services designers may thus only partially reuse space layouts created by architectural designers. As a workaround, they need to manually recreate space layouts according to their space views. This existing workflow is inefficient, error-prone, and a significant barrier for seamless collaboration in multi-disciplinary design teams. According to [5], reduced errors, shorter cycle times of workflows, and reduced rework are viewed as highly important for improved quality and productivity of design firms in architecture, engineering, and construction.In order to address the issue of modeling multiple space views, we describe a set of novel operations that can be used by designers to generate new space layouts from existing layouts. We build on and extend previous work, in which we have developed initial specifications for these operations [6,7]. Layout operations may be composed into expressions to model domain-specific space views. For example, a layout operation expression may be defined to generate an indoor climate control layout from an architectural layout. We use an existing schema for network-based space to represent space layouts [8]. In a network-based space layout, spatial relations between layout elements are explicitly modeled as a directed, weighted graph or network. Processing of certain operations involves tracing of this spatial relation network with graph algorithms to determine layout modifications.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. A survey of related work is included in Section 2. Network-based space layout concepts are reviewed in Section 3. Fundamental layout operations are defined in Section 4. Additional layout operations that are compositions of fundamental operations are introduced in Section 5. The implementation of fundamental and additional layout operations in an existing layout modeling system is described in Section 6. Section 7 presents an example of a layout operation expression. Open issues and future work are discussed in Section 8.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have defined a set of operations on network-based space layouts that support modeling of multiple, domain-specific views of buildings. Operations may be safely composed into expressions as each operation returns a spatially consistent layout. We have implemented these operations as extensions of an existing layout modeling system prototype. With a layout operation expression example we have shown the feasibility of automatically generating a security lighting layout from an architectural layout created in a BIM authoring system.Further layout operations are desirable to improve the expressiveness of an emerging space modeling language. The selection of layouts that include layout elements on a shortest path could be useful for indoor route planning applications. Current work aims to enhance modeling of multiple spatial abstractions of buildings with operations that derive spatial relations between layouts [64]. For example, whole spaces in different layouts may be related by containment or overlap relations. This would facilitate queries that involve the traversal of SRN’s of related layouts with graph algorithms. An example is the retrieval of detailed symbolic location data, such as ”the Library is located on the Ground Floor of the North Wing of the Main Building”, from a collection of layouts that model a pedestrian circulation space view.Maintaining the consistency of multiple space views is a relevant issue for future work. For example, when an architectural designer merges whole spaces in an architectural layout, dependent layouts that model other space views become inconsistent. This could be resolved by re-evaluating expressions that generate dependent layouts. However, this approach is inadequate for addressing roundtrip or iterative design scenarios [1]. For example, modification of luminaire locations by a lighting designer would need to be reflected in the architectural layout. Additional, ‘inverse’ layout operation expressions are desirable to reflect such changes in the architectural layout. Similarly, the definition of reusable layout operation expressions that model space views of specific domains appears promising. Expressions could be defined to generate layouts for artificial lighting, natural ventilation, access control, and so on. On the other hand, the generality of these expressions needs to be explored, for example, their potential to model space views for classes of buildings, such as office buildings or health facilities.