@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Computational based functional analysis of Bacillus phytases

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
13 Bacillus amyloliquefacienssequences having phytase activity are analysed for their physicochemical characters and structural analysis.All 13 Bacillus amyloliquefacienssequences found to be acidic and stable.These sequences are optimally effective in the pH range ubiquitous in the digestive tract of monogastric animals and thus are apt to be exploited as feed additives.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Bacillus species,Phytases,In silico characterization,Industrial applications,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Phytase is an enzyme which catalyzes the total hydrolysis of phytate to less phosphorylated myo-inositol derivatives and inorganic phosphate and digests the undigestable phytate part present in seeds and grains and therefore provides digestible phosphorus, calcium and other mineral nutrients. Phytases are frequently added to the feed of monogastric animals so that bioavailability of phytic acid-bound phosphate increases, ultimately enhancing the nutritional value of diets. The Bacillus phytase is very suitable to be used in animal feed because of its optimum pH with excellent thermal stability. Present study is aimed to perform an in silico comparative characterization and functional analysis of phytases from Bacillus amyloliquefaciens to explore physico-chemical properties using various bio-computational tools. All proteins are acidic and thermostable and can be used as suitable candidates in the feed industry.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Over the years the need for a phosphatase enzyme has escalated due to the complications being caused by phytic acid. Phytic acid (myo-inositol hexakisphosphate or phytate) is found in beans, seeds, nuts, grains, tubers, cereals, legumes, oilseeds and in certain fruits and vegetables like berries and green beans and is the principal storage form of phosphorus. It triggers weakened absorption of mineral ions like zinc, calcium, iron, magnesium and copper and also inhibits certain digestive enzymes like pepsin, trypsin and amylase that can lead to poor bone growth, short stature, rickets, narrow jaws, anemia, tooth decay and mental retardation in human beings. Phytic acid can severely hinder nutrient absorption by intestine (Lopez et al., 2002; Konietzny and Greiner, 2002; Kumar et al., 2010; Afinah et al., 2010)One such enzyme is phytase (myo-inositol hexakisphosphate phosphohydrolase) that hydrolyzes phosphate residues from phytic acid. It hydrolytically cleaves free bound phosphorus (inorganic and undigestable form) from phytic acid molecule releasing phosphorus, calcium and magnesium cations (organic and digestable form). Phytase is a monomeric enzyme that has molecular mass between 40 to 70kDa (Konietzny and Greiner, 2002; Kumar et al., 2010; Afinah et al., 2010; Greiner and Konietzny, 2006).Phytase activity has been reported in various plant and animal tissues like in rice, maize, legume seeds, soybean, barley and in rat (intestine and liver) tissue. It is also found in numerous microorganisms like bacteria (Bacillus sp., Eschirichia coli, Pseudomonas sp.), fungi (Aspergillus sp., Rhizopus sp., Penicillium sp.), yeast (Saccharomyces sp., Candida sp.) and other related species (Konietzny and Greiner, 2002; Kumar et al., 2010; Afinah et al., 2010). There are several classes of phytase that are based on various factors like the site where hydrolytic activity is commenced which includes the 3-phytase that liberates P moiety at position C3 and 6 phytase that releases it at position C6 of the hexaphosphate ring. Another class is grounded on the basis of pH activity which comprises of histidine acid phosphatases that show optimum activity at pH 5 and alkaline phosphatases that indicate ideal activity at pH 8. Several other are the beta propeller phytase, purple acid phosphatases and the very rare protein tyrosine phosphatase like phytases (Kumar et al., 2010; Greiner and Konietzny, 2006; Kerovuo et al., 1998).Phytase has been recognized to show tremendous potential in the industry. Phytase is employed in bakery as a bread making improver to refine its volume, softness and shape. Phytase enhances digestibility of phytate associated phosphorus and is thus applied in the animal feed. It increases phosphorus activity and so exercised as a transgenic crop. Due to its degrading property it is utilized in pulp and paper industry and as an antioxidant in food products to increase the nutritional value, flavour, colour and to decrease microbial spoilage. It also has an application as a therapeutic against cancer, heart related and dental problems. Technical improvements have also been observed in corn wet milling and fractionation of cereal bran (Kumar et al., 2010; Afinah et al., 2010; Greiner and Konietzny, 2006) Different classes and sources of phytase show diverse properties and thus show a range of functions in the industry.This study incorporates the use of various bio-computational tools to perform the structural and functional analysis of Bacillus amyloliquefaciens containing the phytase enzyme in order to decipher its inimitable properties concomitant to its industrial application.Swiss prot/UniProtKB server that is the knowledge base of SIB (Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics) and main proteomics based resource server expasy (expert protein analysis system) (Artimo et al., 2012; Apweiler et al., 2004) (http://www.expasy.org/) were used for protein sequence retrieval of Bacillus(gram positive, rod shaped bacteria) species having phytase activity.Further full length phytase protein sequences were retrieved for in silico study. Total 13 proteins sequences of different strains of Bacillus amyloliquefaciens were downloaded in FASTA format for computational investigation.A java based Akriti v1.0 software (www.insilicogenomics.in/mfpcalc/mfpcalc.html) server was used to calculate the physicochemical properties of retrieved sequences. Amino acid composition, pI or isoelectric point (pH at which net charge is zero), extinction coefficient (quantitative study of protein–protein and protein–ligand interactions), instability index (stability of proteins), aliphatic index (relative volume of protein occupied by aliphatic side chains), GRAVY or Grand Average Hydropathy (sum of all hydropathy values of all amino acids divided by number of residues in a sequence) were analyzed using Akriti v1.0 software.Secondary structure consisting secondary elements i.e. helix, turn and sheet were predicted using PSIPRED and CFSSP: Chou and Fasman Secondary Structure Prediction server (http://www.biogem.org/cgi-bin/cho-fas.pl) (McGuffin et al., 2000; Kumar, 2013). These secondary structures combine to form the tertiary (3D) structure that determines the function of a protein.For functional analysis CYS_REC was used to identify position of cystine and compute most probable SS bond pattern of pairs in protein (Hooda, 2011). The set of conserved amino acid residues were analyzed using Motif search tool (http://www.genome.jp/tools/motif/) (Singh et al., 2012) and membrane and soluble proteins were distinguished using SOSUI server that was able to predict transmembrane helices from amino acid sequences with high precision and accuracy (Suwa et al., 2011).For structural classification CATH server was used (http://www.biochem.ucl.ac.uk/bsm/cath). CATH database groups the protein structures on the basis of similarity or a common evolutionary origin using manual curation along with certain algorithms. This classification procedure includes the distribution of proteins into four groups that are (C) lass, (A)rchitecture, (T)opology and (H)omologous family. (Sillitoe et al., 2013).Total 10 phytase sequences were retrieved for different Bacillus species (Bacillus methylotrophicus, Bacillus siamensis, Bacillus subtilis, Bacillus licheniformis, Bacillus pseudomycoides, Bacillus mycoides, Bacillus cereus, Bacillus atrophaeus, Bacillus coagulans) along with B. amyloliquefaciens. After phylogenetic classification it has been investigated that B. amyloliquefaciensis closer to B. methylotrophicus, B. siamensis, B. subtilis, B. licheniformis, B. pseudomycoides, B. mycoides, B. atrophaeus, B. coagulans and differ with B. cereus(Fig. 1). Based on the imminence to other strains and the industrial prominence of B. amyloliquefaciens, 13 full length phytase proteins were retrieved for different strains of B. amyloliquefaciens that were available in uniprot with equal number of amino acids (length) to show homogeneity in our study (Table 1). To check the evolutionary relationship and diversity of selected proteins multiple sequence analysis and tree construction were performed. Further these sequences were used for physiochemical characterization to identify the unique properties that makes them suitable to be used as feed additives and to select the most suitable candidate (Schallmey et al., 2004). The phylogeny of selected 13 strains of B. amyloliquefaciens were shown in Fig. 2. This phylogeny indicates that there are only two major groups in 13 strains of B. amyloliquefaciens(Fig. 2).The physicochemical properties details were reported in Table 2that includes theoretical isoelectric point (pI), extinction coefficient, instability index, aliphatic index and GRAVY. The isoelectric point values lie between the range of 4–6 that shows the proteins are acidic. If instability index is greater than 40 it indicates that protein is unstable. Based on analysis it has been found that all proteins are stable. The aliphatic index of high range indicating the proteins are thermostable. Lower range of GRAVY shows that the proteins have better interaction with water. Extinction coefficient displays how much light is absorbed by protein at a particular wavelength. The acidic and stable nature of these enzymes allows them to survive the pH range in digestive tract of monogastric animals (Singh et al., 2011). Several studies have postulated the evidence by elevating the functioning of bacterial phytases using various experimental techniques to exhibit fold enhancement of bacterial phytases in providing gastric stability (Igbasan et al., 2000; Garrett et al., 2004; Vijayaraghavan et al., 2013).Fig. 3shows a graphical representation of amino acid composition of selected sequences. The X-axis represents the amino acid composition (%) while the Y-axis represents the selected sequences and coloured bars represent the different amino acids. It is seen that there are almost similar variations in amino acid compositions of all the sequences that shows their similar functioning and hydrolyse the same substrate (Salman et al., 2010).Based on secondary arrangement (helices, turns and sheets) it has been observed that phytase proteins were classified in 2 major groups helix and sheet (Fig 4and Table 3). This illustration has been supported by various structural findings of phytases from different microorganisms. Crystal structure assessments have uncovered a variety of structural parameters for a number of phytase (Kostrewa et al., 1997; Lim et al., 2000).Disulfide bonds in proteins are formed by oxidation of the thiol groups of cystine residues (Trivedi et al., 2009) and are advantageous in providing stability to the protein (Cheng et al., 2007). In all sequences, cystine residue is present at position 19 that is not s–s bounded that hinders the stability of these sequences. There are two motifs present in sequences with number of motifs 10, minimum width 100 and maximum width 150 (Fig 5and Table 4). Conserved sequences in these motifs can be applied for designing certain degenerate primers in order to isolate and identify the type and class of phytases (Kumar et al., 2012). All sequences are found to be soluble in nature.The structural analysis of β-propeller phytase reveals that the domain consists of six blades (PDB IDs:1POO; 2POO; 1QLG; 1H6L; 1CVM) where each blade is a highly curved sheet made up of four to five antiparallel β-strands that are topologically connected to each other (Fig 6). The fourth strand of each blade is connected across the top of the molecule to the first strand of the next blade. Hydrophobic interactions are present between the six blades which are aligned along the shaft of the propeller (diverse central channel filled with water molecules). Hydrophobic Interactions are essential for protein folding that helps in sustaining the biological activity of the protein by subsiding the surface area of protein. It also provides stabilization of dimer formation (Zhang et al., 2011; Ha et al., 2000; Delboni et al., 1995).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
