@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
DNA entropy reveals a significant difference in complexity between housekeeping and tissue specific gene promoters

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
DNA complexity can be quantified using entropy profiles.Gene promoter complexity is influenced by non-random patterns in the DNA sequence.Housekeeping (HK) and tissue specific (TS) gene promoters have different DNA entropy profiles.TS promoters have lower DNA entropies than HK promoters.Lower entropies of TS promoters can be explained by higher densities of regulatory elements.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundThe complexity of DNA can be quantified using estimates of entropy. Variation in DNA complexity is expected between the promoters of genes with different transcriptional mechanisms; namely housekeeping (HK) and tissue specific (TS). The former are transcribed constitutively to maintain general cellular functions, and the latter are transcribed in restricted tissue and cells types for specific molecular events. It is known that promoter features in the human genome are related to tissue specificity, but this has been difficult to quantify on a genomic scale. If entropy effectively quantifies DNA complexity, calculating the entropies of HK and TS gene promoters as profiles may reveal significant differences.ResultsEntropy profiles were calculated for a total dataset of 12,003 human gene promoters and for 501 housekeeping (HK) and 587 tissue specific (TS) human gene promoters. The mean profiles show the TS promoters have a significantly lower entropy (p<2.2e−16) than HK gene promoters. The entropy distributions for the 3 datasets show that promoter entropies could be used to identify novel HK genes.ConclusionFunctional features comprise DNA sequence patterns that are non-random and hence they have lower entropies. The lower entropy of TS gene promoters can be explained by a higher density of positive and negative regulatory elements, required for genes with complex spatial and temporary expression.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the human genome 5% of the DNA is estimated to be under selection pressure (Waterston et al., 2002), but only 1.5% is estimated to be coding (Lander et al., 2001). This indicates that elements of non-coding DNA are under selection pressure, and by implication have functional roles (Mu et al., 2011). Gene promoters comprise non-coding DNA but include large numbers of sequence features, including binding sites for transcription factors (TFs) that contribute to the regulation of gene expression. An increasing understanding of the importance of non-coding DNA has led to many methods being applied to the problem of differentiating functional and non-functional sites within them. Estimating the entropy of DNA, using concepts from the field of information theory (Schneider 2010), is one way in which genomic elements have been analysed.Definitions of entropy, including topological, Shannon, linguistic complexity and lossless compression have been applied to genomic regions from diverse genomes with varying results (Table 1). Five studies, applying definitions of topological entropy (Karamanos et al., 2006), Shannon entropy (Mantegna et al., 1995; Stanley et al., 1999), linguistic complexity (Troyanskaya et al., 2002) and lossless compression (Liu et al., 2008), conclude that non-coding DNA has a lower entropy than coding DNA. In contrast, 3 studies, one applying Shannon entropy (Mazaheri et al., 2010) and a 2 applying topological entropy (Koslicki 2011; Jin et al., 2014) conclude that non-coding DNA has higher entropy than coding DNA. The variation likely results from the differing and often very small DNA datasets used (Table 1), which for some analyses reflects the emphasis on the theoretical entropy calculation rather than its biological application. In addition some studies have defined noncoding DNA as intergenic DNA only (e.g., Mazaheri et al., 2010) or intronic DNA only (Koslicki 2011; Jin et al., 2014), whilst others have included both types of DNA as non-coding (Karamanos et al., 2006). If differences in entropies between different types of DNA are small, then it is not surprising that studies using different datasets and definitions have reached different conclusions.Two recent studies both apply definitions of topological entropy to systematic random samples of genes from all chromosomes in the human genome, and conclude that introns have a higher entropy than exons (Koslicki 2011; Jin et al., 2014). This can be explained by the fact that entropy is a measure of the randomness of a DNA sequence, and introns are expected to be more random as they have fewer functional signals and are less conserved than exons (Koslicki 2011; Jin et al., 2014). It has also been concluded that exons have a higher entropy than gene promoters (Jin et al., 2014), which could reflect the presence of multiple functional elements within the promoters which are under selection pressure. These include transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) characterised by short sequence motifs that are highly degenerate. The TFBSs are bound cooperatively by TFs to form cis-regulatory modules (CRMs), which play a key role in gene regulation (Hardison and Taylor 2012). TFBSs represent DNA sequence patterns within promoters and hence have lower entropies, as observed in Escherichia coli (Krishnamachari et al., 2004).In addition to work comparing non-coding and coding DNA entropies, entropies have been used to create profiles for DNA sequence windows for complete chromosomes and genomes. Entropy profiles, based on linguistic complexity, created for 16 prokaryotic genomes, revealed differences in complexity between CG and AT rich genomes (Troyanskaya et al., 2002). Average mutual information (AMI) profiles created for chromosomes from eukaryotes, showed that such profiles are effective species signatures (Bauer et al., 2008). Topological entropy profiles calculated for Saccharomyces cerevisiae also proved to be effective in quantifying the level of repetitive sequences in regions of DNA (Crochemore and Verin 1999). In additional work, entropy profiles based on the theory of chaotic dynamics (Jeffrey, 1990) have been shown to quantify local DNA signatures (Dufraigne et al., 2005). This method was successfully applied to the identification of horizontal gene transfers between prokaryotic species (Dufraigne et al., 2005). In further work, profiles using Renyi entropies (a generalized of the Shannon entropy) were created and applied them to the identification of statistical significant of DNA sequence motifs, including TFBSs in prokaryotic gene promoters (Vinga and Almeida 2007).As discussed, work has shown that entropy profiles can effectively measure both the complexity of local DNA sequences and act as global species signatures. In the current work the effectiveness of entropy profiles for measuring differences in DNA sequences at a level intermediate of the two is addressed. A topological definition of entropy is used to identify global sequence signatures in the promoters of genes with different transcriptional mechanisms in the human genome. Genes can be transcribed constitutively to maintain general cellular functions or be transcribed in restricted tissue and cells types for specific molecular events (Butte et al., 2001; Chang et al., 2011). The former are termed housekeeping genes (HK) and the latter tissue specific genes (TS). It is known that promoter features are related to tissue specificity (Schug et al., 2005; Farré et al., 2007), with TS genes having higher levels of nucleosome occupancy and higher densities of TFBSs (She et al., 2009). Such features facilitate the close transcriptional control required for expression in specific cell or tissue types. The hypothesis for the current work is that promoter features will give rise to different levels of DNA complexity that can be measured using entropy profiles. The identification of differences in DNA complexity of HK and TS gene promoters would be a first step in classifying additional genes to these two important transcriptional classes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
