@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
All-atomic molecular dynamic studies of human CDK8: Insight into the A-loop, point mutations and binding with its partner CycC

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
CDK8 structure gradually loses two helical structures during the MD simulations.Hydrogen bond occupation of the CDK8 A-loop increases and then stays stable.The A-loop residues exhibit three changes: increasing, decreasing, and stable.CDK8 D173A has the highest average potential energy, while T196D has the lowest.Binding energy of CDK8 and CycC was calculated by MM/PBSA and MM/GBSA methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
CDK8,CycC,Molecular dynamics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The Mediator, a conserved multisubunit protein complex in eukaryotic organisms, regulates gene expression by bridging sequence-specific DNA-binding transcription factors to the general RNA polymerase II machinery. In yeast, Mediator complex is organized in three core modules (head, middle and tail) and a separable ‘CDK8 submodule’ consisting of four subunits including Cyclin-dependent kinase CDK8 (CDK8), Cyclin C (CycC), MED12, and MED13. The 3-D structure of human CDK8–CycC complex has been recently experimentally determined. To take advantage of this structure and the improved theoretical calculation methods, we have performed molecular dynamic simulations to study dynamics of CDK8 and two CDK8 point mutations (D173A and D189N), which have been identified in human cancers, with and without full length of the A-loop, as well as the binding between CDK8 and CycC. We found that CDK8 structure gradually loses two helical structures during the 50-ns molecular dynamic simulation, likely due to the presence of the full-length A-loop. In addition, our studies showed the hydrogen bond occupation of the CDK8 A-loop increases during the first 20-ns MD simulation and stays stable during the later 30-ns MD simulation. Four residues in the A-loop of CDK8 have high hydrogen bond occupation, while the rest residues have low or no hydrogen bond occupation. The hydrogen bond dynamic study of the A-loop residues exhibits three types of changes: increasing, decreasing, and stable. Furthermore, the 3-D structures of CDK8 point mutations D173A, D189N, T196A and T196D have been built by molecular modeling and further investigated by 50-ns molecular dynamic simulations. D173A has the highest average potential energy, while T196D has the lowest average potential energy, indicating that T196D is the most stable structure. Finally, we calculated theoretical binding energy of CDK8 and CycC by MM/PBSA and MM/GBSA methods, and the negative values obtained from both methods demonstrate stability of CDK8–CycC complex. Taken together, these analyses will improve our understanding of the exact functions of CDK8 and the interaction with its partner CycC.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) are critical regulators of cell-cycle progression and gene transcription, whose activities require association with their specific binding partners called cyclins. Because of the fundamental roles of CDKs in controlling cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis and dysregulation of these processes in human cancers, CDKs have been considered as attractive targets for development of novel anticancer drugs (Shapiro, 2006; Schwartz and Shah, 2005). Based on the sequence similarity, the human genome contains 21 genes encoding CDKs and five additional genes encoding a more distant group of proteins known as CDK-like (CDKL) kinases (Malumbres et al., 2009). Instead of directly regulating cell-cycle progression, CDK7, CDK8, and CDK9 are thought to play more important roles in regulating gene transcription compared to other CDKs (Fisher, 2005).CDK8 is particularly interesting because both CDK8 and its regulatory partner Cyclin C (CycC) are found to be either mutated or amplified in a variety of human cancers (Xu and Ji, 2011; Schiano et al., 2013). CDK8 and CycC are two subunits of the Mediator complex, and together with MED12 and MED13, these four subunits form the “CDK8 submodule” (Casamassimi and Napoli, 2007; Poss et al., 2013). Biochemical analyses have identified two distinct Mediator complexes: a “small” complex of over 20 polypeptides that activates transcription of polymerase II-dependent genes, and a “large” complex forms that is generally considered to represses transcription after the small complex is associated with the “CDK8 submodule” (Myers and Kornberg, 2000; Mittler et al., 2001; Naar et al., 2001; Bourbon et al., 2004; Malik and Roeder, 2005). The CDK8 submodule may suppress transcription by either directly blocking the interaction between the small Mediator complex and the RNA Pol II, or indirectly phosphorylating certain transcription factors or components of the general transcription machinery such as RNA polymerase II in yeast and human cyclin H (CycH) (Xu and Ji, 2011; Hengartner et al., 1998; Akoulitchev et al., 2000). The CDK8 module was postulated to regulate initiation and re-initiation of transcription (Knuesel et al., 2009). Interestingly, the CDK8 module can also positively regulate transcription (Galbraith et al., 2010). For example, CDK8 has been reported as a positive regulator of p53-activated gene transcription (Donner et al., 2007), as well as genes involved in the serum response network (Donner et al., 2010) and cellular response to hypoxia (Galbraith et al., 2013). CDK8 was identified as a potent oncogene in colon cancerogenesis, since CDK8 positively regulates β-catenin-dependent gene expression (Firestein et al., 2008; Morris et al., 2008; Firestein and Hahn, 2009). In addition, CDK8 was shown to promote the proliferation of melanoma cancer cells and the expression of CDK8 gene is up-regulated because of mH2A deletion in melanoma cancer cells (Kapoor et al., 2010). Depletion of CDK8 in CDK8-amplified colorectal cancer cells or CDK8-overexpressed melanoma cells potently blocked their proliferation, suggesting that gain of CDK8 drives tumorigenesis in these two types of cancers (Firestein et al., 2008; Kapoor et al., 2010).To understand the function of the CDK8–CycC complex, a 22-Å crystal structure of the human CDK8–CycC pair in complex with the inhibitor sorafenib has been recently determined by X-ray crystallography (Schneider et al., 2011). By comparing to other CDK-cyclin family members, including human CDK4-cyclin D (CycD), CDK9-cyclin T (CycT), CDK5-p25, CDK6-V-Cyclin (Herpesvirus saimiri Cyclin), CDK6/INK4s, CDK7, cyclin K (CycK), cyclin T (CycT)/TAT/TAR, and CycH, as well as the yeast CycC homologue SRB11 (for a detailed overview, see (Lolli, 2010)), the CDK8–CycC complex displays additional potential recognition surfaces for interactions, possibly for the recognition of MED12, MED13, or the substrates of CDK8 (Schneider et al., 2011).When examining the CDK8–CycC crystal structure, we noticed that the part of the structure containing 16 amino acids within the activation loop (or A-loop) of CDK8 was not experimentally determined. For full activation, most protein kinases require the phosphorylation of Thr, Ser, or Tyr residues within the A-loop, also known as the regulatory T-loop that contains the predicted residues for both ATP and cyclin binding. It is thought that the A-loop is flexible: without cyclin, the A-loop blocks the ATP binding site because the positions of several key amino acid residues are not optimal for ATP binding; in the presence of cyclin, however, two α helices change their positions to permit ATP binding (Lolli et al., 2004). Interestingly, two Asp residues (D173 and D189) are located within the A-loop of CDK8. This is important because D173A mutation causes loss of CDK8 kinase activity (kinase dead CDK8), and D189N has been reported in several types of human cancers (Akoulitchev et al., 2000; Firestein et al., 2008; Greenman et al., 2007). However, how these point mutants affect CDK8 activity or its binding with CycC remains unknown.With the continuously improved computation powers coupled with increased number of protein structures being solved experimentally (Zwier and Chong, 2010), computational methods, particularly simulation research, present an attractive and complementary approach to understand the molecular function and regulation of many proteins. Specifically, the new 22-Å crystal structure of the human CDK8–CycC complex has provided an opportunity for computational methods to better understand the function and dynamics of CDK8, CDK8 point mutations and the CDK8–CycC interactions. Proteins are highly dynamic, and are constantly switching between different conformations. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations can provide atomically detailed views of protein motions in vacuum or in solutions, sampling multiple timescales ranging from nanoseconds to milliseconds using supercomputing resources (Zwier and Chong, 2010).Therefore, to understand the A-loop and effect of this loop on overall structure of CDK8, we have employed molecular modeling approach to build the structure of human CDK8 with a complete A-loop, and used MD simulations to optimize and study dynamic changes of human CDK8 in solution. Additionally, we have generated theoretical structures of human CDK8 with the point mutations of either D173A or D189N to study the effects of the mutations on the A-loop and overall structures of CDK8. Furthermore, we have investigated physical interactions between CDK8 and CycC by yeast two-hybrid approach, and calculated binding energy between CDK8 and CycC by Molecular Mechanics/Poisson Boltzmann Surface Area (MM/PBSA) (Wang et al., 2001) and Molecular Mechanics/Generalized Born Surface Area (MM/GBSA) (Kollman et al., 2000) methods to understand the dynamics of CDK8–CycC complex.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
