@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Hierarchical closeness efficiently predicts disease genes in a directed signaling network

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Devised a novel structural measure called hierarchical closeness (HC) to rank disease risk of genes in a directed biological network.Hierarchical closeness outperforms the other well-known structural centrality measures, particularly for cancer, hereditary, immune, and neurodegenerative disease-related genes in a human signaling network.The set of HC-center genes are different from the hub genes with the largest interactions.Genes with relatively high hierarchical closeness are significantly likely to encode proteins in the extracellular matrix and receptor proteins in a human signaling network.All the findings were reproduced in a random Boolean network model.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hierarchical closeness,Disease gene prediction,Signaling network,Boolean network,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundMany structural centrality measures were proposed to predict putative disease genes on biological networks. Closeness is one of the best-known structural centrality measures, and its effectiveness for disease gene prediction on undirected biological networks has been frequently reported. However, it is not clear whether closeness is effective for disease gene prediction on directed biological networks such as signaling networks.ResultsIn this paper, we first show that closeness does not significantly outperform other well-known centrality measures such as Degree, Betweenness, and PageRank for disease gene prediction on a human signaling network. In addition, we observed that prediction accuracy by the closeness measure was worse than that by a reachability measure, but closeness could efficiently predict disease genes among a set of genes with the same reachability value. Based on this observation, we devised a novel structural measure, hierarchical closeness, by combining reachability and closeness such that all genes are first ranked by the degree of reachability and then the tied genes are further ranked by closeness. We discovered that hierarchical closeness outperforms other structural centrality measures in disease gene prediction. We also found that the set of highly ranked genes in terms of hierarchical closeness is clearly different from that of hub genes with high connectivity. More interestingly, these findings were consistently reproduced in a random Boolean network model. Finally, we found that genes with relatively high hierarchical closeness are significantly likely to encode proteins in the extracellular matrix and receptor proteins in a human signaling network, supporting the fact that half of all modern medicinal drugs target receptor-encoding genes.ConclusionTaken together, hierarchical closeness proposed in this study is a novel structural measure to efficiently predict putative disease genes in a directed signaling network.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Genes and their regulatory interactions form a large-scale cellular interaction network, and a multitude of studies have examined the structural characteristics of these networks for insight into the association between genes and diseases (Wu et al., 2008; Zhao and Li, 2010, 2012). For example, it was suggested that disease genes are often centrally distributed as hub nodes (i.e., nodes with high connectivity) on the network. Indeed, genes related to neurodegenerative disease (Panda et al., 2012), breast cancer (Chand and Alam, 2012), and hereditary disease (Xu and Li, 2006) were shown to have higher regulatory interactions than non-disease genes. In contrast, other studies reported that disease genes tend to be non-hubs (Barabasi et al., 2011; Goh et al., 2007). These conflicting results emphasize the necessity of investigating various other structural centrality measures. Closeness (Sabidussi, 1966), a structural centrality measure in which a node is defined as the inverse of the total sum of the shortest distance to all the other nodes in an undirected network, has been frequently used to predict the disease risk of genes on undirected biological networks with satisfactory performance (Erten et al., 2011; Gottlieb et al., 2011; Hsu et al., 2011; Wu et al., 2008). The closeness definition can be also slightly modified to be properly used in a directed network (Opsahl et al., 2010). However, it may not be useful for disease gene prediction on a directed biological network because it does not fully employ direction-related information on the network. In particular, we note that the functional importance of a node can be proportional to the reachability of the node, i.e., the subset of connected nodes from it, on a directed network. This concern led us to investigate the effectiveness of closeness on a directed biological network.In this study, we first observed that reachability is better than closeness in predicting putative disease genes on a signaling network, particularly for top-ranked genes. In addition, it was observed that a gene with higher closeness is more likely to a disease gene within a set of tied genes with the same reachability. Inspired by these observations, we proposed a novel structural measure, hierarchical closeness (HC), by combining reachability and closeness in such a way that the reachability first ranks all genes and then the closeness plays a role as a tie-breaking measure. To demonstrate the effectiveness of HC, we compared HC and four other well-known structural centrality measures, including Degree, Closeness, Betweenness, and PageRank, with respect to disease gene prediction on a human signaling network and discovered that HC outperforms all the other measures, particularly for cancer, hereditary, immune, and neurodegenerative disease-related genes. Interestingly, we also found that the set of highly ranked genes in terms of HC is clearly different from the set of hub genes. It was also interesting that all of these findings are general properties conserved in random networks. Finally, we found that genes with high HC values are significantly likely to encode proteins in the extracellular matrix and receptor proteins in a human signaling network, explaining why half of all modern medicinal drugs target receptor-encoding genes.In this work, we examine the topological distribution of genes in a human signaling network, which is a directed network, and a protein–protein interaction network, which is an undirected network. To this end, we selected 4350 disease genes extracted from OMIM database (Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man) in NCBI (Amberger et al., 2009, 2011) (see Table S1 in Supplementary Information) and mapped them into a human cellular signaling network composed of 1953 nodes and 8579 links obtained from the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (Kim et al., 2011) and a human protein–protein interaction network (HPPI) composed of 7535 nodes and 22,052 interactions (Goh et al., 2007). In particular, the KEGG signaling network published in (Kim et al., 2011) was constructed by integrating all the pathways of Homo sapiens (human) which can be represented by a directed graph: for example, pathways about metabolism, environmental information processing, cellular process, human disease, and so on. All the same identifiers of different pathways were merged into one node and redundant or neutral links were removed. In addition, an interaction from a gene/protein G to a group of genes/proteins {G1, G2,…, Gk} in the original KEGG pathways was transformed into k different interactions G→G1, G→G2,…, and G→Gkin the signaling network.Various studies have assessed the centrality of a node in a network, and here we briefly introduce four well-known structural centrality measures. It is assumed that a directed network G(V, A) is given.Degree: Degree has been applied in numerous previous studies to locate putative disease genes. The degree of a nodev∈Vis defined asCdeg⁡(v)=|{(v,w)|(v,w)∈A}|+|{(w,v)|(w,v)∈A}|.In other words, it denotes the number of in-coming or out-going interactions with respect to v.Closeness: Closeness of a node v (Sabidussi, 1966) is defined as follows:Cclo(ν)=1Σw∈V∖{ν}d(ν,w)where d(v, w) is the distance of the shortest path, if any, from v to w; otherwise, d(v, w) is specified as an infinite value. This measure has been successfully used to prioritize disease candidate genes in a protein–protein interaction network (Gottlieb et al., 2011; Hsu et al., 2011). The definition of Cclo(v) is not proper, though, in cases where there is a node j that is not reachable from v because Cclo(v) eventually becomes zero. Thus, we used a variant definition of closeness (Opsahl et al., 2010) as follows:Cclo−v(v)=1|V|−1Σw∈V∖{v}1d(v,w).Betweenness: Betweenness of a node v (Freeman, 1977) is defined asCbet(v)=Σs,t∈V∖{v},s≠tσst(v)σstwhere σstis the total number of the shortest paths from node s to node t and σst(v) is the number of those paths that pass through v. The betweenness centrality was successfully used to investigate the relationship between structure and robustness in gene networks of glioma for renal cancer tissues (Sun et al., 2012). Proteins with high betweenness centrality in the pathway network were suggested as drug targets (Breitkreutz et al., 2012).PageRank: PageRank (Page et al., 1999) is often used to predict disease genes (Chen et al., 2009; Winter et al., 2012). Assuming that there are n nodes, w1, w2, …, and wn, which have an interaction going to v, PageRank of a node v is given as follows:CPR(v)=(1−d)+d(CPR(w1)C(w1)+⋯+CPR(wn)C(wn))where d is a damping factor usually set to 0.85 and C(w) is the number of interactions going out from w.Although the original closeness measure partially denotes how centrally located a node is in a network, it does not explicitly include information about the range of other nodes that can be affected by the given node. In this regard, we propose hierarchical closeness of a node v, Chc(v), by combining reachability and closeness measures as follows:Chc(v)=NR(v)+Cclo−v(v)whereNR(v)∈[0,|V|−1]is the reachability of a node v defined byNR(v)=|{w∈V|∃apathfromvtow.}|.In other words, NR(v) represents the number of nodes in V that can be reachable from v. It can also represent the hierarchical position of a node in a network (Jothi et al., 2009; Mones et al., 2012). We note that if NR(v)=0, then Chc(v)=0 because Cclo−v(v) is 0. In cases where NR(v)>0, the reachability is a dominant factor because NR(v)≥1 but Cclo−v(v)<1. In other words, the first term indicates the level of the global hierarchy and the second term presents the level of the local centrality. Fig. 1illustrates the hierarchical closeness notion. As shown in that example, all nodes are first ranked by the reachability value, and the set of nodes with the same reachability are further ranked by the closeness. Based on this definition, genes with the highest HC values eventually represent a set of geometrically central genes in a directed network that can reach to most other genes by relatively short paths. In this study, we hypothesize that the higher the hierarchical closeness of a node is, the more functionally important the node is on the directed network.To evaluate network robustness we employed a Boolean network model, which has been intensively used to investigate the dynamics of various biological networks (Kauffman, 1969, 1993; Maki-Marttunen et al., 2013; Samaga and Klamt, 2013; Stern, 1999). A network is represented by a simple directed graph G(V, A) where V={v1, v2, …, vn} is a set of Boolean variables and A={(u, w)|u,} is a set of directed interactions. Then, a network state s(t)=(v1(t), v2(t), …, vn(t)) at time t transits to the next state s(t+1) according to a set of update rules F={f1, f2,…, fn}; i.e., s(t+1)=F(s(t)) where a logical conjunction or disjunction is randomly selected for fiwith a uniform probability distribution. For example, if a Boolean variable v has activation relationships with v1 and v2, and an inhibition relationship with v3, then the conjunction and disjunction update rules arev(t+1)=v1(t)∧v2(t)∧v¯3(t)andv(t+1)=v1(t)∨v2(t)∨v¯3(t), respectively. In the case of the conjunction, the value of v at time t+1 is 1 only if the values of v1, v2, and v3 at time t are 1, 1, and 0, respectively. With these update rules, the generated Boolean network will operate in the ordered regime. The network eventually converges to a fixed state, or a limit-cycle attractor. We denote the converged attractor starting from state s(t) as〈s(t)〉. The network is termed robust against the mutation at v if〈s〉is equal to〈sv¯〉wherev¯(=¬v)indicates the state perturbation of s subject to v. This concept to measure robustness has been widely used (Ciliberti et al., 2007; Kitano, 2004; Kwon and Cho, 2008). Similarly, we employed the fragility of a node v, γ(v), to represent the degree to which a node is not robust against the mutation subject to v as follows:γ(v)=1|S|Σs∈SI(〈s〉≠〈sv¯〉)where S is a set of whole network states (here, |S|=2n), and I(·) is an indicator function. A node is called a fragile node if the fragility is larger than zero. In this study, the dynamics of a human signaling network are compared with those of random networks. In this regard, we employed the Barabasi–Albert network-growth model11In this study, the Barabasi–Albert network-growth model was used to generate random networks with the scale-free property inducing a few hub nodes and many non-hub nodes, as observed in real signaling networks.(Barabasi and Albert, 1999) to generate random directed networks.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Closeness is one of the best-known structural centrality measures, and its effectiveness for disease gene prediction has frequently been reported for undirected biological networks. In this study, we investigated whether closeness is equally effective on a directed network. We first showed that closeness does not significantly outperform other well-known centrality measures such as Degree, Betweenness, and PageRank for disease gene prediction on a human signaling network, which is a directed network, compared with an undirected network. In addition, we observed that the prediction accuracy by closeness measure was worse than that by reachability, but closeness could efficiently predict disease genes among a set of genes with the same reachability degree. Therefore, we proposed a novel measure, hierarchical closeness, in which we combine reachability and closeness such that all genes are first ranked by the degree of reachability and then the tied genes are further ranked by closeness. We found that hierarchical closeness outperforms other structural centrality measures in disease gene prediction, particularly for cancer, hereditary, immune, and neurodegenerative disease-related genes. Moreover, the set of highly ranked genes in terms of hierarchical closeness is clearly different from the set of hub genes with relatively high connectivity. It is also interesting that these findings are consistently observed in random Boolean networks. Finally, we found that genes with relatively high hierarchical closeness are significantly likely to encode proteins in the extracellular matrix and receptor proteins in a human signaling network, consistent with the fact that half of all modern medicinal drugs target receptor-encoding genes. These results suggest that HC-center genes should be seriously considered as putative dynamically important genes in a directed biological network.None declared.