@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The intrinsic dynamics of Cse1p and Xpot elucidated by coarse-grained models

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The intrinsic dynamics of exportins were inherent from their cargo-bound and cargo-free conformations.Dominant modes were found to be relevant to the functional flexibilities and the binding affinities.ENM and FEA were complementary methods to study conformational dynamics of proteins.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Elastic Network Model,Finite Element Analysis,Karyopherin,Nucleocytoplasmic transport,Protein flexibility,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Cse1p and Xpot are two karyopherin proteins that transport the corresponding cargos during the nucleocytoplasmic transport. We utilized Elastic Network Model (ENM) and Finite Element Analysis (FEA) to study their conformational dynamics. These dynamics were interpreted by their intrinsic modes that played key roles in the flexibility of karyopherins, which further affected the binding affinities. The findings included that it was the karyopherin's versatile conformations composed of the same superhelices of HEAT repeats that produced different degrees of functional flexibilities. We presented evidence that these coarse-grained methods could help to elucidate the biological function behind the structures of the two karyopherins.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the central dogma of molecular biology, DNAs carrying the genetic information are replicated and transcribed into mRNAs in the nucleus. The RNAs and RNA-associated proteins are then transported to the cytoplasm for further protein synthesis by traveling through the nuclear pore complexes (NPCs), which are located on a double-membrane called the nuclear envelope (NE) (Allison, 2007). Consequently, the molecular trafficking between the nucleus and cytoplasm, known as nucleocytoplasmic transport (NCT), is one of the key cellular processes in the eukaryotic cells. During the process, the NPC functions as a virtual gate that not only allows the diffusion of water, sugars, ions and other small molecules, but also permits the passage of specific macromolecules (Wente and Rout, 2010). Different hypotheses for the working mechanism of the permeability of NPC have been proposed, such as the hydrogel-like model (Frey et al., 2006), the reduction of dimensionality model (Peters, 2005b), the polymer brush model (Lim et al., 2007), and the trees and shrubs model (Yamada et al., 2010). These models share a central feature that the FG-Nups (Phenylalanine and Glycine repeats-Nucleoporins) of NPC plays a significant role by forming a filament barrier that prevents the penetration of macromolecules; nevertheless, specific transport factors/receptors help conquer the barrier by interacting with FG-Nups (Frey et al., 2006; Grunwald et al., 2011; Peters, 2005a; Rout et al., 2003; Routa et al., 2000; Timney et al., 2006). Most transport factors belong to the karyopherin-β family, and those that mediate nuclear import and nuclear export are termed importins and exportins respectively (Cook and Conti, 2010; Terry et al., 2007). In general, a cargo macromolecule directly interacts with a transport factor that has a mandatory transport signal; thus the whole complex is allowed to go through the NPC (Grünwald and Singer, 2012; Madrid and Weis, 2006). The transport signal for importins is nuclear localization sequences (NLSs), and the signal for exportins is nuclear export sequences (NESs).Over the past decade, structural studies of karyopherin proteins have given first-hand information on their biological functions (Conti et al., 2006; Cook et al., 2007; Cook and Conti, 2010; Fukuhara et al., 2004; Madrid and Weis, 2006; Mosammaparast and Pemberton, 2004). One of the important characteristics is that the karyopherins are likely to have some degrees of flexibility, which are embedded in the superhelices of HEAT repeats. This functional flexibility therefore enables the karyopherins to interact with partners in different scenarios, and results in conformational changes induced by cargo bindings. For example, Cse1p and Xpot are two of the transport factors that shuttle specific cargos from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. The conformation of cargo-free Cse1p is more closed than the cargo-bound Cse1p; however, the cargo-free Xpot has a rather open conformation as compared with the cargo-bound state (Cook and Conti, 2010).When the conformations of a protein are involved in the biological function of the protein, normal mode analysis (NMA) is one of the useful computational techniques for studying its dynamics. NMA was introduced to structural biology three decades ago to investigate the harmonic fluctuations of a protein around its equilibrium state based on chosen empirical potential functions (Brooks and Karplus, 1983; Go et al., 1983). The main idea was to decompose the equilibrium dynamics of a macromolecule into a set of independent normal modes. Later a coarse-grained NMA, now termed Elastic Network Model (ENM), was introduced where a protein is treated as a network of point masses connected to each other with linear springs (Tirion, 1996). Since then, a variety of network constructions have been reported (Atilgan et al., 2001; Haliloglu et al., 1997; Kurkcuoglu et al., 2009; Lu and Ma, 2008; Lyman et al., 2008; Moritsugu and Smith, 2007; Tama et al., 2000). Why has ENM-based NMA become one of the most successful methods in computational biology? In addition to the simplicity that an ENM has, the answer may directly lead to the robustness of its result to the global dynamics of macromolecules (Bahar et al., 2010b; Tama et al., 2006). Some studies showed that more than half of the global motions of 3800 known proteins can be approximately captured by at least their two lowest normal modes (Krebs et al., 2002; Suhre and Sanejouand, 2004). Moreover, these dominant modes are not sensitive to the detailed chemical information but to the overall structures (Bahar et al., 2010a,b; Ma, 2005).In a previous study (Hu and Kim, 2011), we generated possible pathways that illustrated the conformational transition of two exportins (Cse1p and Xpot) from the cargo-bound state to the cargo-free state. Cse1p transports importin alpha Kap60p and Xpot transports tRNA from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. The results showed the flexibility of exportins during the predicted transition. The objective of the present study is further to investigate the correlation between the native conformations of the exportins and their functional flexibilities. We want to know if there are normal modes that coordinate transport factors, Rans, and cargo molecules.In the present study, we investigated two cases Cse1p and Xpot. Since both exportins showed distinguished conformational changes during the NCT, we speculated that their native structures might have contributions to the flexibility, which affects the transport mechanism. Therefore, the first case was to characterize the normal modes of cargo-bound conformation and cargo-free conformation of the exportins. The other case was the effect of the binding of RanGTP on exportins. Studies have shown that the RanGTP has to be present in the cargo-bound state of transport factors. The binding of RanGTP on the karyopherins has impacts on the large conformational changes and local allosteric effects (Cook and Conti, 2010). We wanted to know if the binding would change the flexibility of exportins that produces conformational changes. Consequently, ENMs were constructed on the binary complex of exportins and RanGTP (excluding cargos).In addition to ENM-based NMA, we also attempted to study the mechanical properties of exportins. Therefore, Finite Element Analysis (FEA) was utilized in this study. FEA is a mature, broadly applied engineering technique in many fields, such as solid and structural mechanics, and thermo/fluid dynamics. Recently, its application has been extended to biological science, such as tissue and cell mechanics (Kaazempur-Mofrad et al., 2003) and protein mechanics (Bao, 2009; Tang et al., 2006; White and Bauer, 2004; Wolf and Mofrad, 2008). In particular, FEA has similar utility to NMA for calculating the normal modes of macromolecules (Bathe, 2008). The use of FEA in this research provided insights into the exportins by allowing us to know their mechanical responses such as strain/stress distribution.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
