@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A quantitative approach for assessment of creativity in product design

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Empirically examined the correlation coefficient between the product design process and the creativity of design outcome.Developed a rigorous and quantitative method to measure creativity in product design.Established a standard assessment of creativity in product design for both industry and academia.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Creativity,Quantitative assessment,Design process,Product design,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Most of the assessment of creativity in product design is based on the outcome, not the design process from which the creative ideas are derived. In this paper, we revealed the correlation coefficient of 20 factors critical in the product design process and the quality of design creativity via investigation of the design processes and outcomes of 30 senior student designers. Six closely related factors were identified as variables to calculate the design creativity. An assessment formula was proposed: the corresponding correlation coefficient is the weight factor of each variable, and the sum represents the design creativity degree. Our quantitative approach can improve the validity and reliability of assessment of creativity in product design.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
One of the most important criteria for the quality of performance in design is the creativity applied to the product [19]. Many researchers have developed methods to assess the creativity of product design [27,19,20,51]. However, these subjective and qualitative judgments, in relation to the traditional measurement of creativity, have proved to have insufficient validity and reliability [16]. In most traditional product design studios, assessment of design creativity is based on consensual agreement among evaluators. Aside from the issue of subjective judgment, the selection of appropriate evaluators is a great challenge. Expert judges are difficult to find, and they may develop rater fatigue after a certain number of ratings. In academia, the traditional way that teachers assess creativity has often relied on the assessors’ subjective judgment along with a tacit understanding of what is creative. Commonly, there are not enough raters involved in one class, which makes the practice inappropriate from a quality assurance perspective [57,58]. The students may argue that the teacher cannot recognize their creative efforts. Hence, it is urgently needed to build an objective and unified standard for assessment of creativity in design so that the validity, reliability and applicability of assessment can be improved.Furthermore, creativity is more likely to emerge from the design process, in what is often characterized by the occurrence of a significant event, a ‘creative leap’ [27]. However, to date, evaluators of creativity are not always well informed of how a design developed, or they are apathetic about the extent to which a final outcome reflects the reasoning of the designer throughout the design process [16]. In other words, most of the assessment of creativity in design is based on the design outcome instead of the design process [26,52]. In recent years, computational creativity has provided a computational perspective on human creativity, but the notion of evaluation is still based on the judgment of whether an idea or artifact is creative or not [60]. The existing method for assessing creativity in design is insufficient, without consideration of the design process.To address these issues, the purposes of this research were to:•Investigate the product design process, and consider it as an evaluation criterion in assessment of creativity in product design.Reveal the correlation between the quality of design creativity and the product design process.Propose a quantitative approach to assess creativity in product design, in order to provide a rigorous method and tackle the constraint of subjective opinions of experts.In order to achieve these goals, the methodology in this paper was divided into four parts. First of all, stages and steps in the product design process were identified based on a literature review, and the creativity-related factors in the design process were summarized according to previous endeavors in the literature. Second, 30 design-cases were collected and the verbal protocols were analyzed based on the above-mentioned factors of the design process. Third, the quality of design-creativity of the 30 cases was evaluated by eight experts using the Consensual Assessment Technique. Last, Statistical analysis were employed to calculate the correlation coefficients of all the factors in the product design process and the quality of design creativity. Based on this analysis, an assessment formula was proposed: the corresponding correlation coefficient is the weight factor of each variable, and the sum represents an estimate of the design creativity. Moreover, another experiment was conducted for the evaluation. The result proved that our quantitative approach can reflect the relationships between the crucial factors of the design process and the quality of creative performance. From this, we now believe that this objective method can improve the validity and reliability of assessment of creativity in product design.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we looked at previous studies for understanding creativity in product design, and assessment of creativity. Our methodology is explained in detail in Section 3. In Section 4, we describe our experiment, including the participants, the procedure, the data analysis, and the representation of our approach for the assessment of creativity. We conclude, in Section 5, with a discussion of the potential implications of our approach, and the limitations as well.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
