@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Genome-wide identification and predictive modeling of lincRNAs polyadenylation in cancer genome

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Investigate the distribution of PASs respect to the lincRNA.Acquire the distribution of lincRNA PAS in normal and cancer tissues.Get the motifs surrounding lincRNA of normal and cancer tissues.Propose a SVM-based lincRNA PASs identification method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Long intervening noncoding RNA,Polyadenylation sites,Support vector machine,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) play essential regulatory roles in the human cancer genome. Many identified lncRNAs are transcribed by RNA polymerase II in which they are polyadenylated, whereby the long intervening noncoding RNAs (lincRNAs) have been widely used for the researches of lncRNAs. To date, the mechanism of lincRNAs polyadenylation related to cancer is rarely fully understood yet. In this paper, first we reported a comprehensive map of global lincRNAs polyadenylation sites (PASs) in five human cancer genomes; second we proposed a grouping method based on the pattern of genes expression and the manner of alternative polyadenylation (APA); third we investigated the distribution of motifs surrounding PASs. Our analysis reveals that about 70% of PASs are located in the sense strand of lincRNAs. Also more than 90% PASs in the antisense strand of lincRNAs are located in the intron regions. In addition, around 40% of lincRNA genes with PASs has APA sites. Four obvious motifs i.e., AATAAA, TTTTTTTT, CCAGSCTGG, and RGYRYRGTGG were detected in the sequences surrounding PASs in the normal and cancer tissues. Furthermore, a novel algorithm was proposed to recognize the lincRNAs PASs of tumor tissues based on support vector machine (SVM). The algorithm can achieve the accuracies up to 96.55% and 89.48% for identification the tumor lincRNAs PASs from the non-polyadenylation sites and the non-lincRNA PASs, respectively.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The abnormal regulation of genes expression plays a significant role in triggering cancer (Hanahan and Weinberg, 2011). Recent efforts have uncovered a vast number of novel non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs), which generate transcripts but do not code the functional proteins (Wang and Chang, 2011). However, they impact multiple major biological processes including development, differentiation, and metabolism (Flintoft, 2013). Plenty of attentions has been drawn to the ncRNAs in cancer genome research (Cao et al., 2013; Gibb et al., 2011; Qi and Du, 2012). In contrast to the highly conserved small ncRNAs, long ncRNAs (lncRNAs), a new kind of ncRNAs with molecules greater than 200nt in length is poorly conserved and their expression mechanisms are not fully understood so far (Batista and Chang, 2013; Wang and Chang, 2011). Furthermore, many lncRNAs are specifically associated with certain cancer, such as MALAT1, HOTAIR, and HULC genes (Batista and Chang, 2013; Gibb et al., 2011; Prensner and Chinnaiyan, 2011).The majority of lncRNAs is transcribed by RNA polymerase II, which means that most lncRNAs are always polyadenylated, as almost all mRNAs do (Millevoi and Vagner, 2010; Ulitsky and Bartel, 2013; Zhao et al., 1999). Polyadenylation is an essential step in the RNAs maturation process (Andreassi and Riccio, 2009; Tian and Graber, 2012). Recent efforts have uncovered that alternative polyadenylation (APA), which can generate many different transcripts for a given gene, is prominent in human genome (Di Giammartino et al., 2011; Lutz and Moreira, 2011; Ulitsky and Bartel, 2013). The APA can produce truncated RNA outcome, influence transcript stability, alter translation efficiency and affect transcript export (Ozsolak et al., 2010; Shi, 2012; Tian and Manley, 2013). Many important oncogenes such as p53 and CCND1 are known to have different polyadenylation sites (PASs) in normal and cancer tissues (Lin et al., 2012). A related emerging explanation in cancer biology is that the shorter isoforms have higher translational efficiency than the long ones (Lutz and Moreira, 2011). Comparison studies of the expression level of polyadenylated and non-polyadenylated mRNAs in human normal and cancer tissue have demonstrated that polyadenylation transcripts are associated with the cancer development (Zhao et al., 2013).The long intervening noncoding RNAs (lincRNAs), which lie between two genes, have been widely used for researches on lncRNAs (Ulitsky and Bartel, 2013). Thereby, it is clear that the analyses of lincRNAs could eliminate the influence caused by the overlap with other type of genes. To date, however, the roles and mechanisms of lincRNAs polyadenylation in tumors are rarely fully understood yet.In this study, we reported on the genome-wide identification of lincRNAs PASs in five normal and tumor tissues. At first, we mapped the lincRNAs PASs to the human genome and annotated them based on their location with respect to the lincRNA genes. Then, we performed a de novo search for motifs near lincRNAs PASs. More important, to identify tumor specific PASs, we proposed a novel support vector machine based method with weighted degree string kernel.The annotated lincRNAs data were downloaded from the UCSC genome browser tables (Meyer et al., 2013). We totally got 11,904 transcripts grouped into 7114 gene loci. The original direct RNA sequence (DRS) reads containing PASs results were downloaded from the xPAD database (Lin et al., 2012), a public resource containing PASs of five normal tissues, i.e. breast, colon, kidney, liver, and lung, as well as their corresponding tumor ones.Because PASs vary by a few nucleotides in a given isoform (at most 24bp), we used the snow-ball method to define PASs (Hoque et al., 2013). We first aggregated the reads whose distances to the neighbors are less than 24bp into one cluster. In order to determine the locations of PASs, more attention should be paid on the clusters whose length is more than 24bp, and we needed to re-cluster them and take the 3′-most location as PASs. After that, these clusters were mapped to the human genome. Then, the clusters were checked to find and eliminate those overlapped with other kinds of genes annotation. We counted the length of each cluster, and got the length distribution. In order to investigate PASs distribution of each tissue, a figure drawn by circos (Krzywinski et al., 2009) was depicted in Fig. 1to illustrate the distributions of lincRNAs PASs and lincRNA genes in cancer genome.The relative location of PASs with respect to lincRNAs was annotated using the home-made scripts. When a locus could be attributed to multiple possible annotations, the locus was assigned with a single annotation in the following priority order: 3′-exons (sense), internal-exons (sense), 5′-exons (sense), intron (sense), 5′-exons antisense, internal-exons antisense, 3′-exon antisense, and intron antisense.According to the pattern of genes expression and the manner of APA, we divided the mapped PASs into five categories: constitutive (occur in both normal and tumor tissues), normal APA (alternative only in normal), tumor APA (alternative only in tumor), normal gene specific (gene expression specific only in normal), and tumor gene specific (gene expression specific in tumor).Motifs of the PASs from all these five categories were analyzed using the following method. Motifs in regions flanking (±300nt) PASs of the lincRNAs were detected based on the DREME motif discovery algorithm (Bailey, 2011), followed by a stringent statistical assessment (E-value<1e–10) of the positional preference of the motifs, using CentriMo (Bailey and Machanick, 2012). The motifs corresponding to less than 5% of the sequences were eliminated because they occurred in a limited number of sequences. The detected motifs were assembled into larger motifs. We then scanned all the sequences with these larger motifs to acquire their distribution. For the normal and tumor tissues, we only considered the PASs that specifically occur in the corresponding tissue and those occur in both tissues were eliminated.To recognize the specifically polyadenylated lincRNA genes, we considered the lincRNA genes specifically expressed only in normal or cancer genome. Then, we reported the distribution of these specifically polyadenylated genes in the tumor and healthy tissues using Venn diagram.To recognize the tumor-specific lincRNA PASs from other sequences, we first constructed the model of the whole tumor-specific PASs (including tumor APA and tumor gene specific PAS). Given the fact that the mainly elements are located in the (−100, 100)nt region around polyA sites, we only considered sequences in this region. As a result, our dataset is a set of sequences with 201nt in length like the sequences used in (Hafez et al., 2013). For the positive training data, the elements at position 101 represents the PASs. We chose a flanking region of 100nt upstream and downstream of the mode of the PAS cluster due to previous studies that the main features are located in this region. After that, we eliminated sequences with ambiguous characters to construct the positive dataset. Finally, we got 3371 sequences in the dataset (tumor specific).The negative datasets composed of four parts: (1) a dataset with 21,710 sequences which do not contain PASs (non-PAS); (2) a dataset with 2171 PASs belonging to the protein-coding genes (non-lincRNA PAS); (3) a dataset with 4241 sequences that with lincRNA PASs occur at both normal and tumor tissues (constitutive); (4) a dataset with 2894 sequences surrounding the specifically expressed lincRNA PASs in normal tissues (normal specific). The first two datasets are available in previous reference (Hafez et al., 2013).Here, we built an SVM, using all of the information available in the sequences flanking PASs, by applying the weighted degree kernel with shifts (WD) (shogun toolbox; version 2.0.0) (Sonnenburg et al., 2010). At the beginning, we used the negative data which did not contain PASs to get the optimized parameters. The four parameters to be optimized are the misclassification penalty (C), the length of the substrings compared (order), the positional shifts around polyadenylation site for WD kernel (shift), and the length of flanking region around PAS. We tried different values for each of these parameters, while fixing the rest. To avoid over-fitting, at first, we randomly split our dataset into two: 20% used for model selection and the rest used for training and testing. These two sets were kept independent of each other. In the model selection phase, we applied the 2-fold cross validation, and selected parameters that achieved the highest area under ROC (C=1.5, order=9, shift=16). We then used the selected parameters in the training and testing phase by the 10-fold cross validation. After that, we used the selected parameters to the rest two negative datasets by the 10-fold cross validation.Furthermore, we performed the following classification using the same method, which includes separating the alternative PASs from normal tissue ones, separating the alternative PASs from the constructively ones, separating PASs of tumor specific expression genes from the normal specific ones, separating PASs of tumor specific expression genes from the constructively ones. At last, we performed the prediction on each organ using the above method on their datasets.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
