@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Identification of possible siRNA molecules for TDP43 mutants causing amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: In silico design and molecular dynamics study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Design of siRNAs for tdp43 mutants causing ALS disorder is proposed.Analysis initiated at the genetic level after identifying the respective codons for the mutants based on minimum free energy and probabilistic approach.Elucidation of target accessibility of the identified siRNA.Evaluation of the ability of siRNA to interact with target mRNA via molecular dynamics and thermo-physical analyses.To propose the best possible siRNA candidates for RNAi therapy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
tdp43,siRNA,Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis,RNAi,Molecular dynamics simulation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The DNA binding protein, TDP43 is a major protein involved in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and other neurological disorders such as frontotemporal dementia, Alzheimer disease, etc. In the present study, we have designed possible siRNAs for the glycine rich region of tardbp mutants causing ALS disorder based on a systematic theoretical approach including (i) identification of respective codons for all mutants (reported at the protein level) based on both minimum free energy and probabilistic approaches, (ii) rational design of siRNA, (iii) secondary structure analysis for the target accessibility of siRNA, (iii) determination of the ability of siRNA to interact with mRNA and the formation/stability of duplex via molecular dynamics study for a period of 15ns and (iv) characterization of mRNA–siRNA duplex stability based on thermo-physical analysis. The stable GC-rich siRNA expressed strong binding affinity towards mRNA and forms stable duplex in A-form. The linear dependence between the thermo-physical parameters such as Tm, GC content and binding free energy revealed the ability of the identified siRNAs to interact with mRNA in comparable to that of the experimentally reported siRNAs. Hence, this present study proposes few siRNAs as the possible gene silencing agents in RNAi therapy based on the in silico approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disorder that causes damage to both upper and lower motor neurons. The main pathological feature of most neurological disorders including ALS is the aggregation of insoluble ubiquitinated proteins (Wu et al., 2013). Familial type of ALS is observed in 10–15% of patients and sporadic type is observed in 90% of patients (Tsai et al., 2011). Several point mutations in various proteins such as Superoxide dismutase 1 (Rosen et al., 1993), TAR DNA binding protein (Sreedharan et al., 2008), Fused in Sarcoma (Kwiatkowski et al., 2009), Profilin 1 (Wu et al., 2013), Ubiquilin 2 (Deng et al., 2011) and Valosin containing protein (Johnson et al., 2010) cause ALS disease. The pathogenesis mechanism of ALS still remains unclear and also demands effective treatment (Tsai et al., 2011). Riluzole is the only drug used to control the glutamate level in ALS patients (Miller et al., 2007) although its role in ALS and proper target is not fully explored (Cheah et al., 2010).The TDP43 protein, which is encoded by tardbp gene, plays an important role in cellular processes such as transcription, splicing, stability regulation, etc. Mutations in TDP43 protein is reported to cause both familial as well as sporadic forms of ALS (Kabashi et al., 2008), specifically in ALS10 and also in several other neurological disorders like frontotemporal dementia, Alzheimer disease, etc. (Rutherford et al., 2008; van Eersel et al., 2011; Wilson et al., 2011). Hence, in the present study, tardbp gene is selected as the target for treating ALS by RNA interference (RNAi).Several mutations in TDP43 protein has been reported till date (Supplementary Table 1) and most of them are observed at the glycine rich region (formed by the amino acids between 216 and 414) of C-terminal suggesting the involvement of C-terminal domain in TDP43 proteinopathy (Guo et al., 2011). Recently, Pinto and co-workers has reported the Promine database (Pinto et al., 2010) which lists the disease associated mutations in human neurodegenerative disorders like ALS, including TDP43. Since, all of these biologically important mutations are located at the C-terminal glycine rich region, the present study focuses on the designing of small interfering RNA (siRNA) for this C-terminal glycine rich region.RNA interference is a gene knockdown process, in which small double stranded RNAs trigger the cleavage of its complementary mRNA via RNA Induced Silencing Complex (RISC) formation (Bernstein et al., 2001). RNAi is a natural phenomenon observed first in Caenorhabditis elegans, and involves in sequence specific gene silencing in eukaryotic cells. RNAi pathway includes the processing of double stranded RNA (dsRNA) substrate into small dsRNAs (micro RNAs or small interfering RNAs) by Dicer family proteins. With the target mRNA, micro RNA (miRNA) shows partial complementarity while small interfering RNA (siRNA) shows perfect complementarity. Such partial interaction of miRNA leads to translation inhibition while the perfect complementarity of siRNA leads to target cleavage (Hutvagner and Zamore, 2002).SiRNA is a duplex RNA having nucleotides of 21–28 bases in length and is generated by the processing of the long double stranded RNA by dicer enzyme. Elbashir et al. (2001) have reported that nucleotides of 21–22 bases in length degrade mRNA effectively (Elbashir et al., 2001). The guide strand of siRNA recognizes its complementary target with the help of Argonaute (ago) protein which leads to the cleavage of target mRNA via the formation of RISC (Meister and Tuschl, 2004). Ago protein is the main functional unit of RISC, which shows significant structural similarities across various species. Ago protein has four structural domains such as N-terminal, PAZ, PIWI and MID domains connected by linkers (Schirle and MacRae, 2012). The PIWI domain plays a major role in RNA cleavage as it possesses slicer activity similar to RNase H (Wang et al., 2009). Rational design of siRNA is gaining importance in RNAi or gene therapy due to the dramatic increase in its success rate (Boese et al., 2004). Several online tools have been developed for the rational designing of siRNAs and are siMAX (Schramm and Ramey, 2005), siDirect (Naito et al., 2004), Sfold (Ding et al., 2004), RNAxs (Tafer et al., 2008), etc. The efficiency of siRNA depends on several factors including RNA conformation, target secondary structure, three dimensional conformation, GC content and stability of mRNA–siRNA duplex (Pei and Tuschl, 2006).Recently, immunotherapy and gene therapy are being used to treat incurable diseases like plant viruses, hepatitis C virus, HIV, various types of cancers, Neurological disorders, etc. (Mahmood et al., 2008). The role of RNAi in understanding various immune cell modulations is also reported by Mao et al. (2007). RNAi therapy using siRNA is successfully applied to silence several genes involving in cancer (Gartel and Kandel, 2006) and is being clinically tested with no toxic effects (Petrocca and Lieberman, 2010). RNAi therapy for the treatment of ALS caused by SOD1 mutations has been developed by Xia et al. (2005) and studies by Ralph et al. have been successful in delaying the symptoms of ALS by 100% and extends the life by 80% (Ralph et al., 2005). SiRNAs have been successfully designed and tested against E2 and ns1 genes in Chikungunya virus and are found to be very efficient in inhibiting viral replication (Parashar et al., 2013). The rorc2 gene involved in autoimmune diseases has been suppressed using rationally designed siRNAs with 91.1% of silencing efficiency (Ganjalikhani Hakemi et al., 2013).Several siRNAs, successfully designed by Boudreau et al. (2011) have been proven to be effective in the treatment of Huntington’s disease (Boudreau et al., 2011). SiRNAs designed using Sfold showed significant RNAi activity and are successfully targeted for Hepatitis B (McCaffrey, 2009). Naito et al. have rationally designed and validated antiviral siRNA which showed efficient inhibition of HIV-1 (Naito et al., 2007). Herpes simplex virus (HSV), which infects higher mammals does not have an effective treatment yet. Nur et al. (2013) have designed potent siRNAs using multiple tools like siDirect, Dharmacon design centre genscript, etc. to successfully target this HSV (Nur et al., 2013). The three different siRNAs targeting at position 273, 772, 1237 designed using Sfold showed success in silencing the mice inhibin gene (Han et al., 2013). Helicoverpa armigera is an insect pest which negatively affects the gross yield in various crops like tomato, legumes and cotton, etc. Choudhary and Sahi (2011) have reported siRNAs designed using in silico siRNA designing tools to increase the resistance in plant against this insect pest (Choudhary and Sahi, 2011). The same plant pest has also been controlled by silencing hahr3 gene using siRNAs designed from Sfold (Xiong et al., 2013). The main causative agent of cervical cancer is human papillomaviruses (HPV) and more than 50% of cases show HPV16 variant. The expression of E6 and E7 oncoproteins in HPV16 causes malignancy. Three siRNAs designed using siDirect software have proven their potency in targeting E6 and E7 oncoproteins (Yamato et al., 2008). The disc1 gene disruption causes several major mental disorders like Schizophrenia, bipolar affective disorder and recurrent major depression. The successful knockdown of the disc1 gene using siRNA designed by siDirect tool is reported by Hattori et al. (2014).Molecular dynamics simulation finds application in understanding the nature of biomolecular system from the structure level to the functional level by exploring the time dependent conformational changes (Kalyaanamoorthy and Chen, 2013). The stability of mRNA–siRNA duplex is important for the target cleavage by siRNA and hence performing molecular dynamics simulations on these RNA duplexes would provide a clear insight on the stability and dynamics of mRNA–siRNA duplex at the atomic level (McDowell et al., 2007).Lack of information on ALS mechanism and therapeutic measures demands the need for exploring novel treatment methods like RNAi via siRNA. Thus, the present study proposes the design and identification of novel siRNA candidates for the silencing of TDP43 mutants using theoretical approaches including rational designing of siRNA and molecular dynamics simulation studies.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
