@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A large scale virtual screen of DprE1

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A large-scale (4 million compounds) virtual screen of an essential M. tb protein.The identification of promising lead compounds for the anti-tuberculosis compounds.Analysis of predicted binding affinity and empirical screening.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Virtual screen,Tuberculosis,DprE1,Inhibitors,Kirby–Bauer disc diffusion assay,Computational,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Tuberculosis continues to plague the world with the World Health Organization estimating that about one third of the world's population is infected. Due to the emergence of MDR and XDR strains of TB, the need for novel therapeutics has become increasing urgent. Herein we report the results of a virtual screen of 4.1 million compounds against a promising drug target, DrpE1. The virtual compounds were obtained from the Zinc docking site and screened using the molecular docking program, AutoDock Vina. The computational hits have led to the identification of several promising lead compounds.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Tuberculosis (TB) is an infectious disease caused by the pathogen, Mycobacterium tuberculosis. According to the Center for Disease Control and Prevention, approximately one third of the world's population is infected with tuberculosis. The World Health Organization places TB as the second most deadly infectious disease worldwide, claiming the lives of over 1.4 million in 2011. The standard of care for people infected with TB currently involves a cumbersome six month combination drug therapy regiment (Koul et al., 2011).The tuberculosis pandemic is becoming an evermore pertinent global health concern stemming from the lack of novel inhibitors, which has resulted in an increasing in the multitude of multi-drug resistant (MDR-TB) and extensively-drug resistant (XDR) strains (Dye and Williams, 2010; Rivers and Mancera, 2008). The treatment and repression of this disease is a challenge. One in ten antimicrobial resistant TB cases is ineffective against the frontline drug cocktails. Multi-drug resistant (MDR) and extensively-drug resistant (XDR) strains showcase the urgent need to develop new biological pathways.An enzyme, decaprenylphosphoryl-β-d-ribose 2′-epimerase (DprE1), has shown considerable promise as a drug target due to its vital importance in mycobacterial cell wall biosynthesis (Crellin et al., 2011; Carroll et al., 2011). Previous inhibition of DprE1 has induced cell death (Neres et al., 2012). The epimerization of DPR to DPA is initially catalyzed by the oxidoreductase DprE1 and subsequently by the reductase DprE2. The inhibition of DprE1 prevents the formation of DPA, which is an essential donor substrate for M. tuberculosis's cell wall biosynthesis. There is no known alternative pathway for the synthesis of DPA, thereby making DprE1 a promising drug target (Makarov et al., 2009). The enzyme can be partitioned into two distinct domains: an FAD binding domain and a substrate binding domain. The two domains are situated face to face to facilitate the interaction between the substrate and FAD. Benzothiazinones (BTZs) have displayed high levels of inhibition against not only the most common strains of tuberculosis, but also the MDR and XDR strains justifying its viability as a drug target. However, the activity of these BTZ compounds is directly linked to the formation of a covalent bond between a cysteine residue in the active site and nitroso group of the inhibitor (Makarov et al., 2009; Trefzer et al., 2010, 2012; Ribeiro et al., 2011). M. tb strains that do not contain this specific cysteine residue display a 16,000 fold decrease in activity toward this class of compounds. Since, there are currently strains of M. tuberculosis that do not contain this cysteine residue, it demonstrates a lack of essentialness of this residue making it likely that the most common strains of M. tb could quickly develop resistance to this class of compounds. In addition, these compounds (BTZ) class function as prodrugs. This is a second point where the pathogen could develop resistance to the new class of inhibitors, since prodrugs require metabolic activation before becoming active. M. tuberculosis has shown the ability to circumvent this strategy, as in the case of the drug resistance to isoniazid (Rivers and Mancera, 2008).DrpE1 was virtually screened against 4.1 million compounds from several diverse libraries using the molecular docking program, AutoDock Vina (Trott and Olson, 2010; Franco et al., 2013). The recently solved co-crystal structure of DrpE1 and CT319 (PDB ID: 4FDO) was adopted for the screening process (Batt et al., 2012). The co-crystal structure was utilized since previous studies have shown it to yield higher success rates than analogous unbound structures (McGovern and Shoichet, 2003). The structure was modified by removing the original inhibitor to create the appropriate cavity in the protein for molecular docking. A rigid model was used for the screen due to the large volume of compounds being screened. The PDB file was converted to a PDBQT file and hydrogens were added to the polar atoms using AutoDock Tools.First, we screened the full_nci_ALL_TAUTOMERS_2011 library of approximately 320,000 compounds on our local 64-core server. The other 3.8 million compounds were screened using the Ranger supercomputer at the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC). The enamine_052011_pdbqt, ChemBridge_FullLibrary2011, and asinex_newMay2011_fixedForVinaInDec libraries from the ZINC database were screened (Irwin and Shoichet, 2005; Irwin et al., 2012). These libraries were selected because they contain diverse set drug-like coumpounds. The enamine has a larger library consisting of compounds constructed from several different approaches, a ligand based approach and a receptor based approach, as well as a diverse small molecule library for random searches. ChemBridge's library focuses on small molecules that are characteristic of drug-like or lead-like compounds. Lastly, we screened the Asinex library, which consists of a diverse library of lead-like scaffolds, with 80% of the compounds in the library containing no previous literature reference. All three of these libraries were constructed with a medicinal or drug discovery ideology in which most compounds abide by Lipinski's rule of five. However, there are compounds in these libraries that do not obey Lipinski's rule of five. These exceptions were not discarded from our screen because a large percentage of anti-TB dugs violate this blueprint. Once the virtual screen was completed, we used some custom-written software to sort the compounds by binding affinity and bin the data by binding affinity, as shown in Fig. 1(Dave Toth, 2012).The top 500 compounds were ranked by binding affinity and were visually inspected using PyMOL (Schrodinger, 2010). No data has shown evidence of an allosteric site. Therefore, only compounds binding in the known active site were pursued further. The final list of compounds was narrowed down to a total of 41 compounds based on binding affinity, binding conformation, and structural diversity.Due to the highly infectious nature of M. tuberculosis, the known surrogate Mycobacterium smegmatis was used (Chaturvedi et al., 2007; Etienne et al., 2005). The 41 compounds selected from the prior inspection were subsequently empirically screened using a Kirby–Bauer disc diffusion assay. Kirby–Bauer assays tested the general inhibitory potential of each compound. Of the 41 compounds screened, six of the compounds presented activity (compounds 6, 10, 11, 27, 29, and 30). All six displayed zones of inhibition greater than 10mm. Compound 11 demonstrated the largest zone of inhibition, with a measurement of 30mm (Fig. 2). The six active compounds were subsequently assayed to determine the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC).Compound 11 had a predicted binding affinity of −12.3kcal/mol. Compound 11 (ZINC04879687). demonstrated the largest zone of inhibition in the Kirby–Bauer assays. Its predicted binding affinity was examined using PyMOL. The amide functional group on Compound 11 plays a vital role in its binding affinity to the active site of DprE1. The amine portion of the amide functional group forms hydrogen bonds with neighboring Tyrosine 60 via the hydroxyl group (2.4Å) and the Phenylalanine 320 residue via the backbone carbonyl group (2.5Å). The carbonyl group of the amide hydrogen bonds with Leucine 317 (3.4Å). The nitrogen of the FAD displays hydrogen bonding to the alcohol on Compound 11, with a hydrogen bonding distance of 2.2Å. The planar shape of the inhibitor allows the compounds to fit well into the elongated active site.Compound 31 had a predicted binding affinity of -11.4kcal/mol. Compound 31 (ZINC01636430) forms a hydrogen bond (3.4Å) between the carbonyl on the central ring of the inhibitor and glutamine 336. The second carbonyl on the same ring forms a dipole interaction with the amide portion of the FAD co-enzyme. The planar portion of the compounds sits similarly to the previously described Compound 11.Compound 27 had a predicated binding affinity of −12.3kcal/mol. Both carbonyls of the sulfamide group of Compound 27 (ZINC04276423) form a hydrogen bonding intereaction with a bonding distance of 3.3Å and 3.4Å. The carbonyl group of Compound 27 also forms a polar contact with the co-enzyme, FAD. The other carbonyl on the same inhibitor also forms a polar contact with Glutamine 336. Compound 27 has a similar motif as Compound 11 as it has a multi-fused aromatic ring system.Compound 29 had a predicted binding affinity of -11.5kcal/mol. Compound 29 (ZINC0162532) forms a dipole interaction (2.8Å and 3.3Å) with asparagine 385 with both oxygens on the periphery of the bicyclic ring. The second oxygen on that same ring forms a hydrogen bond (2.7Å) with the amino portion of Gln 336. The amino group of Lysine 418 forms a hydrogen bond with one of the oxygen's on the sulfonamide of the inhibitor. The hydroxyl group on the tyrosine forms a hydrogen bond (2.6Å and 3.3Å) with both oxygen's of the sulfonamide group of the inhibitor. The predicted binding orientations are shown in Fig. 3.The computationally predicted binding affinity of all compounds assayed had a higher binding affinity the current inhibitor of DprE1. Currently, the most potent inhibitor of DprE1 is a covalent inhibitor, BTZ043. This compound was docked against DprE1 using AutoDock Vina just as the virtual screen was done for comparison, and it was found to only have a binding affinity of −7.7kcal/mol. The poor binding affinity helps explain the lack of activity among strains that do not contain the nucleophilic cysteine residue. Since several strains of M. tb already exist without the essential Cys residue it is conceivable that the pathogeon could quickly develp resistance to BTZ043. The non-covalent inhibitors identidied here do not rely on the nucleophilic Cys resideu. A truncated version of the natural substrate decaprenylphosphoryl-β-d-ribose (DRP) was also docked using AutoDock Vina, and found to have a binding affinity of −8.6kcal/mol. Since DRP has a long hydrocarbon chain, it was difficult to dock the entire substrate, as the large number of possible conformations made it difficult to converge on the correct binding conformations. Thus, all of the inhibitor identied here displayed significantly higher binding affinities than the natural substrate and BTZ043, currently the most potent inhibitor of DprE1 (Table 1).Compound 11 showed the largest zone of inhibition. A structural similarity search was performed on Compound 11. Based on the predicted binding configuration, it appears that the four fused rings and the amide portion are essential for the high binding affinity. Fig. 4has the core of Compound 11 and three similar structures highlighted in red. Tetracycline has one aromatic ring and three cyclohexane rings while the rest have two aromatics and two cyclohexane rings. All of the compounds in this set contain an amide in the same position and an enol in the analogous position. In addition they are highly functionalized with either an alcohol or carbonyl on one side of the fused rings. Tetracylcine and anhydrotetracycline have an additional dimethylamino group, but with the opposite stereochemistry. Three more compounds with this common motif with different substituent groups were purchased. The new set of compounds were screened using Kirby–Bauer disc diffusion assays. All three showed strong inhibition. Tetracycline demonstrated the largest zone of inhibition (40mm) followed by anhydrotetracycline (34mm) and the smallest was PH003629 (26mm). PH003629 had the weakest inhibition out of the similarity set, suggessting that the addition of a Br substitution in this position weakens the potency of the inhibitors. Tetracycline is a well-known antibiotic that has been used to treat a wide variety of disease, including M. tb (Mengez et al., 1967). Tetracycline has previously been shown to inhibit M. smegmatis at an MIC of 0.25mg/L (565nM) (Lu et al., 2003). Tetracycline is known to bind to the 30S subunit of microbial ribosomes, inhibiting protein synthesis. Our work here suggests that it may also bind to DprE1, preventing cell wall formation. Our future work will be to confirm these preliminary findings.AutoDock Vina was used to conduct the molecular docking studies. Computational time was supplied by a startup grant from NSF-XSEDE program. The Ranger supercomputer at the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC) was utilized for these studies. The structure was subsequently converted to a PDBQT file using AutoDock Tools. The search grid was set to x center=41.132, y center=14.072, z center=11.721, x dimension=28, y dimension=30, and z dimension=26. The exhaustiveness for the search was set to 8.Compounds were visualized using PyMOL to ensure that the compounds bound to the previously identified active site. Since to our knowledge, no allosteric sites have been reported, only compounds in the active site were pursued.The biological activity of the compounds were examined using a Kirby–Bauer disc diffusion assay against the known surrogate of M. tb, M. smegmatis. M. smegmatis (strain mc2 155) was used since it is a safe surrogate, which has been shown to be a good model for identifing M. tb inhibitors (Pinault et al., 2013). All of the compounds were fixed to a concentration of 25mM in DMSO. Four sterile discs were evenly distributed around an agar plate. Three were impregnated with 15μL of inhibitor solution and the fourth set as our control with an allotted 15μL of DMSO. The plates were incubated for 30h at 37°C.A series of 1mL solutions were seeded with M. smegmatis and a gradient of concentrations of inhibitor. The inhibitors were dissolved in DMSO. The solutions were placed in the shaker at 37°C till the control sample reach and optical density of 600, typically 4 days. Subsequently the solutions were analyzed to determine the MIC values for the series of inhibitors.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
