@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Combination of improved cosine similarity and patent attribution probability method to judge the attribution of related patents of hydrolysis substrate fabrication process

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Innovatively establishing a combination method of judging patent attribution.Improved cosine similarity concept and patent attribution probability is combined.Term and word segmentation system is used to analyze technical/functional words.Normalized numerical value is used as the weight of improved cosine similarity.Normalized numerical value is used in the probability method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hydrolysis substrate fabrication process,Cosine similarity,Patent,Probability,Attribution,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The paper studies the attribution of patents by innovatively establishing a combination of improved cosine similarity concept and patent attribution probability method for hydrolysis substrate fabrication process in order to enhance the speed and accuracy for judgment of patent attribution. For the improved cosine similarity method innovatively established in the paper, all the vocabularies of important technical words or functional words in patent documents are regarded as a number of vector dimensions. The normalized numerical values of these vocabularies are regarded as the weights of these technical words or functional words. They are substituted in a formula of improved cosine similarity. Regarding the patent attribution probability method, it applies the normalized numerical values of the various clusters of technical or functional words as well as the formula of probability method to judge which technical category or functional category that a patent is attributed to. As the study innovatively combines improved cosine similarity with patent attribution probability method, before employing patent attribution probability method for a patent document, the study firstly uses improved cosine similarity to check with the cluster of patent group words having high relativity, and rule out the unrelated technical categories or functional categories that the patent is not attributed to, so as to decrease the number of categories for calculation and the time to calculate which technical category or functional category that a patent is attributed to when using patent attribution probability method, and to achieve a method that can more rapidly and accurately judge which technical category or functional category that a patent is attributed to.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The following literatures relating to the paper‘s contents are introduced in this order: (1) The literatures concerning document classification management: Generally speaking, in the aspect of analysis of document contents, the importance of a term is usually determined by the appearance frequency of the term in documents. Since the paper has to firstly calculate the frequency of the keywords in patent documents, the related literatures are firstly introduced. (2) The literatures concerning cosine similarity: This is because the paper has to calculate the similarities of the technical categories of patent documents. (3) The literatures concerning knowledge management and knowledge extraction: Since patent is a kind of knowledge, it is related to knowledge management and knowledge extraction. (4) The literatures concerning patent analysis: This is because patent analysis and calculation of technical categories of patent have to be made. According to the above order, the related literatures are introduced below.The literatures concerning document classification management are explained below. In the aspect of analysis of document contents, the importance of a term is usually determined by the appearance frequency of the term in documents. Singhal and Salton [1], suggested that in the aspect of analysis of document contents, the importance of a term was usually determined by the appearance frequency of the term in documents. They also explored the relationship between the appearance frequency of terms in documents and the importance of terms. Those terms with high appearance frequency but of low importance were usually the meaningless conjunctions or grammar words, which could not express the features of the document contents. Hence, during analysis of document contents, these kinds of terms had to be filtered out before retrieving keywords. The keywords with low appearance frequency and of low importance would be abandoned during analysis of document contents, whereas the terms with high appearance frequency and also of high importance could fully represent the features of document contents. Therefore, how to retrieve these terms is an important issue to analysis of document contents. Normally in a cluster of documents, part of the keywords appear together with other keywords. These terms usually have a certain extent of relativity. In order to save the time of reading information, some methods were developed from the past literature for automatic reading of documents and filtering information stream. After that, only related information is transmitted to the people in need. The above process is called information filter in the studies of information retrieval, and this topic has started to be studied and discussed. Besides, when extending from the definitions of the keywords themselves, other different related term can also be obtained. According to the appearance frequency of keywords in document groups, relativity of keywords can be judged, and a stock of related terms can be established. Such a stock of related terms can be applied to integration of keywords. After combination of the terms of high relativity, the set of keywords can represent the features of document contents. Lawrence and Giles [2], proposed improving the retrieval of literatures relating to techniques of general search engines and searched results of scientific information, but they did not make analysis of technical/functional words of patent documents.The literatures concerning cosine similarity are explained below. Cosine similarity is a calculation way of similarity commonly used in information retrieval Salton and McGill [3]. It can be used to calculate the similarity between documents, and the similarity between vocabularies, and even the similarity between the searched phrases and documents. Before calculation of similarity between two documents, the documents have to be expressed in vector form, implying that all the important vocabularies in these documents have to be regarded as a number of vector dimensions. The weights of these vocabularies are values of the dimensions, which are combined to form a vector to represent the documents. Vallet et al. [4], used semantic search to develop a retrieval model to improve search step from a large stock of documents, and define weight calculation method and rank calculation method of classical vector space model. Based on semantic and combination optimization techniques, Gan and Chen [5], proposed improving calculation method of TF-IDF weights and applying it to vector space model (VSM). This calculation method can effectively decrease the classification of subjective factors. Wang et al. [6], proposed collaborative filtering (CF) as an effective method to solve information overload problem, and enhance the accuracy in searching the similarities of preferences among different users. Using cosine similarity and TF-IDF weights, they finished information search and filtering of retrieved information. Zhang and Odbal [7] proposed a method to automatically aim at crosscheck of Mongolian and Chinese words. Based on the statistical vector space model, keywords were retrieved from texts. Based on the contents of the combined retrieved keywords, TF-IDF method could confirm the weight for the vector of a sentence. Once the weights of terms are confirmed, the similarity between vectors of the sentence could be calculated through the cosine similarity formula. All the above literatures used cosine similarity method to make further studies of vector space model. They used TF-IDF method to calculate the weights of terms, and make improvement and studies on the TF-IDF calculation method of weight. General cosine similarity is obtained by using TF-IDF to know the appearance frequency of a certain keyword in a document and using frequency of the term to calculate the weight of the keyword. If its appearance frequency is higher, it can better know the category of the document. However, the above cosine similarity and TF-IDF are only applied to one-on-one comparison of similarity between documents, but still have not considered the effects of the total number of words or length of a patent document on weight, and have not been applied to judge which technical category or functional category that a newly added patent document is attributed to.The literatures concerning knowledge management and knowledge extraction are explained below. Since patent is a kind of knowledge, patent analysis is related to patent management and knowledge. The paper gives a brief introduction of two research papers about knowledge management. To solve the problem of classification, information management has to be conducted in good ways. Gruber [8] defined knowledge management (KM) as “a process that helps organizations define, select, rearrange and spread important information and professional knowledge.” And O’leary [9] defined KM as “the formal management of knowledge for facilitating creation, access and reuse of knowledge, typically using advanced knowledge.” He further argued that KM was more than management of knowledge, and the ultimate purpose of KM was to further innovate through reuse of knowledge. Trappey et al. [10] proposed an effective analysis on patents of fundamental research and development (R&D) knowledge to decrease the development time of new products, enhance the success rate of marketing of products, and reduce the potential patent infringement. The method they proposed was to retrieve and collect patents with complete contents, and make a crucial report in the form of a tree chart. Using statistical methods to evaluate and verify the related keywords, together with a certain proportion of weight values, the accuracy of classification could be increased.The literatures concerning patent analysis are explained below. Lin et al. [11], established an innovative integrated semantic analysis and term and word segmentation system of English patent documents. This new system method applied the part/component keywords extracted from English patent documents and the semantic analysis method of the technical words and functional words. It used the concept of appearance frequency and normalization frequency of keywords to establish word clusters of technical category or functional category. They further developed a probability analysis method and formula for judging which technical category that an LED patent document in is attributed to, and made proof accordingly. Trappey et al. [12], proposed the life spans of dental implant (DI) key technologies using patent analysis. Key patents and their frequently appearing phrases are analyzed for the construction of the DI ontology. Afterward, the life spans of DI technical clusters were defined based on the ontology schema. This research demonstrated the feasibility of using text mining and data mining techniques to extract key phrases from a set of DI patents with different patent classifications (e.g., UPC, IPC) as the basis for building a domain-specific ontology. Bermudez-Edo et al. [13], proposed a methodological approach for the definition of relationships and reasoning tasks for patent analysis by using patent ontologies, and provided a real illustration of its potential in the context of international flows of research knowledge. This declarative method was based on the formal definition of key patent analysis indicators (KPAIs). More specifically, the paper illustrated the applicability of the proposed methodology by classifying patents into the five patterns of internationalization identified by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Trappey et al. [14] proposed a novel and generic methodology combining ontology based patent analysis, and clinical meta-analysis was developed to analyze and identify the most effective patented techniques in the dental implant field. The research established and verified a computer supported analytical approach and system for the strategic prediction of medical technology development trends. As mentioned above, Lin et al. [11] developed term and word segmentation system and probability method of English patents, and once applied them to LED patent document, but they did not apply cosine similarity method to their studies. They also had never proposed the combination of improved cosine similarity and patent attribution probability method, as developed by the study. Thus, the study innovatively establishes a combination of improved cosine similarity concept and patent attribution probability method for hydrolysis substrate fabrication process in order to enhance the speed and accuracy for the judgment of patent attribution.The study divides patent documents into three parts: part/component words, technical words and functional words, intending to segment long patent documents to be more precise and simpler terms or sentences so as to rapidly grasp the core techniques from the text of a patent document.The study employs the integrated and semantic analysis as well as term and word segmentation system method of English patent documents innovatively established by Lin et al. [11], with the main procedures stated below. In the texts of related English patent documents, there were many part/component words. For the descriptions in a text, certain special terms were used to describe these part/component keywords. If it is required to retrieve these part/component keywords, semantic analysis method can be used to analyze the quantifiers, prepositions and verbs frequently used in the descriptions in the English texts of a patent document so as to describe the related part/component keywords in the patent document, and further retrieve the part/component keywords. Besides, the part/component keywords in a patent always come along with certain specific conjunctions, verbs, prepositions and nouns to reveal the associated techniques and functions of the part/component keywords. Thus, the paper uses this feature to develop a semantic analysis formula and establish a semi-automatic and semi-artificial analysis of the term and word segmentation system of the part/component keywords, technical and functional keywords in the English patent documents. In fact the traditional Chinese and simplified Chinese texts of patents are the same as the English text of patents, having a similar feature that certain special terms are used in the text of patents to describe the part/component keywords. Therefore, the integrated semantic analysis and term and word segmentation system method of the English patent documents about hydrolysis substrate fabrication process can also be applied to the traditional Chinese and simplified Chinese texts of patents. Focusing on the semantic analysis results of English patent documents, the paper has summarized the term segmentation points of the part/component keywords, technical keywords and functional keywords, as shown in Tables 1–3.The following sentences of two examples are found automatically from the term and word segmentation system by the segmentation points of the technical keywords in Table 2 and the functional keywords in Table 3.(1)Example of finding the technical wordsThe following sentences are found automatically from the term and word segmentation system by the segmentation points of the technical keywords, by and use, shown in Table 2.(a)by using the CMP abrasiveused as abrasives for polishing semiconductorsuse of a liquid additive for CMP abrasive for preparing a CMP abrasiveThen the technical words, CMP abrasive, polishing and liquid additive, can be found artificially.(2)Example of finding the functional wordsThe following sentences are found automatically from the term and word segmentation system by the segmentation points of the functional keywords, improved, shown in Table 3.(a)improve cleaning efficiency of copper residualimproved planarizationThen the functional words, cleaning efficiency and planarization, can be found artificially.The study combines improved cosine similarity concept and patent attribution probability method to judge the attribution of a patent. It is hoped that the accuracy and speed of judgment can be enhanced when analyzing which technical and functional category that a patent is attributed to. Further description is made as follows:Cosine similarity is a calculation way of similarity value commonly used in information retrieval. It can be used to calculate the similarity between documents, and the similarity between vocabularies, and even the similarity between the searched phrases and documents. Salton and McGill [3] Before calculation of the similarity between two documents, the documents have to be expressed in vector form, implying that all the important vocabularies in these documents have to be regarded as a number of vector dimensions. The weights of these vocabularies are the values of the dimensions, which are combined to form a vector to represent the documents. For example, a known document i is expressed as a document vector Di=(wi1,wi2,…,win), and a new document j to be compared with document i is expressed as Dj=(wj1,wj2,…,wjn), where wikdenotes the weight of each term in document i; and wjkdenotes the weight of each term in document j. The formula for calculation of cosine similarity between these two documents are Salton and McGill [3]:(1)Cos(Di,Dj)=∑k=1nwikwjk∑k=1nwik2∑k=1nwjk2∑k=1nwikwjk=wi1∗wj1+wi2∗wj2+⋯+win∗wjn∑k=1nwik2∑k=1nwjk2=wi12+wi22+…+win20.5wj12+wj22+…+wjn20.5Likewise, for the similarity between vocabularies, when the vocabularies are expressed as similar vectors, the document with appearance of these vocabularies as vector dimension, and the weight of a vocabulary in the document as the value of the dimension, then the cosine similarity between two vocabularies can also be calculated. Let the smallest value of cosine similarity be 0, and the greatest value be 1. The geometric meaning of cosine similarity is the calculated included angle of two documents’ vectors in high-dimension space. The smaller the included angle, the greater the cosine similarity (when the angle is 0, similarity is 1); and the greater the angle, the smaller the cosine similarity (when the angle is at a direct cross at 90°, similarity is 0).Generally speaking, when cosine similarity is being carried out, TF-IDF method is often used to calculate the weight of word by its frequency. The number of times of a certain keyword appeared in a document is taken as the weight of the keyword. When a word appears more frequently, it can better presents the category of the document. However, TF-IDF mostly considers the appearance frequency of keywords only, and is only used to make one-on-one comparison of similarity between documents, but it has not considered the effects of the total numbers of words or length of a patent document on weight and has not been applied to judge which technical category or function category that a newly added patent document is attributed to.First of all, the improved cosine similarity method of the study searches from documents of patents the related patents of hydrolysis substrate. After dozens of the related patents are found, the paper employs the term and word segmentation system and technical/functional matrix developed by Lin et al. [11], as well as the establishment method of technical words of each technical category and functional words of each functional category in the related patents. The paper also applies a concept that lets the normalized numerical values of different important technical words or functional words of each technical category or functional category be the weights of these technical words or functional words. Regarding the improved cosine similarity method that judges a certain newly added patent may be similar to a certain technical category or functional category, the normalized numerical value qtj of each important technical word or functional word of a certain newly added patent is the quotient after dividing the appearance frequency of important keyword i of important technical words, part/component words or functional words of a certain technical category or functional category searched and established by term and word segmentation system, by the total number of words of the entire patent text.The normalized numerical value dsiof the patent document group relating to a certain technical category or functional category of the related patent document group being searched is the quotient after dividing the appearance frequency of the related important key technical word or functional word i of a patent document group relating to a certain technical category or functional category, by the total number of words of the patent document group relating to a certain technical category or functional category.As mentioned above, the paper’s calculation method of weight by improved cosine similarity is an innovative method being different from other literatures’ calculation method of weight by TF-IDF cosine similarity, and is applicable to documents of patents.The improved cosine similarity value Cos(Ds, Qt) of the study is shown as follows:(2)Cos(Ds,Qt)=d→s·q→t|d→s|×|q→t|Dsdenotes the vector of patent document group,Ds=(ds1,ds2,…,dsM),where (ds1,ds2,…,dsM) denotes the normalized numerical value of important key technical word or functional word of the related patent document group in a certain technical category or functional category.Qtdenotes the vector of new patent document,Qt=(qt1,qt2,…,qtM),where (qt1,qt2,…,qtM) denotes the normalized numerical value of important key technical or functional word in a certain technical category or functional category of the newly added patent.(3)dsi=Appearance frequency of important key technical word or functional word i of a patent document group relating to a certain technical category or functional categoryTotal number of words in the entire text of a patent document group relating to a certain technical category or functional category(4)qtj=Appearance frequency of important key technical word or functional word i of a certain technical category or functional category of a newly added patentTotal number of words in the entire text of a newly added patentBesides, another innovative contribution of the study’s improved cosine similarity is that after comparative analysis of technical words and part/component words of hydrolysis substrate fabrication process, the constraints for threshold value of improved cosine similarity value are set, making it available to judge directly the newly added patent is attributed to the technical category of when the improved cosine similarity value is greater than 0.6, and directly rule out the newly added patent when the improved cosine similarity value is less than 0.3.The constraints of its threshold value are explained as follows:1.When the improved cosine similarity value is greater than 0.6, the newly added patent can be directly attributed to this technical category.When the improved cosine similarity value is between 0.3 and 0.6, patent attribution probability method can be used to test which technical category the newly added patent may be attributed to.When the improved cosine similarity value is less than 0.3, the probability for the newly added patent to be attributed to this technical category can be directly ruled out.The study also combines improved cosine similarity and patent attribution probability method, and the innovative contribution and advantages of such combination are further explained below. Improved cosine similarity and probability method of patent attribution are combined, hoping to enhance the speed in judging whether related patents are attributed to technical category or functional category, and expecting to clarify the accuracy in judging the probability for which technique a patent is attributed to, so as to cause no effects on judgment and decrease artificial error in calculation. Therefore, the study combines the method for calculation of probability of patent attribution with improved cosine similarity in order to judge the technical category of a newly added patent. First of all, improved cosine similarity of the newly added patent is calculated, and the technical categories that the patent is improbably attributed to are all ruled out. Then the probability method of the following patent attribution is employed. Below is a description on the steps of the above method. After the newly added patent has been analyzed by term and word segmentation system, the related technical words, part/component words and functional words are obtained. Calculate the normalized numerical values of the various technical words, part/component words and functional words of the patent, and then substitute them in the improved cosine similarity formulas innovatively established by the study, i.e. Eqs. (2)–(4).After crosscheck of improved cosine similarity, the technical categories that are impossible to appear in the patent are all ruled out. Then, use the method of probability to calculate the attribution of the newly added patent. Before using the method for calculation of the probability of patent attribution, from the viewpoint of statistical analysis, because not all keywords have the same important to the certain technical category, the study also adopts the concept of fuzzy values to divide the normalized word group of keywords into three different grades according to the difference in importance degree of this technical category. In general, let the maximum normalized numerical value be 1, the next one be 0.8, and then the next one be 0.6. Besides, due to difference in fuzzy values, the analyzed results being adjusted may also be different. Thus, continuous adjustment and revision are required during analysis, so as to let the value of each keyword obtain a more suitable. When fuzzy values are established, the corresponding fuzzy values of the keywords are entered to an information table so as for analyzing related patents. Thus, the patent attribution probability method in the study focuses on this situation and uses the concept of fuzzy value to calculate the normalized numerical values of the cluster of part/component keywords.The study firstly searches dozens of related patent documents, and uses term and word segmentation system to analyze the part/component keywords, technical and functional keywords of the patent documents in traditional Chinese, simplified Chinese and English. For the newly added patent document, patent attribution probability method is employed to judge the calculation formulas to be applied for knowing whether the patent is attributed to technical category or functional category. These formulas are expressed as normalized numerical value Eqs. (5) and (6)–(9) as follows:(5)Ni=k_w_valueif_w_valueNi: normalized numerical valuek_w_valuei: appearance frequency of keyword in the entire textf_w_value: number of words of the entire textE_Ni: product after multiplying the appearance frequency of each keyword in the entire text by normalized numerical value.m: number of all the component words, technical words or functional words in technical category or functional categoryHere,s_e_f_valuej: numerical value of weight in technical category or functional category, j.(9)a_value=∑j=1cs_e_f_valuejc: total number of technical categories or functional categoriesPj: probability value of each technical category or functional category in the patentFrom the result of Pj, the study can judge the patent should be attributed to which technical category or functional category. It implies that if Eqs. (5)–(10) are applied to calculation of technical category, it is only required to calculate the technique-related component words and technical words; and for calculation of functional category, it is only required to calculate the function-related component words and functional words. Besides, after analysis of the collected patent documents of hydrolysis substrate fabrication process in Chinese and English, the study can summarize and judge that the related patent documents of hydrolysis substrate fabrication process in traditional Chinese, simplified Chinese and English are attributed to the first-layer and second-layer technical category and functional category.When carrying out improved cosine similarity, for the newly added patent’s technical category to be compared, the paper takes the normalized numerical value of important key technical word of this technical category only, and then calculates the improved cosine similarity value. Unlike probability attribution method, the normalized numerical values of all keywords of each technical category of the newly added patent have to be calculated. Hence, the speed for improved calculating the improved cosine similarity value is faster than the calculation process of probability attribution method. Besides, when the improved cosine similarity value is less than 0.3, the impossible technical categories can be ruled out first; and when the improved cosine similarity value is greater than 0.6, the patent can be directly attributed to this technical category, thus decreasing the number of technical categories to be judged. Therefore, when making calculation to judge the probability for a patent to be attributed to a technical category, it is not required to calculate all the technical categories.The flow chart of the combination of improved cosine similarity and patent attribution probability method in Fig. 1shows the patent attribution calculation method for judging which technical category or functional category a newly added patent is attributed to. The chart shows from the top to the bottom that after a new patent is added with term and word segmentation system and analyzed, the normalized numerical values of important key technical words or functional words of a certain technical category or functional category of the new patent have to be calculated first. After that, the improved cosine similarity value of the technical category or functional category to be compared is calculated. Through comparison of improved cosine similarity values, and according to the constraints, when the improved cosine similarity value is less than 0.3, the impossible technical categories can be ruled out first; when the improved cosine similarity value is greater than 0.6, the patent can be directly attributed to this technical category; and when the improved cosine similarity value is between 0.3 and 0.6, probability equation of the probability attribution method should be used for calculation so as to judge which technical category or functional category it is attributed to.Therefore, the combination of improved cosine similarity and patent attribution probability method does not require calculation of the probabilities of all technical categories or functional categories, and can obtain the result faster and more accurately.If a newly added patent has its improved cosine similarity values of two technical categories both greater than 0.6, it can be judged that the newly added patent may have two technical categories at the same time. But if the improved cosine similarity values of two technical categories are 0.3–0.6, patent attribution probability method should be used to calculate Pjvalues. Then the difference between the probability values Pjof the two technical categories is not great, and manual judgment should be made to make sure whether the newly added patent has these two technical categories. Besides, in case the improved cosine similarity values of a newly added patent are both less than 0.3 at all technical categories, it indicates that the technical category of the newly added patent dose not belong to the technical category of CMP fabrication process of hydrolysis substrate in this study. Therefore, the newly added patent could be excluded.Using its engineering knowledge and bill of materials (BOM), the study firstly defines the first-layer techniques of hydrolysis substrate fabrication process. The categories of the first-layer techniques are: (1) substrate polishing technique; (2) substrate temperature control technique; (3) substrate inspection and testing technique; and (4) substrate cleaning technique. After that, the study starts to search a large number of the related patents. For the large number of the related patents being searched, term and word segmentation system is used to analyze the key technical words, part/component words and functional words in each document, and calculate their normalized numerical values. The patents with high relativity to different techniques and functions are categorized in their technical group word cluster and functional group word cluster. Coping with synonym concept, the paper establishes the first-layer clusters of important technical words, part/component words and functional words of each technique of the related patents of hydrolysis substrate fabrication process. The substrate polishing technique of hydrolysis substrate fabrication process is taken as an example, as shown in Table 4, which presents the word clusters and normalized numerical values of important technical words and parts/component words relating to hydrolysis substrate polishing technique. Table 5shows the word clusters and normalized numerical values of important functional words relating to hydrolysis substrate polishing technique. For the technical words and component words in Table 4, the software of term and word segmentation system [11] is applied to the segmentation points in Tables 1 and 2 so as to automatically segment the sentences containing technical words and component words. From these sentences, the authors manually find out the technical words and component words. This is how semi-automatic and semi-manual method operates. After that, the study calculates the normalized numerical values of these technical words and component words, and rearranges these words according to the descending order of their normalized numerical values. Using the above method can more quickly find out the important technical words and component words. Table 4 only gives an example of finding out the related technical words and component words, but has not made categorization of techniques. As for the functional words in Table 5, the software of term and word segmentation system [11] is applied to the segmentation points in Table 3 so as to automatically segment the sentences containing functional words. From these sentences, the authors manually find out the functional words. After that, the study calculates the normalized numerical values of these functional words, and rearranges these words according to the descending order of their normalized numerical values. Table 5 only gives an example of finding out the related functional words, but has not made categorization of functions. Since Tables 4 and 5 have not undergone categorization of techniques and functions respectively, some words appear repeatedly in the process of finding out technical words and functional words from these sentences. Then it needs to further induce different technical categories and functional categories and further analyze which of the technical words and functional words in Tables 4 and 5 respectively have to be re-categorized. The words in Tables 4 and 5 are respectively the technical words and functional words manually found out from the sentences that are automatically segmented by the term and word segmentation system being applied to Tables 1–3. Therefore, from the technical words and functional words found, the study further analyzes the individual technical categories of these technical words, and the individual functional categories of these functional words. Furthermore, the study establishes the technical/functional matrix and categorization of the related patents in Table 6. As above mentioned for Tables 4–6, according to the order of normalized numerical values, the paper uses artificial categorization to establish the word clusters of more important technical words, part/component words in the first-layer techniques and the second-layer techniques of hydrolysis substrate fabrication process as shown in Table 7, and word clusters of functional categories in the hydrolysis substrate fabrication process as shown in Table 8. If there is a patent newly added, the internal information of technical/functional matrix and the related word clusters can be improved continuously.The so called “hydrolysis substrate fabrication process” in the study is limited to the fabrication process of hydrolysis substrate polished by CMP fabrication process. The study employs patent semantic analysis as well as term and word segmentation system to semi-automatically and semi-manually analyze the appearance frequency of the related key technical words and functional words of technical category and functional category, and calculate their normalized numerical values. Besides the authors of the paper, the department has another team once studied the chemical mechanical polishing (CMP) process of hydrolysis substrate. Therefore, based on the physical meanings of the analyzed technical words and functional words, and through engineering knowledge and fabrication process analysis, the related technical/functional matrix for CMP fabrication process of hydrolysis substrate is further established. In addition, based on the categories that the technical word clusters and functional word clusters are attributed to after analysis, the related technical word clusters of each technical category and the related functional word clusters of each functional category are further established, thus proving the rationality of the related technical word clusters of each technical category and the related functional word clusters of each functional category in the study. After analyzing the related technical categories of these technical words and part/component words as well as the related functional categories of the CMP fabrication process of hydrolysis substrates, the paper further understands and establishes the steps of CMP fabrication process of the polished hydrolysis substrate. Since slurry has to be simultaneously added during CMP polishing process of hydrolysis substrate, and the addition of slurry would cause chemical reaction with hydrolysis substrate, the material removal rate during polishing is increased. Besides, different temperatures of slurry also affect substrate temperature and the material removal rate during polishing. After CMP polishing process of hydrolysis substrate, the hydrolysis substrate has to be cleaned, and then inspected and tested. Thus, the CMP fabrication process of hydrolysis substrate is: ① Add in slurry to carry out polishing of hydrolysis substrate and control slurry temperature and substrate temperature, ② Clean the substrate, ③ Inspect and test the substrate, as shown in Fig. 2. In the CMP fabrication process, slurry has to be added to raise the material removal rate of hydrolysis substrate. Nevertheless, based on the searched results of the related patent, there is existence of some patents relating to control of slurry temperature and control of substrate temperature. Therefore, the technical category of the first-layer technical field of the study’s CMP fabrication process of hydrolysis substrate is divided into: ① Substrate polishing technique, ② Substrate temperature control technique, ③ Substrate cleaning technique, and ④ Substrate inspection and testing technique. Then the part/component and key technical word clusters used by different technical categories are integrated. Similarly, according to the key functional words appeared in different functional categories, the functional words clusters used in different functional categories are integrated. According to the sequence in CMP fabrication process, the technical word clusters of the first-layer technical category and the functional words clusters of functional category are established. After that, the various technical methods used by individual technical categories of the CMP fabrication process under the first-layer technical category, which is achieved through manual attribution, are summarized as the second-layer technical category. However, since a majority of the second-layer technical category does not have fabrication process properties, with only the first-layer technical category using the various related technical methods, there is no such problem of specific sequence in the fabrication process.Besides, the technical category and functional category indicated in the above improved cosine similarity and patent attribution probability method are just referring to the first-layer technical category, second-layer technical category and functional category, as shown in Table 6, which presents the first-layer and second-layer technical/functional matrix of the Chinese and English patent documents relating to hydrolysis substrate fabrication process, and the related patents. The figures in the Table 6 are the patent codes applied for patents. The codes starting with TW or I or being all numbers belong to Taiwanese patents; the codes starting with US belong to American patents; the codes starting with EP belong to European patents; and the codes starting with CN belong to Chinese patents. The first-layer techniques, second-layer techniques and functions relating to hydrolysis substrate fabrication process in Table 6 are shown as follows:The first-layer technique of the patents of hydrolysis substrate fabrication process is divided into four types: (1) substrate polishing technique; (2) substrate temperature control technique; (3) substrate inspection and testing technique; and (4) substrate cleaning technique.The second-layer techniques of the first layer’s substrate polishing technique are divided into three types: (1) polishing method and device; (2) design of polishing pad; and (3) component of polishing slurry.The second-layer techniques of the first layer’s substrate temperature control technique are also divided into three types: (1) temperature feedback device; (2) heating element; and (3) cooling element.The second-layer techniques of the first layer’s substrate inspection and testing technique are also divided into three types: (1) inspection and testing of emitting and accepted light; (2) image extracting method and technique; and (3) structure of inspection apparatus.The second-layer techniques of the first layer’s substrate cleaning technique are also divided into three types: (1) cleaning method; (2) structure of cleaning apparatus; and (3) rinse solution and nozzle design.The functions are divided into nine types: (1) Increase flatness of substrate; (2) Raise removing rate; (3) Reduce cost; (4) Improve temperature uniformity; (5) Increase heat exchange efficiency; (6) Promote accuracy of inspection and testing; (7) Accelerate inspection and testing speed; (8) Improve quality; and (9) Increase cleaning efficiency.Regarding patent No. 200603277 in Section 4.2.1, only the equation of probability value is used to calculate the probability values of all part/component words and technical words of this patent document; and the probability values of all technical categories of the first-layer techniques are compared, with the comparison process shown in Fig. 3. Right now, as C=4, the achieved probability value of substrate polishing technique is 48.01%; the probability value of substrate temperature control technique is 16.67%; the probability value of substrate cleaning technique is 19.43%; and the probability value of substrate inspection and testing technique is 15.89%. Since the probability value of substrate polishing technique is greatest, it can be judged that the first-layer technical category of this patent document is substrate polishing technique.After that, the study tests the first-layer technical categorization of the second patent, Patent No. 201120976. The study applies normalization Eq. (5) to calculate the normalized numerical values, and calculate Eqs. (6)–(10) to achieve the probability value of Pj. The achieved results are: the probability of “substrate polishing technique” is 18.4%; the probability of “substrate temperature control technique” is 17.91%; the probability of “substrate inspection and testing technique” is 17.97%; and the probability of “substrate cleaning technique” is 45.72%. Therefore, it can be judged that the first-layer technique of the patent belongs to “substrate cleaning technique.” Then the study carries out the second-layer technical categorization, and achieves the probability value of Pj. The achieved results are: the probability of “cleaning method” is 25.05%; the probability of “structure of cleaning apparatus” is 38.13%; and the probability of “rinse solution and nozzle design” is 36.82%. Therefore, the second-layer technique of the patent mainly belongs to “structure of cleaning apparatus.” Besides, the probability of “rinse solution and nozzle design” is 36.82%, which is greater than 30% and not far from the probability of “structure of cleaning apparatus.” Hence, after artificial interpretation of the patent, and checking of “rinse solution and nozzle design” to have lower Pjvalue, it is also found that “rinse solution and nozzle design” is also mentioned in the newly added patent document. Thus, we can be judge that the newly added patent document simultaneously appears in two technical categories of the second-layer technique, which conforms to the result of artificial analysis. After verification in these two patent documents, this probability calculation formula and theory are proved to be feasible.Further using the above combination of improved cosine similarity formula and probability calculation method, the study firstly calculates the improved cosine similarity of the newly added patents, and rules out the technical categories that the patent is improbably attributed to. Then the study employs patent attribution probability method for testing, using the same testing way of the two patent documents as in the previous section, and compare the results.Regarding patent No. 200603277 mentioned again in Section 4.2.2, the study firstly applies important key part/component words and technical words to improved cosine similarity to carry out comparison of improved cosine similarity values of different technical categories of the first-layer technique, with the comparison process shown in Fig. 4. The achieved results are: the improved cosine similarity value of substrate polishing technique is 53.5%; the improved cosine similarity value of substrate temperature control technique is 39.4%; and the improved cosine similarity values of substrate cleaning technique and substrate inspection and testing technique are both 0%. Therefore, according to the constraints for threshold value of improved cosine similarity value proposed by the study, the substrate cleaning technique and substrate inspection and testing technique can be ruled out first. Furthermore, according to the judgment principles of the constraints of threshold value, since the improved cosine similarity values of substrate polishing technique and substrate temperature control technique are both between 0.3 and 0.6, the probabilities of these two technical categories are judged, and the probability equation right now is C=2. After calculation by probability equation, it is known that the probability value of substrate polishing technique is 71.9%, and the probability value of substrate temperature control technique is 28.81%. Therefore, it can be judged that the first-layer technical category of this patent document is substrate polishing technique.As seen from the above results of patent No. 200603277 obtained by two different calculation methods, when the first-layer technical category is entered in Section 4.2.1 and only probability equation is used for calculation, C=4, implying that the total number of technical categories is 4. But in Section 4.2.2, important key part/component words and technical words are firstly used for making comparison of improved cosine similarity values of different technical categories of the first-layer technical category. Meanwhile, the techniques with low improved cosine similarity values and the impossible ones are ruled out, making the total number of technical categories calculated by applying the patent attribution probability equation be 2 that is C=2. When C=2, calculation by probability equation and judgment by probability value are carried out. Here, since the total number of technical categories is positively proportional to a_value and inversely proportional to Pjvalue, as shown in Eqs. (9) and (10), it refers that when judging patent attribution by probability method only, C=4.Thus, when C value is greater, the total number of technical categories will be more, and the denominator of probability equation Pjwill be greater, resulting in a smaller Pjvalue. Contrarily, when C value is smaller, the total number of technical categories will be less, and the denominator of Pjequation will be smaller, resulting in a greater Pjvalue. From Section 4.2.1 to Section 4.2.2, it can be seen that the total number of technical categories of the first-layer technique calculated by probability equation only is: C=4. After that, the combination of improved cosine similarity and patent attribution probability method proposed by the study is applied. First of all, improved cosine similarity method is used to calculate the improved cosine similarity value. After improved cosine similarity values are compared, the unrelated technical categories are ruled out, making the total number of technical categories become C=2. When C=2 is substituted in probability attribution equation, i.e. Eq. (10), the a_value in the denomination of Pjequation becomes smaller. Hence, the probability value of substrate polishing technique rises from 48.01% when calculated by probability method only, to 71.91%. It can be seen that the difference in probability value becomes greater, and the new probability value is greater than 60%. Thus, the technical category of this patent can be more confirmed to be substrate polishing technique. Just because of this, it can more accurately judge which category a patent document is attributed to.As known from the above two results, when improved cosine similarity is firstly calculated, from the newly added patent document’s technical category to be compared, the normalized numerical values of important key technical words of this technical category only are taken to make comparison of improved cosine similarity values. Unlike probability attribution method, the normalized numerical values of all key technical words of the newly added patent have to be calculated. Hence, the used important key technical words for calculation of improved cosine similarity value are less, making the calculation speed faster than the calculation process of probability attribution. Besides, the combination of improved cosine similarity and patent attribution probability method can firstly rule out the impossible technical categories, decreasing the number of technical categories, and without the need to calculate all the technical categories. In addition, since the constraints for threshold value of improved cosine similarity value are established, when the improved cosine similarity value is less than 0.3 or the improved cosine similarity value is greater than 0.6, the technical category can be directly ruled out or the patent is attributed to this technical category respectively, without the need to make calculation by probability attribution method.Therefore, based on the above description, when the combination of improved cosine similarity and patent attribution probability method is compared with the sole use of patent attribution probability method, over the judgment of technical category that a newly added patent is attributed to, the combination of improved cosine similarity and patent attribution probability method is more accurate and faster.Employ the above method and firstly use the improved cosine similarity formula to crosscheck with the technical words and part/component words of each second-layer’s technical category of “substrate polishing technique” established in the previous search step. The results of crosscheck with each technical category of the second-layer techniques are: the acquired similarity value of “polishing method and device” is 59.38%; the similarity value of “design of polishing pad” is 38.37%; and the similarity value of “component of polishing slurry” is 0%. Therefore, we can rule out “component of polishing slurry” since its similarity value is less than 30%, and the probability for its appearance is low.Based on the result obtained in above Step, the probability for appearance of “component of polishing slurry” is ruled out. Patent attribution probability method is used to make calculation of the second-layer techniques of “polishing method and device” and “design of polishing pad,” achieving these results: the Pjvalue of “polishing method and device” is 59.93%; and the Pjvalue of “design of polishing pad” is 40.07%. Hence, it is judged that this patent is related to “polishing method and device.” After artificial interpretation of the patent and checking of “design of polishing pad” to have lower Pjvalue, it is judged that this patent is unrelated to “design of polishing pad.” Thus, we can judge that the second-layer technique of this newly added patent document, Patent No. 200603277 belongs to “polishing method and device.”Use the above steps and method to test the second newly added patent, Patent No. 201120976. Use the improved cosine similarity formula to crosscheck with the technical words and part/component words of each first-layer’s related technical category. The similarity value of the first-layer’s “substrate polishing technique” is 13.73%; the similarity value of “substrate temperature control technique” is 10.29%; the similarity value of “substrate inspection and testing technique” is 0%; and the similarity value of “substrate cleaning technique” is 46.79%. Since the similarity values of “substrate polishing technique,” “substrate temperature control technique” and “substrate inspection and testing technique” are all less than 30%, they are all ruled out due to low probability. Therefore, we can directly judge that the first-layer technical category of the newly added patent, Patent No. 201120976 is “substrate cleaning technique.” Use improved cosine similarity to crosscheck with the technical words and part/component words of each second-layer technical category of “substrate cleaning technique.” The achieved results are: the similarity value of “cleaning method” is 38.56%; the similarity value of “structure of cleaning apparatus” is 58.6%; and the similarity value of “rinse solution and nozzle design” is 54.92%. Hence, it is judged that the second-layer technical category of the newly added patent, Patent No. 201120976 may be attributed to “structure of cleaning apparatus” and “rinse solution and nozzle design,” whose similarity values are both higher or close to 60%. Besides, since the similarity value of “cleaning method” is between 30% and 60%, patent attribution probability method is firstly used to make calculation of these 3 s-layer technical categories. The achieved results are: the Pjvalue of “cleaning method” is 25.05%; the Pjvalue of “structure of cleaning apparatus” is 38.13%; and the Pjvalue of “rinse solution and nozzle design” is 36.82%. Since the Pjvalue of “cleaning method” is less than 30%, “cleaning method” is ruled out for its lower Pjvalue. Then, use patent attribution probability method to make calculation of the two second-layer technical categories, “structure of cleaning apparatus” and “rinse solution and nozzle design.” The achieved results are: the Pjvalue of “structure of cleaning apparatus” is 50.88%; and the Pjvalue of “rinse solution and nozzle design” is 49.12%. Thus, the second-layer technical category of this patent is mainly “structure of cleaning apparatus.” Besides, since the difference in Pjvalue between them is not great, after artificial interpretation of the patent and checking of “rinse solution and nozzle design” to have lower Pjvalue, it is found that “rinse solution and nozzle design” is also mentioned in this patent document. Therefore, we can judge that this newly added patent, Patent No. 201120976 appear in both two second-layer technical categories.Use the same method above to do testing. Besides, test the functional words of the newly added patent, Patent No. 200934846. As mentioned above, use improved cosine similarity to cross check the restrictions of functional words. Since the word “polishing” is mentioned in the function cluster of the newly added patent, and its numerical value is very great, the word “polishing” is ruled out. Then the similarity value of “improve quality” is 50.63%; the similarity value of “raise removing rate” is 11.43%; the similarity value of “increase flatness of substrate” is 79.56%; and the similarity value of “reduce cost” is 50%. After “raise removing rate” is ruled out due to its similarity value being less than 30%, patent attribution probability method is used to make calculation. The achieved results are: the Pjvalue of “improve quality” is 23.83%; the Pjvalue of “increase flatness of substrate” is 59.12%; and the Pjvalue of “reduce cost” is 17.05%. After artificial interpretation, it is found that this patent is mainly about “increase flatness of substrate.” Nevertheless, although the functional words of “improve quality” and “reduce cost” are less, they are mentioned in the patent. Therefore, we judge that this patent has these three functions existed, but is mainly about “increase flatness of substrate.” This result is the same as our test result, proving that it is feasible to apply this method to functional words.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The paper innovatively uses the combination of improved cosine similarity concept and patent attribution probability method to establish a study for judging which technical category and functional category that a newly added patent is attributed to, intending to enhance the speed and accuracy for judgment of patent attribution. Focusing on the searched patents relating to hydrolysis substrate fabrication process, the paper uses the technical words, part/component words and functional words of the related patents of hydrolysis substrate fabrication process to judge which technical category and functional category that a patent is attributed to. According to the method proposed in the paper, before patent attribution probability method is applied to a newly added patent, improved cosine similarity formula is firstly used to crosscheck the newly added patent with the various technical categories or functional categories. First of all, the improved cosine similarity values of the newly added patent are calculated so as to preliminarily judge that the newly added patent may be attributed to technical category or functional category. Furthermore, the patent categories with unrelated technical categories or functional categories are ruled out. And the formula of probability method is used for calculation of the technical categories or functional categories that the patent may be attributed to. According to the calculated probability values, it can judge that the patent is attributed to which technical category or functional category. It decreases the quantity of technical categories or functional categories to be calculated by patent attribution probability method, shortens the calculation time, and enhances the speed and accuracy in judgment of which category a patent is attributed to. The study not only establishes the innovative patent attribution way by combining the concept of improved cosine similarity method with the method for judging the probability of patent attribution, but also takes the related patents of hydrolysis substrate fabrication process for verification, thus proving that the innovative method developed by the paper is feasible.