@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Structural and energetic insight into the interactions between the benzolactam inhibitors and tumor marker HSP90α

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Computational methods were used to reveal the interactions of benzolactam inhibitors to HSP90α.Hydrophobic interactions contributed the most to the binding affinity.A good linear correlation was obtained between the calculated and the experimental binding free energies.Ala55, Ile96, and Leu107 are responsible for the different binding affinities of compounds.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
HSP90α,MD simulations,Molecular docking,MM–GBSA,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The heat shock protein 90α (HSP90α) provides a promising molecular target for cancer therapy. A series of novel benzolactam inhibitors exhibited distinct inhibitory activity for HSP90α. However, the structural basis for the impact of distinct R1 substituent groups of nine benzolactam inhibitors on HSP90α binding affinities remains unknown. In this study, we carried out molecular docking, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, and molecular mechanics and generalized Born/surface area (MM–GBSA) binding free energy calculations to address the differences. Molecular docking studies indicated that all nine compounds presented one conformation in the ATP-binding site of HSP90α N-terminal domain. MD simulations and subsequent MM–GBSA calculations revealed that the hydrophobic interactions between all compounds and HSP90α contributed the most to the binding affinity and a good linear correlation was obtained between the calculated and the experimental binding free energies (R=0.88). The per residue decomposition revealed that the most remarkable differences of residue contributions were found in the residues Ala55, Ile96, and Leu107 defining a hydrophobic pocket for the R1 group, consistent with the analysis of binding modes. This study may be helpful for the future design of novel HSP90α inhibitors.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As ubiquitous proteins in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic, Heat shock proteins (HSPs) are a family of proteins induced by heat shock. The quintessential members of this group are associated with the folding and unfolding of a wide variety of other client proteins (Taipale et al., 2010). According to their molecular size, mammalian HSPs can be divided into six families, such as HSP27, HSP40, HSP60, HSP70, HSP90, and HSP100 (Khalil et al., 2011). Mammalian HSP90, a highly conserved molecular chaperone, has two major isoforms in the cytoplasm, namely HSP90α (inducible form) and HSP90β (constitutive form). To date, over 200HSP90 client proteins have been identified, including signaling protein kinases (e.g. epidermal growth factor receptor, Akt kinase, Ras), transcription factors (e.g. p53), and steroid hormone receptors (Khalil et al., 2011). These client proteins are well involved in the cellular signal transduction pathways, such as PI3K-Akt-MAPK/ERK and cAMP-dependent pathways. Therefore, in addition to the involvement in protein folding, HSP90 also plays fundamental roles in a plethora of cellular processes, encompassing intracellular transport, signal transduction, protein degradation, gene regulation, and apoptosis (Zhao et al., 2005).Various studies demonstrate that overexpression of HSP90 has been implicated in various human carcinomas, including both solid tumors and hematological malignancies, marking HSP90 a promising molecular target for cancer therapy (Li et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2009; Shiau et al., 2006). It is also well-documented that the secretion of HSP90α from the cytosol to the extracellular space can be processed under the stress conditions such as hypoxia and oxidative stress (Li et al., 2007). Recently, Wang et al. (2009) have ascertained that the secreted HSP90α is responsible for tumor invasiveness and blockade of the secreted HSP90α inhibits tumor invasiveness. Moreover, the level of plasma HSP90α is correlated with tumor malignancy in clinical cancer patients. These data not only imply the effective target of HSP90α in cancer therapeutics, but also reveal the feasibility of using HSP90α as a viable marker for diagnosis of malignant tumors. Indeed, HSP90α has recently been proved to be a new tumor marker (Khalil et al., 2011).Structurally, HSP90 is a homodimer and each monomer is composed of three flexible domains, including an N-terminal domain, a middle domain, and a C-terminal dimerization domain. The N-terminal domain is the site of ATP binding and is related to the weak ATPase activity. Association of ATP molecule to the N-terminal domain allosterically induces conformational changes in the arrangement of the N-terminal and middle domains and then is hydrolyzed to ADP when the allosteric regulations are complete (Shiau et al., 2006; Lu et al., 2014a,b). This allosteric activation mechanism is greatly conserved in the HSP family (Lu et al., 2014c). From the therapeutic standpoint, it is feasible to design potent inhibitors to compete with ATP, thereby resulting in the inhibition of HSP90 function which contributes to an effective cancer therapy. Therefore, the functional role of HSP90 in the pathogenesis of cancer is gaining increasingly attention in developing HSP90 inhibitors.Inhibitors targeting the ATP-binding site of HSP90α are currently in various stages of developments. As of yet, none of HSP90α inhibitors are available in the market. In fact, some promising HSP90α inhibitors display excellent antitumor activities and have entered clinical phase II and/or III trials in non-small-cell lung cancer, melanoma, and acute myeloid leukemia (Bhat et al., 2014), such as AUY922, AT13387, STA9090, KW-2478, and SNX5422 (Fig. 1). Very recently, Ernst et al. (2014) reported a novel benzolactam series of HSP90α inhibitors. Of them, the potent compound 33 showed an IC50 of 3nM for HSP90α. Remarkably, the compounds with the different carbon linked substitution ortho to the lactam, namely the R1 substituent groups (Table 1), may reduce the HSP90α binding affinity compared to the compound 33 with the R1 substituent group of the 4-tetrahydro-2H-pyran. For instance, the compound 36 with the R1 group of tert-butyl showed 60-fold lower potency against the compound 33. However, the structural basis for the impact of distinct R1 substituent groups on HSP90α binding affinities remains unknown.Computational modeling, with its ability to assess the protein–ligand interactions at atomic level, has been increasingly employed to insight into the structural and energetic properties of the formation of biomolecular complexes. In this study, we performed molecular docking, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, and the binding free energy calculations (molecular mechanics and generalized Born/surface area, MM–GBSA) to illuminate the detailed interactions between the benzolactam inhibitors and HSP90α. Based on the obtained results, we would unravel the structural basis for the effect of different R1 substitutes of benzolactam inhibitors on the inhibitory capability of HSP90α, which may be the benefit of developing the next-generation of potent HSP90α inhibitors.The 1.93Å X-ray crystal structure of the HSP90α N-terminal domain in complex with the compound 31 was extracted from the RCSB Protein Data Bank (PDB ID: 4O0B) (Ernst et al., 2014). The chemical structures for the remaining eight compounds were constructed using the ACD/ChemSketch software and subsequently energy-minimized using the B3LYP/6-31G* as implemented in the Gaussian03 program.The compound 31 was deleted from the ATP-binding site of HSP90α and the resulting unbound structure was used in the docking experiments, which was carried out using the AutoDock 4.2 package (Morris et al., 2009). For the HSP90α, the polar hydrogen atoms were added and subsequently the heavy atoms were fixed and only hydrogen atoms were allowed to move during energy minimization to form optimal orientations. After minimization, the Kollman united atom partial charges and AutoDock atom types were assigned through the Hydrogen module in AutoDock Tools (ADT). For the compounds, all hydrogen atoms including polar and non-polar atoms were added and the Gasteiger-Hückel atomic charge was subsequently assigned. The grid center was defined at the centroid of compound 31 in the HSP90α/31 complex. The number of grid points in x, y, and z direction was set to 60, 60, and 60 with a spacing value of 0.375Å via the AutoGrid module. In the process of docking, the Lamarckian genetic algorithm was used for ligand conformational search. The parameters for the docking run were set as follows: a maximum number of 2500,000 energy evaluations, an initial population of 150 randomly placed individuals, a maximum number of 27,000 generations, a mutation rate of 0.02, a crossover rate of 0.8, and an elitism value of 1. For the local search, the so-called Solis and Wets algorithm was applied with a maximum of 300 iterations per search. The parameters were set the same in the previous studies (Lu et al., 2012). A total of 50 autodocked docking runs were carried out for each compound. Using the docked conformation with the lowest binding energy as a reference, the resulting docked conformations were ranked into clusters using a tolerance of 1.0Å root-mean square deviation (RMSD).MD simulations of the nine systems, HSP90α in complex with the corresponding compound in the ATP-binding site, were carried out using the AMBER11 package (Case et al., 2010). The coordinates of the crystal water molecules in the PDB 4O0B were merged into the docked HSP90α-ligand complexes and subsequently kept in the MD simulations. The AMBER ff03 force field (Duan et al., 2003) was used for the HSP90α and the generalized AMBER force field (GAFF) (Mukherjee et al., 2011) was used for the nine compounds. The electrostatic potential for the compounds was calculated at the HF/6-31G* level using the Gaussian03 program. Then, the partial charges were determined via the restricted electrostatic-potential fitting method. A truncated octahedral box of TIP3P waters (Jorgensen et al., 1983) was added with a 10Å buffer around the complex. The appropriate number of counter-ions was added to maintain the electroneutrality of the nine simulated systems.In the minimization, the protein–ligand complexes of the nine systems were first constrained to minimize the water molecules and counterions. Then, the whole system was minimized without any restraint. After the completion of minimization, each system was heated to 300K in 300ps, followed by constant temperature equilibration at 300K for 700ps with a positional constraint of 10kcal/(molÅ2) on the protein–ligand complex in a canonical ensemble (NVT). In the production run, each 50ns MD simulation was performed in an isothermal isobaric ensemble (NPT) with periodic boundary conditions. The particle mesh Ewald (PME) method (Darden et al., 1993) was used to calculate the long-range electrostatic interactions. A cut-off distance of 10Å was used to calculate the short-range electrostatics and van der Waals interactions. The SHAKE algorithm (Ryckaert et al., 1997) was used to restrain all covalent bonds involving hydrogen atoms. Each simulation was coupled to a 300K thermal bath at 1.0atm via the Langevin algorithm (Wu and Brooks, 2003). The integration step was set to 2fs in the MD simulations.The popular MM–GBSA method (Sun et al., 2014; Lu et al., 2011; Bai et al., 2014; Shang et al., 2014; Lu et al., 2014d) was used to assess the binding free energy (ΔGbinding) between HSP90α and each compound. The 101 snapshots were extracted from the 20–50ns MD trajectories with an equal interval of 300ps to the ΔGbinding∙ ΔGbinding was calculated using Eq. (1).(1)ΔGbinding=ΔGcomplex–[ΔGprotein+ΔGligand]Each free energy term in Eq. (1) includes the gas phase molecular mechanical energy (ΔEgas), the solvation free energy (ΔGsolvation), and the entropy term (−TΔS), as shown in Eq. (2). The conformational entropy (−TΔS) was calculated through a normal mode analysis with AMBER NMODE module.(2)ΔGbinding=ΔEgas+ΔGsolvation–TΔSΔEgas can be further divided into the van der Waals energy (ΔEvdW), electrostatic energy (ΔEele), and internal energy (ΔEint) in the gas phase (Eq. (3)).(3)ΔEgas=ΔEvdW+ΔEele+ΔEintThe solvation free energy, ΔGsolvation, consists of two parts (Eq. (4)): the polar contribution (ΔGGB) and the nonpolar contribution (ΔGnonpolar).(4)ΔGsolvation=ΔGGB+ΔGnonpolarThe polar contribution (ΔGGB) to the solvation free energy was obtained using the GB model described by Onufriev et al. (igb=5) with mbondi2 radii and interior and exterior dielectric constants of 1 and 78.5, respectively. The nonpolar contribution (ΔGnonpolar) to the solvation free energy was calculated from the solvent-accessible surface-area (SASA) (Eq. (5)),(5)ΔGnonpolar=γ×SASA +bThe corresponding solvation parameters γ and b are 0.0072kcal/(molÅ2) and 0kcal/mol, respectively.The ΔGbinding was decomposed into contributions from protein and ligand interaction pairs via the MM–GBSA method. The ΔGbinding of each interaction pair consists of three terms, including ΔEvdW, ΔEele and ΔGGBSA.The correlative motions of protein domains were analyzed by the Cα atoms dynamical DCCM (Blachly et al., 2013), which can be calculated by Eq. (6):(6)C(i,j)=c(i,j)c(i,i)1/2c(j,j)1/2where C(i,j) is the covariance matrix element of the protein fluctuation between residues i and j.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In the present study, molecular docking, MD simulations, MM–GBSA binding free energy calculations, and decomposition of binding energy were performed to unravel the binding modes and the different binding abilities of the nine benzolactam inhibitors to the ATP-binding site of HSP90α N-terminal domain. The MM–GBSA calculations showed that the hydrophobic interactions between the nine compounds and HSP90α contributed the most to the binding affinity. Moreover, a good linear correlation was obtained between the calculated ΔGbinding and the experimental ΔGbinding, which can be utilized to predict other benzolactam inhibitors. The analysis of per residue contributions revealed that the most remarkable differences found in per residue contributions to the ΔGbinding were observed in the residues Ala55, Ile96, and Leu107. The obtained binding modes of complexes also supported the residue decomposition. Overall, the potent compounds 31–33 engaged in three hydrogen bonds with Asp93, Thr139, and Thr184. The hydrophobic pocket residues were composed of Asn51, Ala55, Ile96, Met98, Leu107, Phe138, Try139, Trp162, and Val186. The results obtained from this study will be valuable for future rational design of novel HSP90α inhibitors as promising anticancer therapeutics.