@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
H7N9 influenza outbreak in China 2013: In silico analyses of conserved segments of the hemagglutinin as a basis for the selection of peptide vaccine targets

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
19 Mismatches detected in HA protein comparing sequences from prior or post H7N9 human infection.Among them three are conserved and present in receptor binding pocket close to the bound sialic acid.14 Amino acid long surface exposed peptide region identified comprising two among three mutations.The region is highly immunogenic respect to B and Th cell induction with high uniqueness.The region is mostly conserved among other H7 subtypes and can be used as a peptide vaccine target.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Bioinformatics,Peptide vaccine,Influenza virus,H7N9 conserved regions,Graphical representation and numerical characterization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The sudden emergence of a human infecting strain of H7N9 influenza virus in China in 2013 leading to fatalities in about 30% of the cases has caused wide concern that additional mutations in the strain leading to human to human transmission could lead to a deadly pandemic. It may happen in a short time span as the outbreak of H7N9 is more and more recurrent, which implies that H7N9 evolution is speeding up. H7N9 flu strains were not known to infect humans before this attack in China in February 2013 and it was solely an avian strain. While currently available drugs such as oseltamivir have been found to be largely effective against the H7N9, albeit with recent reported cases of development of resistance to the drug, there is a necessity to identify alternatives to combat this disease, especially if it assumes pandemic proportions. In our work, we have tried to investigate for the genetic changes in hemagglutinin (HA) protein sequence that lead to human infection by an avian infecting virus and identify possible peptide targets to design vaccines to control this upcoming risk.We identified three highly conserved regions in all H7 subtypes, of which one particular immunogenic surface exposed region was found to be well conserved in all human infecting H7N9 strains (accessed up to 27th March 2014). Compared to H7N9 avian strains, we identified two mutations in this conserved region at the receptor binding site of all post-February 2013 human-infecting H7N9China hemagglutinin protein sequences. One of the mutations is very close (3.6Å) to the hemagglutinin sialic acid binding pocket that may lead to better binding to human host’s sialic acid due to the changes in hydrophobicity of the microenvironment of the binding site. We found that the peptide region with these mutational changes that are specific for human infecting H7N9 virus possess the possibility of being used as target for a peptide vaccine.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Human cases of infection with a novel avian influenza H7N9 were first reported in China on 31st March, 2013 (Huang et al., 2013; Gao et al., 2013). 192 Confirmed cases with severe sickness and 65 deaths were reported till January 3rd, 2014.The earliest H7N9 avian influenza virus was reported from America, spread to Europe and finally arrived in Asia, but it became human infecting H7N9 only in Asia in 2013 (Bai et al., 2014). Human infection with any H7 influenza virus is rare and H7N7, H7N3 and H7N2 are the only subtypes that were found to cause human infections previously. H7N9 was also the first reported case of a low pathogenic avian influenza virus associated with human mortality. The emergence of a novel reassortant avian influenza virus causing fatalities among humans is a significant threat for public health because if it spreads through human-to-human transmission it can lead to deadly pandemic; H7N9 may have been the result of reassortment between a H9 virus strain with a H7-type hemagglutinin and a N9-type neuraminidase, the rest of the 8 segments being part of the original H9 strain (Neumann et al., 2014; Wu et al., 2013; Xiong et al., 2013; Kageyama et al., 2013). To date, however, human infections with avian H7N9 virus in most of the cases have a history of contact with live poultry market or farms, so it seems to occur through direct contact with infected poultry (Wu et al., 2014; Yu et al., 2013).Like other subtypes of influenza A virus, H7N9 causes mild to severe disease symptoms including fever, cough, and shortness of breath, which may progress to severe pneumonia. Blood poisoning and organ failure are also possible in case of severe H7N9 infection. Elderly people are specifically vulnerable as it was clinically seen that subtype H7N9 causes severe flu symptoms in elderly patients (>60 years of age) with longer duration (median 41.7 days) (Guo et al., 2014; Lam et al., 2013; Zhou et al., 2013). It was reported that most of the patients with confirmed cases of infection were critically ill and that approximately 20% had died of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) or multi-organ failure (Gao et al., 2013). It was seen that sex difference exist in H7N9 infection: males are more susceptible to infection than females (Wu et al., 2014; Ke et al., 2013; Yu et al., 2013; Cowling et al., 2013a,b).Since the influenza virus effortlessly evolves resistance to antiviral drugs, it is more effective to prevent infection using vaccination techniques. An approach to identify human antibody responses towards H7N9 strain confirmed relatively weak protective antibody response to influenza A (H7N9), and needed multiple immunizations to achieve protective immunity (Guo et al., 2014).Effect of drugs available to inhibit influenza A infection was also bioinformatically found to have low binding efficacy with H7N9 neuraminidase (Woods et al., 2013) which substantiates the need of a novel vaccine to protect mankind from this emerging threat. A peptide vaccine is a type of subunit vaccine in which a peptide of the original pathogen is used to immunize an organism. Peptide-based vaccination appears promising as an approach to successfully induce an anti-neoplastic immune response, without any major side effects (Izumoto, 2012).Apart from neuraminidase, the other major surface protein of the influenza virus is hemagglutinin (HA) which is responsible for viral entry into the host cell and also has potential to induce specific antibody response during natural viral infections in humans. Our investigation focused on this protein to identify potential peptide targets for an eventual vaccine that could inhibit virus entry and proliferation ab initio; the search should also identify the specific changes that rendered low pathogenic avian influenza into a deadly human infecting virus to the extent that the hemagglutinin played a role in it. To understand what types of changes occurred in new human infecting H7N9 strains we therefore investigated mutational mismatches among 120HA protein sequences of different H7N9 strains from NCBI which included both prior to and post human infection. We found several mutational changes. Further, to understand which mutational changes are significant, we analyzed all the protein sequences to find surface exposed regions with important mutations of HA. We found eight such regions and then analyzed these peptide regions for immunogenicity and identified a region which encompasses two mutations in the receptor binding pocket in close vicinity to the bound sialic acid and has a potential to be used as a peptide vaccine for H7N9 to control its further pandemic threat, due to its high immunogenicity towards both B and T cell.We have analyzed HA sequences of all H7N9 strains after human infection in China from NCBI database (accessed up to 14th March, 2014). We have analyzed 120HA sequences (20HA sequences from before February 2013 and 100HA sequences after February 2013, from data available up to 14th March, 2014) of H7N9 prior to and post human infection. We discarded partial sequences and focused on full length sequences only. For comparison purposes, we have also accessed full length HA sequences of H7N7 (5 sequences), H7N6 (4 sequences), H7N5 (3 sequences), H7N3 (5 sequences), H7N2 (5 sequences) and H7N1 (3 sequences) viruses on the basis that several strains of these flu types have been observed to infect human beings. Supplementary Table 2 lists the accession numbers and the descriptive IDs of all the sequences used in this work.We have used Clustal X to compare HA protein sequences of the influenza virus strains by multiple alignment. We have aligned HA protein sequences H7N9 strains from prior and post advent of human transmission. Clustal X was also used to align HA protein sequences of H7N9 and other H7 subtypes available in our database.To extract the solvent accessibility profile we have chosen single H7N9 representatives from database of mutant H7N9 and subjected them to the solvent accessibility prediction server (the SABLE server) (Adamczak et al., 2005). The prediction algorithm of the server is neural network based and it has classification accuracy between 77% and 78.4% for all three states of a protein structure (Adamczak et al., 2005). The server generates relative solvent accessibility index for each amino acid ranging from 0 to 100 signifying how much of the residue is exposed to the solvent (100—complete exposure). The results (i.e., generated numbers) for each amino acid position are then subjected to a shifting window scan, where the average solvent accessibility (ASA) is measured for the peptide stretch covered by the window (14 amino acid long), and the next ASA value is generated by shifting the window by one position and so on until the complete length of the sequence is covered. Then ASA values for each amino acid position are plotted leading to an average solvent accessibility profile from the overlapping windows for the entire protein sequence (Ghosh et al., 2010). Our choice of 14 amino acid window size in this study is also based on previous reports that a 14-amino acid peptide is more potent antigenically compared to smaller peptides (Multhoff et al., 2001). In our investigation, from the peaks of the plot we detected 12 regions with high solvent exposure. For confirmation this was done for ten more mutant H7N9 sequences from the protein sequence database and the same set of peptide regions were found.The ASA profile was further tested by submitting the same set of sequences to three other ASA prediction servers: the I-TASSER, HHpred and Jpred. All the servers’ predictions generate essentially similar results, and are comparable to the SABLE results.Variability of selected sequences throughout the HA sequence pool were identified by graphical sliding window method (GSWM). The calculation of GSWM is done on a 20-dimensional Cartesian coordinate system used for graphical representation and numerical characterization of protein sequences (Nandy et al., 2009; Ghosh et al., 2012). In this method each amino acid is assigned to one of the Cartesian axes, say the i-th axis, and occurrence of the amino acid in the sequence causes the count for that axes, i.e. xi, to increase by 1. Doing this sequentially for each amino acid as they appear in the sequence leads to a sequence of points in the 20D grid that traces out a 20-dimensioanl curve in the hyperspace which cannot be visualized but which is amenable to numerical computation. Defining a set of weighted average count for each axisμ1=∑xi/N,μ2=∑x2/N,…μ20=∑x20/Nwe can define a graph radius pRpR=(μ12+(μ22+⋯+μ202)where the xi(i=1,2,…,20) represents the co-ordinates of each amino acid in the sequence and N is the total number of amino acids of the sequence. The pRis sensitive to the residue composition and distribution of a sequence; for sufficiently long stretches the pRcan be used to compare sequences: equal values of the pRare found to imply identical sequences. Since only comparative values are important and not the absolute values of the pR, for small sequences one can add an arbitrary long sequence, say one instance each of each amino acid, i.e., a 20-aa peptide sequence, to all the sequences and compute their pRvalues for comparison purposes.We used this approach to compute pRvalues of 14 aa (amino acid) peptides of our HA sequences. For each sequence, we subject the entire sequence to a shifting window scan where the protein descriptor, pR(enhanced by the prefix sequence), is measured for the peptide stretch covered by the window, and the next pRvalue is generated by shifting the window by one position and so on until the complete length of the sequence is covered. All the 120 H7N9 sequences of HA were analyzed by this method and the number of different values of the pRthat results at each position was determined. Variability of pRvalues at each window at each amino acid position over all the HAs was then compared to determine which peptide stretches varied the least, implying relative conservativeness of those peptide stretches.We have looked for prospective epitope regions in the surface exposed segments of HA sequences predicted by SABLE server (http://sable.cchmc.org/). It is well-known that optimal protective immune response against influenza is B cell mediated response (Stanekova and Vareckova, 2010), which requires presentation and recognition of antigen by T cell (Ghosh et al., 2012). IEDB server (http://tools.immuneepitope.org/tools/bcell/iedb_input) has been used for predicting MHCII binding and predicting cross reactivity between prospective antigen and T cell (Gonzalez-Diaz et al., 2009). ABCpred server (http://www.imtech.res.in/raghava/abcpred/) has been used to predict B cell response (Saha et al., 2006). Other than continuous epitope for B cells, this server recognizes discontinuous epitopes also. To confirm our predicted region’s ability to be detected within a discontinuous epitope we analyzed the HA protein sequence by ElliPro server (http://tools.immuneepitope.org/tools/ElliPro/iedb_input) also which determines discontinuous epitopes available in the protein based on its 3D structure.To determine the uniqueness of the identified region the peptide sequence was subjected to NCBI protein—protein BLAST to find out any structural similarities of the identified region with other proteins. We further analyzed the sequence in PSIPRED (http://bioinf.cs.ucl.ac.uk/psipred/) for 3D alignment.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
