@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Cloud asset for urban flood control

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The concept of “cloud asset” is first proposed for urban flood control.The framework of cloud asset is worked out from both hardware and software aspects.Cloud asset enabled workflow management is presented.A case is given to verify the effectiveness of cloud asset.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cloud asset,Smart object,Cloud-based applications,Mobile agent,Urban flood control,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The performance of physical assets has become a major determinant success factor for urban flood control. However, managing these assets is always challenging as there are a huge number of diverse assets involved, which are distributed throughout the city, and owned by different agencies. Aiming at improving the management efficiency of these assets, and ensuring their performance, this paper proposes the concept of cloud asset based on cloud computing, mobile agent, and various smart devices. Through hardware integration and software encapsulation, cloud asset could sense its real-time status, adapt to varied working scenarios, be controlled remotely, and shared among agencies. It enables accurate real-time control of every asset, and thus improves the management efficiency and effectiveness. This paper first presents the concept of cloud asset with its technical architecture, and then analyses the software agent model for cloud asset, which is the key enabler to realize UPnP (Universal Plug and Play) management of assets, and provides mobility and intelligence for them. After that, the framework of cloud asset-enabled workflow management is built, in which cloud asset could be easily found and dynamically invoked by different workflows. Finally, a demonstrative case is provided to verify the effectiveness of cloud asset.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Urban flood control has attracted more and more attention in recent years since flood is becoming the most frequent and greatest natural disaster for urban areas, and usually causes severe impacts. Over 233 out of the 633 largest cities in the world are threatened by flood, affecting about 663million inhabitants [1]. In China, during 2008 to 2010, at least 62% cities had encountered urban flood, and 137 cities were flooded for more than three times. According to the Flood Control and Draught Relief Headquarters of China, over 234 cities had been suffered from flood in 2013. The situation will become even worse in the future with the worldwide excessive urbanization and climate change [2]. To mitigate future flood damages in urban area, various measures have been taken out, such as river training, storm water diversion, flood forecasting, real-time warning, and emergency management.However, the effectiveness of these measures is always impeded by the poor performance of diverse physical assets involved, such as dams, sewers, pipes, pumps, hoisters, and sandbags, which will then threaten the success of urban flood control [2]. In order to ensure the performance of these assets throughout the whole process of urban flood control, effective management of them is urgently needed. Currently, some attempts have also been made. For example, Malano et al. [3] identified the roles asset management program (AMP) plays for irrigation and drainage infrastructure, and analyzed its investment requirements. Park and Kim [4] developed a data warehouse based decision support system for the management of sewer infrastructure. To monitor the condition of water pipeline and networks, Davis et al. [5] made a detailed analysis for the possible techniques, and Lau and Dwight [6] proposed a fuzzy-based decision support model. Nevertheless, as most of them are only focusing on a sub-set of assets in urban flood control and covering parts of their lifecycles, many problems remain unsolved, including how to get real-time data from different assets, make remote control of them, and optimize the usage throughout their whole lifecycles.Information technology provides an opportunity to solve these problems, and has been proved to be effective in many other fields. For example, radio frequency identification (RFID) could help asset managers to make asset tracking and monitoring. It has already been widely used in hospitals to improve the asset management efficiency and reduce the cost [7]. As the enabling technology to collect real-world information, wireless sensor network (WSN) has also been widely used in asset management [8]. In addition, agent technology, which could make the management process much more intelligent and flexible, is also widely adopted, such as in the management of transformers in smart grids [9]. However, compared with these practices, the management of physical assets in urban flood control is immensely more complex. It evolves tremendous large amount of diverse physical assets that are physically distributed in very large areas, located in extreme environment, and owned by different agencies [3]. Major challenges still exist that impede the adoption of these technologies to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of physical asset management in urban flood control.Firstly, how to make asset smart so that it could work automatically and be controlled remotely? In urban flood control, monitoring the working status of various physical assets and the environmental information around them is of great importance. However, the dispersion of assets and their extreme working environment makes it impossible to make on-site control for them, thus is a challenge to collect real-time data from them. Besides, during the process of urban flood control, many assets are mobile that would move from one place to another, which further increases the difficulty of managing them. Moreover, the poor connectivity of network posts another difficulty to manage assets remotely as it cannot be always guaranteed in emergency during urban flood.Secondly, how to realize UPnP management for all the diverse assets? In urban flood control, physical assets are usually differed from properties, functions, and interfaces. Even for the semantic same assets, such as pumps from different manufactures, may varied from the implementation point of view. Professional knowledge is usually required when managing these assets, which is fault-prone and inefficient. UPnP is an agile, efficient and platform independent concept for the management of devices, and could greatly improve the management efficiency and flexibility of these assets. However, due to the diversity of APIs for different assets, it is a challenge to develop an information infrastructure for the UPnP management of assets. In addition, the differences on assets executing platforms also impede the development of integrated asset management solution, and hinder the deployment of information systems.Thirdly, how to improve the flexibility of asset management so that assets could easily adapt to the dynamic and diverse working scenarios? In urban flood control, the exact working scenarios of assets are usually dynamic and unpredictable. It will benefit a lot if assets could be easily raised and adopted in a new working scenario according to the real-time situations. However, the management of assets is always separated with the process of urban flood control, and information of them is isolated in different agencies with different formats and security levels. It will be a great obstruction to realize flexible utilization. Moreover, the absence of effective asset sharing mechanism further increases the difficulty, and impedes the global optimal decision making during the process of urban flood control.Aiming at addressing the above challenges, this paper proposes the concept of “cloud asset” for urban flood control. Through equipping with various information technologies, cloud asset could: (1) Automatically collect real-time data from the physical world during its whole lifecycle; (2) Be monitored and controlled remotely in an UPnP manner; (3) Be flexible and intelligent to adapt to various working scenarios; And (4) be easily invoked and shared through the cloud by all the authorized agencies.In the rest of this paper, relevant literatures will be reviewed first, and then Section 3 will introduce the concept of cloud asset and its technical architecture. In Section 4, the mobile agent model of cloud asset will be discussed in details, and Section 5 will describe the mechanism of how a cloud asset is invoked and used by diverse workflows. A case of cloud asset with its executing process will be presented in Section 6. After that, Section 7 will conclude the whole paper and discuss the future works.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Numerous diverse physical assets are involved in urban flood control, and effective management of them is always of great importance. In order to manage these assets more efficiently and accurately under the scenario of urban flood control, this paper proposed the concept of “cloud asset”. By integrating with various technologies, from both hardware and software aspects, its conceptual framework was clearly defined, and the supportive management platform was developed. Besides, to support UPnP management of assets, and provide them intelligence and mobility, cloud asset agent model was carefully designed. Furthermore, a cloud-asset enabled workflow management was worked out to fit the dynamic and unpredictable workflows in urban flood control. A demonstrative case was also given to verify the effectiveness of the proposed concept.The contributions of this paper can be concluded as follows. (1) This paper innovatively proposes the concept of cloud asset for urban flood control. It helps realize automatic real-time data collection and remote control of asset, and enables its visibility and traceability through an asset-centric solution, which is feasible and economical under the specific context of urban flood control. Besides, from the managerial point of view, this concept also shifts the management of physical asset from managing its physical status and functions to managing its capabilities and services in the cloud, which is much more flexible and efficient. (2) The technical framework of cloud asset and its management platform is proposed through the well integration of various technologies. It could not only be adopted by diverse assets through their whole lifecycle, but also realize the UPnP management of them. Besides, the framework is proposed independently of any platforms, so that it could be followed by practitioners easily to implement the concept into reality through various development environments. (3) A cloud asset enabled workflow management approach is proposed, in which cloud asset could be easily searched and invoked by diverse workflows. It is flexible enough to adapt to the complex environment of urban flood control, and make the sharing of assets between agencies possible.In the future, this work could be further extended in three aspects. Firstly, to enable better sharing of cloud assets, and facilitate their automatic execution in digital world, an ontology system should be built for unified asset description. Secondly, considering the specific emergency situation in urban flood control, corresponding real-time data analytics tools and decision making models should be further explored to provide timely and accuracy decisions on both urban flood control and asset management processes. Thirdly, the concept should be taken into some real-life urban flood control cases to make a much detailed evaluation of our proposed concept. Furthermore, this research can also be extended for other assets, such as virtual asset like stock, knowledge, and human resources.