@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multiscale modelling to understand the self-assembly mechanism of human β2-adrenergic receptor in lipid bilayer

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Self-assembly mechanism of β2-AR in membrane using multiscale modelling is reported.β2-AR monomers are found to form oligomers after 10μs CGMD simulation.TM1, H8, TM5 and TM6 helices formed most of the dimerization surfaces.Subtle helical rearrangements are required to form energetically favourable dimers.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
GPCR,β2-AR,Oligomerization,CGMD,Simulated annealing,MARTINI,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The long perceived notion that G-Protein Coupled Receptors (GPCRs) function in monomeric form has recently been changed by the description of a number of GPCRs that are found in oligomeric states. The mechanism of GPCR oligomerization, and its effect on receptor function, is not well understood. In the present study, coarse grained molecular dynamics (CGMD) approach was adopted for studying the self-assembly process of the human GPCR, β2-adrenergic receptor (β2-AR), for which several experimental evidences of the dimerization process and its effect on cellular functions are available. Since the crystal structure of β2-AR lacks the third intracellular loop, initially it was modelled and simulated using restrained MD in order to get a stable starting conformation. This structure was then converted to CG representation and 16 copies of it, inserted into a hydrated lipid bilayer, were simulated for 10μs using the MARTINI force field. At the end of 10μs, oligomers of β2-AR were found to be formed through the self-assembly mechanism which were further validated through various analyses of the receptors. The lipid bilayer analysis also helped to quantify this assembly mechanism. In order to identify the domains which are responsible for this oligomerization, a reverse transformation of the CG system back to all-atom structure and simulated annealing run were carried out at the end of 10μs CGMD run. Analysis of the all-atom dimers thus obtained, revealed that TM1/TM1, H8/H8, TM1/TM5 and TM6/TM6 regions formed most of the dimerization surfaces, which is in accordance with some of the experimental observations and recent simulation results.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute the largest family of integral membrane proteins mostly involved in signal transduction pathways. Being present on the cell surfaces, these receptors transmit signals in response to various stimuli like light, odorants, ions, hormones, nucleotides, small peptides etc. bringing about various physiological changes through their interactions with heterotrimeric G proteins (Watson and Arkinstall, 1994; Flower, 1999). Around 5% of the entire human genome encodes for approximately 950 GPCR proteins (Collins, 2004; Takeda et al., 2002), whose physiological importance can be understood from the fact that malfunctioning of these receptors lead to various diseases like asthma, hypertension, congestive heart-failure, schizophrenia, Parkinson's and glaucoma (Wilson and Bergsma, 2000). As a result of this, GPCRs have become hot targets for therapeutic drugs over the years, resulting in almost 45% of current day drugs which target and modulate various GPCR structures (Drews, 2000).Despite having immense importance, the exact mechanisms of binding of these receptors to their ligands, activation mechanism and their interactions with G proteins are not very clearly understood due to the lack of sufficient structural information. The crystal structure of rhodopsin (Palczewski et al., 2000; Ballesteros and Palczewski, 2001) was the first mammalian GPCR to be reported and almost a decade later other structures came up including that of human β2-adrenergic receptor (β2-AR) in both active and inactive forms (Rasmussen et al., 2007, 2011a,b; Rosenbaum et al., 2011), A2A adenosine receptor (Jaakola et al., 2008), CXCR4 receptor (Wu et al., 2010), metarhodopsin II (Choe et al., 2011), κ-opioid receptor (Wu et al., 2012) and μ-opioid receptor (Manglik et al., 2012).Among the different classes of GPCRs, class A GPCRs are some of the most well studied molecules. After rhodopsin, the adrenergic receptors are the most widely studied and most well understood molecules in this class (Strosberg, 1993, 1995). Among the nine subtypes of adrenergic receptors, β2-AR, stimulated by adrenaline and noradrenaline, has become the epicentre of present GPCR research due to the recent elucidation of its active crystal structure (PDB ID: 3SN6) (Rasmussen et al., 2011b) and pharmacological importance for being associated with asthma, obesity and type-2 diabetes. Despite the available structural information, the exact mechanisms by which these transmembrane proteins function in the lipid bilayer have eluded researchers for decades. The notion that all GPCRs function as independent monomeric units has long been challenged by various biochemical and biophysical studies (like fluorescence or bioluminescence resonance energy transfer, FRET and BRET, respectively) which suggest many GPCR molecules function either as homodimers or heterodimers (Bouvier, 2001; George et al., 2002; Issafras et al., 2002; Overton and Blumer, 2002; Terrillon et al., 2003; Floyd et al., 2003), the minimal oligomeric assemblies in the membrane environment and that these processes occur constitutively and are not modulated by ligand binding (Issafras et al., 2002; Terrillon et al., 2003; Floyd et al., 2003; Overton and Blumer, 2000; Ayoub et al., 2002; Jensen et al., 2002; Babcock et al., 2003; Canals et al., 2003; Dinger et al., 2003; Guo et al., 2003; Stanasila et al., 2003; Trettel et al., 2003). Various functions ranging from ontogeny to regulation of their pharmacological and signalling properties have been attributed to the dimerization of GPCRs (Terrillon and Bouvier, 2004; Gurevich and Gurevich, 2008) The notion that GPCRs form dimers, is supported by various structural studies including radiation inactivation of α- and β-AR (Venter and Fraser, 1983), hydrodynamic properties of cardiac muscarinic receptors (Peterson et al., 1986), photoaffinity labelling of muscarinic receptors (Avissar et al., 1983) and cross-linking of glucagon receptors (Herberg et al., 1985). Using atomic force microscopy, Palczewski and co-workers have shown that rhodopsin and opsin form constitutive dimers in dark-adapted native retinal membranes involving transmembrane (TM) segments TM4 and TM5 (Fotiadis et al., 2003; Liang et al., 2003). Javitch and co-workers have shown through chemical cross-linking experiments that similar TM4–TM5 interfaces are involved in dopamine D2 receptor (Guo et al., 2003) and δ-opioid receptor (Johnston et al., 2011) dimers. However, the recent crystal structure of κ-opioid receptor (Wu et al., 2012), in the form of dimers, shows that TM1 and the eighth helix (H8) form the interfacial surface. Similar observations can also be made from the μ-opioid receptor (Manglik et al., 2012) crystal structure, which shows the presence of TM5/TM6 as well as TM1/H8 interfaces on the dimerization surface. Analogous studies by Angers and co-workers (Angers et al., 2000) have demonstrated the constitutive homodimerization of another human GPCR, β2-AR, at the surface of living mammalian cells. The fact that β2-AR forms homodimers has become well accepted through a series of experimental evidences. Co-expression studies of truncated β2-AR containing TM1–TM5 and TM6–TM7 have been shown to form functional receptors, while expression of truncation alone yielded no signalling (Kobilka et al., 1988). Bouvier and co-workers (Hebert et al., 1996) have shown through differential epitope tagging that β2-AR form SDS resistant homodimers and TM6 of the receptor represent part of an interface for receptor dimerization which even leads to the receptor activation. A FRET study performed by Fung and co-workers involving β2-AR in model bilayer showed that the molecule undergoes spontaneous oligomerization with TM1/H8 forming the preferential dimerization surface along with TM6/TM6 interfacial surfaces also being present (Fung et al., 2009). Apart from experimental studies, a couple of recent computational studies by Periole and co-workers (Periole et al., 2012) and by Johnston and co-workers (Johnston et al., 2012) have shown that TM1/H8 forms energetically most preferential dimerization surface in both rhodopsin as well as β1/β2-AR dimers respectively, apart from other TM surfaces also being present on the dimerization surface.The present communication aims at studying the mechanism of self-assembly of β2-AR using multi-scale modelling technique complemented by very long simulation time. The approach utilizes coarse grained (CG) simulation in order to achieve micro-second (μs) level MD simulation which helped to unravel the self-aggregating property of β2-AR. Simplified CG models can be used to overcome the limitations posed by huge and complex all-atom systems, enabling the study of biomolecular processes occurring in the scale of tens of microseconds. Several membrane protein assemblies have been studied recently using the CGMD technique (Periole et al., 2012; Johnston et al., 2012; Psachoulia et al., 2010; Periole et al., 2007; Schmidt et al., 2008; Reynwar and Deserno, 2008; de Meyer et al., 2008; Sengupta and Marrink, 2010; Morozova et al., 2011; West et al., 2009). The study reported here started off with rebuilding of the missing residues of the starting crystal structure of β2-AR, which was then converted into a CG model and was embedded in a 1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DSPC) bilayer. The CG monomeric unit thus formed was replicated in the x–y plane to produce a system consisting of 16 monomers of β2-AR immersed in the DSPC bilayer. The entire system was then simulated for 10μs using the MARTINI CG force field parameters (Monticelli et al., 2008; Marrink et al., 2007; de Jong et al., 2012). The long simulation performed helped to understand the self-assembly mechanism of β2-AR monomers occurring constitutively in the lipid environment. The structures obtained at the end of the 10μs of the CGMD run was converted back to all-atom (AA) representation and refined using simulated annealing (SA) runs in order to identify the dimerization interfaces of the β2-AR monomers. The calculations in terms of solvation free energy of dimer formation also helped to understand the importance of helical rearrangements achieved through simulations as compared to the direct dimeric contacts obtained through homology modelling of β2-AR dimers. The overall study helped to understand qualitatively the time dependent evolution of the membrane protein assemblies and identify the helical interfaces among them, complementing the already available experimental evidences of the homodimer formation property of human β2-AR protein.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In vivo study of membrane proteins is an arduous task. Understanding the functional behaviour of these molecules under cellular conditions remains hindered many a times, owing to their complexity. The notion that GPCRs function as dimers could not be proved for a long time because of the lack of experimental evidences. But recent studies have proved beyond doubt that these membrane receptors indeed function as oligomeric units, both homo as well as heteromers (Bouvier, 2001; George et al., 2002; Issafras et al., 2002; Overton and Blumer, 2002; Terrillon et al., 2003; Floyd et al., 2003). The present study helps to qualitatively understand the self-assembly mechanism of one of the most well understood human GPCR molecules, β2-AR, for which experimental evidences of self-assembly are available (Angers et al., 2000; Kobilka et al., 1988; Hebert et al., 1996). The CG representation using MARTINI force field, helped to achieve a very long simulation time of 10 μs, for an explicit system consisting of 16 monomers of β2-AR, DSPC lipid molecules, water and ions. The analyses carried out in terms of buried protein ASA, monomer mean square displacement, radial distribution functions, lipid bilayer thickness analysis and order parameter helped to represent and understand the self-assembly mechanism of β2-AR in the lipid bilayer. The increasing trend of the averaged value of buried ASA of all the protein monomers is a clear indication of the oligomerization event taking place spontaneously in the lipid bilayer. The fluctuations in the values reflect the association and dissociation of the protein monomers during the process. Visualization of the trajectory also clearly showed the monomers assembling in the DSPC bilayer to form dimers (6 distinct dimeric units were formed and maintained throughout the simulation), which associated to form higher oligomeric clusters. Towards the end of the simulation, 8μs onwards, a growing string-like cluster was observed which is also reflected by the bilayer thickness plot of Fig. 3. The observations reported in the current study with respect to the interfacial TM helices forming the dimerization interfaces are in agreement with some of the previously reported experimental as well as simulation studies of different GPCRs (Choe et al., 2011; Wu et al., 2012; Manglik et al., 2012; Periole et al., 2007, 2012; Johnston et al., 2012). The observation that TM1/TM1 and H8/H8 form the most stable dimerization interface, constituting a major proportion of the dimer population, is in line with experimental observations of crystal structures of metarhodopsin II (Choe et al., 2011), κ-opioid (Wu et al., 2012) and μ-opioid (Manglik et al., 2012) receptors and cross-link based β2-AR dimers (Fung et al., 2009), as well as simulation studies performed on rhodopsin (Periole et al., 2012) and β2-AR/y1-AR dimers (Johnston et al., 2012). TM1/TM5 and TM6/TM6 interfaces were also found to form the dimerization interface. The successful application of the reverse transformation technique helped to reconstruct the AA structure at the end of 10s CGMD simulation and visualize the relative orientations the TM1/TM1, H8/H8, TM1/TM5 and TM6/TM6 helices forming the dimers. The AA structure analysis also revealed the orientation of the helices in the bilayer and also the relative position of the “272LKTLGIIMGTFTL” motif on TM6. Further, calculations of the solvation free energy gains upon dimer formation revealed that the β2-AR dimeric pairs obtained through the simulation run were energetically similar to that of available dimer crystal structure of metarhodopsin II as well as a modelled β2-AR dimer with metarhodopsin II as a template.The present study is an effort to qualitatively understand the process of β2-AR self-assembly. The application of CG method helped to achieve a long simulation time, often difficult to attain through AA simulations, which showed that β2-AR indeed self-assembles constitutively in the cellular lipid environment with interfacial TM helices similar to other GPCR dimers. However, like any other reduced representation schemes, MARTINI CG models also suffer from a few inherent limitations which have been discussed in details by Marrink and co-workers (Periole et al., 2012; Marrink and Tieleman, 2013; Ingólfsson et al., 2013) and hence any result should be interpreted with utmost care. The elongated oligomeric β2-AR cluster formations towards the end of the CGMD simulation could have arisen due to the limitations and simplicity of the modelled CG membrane, as the reduced representation of the MARTINI force field overlooks polar interactions like hydrogen bond and salt bridges, and also uses restraints to preserve protein secondary structural elements which might limit internal protein dynamics and hence affect cluster size. As a result of this, the reverse transformation to all-atom representation at the end of the CGMD run failed to properly establish inter-monomer polar interactions and might require long all-atom refinement simulation to do so.Considering the advantages and limitations generally associated with CG models, the findings reported here may help researchers to design better experimental studies involving oligomeric units of the β2-AR protein, in order to further understand the functioning of this GPCR, and other GPCR molecules in general. This may also lead to varied approaches to targeting this molecule, already known to have immense pharmacological importance.