@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Affinity of HIV-1 antibody 2G12 with monosaccharides: A theoretical study based on explicit and implicit water models

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Affinities of HIV-1 antibody 2G12 with monosaccharides were examined.QM methods with explicit and implicit water models were applied.d-Fructose's higher binding affinity over d-mannose was clarified.Stronger binding of d-fructose over d-mannose was due to the solvation effects.Significant pair interactions among d-fructose, amino acids, and waters were found.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
HIV-1 antibody 2G12,d-Mannose and d-fructose,FMO-PCM,In silico ligand structure,Solvation effect,Binding free energy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In order to develop potential ligands to HIV-1 antibody 2G12 toward HIV-1 vaccine, binding mechanisms of the antibody 2G12 with the glycan ligand of d-mannose and d-fructose were theoretically examined. d-Fructose, whose molecular structure is slightly different from d-mannose, has experimentally shown to have stronger binding affinity to the antibody than that of d-mannose. To clarify the nature of d-fructose's higher binding affinity over d-mannose, we studied interaction between the monosaccharides and the antibody using ab initio fragment molecular orbital (FMO) method considering solvation effect as implicit model (FMO-PCM) as well as explicit water model. The calculated binding free energies of the glycans were qualitatively well consistent with the experimentally reported order of their affinities with the antibody 2G12. In addition, the FMO-PCM calculation elucidated the advantages of d-fructose over d-mannose in the solvation energy as well as the entropic contribution term obtained by MD simulations. The effects of explicit water molecules observed in the X-ray crystal structure were also scrutinized by means of FMO methods. Significant pair interaction energies among d-fructose, amino acids, and water molecules were uncovered, which indicated contributions from the water molecules to the strong binding ability of d-fructose to the antibody 2G12. These FMO calculation results of explicit water model as well as implicit water model indicated that the strong binding of d-fructose over d-mannose was due to the solvation effects on the d-fructose interaction energy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In physiological systems, a large variety of biological functions are regulated by various interactions between biomolecules. Aiming for the understanding of the functions as well as drug developments, it is necessary to investigate biochemical mechanisms of the interactions that trigger a disease. It is known that the interaction between saccharides and their receptors is involved in many biological systems especially in viral infection (Smith and Helenius, 2004), e.g., influenza virus hemagglutinin–saccharides interaction (Gamblin et al., 2004; Skehel and Wiley, 2000; Zhang et al., 2010). The quantitative analysis of the interaction between saccharides and their receptor by theoretical calculations is challenging because of saccharides’ weaker, but sensitive affinities compared with other biomolecules such as proteins or DNAs.In the present study, we employ the fragment molecular orbital (FMO) method proposed by Kitaura et al. (Kitaura et al., 1999; Fedorov and Kitaura, 2007a). FMO method enables us to evaluate the physical properties of fragments as well as the interaction between them (Fedorov and Kitaura, 2007a). It is also possible to examine the binding affinity between a ligand and its receptor based on chemical fragments. These days, various investigations of ligands’ interaction with proteins in large biochemical systems have been reported using FMO method (Fukuzawa et al., 2006; Ito et al., 2008; Yamagishi et al., 2010; Ozawa et al., 2011; Nomura et al., 2012), which are summarized in reviews (Fedorov and Kitaura, 2007a; Gordon et al., 2012). With regard to saccharides–protein interaction, FMO calculations on charged saccharides with influenza hemagglutinin (Iwata et al., 2008; Sawada et al., 2007, 2008; Takematsu et al., 2009) and a neutral high-mannose ligand complex with griffithsin (Nagata et al., 2012) were recently reported.For the application of calculations to biochemical target, it is important to properly consider solvent effects. Among various continuum solvation models, the polarizable continuum model (PCM) (Tomasi et al., 2005) is one of the most widely used ones. The FMO-based PCM was introduced for the energy by Fedorov et al. (2006) and various enhancements of the FMO-PCM method, such as gradient (Li et al., 2010) and pair interaction energy decomposition analysis (PIEDA) (Fedorov and Kitaura, 2012), have been developed. In 2010, Sawada et al. performed the FMO-PCM calculations at the MP2/6-31G* level to disaccharides complexes with influenza virus hemagglutinin resulted in good agreement with the experimental binding energies (Sawada et al., 2010a, 2010b; Sawada, 2012).HIV infection is a target system of our research, where an interaction of saccharides–protein plays a key role in the infection. In order to elucidate the nature of glycan–protein binding at the molecular level toward the contribution to the medications, we studied monosaccharides bound with the antibody involved in HIV-1 infection system by FMO calculations.HIV-1 infection is the etiologic cause of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) and has been investigated since the virus was recognized 30 years ago. At the end of 2010, UNAIDS (Joint United Nations Programme on HIV and AIDS) reported that an estimated 34 million people were living with HIV worldwide and the number of people dying of AIDS-related causes was 1.8 million (AIDS Epidemic Update, 2012). An effective vaccine is, therefore, paramount to combat the epidemic.A remarkable feature of HIV is the dense glycan array that surrounds the exposed envelope antigens. The envelope protein gp120 of HIV-1 is one of the most heavily glycosylated proteins in nature, with many of high-mannose type glycan (Morelli et al., 2011). The glycan epitope of gp120 has been considered as potential antigenic targets for the development of an antibody-based HIV-1 vaccine.The human monoclonal antibody 2G12 is capable of recognizing sugars on the high-mannose carbohydrate of gp120 with high affinity (Calarese et al., 2003). In 2003, Calarese et al. solved X-ray crystal structures of Fab region of 2G12 and its complexes with the disaccharide Manα1-2Man (Fig. 1) and the high-mannose oligosaccharide Man9GlcNAc2 (Calarese et al., 2003). Their study indicated the importance of the oligomannose D1 arm in the interaction between gp120 high-mannose and 2G12 (Calarese et al., 2003, 2005). Antigens that resemble these natural high-mannose epitopes of 2G12 would be highly desirable components for an HIV-1 vaccine.In 2010, Davis and his co-workers reported X-ray crystal structures of Fab 2G12 with d-fructose (Doores et al., 2010). They also found that d-fructose had higher affinity with 2G12 than self glycan d-mannose (Doores et al., 2010). From a structural point of view, they investigated the effects of C-5 hydroxyl group of d-fructose on the ligand binding as well as water molecules in the vicinity of the binding site found in the X-ray structure. This non-self glycan could be an important component of a carbohydrate anti-HIV-1 vaccine. Therefore, the understanding of the glycans’ binding mechanisms of the antibody 2G12 is critical in developing HIV-1 vaccines.Details of the antibody–neutral carbohydrate ligand interaction are still unclear. To investigate the glycan ligand binding mechanisms of 2G12, we have shown the physicochemical picture of the interaction between 2G12 and its high-mannose Man9GlcNAc2 ligand (Koyama et al., 2013). We herein report the binding free energies of neutral monosaccharides, d-mannose and d-fructose, with HIV-1 antibody 2G12 using FMO-PCM calculations at the MP2/6-31G* level. This is the first application of the FMO-PCM calculations to the HIV-1 system where human HIV-1 antibody 2G12 binds to its ligand saccharides. From an aspect of the saccharide–protein interaction, the higher-level calculation considering solvation effects would be necessary for the appropriate evaluation of this neutral monosaccharids’ moderate interaction. For this objective, explicit water molecules detected in the X-ray structure were also examined extensively by means of pair interaction energy analysis.To elucidate the nature of a higher binding affinity of d-fructose over d-mannose, we carried out FMO calculation utilizing X-ray crystal structures of the Fab 2G12–d-fructose/d-mannose complexes as calculation models. At first we cut out the ligand-binding site from the original X-ray crystal structure in order to reproduce systems with minimum computational loads. The model used in the present study consists of peptides of a binding region of the antibody 2G12 (L-chain Val2-Val110, H-chain Glu1-Lys117) with one monosaccharide ligand. Hydrogen atoms were subsequently added to the model by means of MOE Protonate 3D program under the experimental condition; pH 7.0 and T=300K (MOE (The Molecular Operating Environment) Version 2009.10). All the protonated states of histidines of d-mannose–antibody complex (PDB ID: 1OP3) and of d-fructose–antibody complex (PDB ID: 3OAY) were same except H32; positively charged H32 (with hydrogen atoms on the δ and ɛ nitrogens, with d-mannose) and neutral H32 (with a hydrogen atom on the δ nitrogen, with d-fructose). This difference mainly aroused from the position as well as the direction of the hydroxyl group of the mannose (Figs. 3 and 4).Regarding the glycan ligand, the crystal structure of Fab 2G12 with d-fructose (PDB ID: 3OAY, Resolution 1.95Å) was utilized for the d-fructose–antibody complex model. The model for d-mannose–antibody complex was prepared using mannose disaccharide–Fab 2G12 complex crystal structure (PDB ID: 1OP3, Resolution 1.75Å). The ligand mannose disaccharide was cut into monosaccharide d-mannose and protonated without any other refinement for X-ray structure. Using the software Facio (Suenaga, 2008), the peptides of Fab 2G12 proteins were fragmented into mono amino acid residue-fragments, except Cys-S-S-Cys pairs (disulfide bonds). In the FMO fragmentation scheme, each carbonyl group of the peptide bond was allocated to the next residue fragment (Yoshioka et al., 2011). Each ligand monosaccharide was treated as one fragment. These fragmentation techniques were applied to all FMO calculations in the present work. All FMO calculations were performed at the MP2/6-31G* level (Hehre et al., 1972) using the GAMESS program package (Schmidt et al., 1993; Fedorov and Kitaura, 2004).Pair interaction energy decomposition analysis (PIEDA) (Fedorov and Kitaura, 2007b) was applied to clarify the characteristics of the interaction between the antibody and the ligand. The pair interaction energy is divided into the electrostatic (ES), exchange-repulsion (EX), charge-transfer plus higher order mixed terms (CT+mix), and dispersion (DI) contributions. There is no entropic contribution in PIEDA scheme.ΔEIJint=ΔEIJES+ΔEIJEX+ΔEIJCT+mix+ΔEIJDIAlthough Fedorov and Kitaura recently expanded the PIEDA analysis into problems in solution by combining the fragment molecular orbital (FMO) method with the polarizable continuum model (PCM) (Fedorov and Kitaura, 2012), we did not utilize the method because it has not been implemented in the GAMESS program package at this time. It would be considered for further study.To include solvation effects in calculation models, there are two main computational methods, explicit and implicit models. While considering solvents as explicit molecules is the most ideal calculation model, it requires large computational loads. On the other hand, polarizable continuum model (PCM) (Tomasi et al., 2005) implicitly considers the liquid solvation state as a parameter and requires less computational cost. It has been extensively used to introduce solvent effects to the calculation model as mentioned above. Thus, we carried out FMO combined with PCM (FMO-PCM) calculation to examine the binding free energy of d-fructose–2G12 and d-mannose–2G12 complexes in the physiological condition. The antibody 2G12 complexes with d-mannose/d-fructose, free ligands, and the antibody 2G12 were prepared using their X-ray crystal structures (PDB ID: 3OAY, 1OP3) as noted above. In FMO-PCM calculations, conductor-like PCM (Cammi and Tomasi, 1995) under water solvent (ɛ=78.39) at 298K was employed. Although biological reactions occur in vivo at around 310K, the calculation at 298K was selected for the comparison with the affinity investigation in vitro (Doores et al., 2010). A cavity in the solvent was constructed surrounding the solute with the simplified united atomic radii H: 0.01Å, C: 1.77Å, N: 1.68Å, O: 1.59Å, and S: 2.10Å (Barone et al., 1997). All FMO-PCM calculations were performed at the MP2/6-31G* level.To consider the interaction as the binding free energy ΔGbind, we estimated the solute entropic contributions using normal-mode analysis implemented in sander and nmode programs in AMBER10 package (Case et al., 2008). Ten snap-shot structures were extracted every 100ps from 2 to 3ns trajectories of the MD simulations of the complex, unbound 2G12 as well as unbound ligand.The binding free energy ΔGbind was evaluated by following expressions.ΔGbind=ΔGPCM−TΔSΔGPCM=GPCM,complex−GPCM,2G12−GPCM,ligandΔS=Ssolute,complex−Ssolute,2G12−Ssolute,ligandThe binding free energy ΔGbind corresponds to the sum of the binding energy in PCM-FMO scheme ΔGPCM and the entropic contribution estimated by normal-mode analysis −TΔS. Each energy component was computed as the difference between the complex and its free systems. The binding free energy in PCM-FMO scheme ΔGPCM is the sum of two energy terms of the binding energy in the gas phase ΔEgas and the solvation energy ΔGsolvation.ΔGPCM=ΔEgas+ΔGsolvationΔGsolvation shows the change in the solvation free energy during the complex formation, when some surface of the interacting systems is desolvated. The solvation free energy ΔGsolvation is further divided into five energy components by following equation.ΔGsolvation=ΔGpold+ΔGes+ΔGcav+ΔGdisp+ΔGrepΔGpold is the destabilization component of the solvent-induced polarization of the solute, ΔGes is the solute–solvent electrostatic interaction energy, ΔGcav is the cavitation energy (describing the loss of the solvent free energy necessary to create a cavity for the solute), ΔGdisp is the solute–solvent dispersion interaction energy, and ΔGrep is the solute–solvent exchange-repulsion interaction energy (i.e., the nonelectrostatic part of the interaction excluding the dispersion).To clarify the effect of the difference in the ligand structures between d-mannose and d-fructose on the binding energy ΔEgas, we prepared calculation model complexes with Model-ligand (see Scheme 1).Scheme 1 graphically shows the differences among substituents of monosaccharides investigated in the present study. The difference between d-mannose and d-fructose was the position of one hydroxyl group, at C-1 and C-5, respectively. To analyze the effects of the substituent on the interaction energy in each crystal structure, we prepared a complex with a model-ligand, which was simply modified at the position investigated. The Model-ligand had the structure without hydroxyl group on C-1 nor C-5 position. C-1 hydroxyl substituent effect on the interaction was investigated using the complexes with d-mannose (PDB ID: 1OP3) and those with Model-ligand, which were prepared by substituting C-1 hydroxyl in d-mannose with hydrogen atom. C-5 hydroxyl substituent effect was investigated by calculating the complexes with d-fructose (PDB ID: 3OAY) and those with the Model-ligand. Ligands and substituents examined in the present study are summarized in Table 1.For further investigation of the solvation energy contribution in the ligand binding mechanism, crystal waters of the Fab 2G12–d-fructose complex were considered explicitly. In the X-ray crystal structure of the Fab 2G12–d-fructose complex, there were six water molecules around 5Å from the ligand. We prepared the complex model including those water molecules to examine how they were involved in the ligand–2G12 interaction. For comparison, the Model-ligand–antibody complex with waters’ model was also prepared by modifying the model of d-fructose–antibody complex with six waters by in silico modification module implemented in the MOE program package. Using the module, C-5 hydroxyl group in d-fructose was changed to hydrogen atom and relaxation for hydrogen atoms of the Model-ligand was performed without any other refinement for heavy atoms in X-ray structure. Crystal water molecules were assigned a number from 1 to 6 (residue names in PDB 3OAY are WAT H242, H252, H259, H275, H451, and H457) (Fig. 2).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We calculated the binding free energy between the d-mannose/d-fructose with the antibody 2G12 considering the solvation free energy as implicit model (FMO-PCM) at the MP2/6-31G* level. The stronger binding affinity of d-fructose over the original ligand of d-mannose was theoretically examined and natures of the ligand binding were clarified. The calculation results were well consistent with the experimentally observed order that d-fructose had higher binding affinities with Fab 2G12 than that of d-mannose. The FMO-PCM calculation along with MD simulations elucidated the advantage of d-fructose over d-mannose in the solvation energy as well as the entropic penalty terms.To clarify the nature of differences in the binding energy between d-fructose and d-mannose, the binding energy in the gas phase were further analyzed. We constructed Fab 2G12 complexes with the Model-ligand in which substituent C-1 hydroxyl of d-mannose or C-5 hydroxyl of d-fructose were modified to hydrogen. It was found that C-1 hydroxyl group in d-mannose played as the stabilization substituent in the ligand binding where His H32 of the antibody mainly engaged in the stabilization. On the other hand, this was not the case with C-5 hydroxyl in d-fructose. By comparing the results obtained with d-fructose and the Model-ligand calculations, we found that C-5 hydroxyl group in d-fructose contributed as destabilization factor in the Fab 2G12 binding. Thus, the higher binding affinity of d-fructose does not arise from the direct interaction energy between the C-5 hydroxyl group in the ligand and Fab 2G12.The solvation energy that provided the superior binding affinity with d-fructose was further investigated by considering solvation effect with the explicit water model. FMO calculations with crystal water molecules showed notable pair interaction energies among water molecules, amino acids, and d-fructose which contributed to the stabilization of the ligand binding to 2G12. These FMO calculation results of explicit water model as well as implicit water model indicated that the strong binding of d-fructose over d-mannose was due to the solvation effects on the d-fructose interaction energy.An essential first step and challenge toward a vaccine development by theoretical calculations is the reproduction of experimental results. Our calculation result that was qualitatively well consistent with experimental order only came after considering both the solvent effect in high-level FMO calculations and entropic contributions. This study provides the fundamental knowledge of the ligand–antibody interaction analysis by theoretical calculations toward a vaccine design.