@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
APL: An angle probability list to improve knowledge-based metaheuristics for the three-dimensional protein structure prediction

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Angle probability lists improve knowledge-based protein structure prediction methods.Development of knowledge-based methaheuristics for protein tertiary structure prediction.First principle methods with database information.Amino acid and secondary structure conformational preferences.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Three-dimensional protein structure prediction,Amino acid conformational preferences,Metaheuristics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Tertiary protein structure prediction is one of the most challenging problems in structural bioinformatics. Despite the advances in algorithm development and computational strategies, predicting the folded structure of a protein only from its amino acid sequence remains as an unsolved problem. We present a new computational approach to predict the native-like three-dimensional structure of proteins. Conformational preferences of amino acid residues and secondary structure information were obtained from protein templates stored in the Protein Data Bank and represented as an Angle Probability List. Two knowledge-based prediction methods based on Genetic Algorithms and Particle Swarm Optimization were developed using this information. The proposed method has been tested with twenty-six case studies selected to validate our approach with different classes of proteins and folding patterns. Stereochemical and structural analysis were performed for each predicted three-dimensional structure. Results achieved suggest that the Angle Probability List can improve the effectiveness of metaheuristics used to predicted the three-dimensional structure of protein molecules by reducing its conformational search space.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Proteins are biological macromolecules responsible for the execution of different and important functions in living systems (Lesk, 2002; Tramontano, 2006). From a structural perspective, protein is an ordered linear chain of building blocks known as amino acid residues. Each protein is defined by its unique sequence of amino acid residues that causes the protein to fold into a particular three-dimensional (3-D) shape. The biochemical function of a protein is close related with its three-dimensional structure (Lehninger et al., 2005). Predicting the folded structure of a protein (PSP problem) only from its amino acid sequence, remains a challenging problem in Computer Science, Mathematics, Physics, Biology and Chemistry (Lander and Waterman, 1999; Wooley and Ye, 2010; Dorn et al., 2014). The challenge arises due to the combinatorial explosion of plausible shapes that a protein sequence can assume (Levinthal, 1968).Determining the 3-D structure of a protein is both experimentally expensive (due to the costs associated) and time consuming (Guntert, 2004). The difficulty in determining and finding out the 3-D structure of proteins has generated a significant discrepancy between the volume of sequences of amino acid residues produced by Genome Projects11http://genomics.energy.gov.and the number of 3-D structures of proteins determined by experimental methods (X-Ray, NMR, etc). Even though, this small proportion represents a rich source of information to be explored by computational methods for the PSP problem (Greer, 1990; Johnson et al., 1994; Turcotte et al., 2001; Dorn et al., 2011). Conformational preferences are acquired from protein templates stored in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) (Berman et al., 2000) and used in prediction tasks (Hovmoller and Ohlson, 2002; Dorn et al., 2013, 2014a).The 3-D PSP problem in computational complexity appears to be a NP-complete problem (Guyeux et al., 2014). Several computational strategies and algorithms have been proposed as a solution to the PSP problem. These methods can be classified in four classes (Floudas et al., 2006; Dorn et al., 2014): (i) first principle methods without database information (Osguthorpe, 2000); (ii) first principle methods with database information (Srinivasan and Rose, 1995; Rohl et al., 2004); (iii) threading or fold recognition methods (Bowie et al., 1991; Jones et al., 1992; Bryant and Altschul, 1995; Turcotte et al., 1998) and (iv) comparative modeling methods (Sánchez and Sali, 1997; Martí-Renom et al., 2000). Group ii, iii and iv are often referenced as knowledge-based methods. These methods are able to perform fast and effective prediction of protein 3-D structures when template structures and fold libraries are available (Kolinski, 2004). Analysis of the last Critical Assessment of protein Structure Prediction (CASP10)22http://predictioncenter.org.experiments reveals that the best results are achieved by methods that use some knowledge from experimental databases (Kryshtafovych et al., 2014a).A knowledge-based prediction method is fully dependent on the quality of structural models and how they are represented and used (Dorn et al., 2014). In this article, we propose a strategy to obtain and represent conformational preferences of amino acid residues from experimentally determined protein structures. Conformational preferences of amino acid residues in protein and its secondary structure are obtained from PDB and represented as an Angle Probability List (APL) (Dorn et al., 2013). This information represents a rich source of data and can be used in knowledge-based prediction methods. In this paper, we analyze the impact of using APL in metaheuristics.The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents fundamental concepts of protein structure; conformational preferences of amino acid residues of proteins; and metaheuristics. Section 3 shows the developed Angle Probability List and the standard implementation of two metaheuristics applied to evaluate our method. In Section 4 we discuss the results using our approach in different metaheuristics. Finally, the last section concludes the paper and points out some future works.Proteins are composed of ordered linear chains of amino acid residues linked by peptide bonds (Fig. 1) (Liljas et al., 2009; Lehninger et al., 2005; Lesk, 2010). An amino acid residue is a small molecule containing an amino group (H3N+), a carboxyl group (COO−), and a hydrogen atom attached to a central α carbon (Cα). In addition, each amino acid also has a R organic group (also called side-chain) attached to the Cα. The side-chain gives to the amino acid its propriety. A peptide bond is formed when the carboxyl group of one residue reacts with the amino group of other residue, thereby releasing a water molecule (Lehninger et al., 2005).The linear sequence of amino acid residues is known as the protein's primary structure. Frequently, a fragment of amino acid residues adopts the same conformation (Tramontano, 2006). Local segments of the protein main-chain conformation define the secondary structure. These structures are defined by the presence of hydrogen bonds between the amino and carboxyl groups of the polypeptide chain. There are preferred conformations like α-helices, β-sheets, β-turns, among others (Lehninger et al., 2005). In different proteins, helices and sheets are combined in many ways to create different spatial arrangements of the polypeptide chain. (Lesk, 2010). This is called the protein tertiary structure (3-D) and represents the functional/native state of the protein (Lesk, 2002; Tramontano, 2006).There are different ways to represent a polypeptide structure (Dorn et al., 2014): all-atom model (Osguthorpe, 2000), united atom model (Khalili et al., 2005), rotamers (Shapovalov and Dunbrack, 2011), and torsion angles (Cutello et al., 2006; Dorn et al., 2011, 2013). Due to the planarity of the peptide bond, the conformation of a peptide backbone is mainly described by two torsion angles per amino acid residue (Lehninger et al., 2005): ϕ (phi) and ψ (psi). In this work, we represent a polypeptide chain by its set of main-chain and side-chain torsion angles (ϕ, ψ and χ angles). The main advantage of this representation is the reduced number of variables to control and optimize when predicting the polypeptide structure. The set of consecutive main-chain torsion angles describes the internal rotation of the protein (Lesk, 2002; Scheef and Fink, 2003) and causes the polypeptide to fold into a particular three-dimensional shape.The peptide bond (C–N bond – Fig. 1ω angle) is not involved in the molecular rotation, due to its double-bond character. The rotation is only allowed around the N–Cαand Cα–C bonds. The angles of these bonds are known as phi (ϕ) and psi (ψ) angles, respectively (Lodish et al., 1990; Lesk, 2002). The possible conformation of a given polypeptide depends on the amino acid chemical properties. The side-chains of amino acid residues also plays important roles in the conformation of a protein molecule. The number of χ angles in these side-chain depends on the amino acid residue (Liljas et al., 2009) (more details can be found in Section 2.3).Metaheuristics are often used to deal with hard optimization problems (Glover and Kochenberg, 2003; Resende et al., 2010), because of their ability to find satisfactory solutions with less computational effort than exact methods. Metaheuristics designates a class of approximate computational methods that optimizes a problem by an iterative generation process (Goldberg, 1989; Blum and Roli, 2003; Glover and Kochenberg, 2003; Battiti et al., 2008; Talbi, 2009; Mucherino and Seref, 2009; Luke, 2009). This process guides a subordinate heuristic by intelligently combining different concepts for exploring and exploiting the search space (Osman and Kelly, 1996; Osman and Laporte, 1996). Metaheuristics make few or no assumptions about the problem being optimized and can search vast spaces of candidate solutions and apply two strategies of intensification and diversification in the effective exploration of the search space. The first one (intensification) eliminates the search space by examining neighbors of elite solutions, while the last one (diversification) is a stochastic component that explores unvisited regions. Metaheuristics do not guarantee an optimal solution, and they are used to deal with combinatorial optimization problems in which an optimal solution is sought over a discrete search-space (Luke, 2009).Examples of metaheuristics are: Simulated Annealing (SA) (Kirkpatrick et al., 1983; Granville et al., 1994), Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) (Kennedy, 2003; Trelea, 2003), Genetic Algorithms (GAs) (Goldberg, 1989), etc. Two of the most popular metaheuristics applied in the field of 3-D protein structure prediction are the Genetic Algorithms (Dandekar and Argos, 1992; Le Grand and Merz, 1993; Sun, 1995; Pedersen and Moult, 1997; Hoque et al., 2006) and Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO)(Meissner and Schneider, 2007; Kondov, 2013). GAs are adaptive heuristic search algorithms based on the evolutionary ideas of natural selection and genetics (Luke, 2009). GAs are modeled through the use of a population of individuals representing solutions, which undergo selection in the presence of variation-inducing operators such as mutation and recombination. For every individual is calculated a fitness value that indicates how good is the solution. For each iteration of the algorithm, called a generation, different individuals are combined by chance and the new solution formed by this operation is used in the new population. It is also common to use some mechanism to maintain the variability of the individuals, decreasing the chances of being trapped in a local minimum (Kirkpatrick et al., 1983). Dorn et al. (2013), for example, combines a Genetic Algorithm, structural information from PDB and a Local Search operator for the 3-D protein structure prediction problem. In Dorn et al. (2011) a Genetic Algorithm is combined with a structured population, and it is hybridized with a path-relinking procedure that helps the algorithm to escape from the local minimum. Cutello et al. (2006) use a Genetic Algorithm to solve a multi-objective representation of protein structure. Park (2005) uses a Genetic Algorithm for fragment assembly to find low-energy conformations. Hoque et al. (2009) present a comprehensive review of the application of GA in the protein folding problem.In a Particle Swarm Optimization algorithm, the potential solutions, called particles, fly through the problem space by following the current optimum solutions. Meissner and Schneider (2007) built a PSO algorithm to optimize backbone geometries of proteins considering secondary structure information in the optimization process. In Kondov (2013), a distributed parallel Particle Swarm Optimization algorithm was developed for protein structure prediction problem. Lin and Hsieh (2009) presents a hybrid PSO/GA algorithm to search for the native structure of a protein molecule in a hydrophobic-hydrophilic lattice model representation.Despite the advances, metaheuristics still have to deal with the challenge of vast conformational search spaces caused by the different combination of amino acid residues. To address this challenge, we developed an approach to obtain conformational preferences of amino acid residues in protein templates based on its secondary structure. This information represented as an Angle Probability List was used to reduce the protein conformational search space. Section 3 describes the developed knowledge-based metaheuristics for 3-D protein structure prediction.The ϕ and ψ torsion angles of a protein molecule (Fig. 1) can assume, theoretically, any value between −180∘ and +180∘. However, some combinations are prohibited by steric interferences between atoms from the main-chain and atoms from the side-chain (Hovmoller and Ohlson, 2002). The allowed and prohibited values for the torsion angles ϕ (x-axis) and ψ (y-axis) are graphically demonstrated by the Ramachandran plot (Ramachandran and Sasisekharan, 1968). Despite these prohibited combinations of the phi and psi torsion angles, proteins can still assume several conformations. The stable arrangement of segments of amino acid residues of the polypeptide shape structural patterns (Lehninger et al., 2005) and represents the secondary structure of a polypeptide (Branden and Tooze, 1998; Scheef and Fink, 2003; Andersen and Rost, 2003). Regularity in the spatial conformation is maintained through these intermolecular interactions. Identical conformations have similar torsion angles values. The two most common secondary structures are α-helices (Pauling et al., 1951) and β-sheets (Pauling and Corey, 1951). There are other periodic conformations (coils and turns), but the α-helix and β-sheets are the most stable and can be considered as the main elements in 3-D structures (Liljas et al., 2009; Andersen and Rost, 2003; Tramontano, 2006).Amino acid residues in a secondary structure usually adopt a particular set of backbone torsion angles (ϕ and ψ) (Hovmoller and Ohlson, 2002). In this article, we analyze the conformational preferences of amino acid in proteins according to its secondary structure. Fig. 2shows the Ramachandran plot of six most abundant secondary structure conformational states present in 6650 proteins obtained from PDB (for more details, see Section 3.1).Knowledge-based protein structure prediction methods are reasoned on the observation that when a new fold is discovered, it is composed of common structural motifs or fragments from super-secondary structures of proteins with known templates (Lesk, 2002; Tramontano, 2006). Conformational preferences (phi and psi) and secondary structure propensities obtained from experimentally determined proteins can be taken into account by knowledge-based metaheuristics (Dorn et al., 2013, 2014) developed for the PSP problem. In following sections we described how we combine the conformational preferences of amino acid residues with its secondary structure information to build the Angle Probability List (APL), and to apply this into a knowledge-based metaheuristics for the PSP problem.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
