@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
PPM-Dom: A novel method for domain position prediction

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
PPM-Dom could predict the exact positions of each domain in any query proteins.PPM-Dom could distinguish different domains in the same query sequence from each other.PPM-Dom could figure out each part of the discontinuous domain regions.The number of domains would be inferred effortlessly from the positions of domains.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Domain position prediction,Complex network,Community division,Fuzzy mean operator,Protein structure,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Domains are the structural basis of the physiological functions of proteins, and the prediction of which is an advantageous process on the study of protein structure and function. This article proposes a new complete automatic prediction method, PPM-Dom (Domain Position Prediction Method), for predicting the particular positions of domains in a target protein via its atomic coordinate. The presented method integrates complex networks, community division, and fuzzy mean operator (FMO). The whole sequences are divided into potential domain regions by the complex network and community division, and FMO allows the final determination for the domain position. This method will suffice to predict regions that will form a domain structure and those that are unstructured based on completely new atomic coordinate information of the query sequence, and be able to separate different domains in the same query sequence from each other. On evaluating the performance using an independent testing dataset, PPM-Dom reached 91.41% for prediction accuracy, 96.12% for sensitivity and 92.86% for specificity. The tool bag of PPM-Dom is freely available at http://cic.scu.edu.cn/bioinformatics/PPMDom.zip.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The rapid-cumulated data of protein structures offer both great opportunity and challenges in exploring the relationship between protein structure and function. Protein structure is a determinant for molecular interaction and function, which makes the comparison and classification of it a difficult but important task (Penner et al., 2011). Proteins can be considered to be built up from domains, and each of which can be considered as a semi-independent structural unit of a protein capable of folding independently (Richardson, 1981; Wetlaufer, 1973). Domains, the protein subsequences, may fold and function independently of the rest of the protein (Koehl and Levitt, 1999; Lindorff-Larsen et al., 2005), and in most cases are the structural basis of the physiological functions of proteins. Sometimes, it makes more sense to associate terms with individual domains instead of only with full-length proteins (Fang and Gough, 2013). Consequently, the position prediction of protein domains is a crucial step for functional classification, homology-based structure prediction (Bondugula et al., 2009) and structural genomics (Liu and Rost, 2003), which is always an important aspect of research in the study of proteins.Several computational tools and methods have been proposed for the prediction of domains. Limited success were made in describing protein domains from sequence alone (Busetta and Barrans, 1984; Kikuchi et al., 1988; Vonderviszt and Simon, 1986), however, new attempts were made recently such as Predoms, a computational toolkit predicting domains based on the entropy parameters of the given sequence (Khan et al., 2010). Protein domain position was predicted based on random forest and mRMR feature selection (Li et al., 2012). Some of the methods require secondary structure data. The SSEP-Domain protein domain prediction approach based on the secondary structure elements was presented (Gewehr and Zimmer, 2006). An ab initio machine learning approach known as DOMpro was developed to predict protein domains based on predicted secondary structure combined with profiles and predicted relative solvent accessibility (Cheng et al., 2006). DomSSEA was presented to predict continuous domains using predicted secondary structure (Marsden et al., 2002). Other domain prediction methods require 3D structural data. In an early study, a method named scooby-domain was recommended to identify globular domains in protein sequence based on the observed lengths and hydrophobicities of domains from proteins with known tertiary structure (George et al., 2005). On the other hand, methods based on the atomic coordinates were discussed such as PDP (Alexandrov and Shindyalov, 2003), DomainParser (Xu et al., 2000), and web servers such as 3Dee (Siddiqui et al., 2001) and DIAL (Pugalenthi et al., 2005). Furthermore, other webservers for domain prediction were available. DHcL was introduced, which read PDB identifier(s) or a 3D protein structure in a PDB format from the user and gave back the location of domains at different levels of hierarchy (Koczyk and Berezovsky, 2008). Servers such as Meta-DP (Saini and Fischer, 2005) and InterProScan (Zdobnov and Apweiler, 2001) provide interface for domain prediction using a number of methods. Kinds of databases providing related information of domains. The dcGO database annotates protein domains with ontological terms, the approach of which takes the terms attached to full-length sequences with the domain composition on a large scale (Fang and Gough, 2013). NCBI's CDD provides resource for the annotation of protein sequences with the location of conserved domain footprints together with inferred functional sites (Marchler-Bauer et al., 2011). SMART provides identification and annotation of protein domains and the analysis of domain architectures (Letunic et al., 2012). Databases of this kind are available such as InterPro (Hunter et al., 2012), Pfam (Punta et al., 2012), PROSITE (Sigrist et al., 2010), and so on.In many aspects of the researches in bioinformatics, the exact domain position is the precondition for the later processes such as studies based on DDI (Domain–Domain interaction) (Lee et al., 2006; Xiao-Li et al., 2005). The study of domain architectures in multi-domain protein families is a common tool in sequence classification and would always reveal their evolutionary history (Marchler-Bauer et al., 2011). However, methods for the prediction of domains did not have high accuracy in predicting multidomains, and some of them can only predict the specific domains, while almost all of them could only predict the number and boundaries of domains, but not the exact position of domain regions. Boundary residues are designated as 20 residues before and after the true domain boundary (as defined by SCOP) (Bondugula et al., 2009) for multidomain proteins. The labeling protocol was widely used (Bryson et al., 2007; Chen et al., 2006; Cheng et al., 2006; Sim et al., 2005) in the domain researches. Although the approximate domain positions could be inferred from the domain boundaries, only the regions around the boundaries could be obtained without knowing the position of amino acids on the other end of domain region in the sequence. Moreover, none of the amino acids in domain regions could be inferred from the domain boundary study for single domain proteins, which suggested that it reminds in need of improvement. Besides, non-contiguous sequences were discarded in former studies, and the quantity of such domains were around 7% in SCOP in 2009 (Bondugula et al., 2009). That is, when such proteins were taken as the query proteins, the prediction performance may well not be satisfactory.The annotation of protein sequences with the location of domains is a common practice in the analysis of sequence data (Marchler-Bauer et al., 2011). A few articles were contributed to domain region prediction (Cheng et al., 2006; Li et al., 2012; Linding et al., 2003; Suyama and Ohara, 2003). PPM-Dom could predict the exact position of each domain fragment in any query proteins, and moreover, it could indicate amino acids belonging to each domain region in the 3D space, that is, separate different domains in the same query sequence from each other, which make up for the aforementioned deficiency to some extent. With the recent advances in domain prediction, fuzzy mean operator (FMO) has been shown to make contributions to it. In a recent study, FIEFDom was used to predict the domain boundaries of a multidomain protein using an FMO (Bondugula et al., 2009). Learning from the former researches, this study proposed a new prediction method, known as PPM-Dom, for predicting the particular positions of domains in a query protein via its atomic coordinate, and the number of domains would be inferred effortlessly after that. The method is composed of complex networks, community division, and FMO. On evaluating the performance using an independent testing dataset of 100 proteins, PPM-Dom reached 91.41% for prediction accuracy, 96.12% for sensitivity and 92.86% for specificity. PPM-Dom is a widely applicable method which can be employed for proteins with domain/domains of which each amino acid has its spatial coordinates.In the present study, the complex networks, community division, and fuzzy mean operator (FMO) for predicting the particular positions of domains in a query protein were employed. The whole sequences are divided into potential domain regions by the complex network and community division, and FMO allows the final determination for the domain position. The whole flowchart of the PPM-Dom is shown in Fig. 1. The query protein was PDB code 1BZ7, chain A, which was determined to have two different domains by PPM-Dom. Referring to its accuracy, sensibility and specificity, the protein reached 100%, 100%, and 100%, respectively. Moreover, when taken into the consideration the identification of different domains in the same sequence, the accuracy, sensibility and specificity reached 99.03%, 99.07%, and 99.01%, respectively.The protein structure data set in this analysis was derived from the protein data bank (PDB). Proteins with a pairwise sequence identity ≤30% were downloaded to ensure the nonredundance of the data. The information on domains in proteins were then collected from SCOP (database 1.75, structural classification of proteins) (Andreeva et al., 2004, 2008; Brenner et al., 2000), a database which organizes proteins hierarchically according to their families and folds, which is considered the standard for protein structure classification (Day et al., 2003). Protein domains in SCOP are grouped into species and hierarchically classified into families, superfamilies, folds and classes (Lo Conte et al., 2002), which ensures that the data are picked up more comprehensively and make the results of prediction more believable. In this study, all the information of domains was collected from SCOP, which was then used to label the proteins collected in advance. In order to ensure the clear structure of the proteins, only those in which the structures were solved by X-ray crystallography with resolution ≤2.5Å were kept. The remaining 2847 proteins comprised the final data set, from which 100 proteins were randomly chosen as the independent testing dataset, and the other 2747 were the learning dataset. For learning dataset, each sequence is used as a query protein, while the remaining proteins are used as the reference set for fragment searches. The compositions of the each dataset were listed in Table 1.Protein structures can be treated as complex systems comprised of residues, known as the amino acid complex network. The method of complex network was widely applied in many fields (Barabasi et al., 2011; Cheng et al., 2012; Karni et al., 2009). In this study, a protein structure is represented by a complex network, in which a vertex is a residue and an edge is an interaction between residues. The purpose of network community division methods is to divide the vertexes of the networks into groups, within which the connections between the vertexes are dense and the connections between which are sparser in the same time (Girvan and Newman, 2002). Consequently, community division method could be used to organize and analyze the complex networks, and has been widely used in various studies in recent years (Ahn et al., 2010; Kovacs et al., 2010; Szalay-Beko et al., 2012).Based on the former research, the effect of different cutoff values of edges for constructing complex networks were analyzed. It was observed that for analyzing domain data, the optimal numerical interval of the cutoff values was 5.0–7.5Å (Cα–Cα distances), and the ideal community division method was based on edge betweenness (Newman and Girvan, 2004) for this kind of data (Sun et al., 2013).With the recent advances in domain prediction, fuzzy mean operator (FMO) has been shown to make contributions to it. The amino acid label identification method employed in this study is composed of PSI-Blast and FMO (Bondugula et al., 2009), which is utilized to label the communities as domain region and sequence regions.The results of community division were introduced here without presenting the labels of each community, that is, whether each belonged to the domain region or sequences region, and moreover, whether two different communities (continuous or discontinuous in the query sequences) belonged to the same or different domain regions. Here, ideas were borrowed from FIEFDom (Bondugula et al., 2009), and the practical method was then improved when combined in this study. The steps are explained below. First, sequence alignment of the query protein by PSI-Blast using the database previously constructed was used, from which the fragments of the protein were obtained; Second, each amino acid of the query protein was estimated that whether they belonged to a domain region by a voting scheme after estimating the expectation value of the fragments of the protein by FMO; Third, each community obtained by community division method was classified, and whether it belonged to a domain region was determined using the labels of each amino acid; Finally, whether two different communities (continuous or discontinuous in the query sequences) belonged to the same or different domain regions was estimated.In the first step, sequence alignment of the query protein was determined by PSI-Blast using the database previously constructed, from which the fragments of the protein were obtained. Here, the expectation value (e-value) was the result of the sequence alignment, which was set at 10,000. This score ensured sufficient information for the vote later.In the second step, the same pretreatment as outlined of FIEFDom (Bondugula et al., 2009) was employed using the following scoring scheme (Bondugula and Xu, 2007):(1)Si=max(1,log10Ei+7)(2)P=∑i=1nbiSi−4∑i=1nSi−4where, Eiis the expectation of the ith fragments of the protein, biis 0 when the ith fragment does not belong to the domain region and 1 when it does, P is the probability that one blind amino acid belongs to a domain region, which is the objective of this step.In the third step, the arithmetic mean values of the probability of all amino acids in one community were calculated, which were designated P. Here, a threshold was introduced called p′, which was defined as the measure of probability of a community belonging to a domain region (the probability increased as the threshold increased). When P≥p′, the whole community was judged to belong to the domain region, and the identity of all the communities in the given protein was decided.In the final step, there may be two or more different communities beside each other all belonging to the domain region, as a result, it must be decided whether these regions are in the same domain. Here, sequence alignment was used for the exact 20 amino acids in each critical place of the communities beside each other using PSI-Blast, namely 40 amino acids in all, from which the fragments were obtained, which were then put into practice using the following formulas:(3)Si=max(1,log10Ei+7)Ci(4)P=∑i=1nbi⋅Si−4∑i=1nSi−4where, Eiis the expectation of the ith fragments of the protein, biis 0 when the ith fragment does not belong to the domain region and 1 when it does, Ciis similar to bi, which is 1 when the ith fragment is similar to the critical place in the training set and 0 when it is not. P is the probability that one blind amino acid belongs to a domain region. Using this step it was estimated whether two different communities (continuous or discontinuous in the query sequences) belonged to the same or different domain regions.The performance of this method was assessed by accuracy, sensibility and specificity, which were defined as follows:(5)Accuracy=TP+TNTP+TN+FP+FN(6)Sensibility=TPTP+FN(7)Specificity=TPTP+FPwhere TP denotes true positives (amino acids belonging to domain regions correctly predicted as amino acids belonging to domain regions), FP stands for false positives (amino acids incorrectly predicted as belonging to domain regions), TN (amino acids belonging to sequence regions correctly predicted as amino acids belonging to domain regions) and FN stands for false negatives (amino acids incorrectly predicted as belonging to sequence regions). Moreover, when referred to the estimate that whether two different communities (continuous or discontinuous in the query sequences) belonged to the same or different domain regions, amino acid from different kinds of domains would be treated as different samples. In this case, for a query protein sequence, amino acids belonging to the exact domain region were treated as positive samples, and the others in the same sequence were the negative samples.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
