@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A computational method of predicting regulatory interactions in Arabidopsis based on gene expression data and sequence information

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
SVM is explored to predict regulatory interactions in Arabidopsis. Experimentally validated regulatory relationships were collected as the positive samples.Negative training samples were randomly selected TF–target pairs under some strategies.Each gene pair was represented by incorporating the expression data and sequence information.Through the jackknife test, our method reached an overall accuracy of 98.39% with the sensitivity of 94.88%, and the specificity of 93.82%.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Transcription factor,Expression profile,Sequence information,Support vector machines,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Inferring transcriptional regulatory interactions between transcription factors (TFs) and their targets has utmost importance for understanding the complex regulatory mechanisms in cellular system. In this paper, we introduced a computational method to predict regulatory interactions in Arabidopsis based on gene expression data and sequence information. Support vector machine (SVM) and Jackknife cross-validation test were employed to perform our method on a collected dataset including 178 positive samples and 1068 negative samples. Results showed that our method achieved an overall accuracy of 98.39% with the sensitivity of 94.88%, and the specificity of 93.82%, which suggested that our method can serve as a potential and cost-effective tool for predicting regulatory interactions in Arabidopsis.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Understanding the mechanisms of transcriptional regulations is a crucial step to elucidate various biological processes. In eukaryotes, a protein known as transcriptional factor (TF) binds specifically to the cis-regulatory element of a gene to executive biological processes or adapt to different environmental stresses. Mining the regulatory interaction between TF and its target can help biologist to decipher the complicated regulatory networks and uncover the processed of growth control, cell-cycle progression, and development as well as differentiated cellular function (Alberts et al., 1994).In the past decade, extensive efforts have been made to identify the TF–target regulatory interaction in genome-wide research. Probably the most famous experimental method is ChIP-on-chip technique, which combined the chromatin immunoprecipitation and microarray technologies, and can directly identify in vivo promoters for a specific TF (Orlando, 2000; Ren et al., 2000; Wang et al., 2000). However, such experiment is based on a certain special TF and need to get the specific antibodies for the TF. Subsequently, with the huge accumulation of molecular and microarray data, many computational methods for predicting the regulatory interactions are proposed. These methods can be generally classified into two categories: methods in the first categories identify the TFBS of the TF on the cis-regulatory element of a gene under the assumption that genes with the similarity expression profile may under the similar transcriptional coregulation. So the genes can be grouped into disjoint clusters on the basis of similarity in their expression profiles or functional annotations (Eisen et al., 1998; Roth et al., 1998; Spellman et al., 1998; Hughes et al., 2000). Genes in the same cluster are thought to be transcriptionally co-regulated, and their regulatory regions can be analyzed for the presence of shared sequence motif (Tavazoie et al., 1999; Brazma et al., 1998; Vilo et al., 2003; Doi et al., 2008). Methods in the second categories circumvent the TFBS finding process and focus on gene expression data. (Qian et al., 2003; Friedman et al., 2000; Yoo et al., 2002; Nero et al., 2009; Jiao et al., 2011). They used gene expression data to infer TF–target regulatory interactions, without identifying the TFBS in the promoter region of a target gene.Despite the computational approaches introduced above are very promising to discover TF–target regulatory interactions, they still have some limitations. Many researches argue that inferring regulatory interactions based on microarray data has some inherent faults. First, TFs and their targets do not have a correlated expression profile data over a time course (Qian et al., 2001), so measuring similarity of expression profile suggests only a statistical dependency between TF and its targets, not a direct causal relationship. Second, microarray is a kind of high-throughput analysis technology after all, so it cannot be very precise. Genes with a slim expression level can hardly be detected accurately (Liu et al., 2010). Therefore it is inadequate to predict regulatory interactions only considering the expression data, which leaves us wondering whether some simple but potentially probable basic information could be uncovered.Arabidopsis thaliana, as a primary experimental plant model, has widely used in a reductionist approach to dissect different aspects of plant biology (Somerville and Koornneef, 2002). Inferring of regulatory interactions in Arabidopsis not only enhances our knowledge of biological processed in plants, but also helps a great deal in developing bio-engineered crops that can better sustain challenging environments (Kasuga et al., 1999). In this paper, we introduced a computational approach for inferring regulatory interactions in Arabidopsis based on SVM by incorporating a variety of features including gene expression data and sequence information of the TF and its target gene. Our method was evaluated by the Jackknife cross-validation on a set of 178 positive regulatory interactions and 1068 negative gene pairs, and achieved good performance in an overall accuracy of 98.39%.Gene expression data were obtained from the TAIR database (http://www.arabidopsis.org/portals/expression/microarray/ATGenExpress.jsp). This microarray dataset contains 79 different samples derived from different tissues and different developmental stages in wild-type Columbia (Col-0) and various mutants of Arabidopsis, including seedling and whole plant, leaves, roots, flower and pollen, shoots and stems, siliques and seeds. In addition, we extracted the upstream promoter sequences up to 1000bp for each gene from the genome-wide of Arabidopsis and download the peptide sequences of TFs from the Arabidopsis Gene Regulatory Information Server (AGRIS).In order to meet the requirement of our regulatory interactions prediction problem in a form suitable for training, we constructed TF–target gene pairs (T, G) as follows. These pairs consisted of a known TF T and a putative target gene G that might be regulated by this factor T.The gene expression data collected is based on 79 experimental conditions in all, and each condition is repeated 3 times by experiments. In this study, the average of triplicate values was calculated for each condition and regarded as the final expression value. Then, we got 79 expression values as a feature vector for each TF and target gene, formulated as(1)Ve=[e1,e2,…,e79]Tand the regional distribution of the expression profile for different tissues and different developmental stages is displayed as following:e1,…,e8,︷seedingsandwholeplantse9,…,e28,︸leavese29,…,e35,︷rootse36,…,e57,︸flowersandpollene58,…,e71,︷shootsandstemse72,…,e79︸siliquesandseeds.In Eukaryotes, transcription factors regulate their target genes through binding their respective promoter regions. Hence in this study, the sequence-derived information features were extracted to describe the peptide sequence of TF and the promoter sequence of target gene. Amino acid composition (AAC) is a conventional sequence-based feature for protein sequence, which consists of 20 components, referring to the occurrence frequencies of the 20 amino acids in a given protein sequence. Here, AAC was applied to represent the peptide sequence of TF and was denoted as:(2)Va=[fa1,fa2,…,fa20]TAs is known, the promoter is a specific, short DNA sequence motif located in the upstream sequence of a target gene, providing a control point for regulated gene transcription. Further analysis of the promoter sequence is useful for getting some information to infer regulatory interactions. In bioinformatics, k-mers usually refer to specific k-tuples or k-grams of nucleic acid or amino acid sequences that can be used to identify certain regions within biomolecules like DNA sequence. Specially, 3-mers, which are called codon, as a triplet form in mRNA is of great significance in biology. In view of this, many work employed 3-mers as a useful tool for characterization of DNA sequences (Nikolaou and Almirantis, 2003; Wang and Zhang, 2006). In this study, we also utilized the combination of 3-mers as characteristic features to represent the promoter sequence. The frequencies of 64 3-mers are formulated as:(3)Vc=[fc1,fc2,…,fc64]TBased on above features, the following 242-D feature vector is used to represent an arbitrary gene pair (T, G):(4)V=Ve−tf⊕Ve−tg⊕Va⊕Vcwhere ⊕ is the concatenation operator, Ve−tfis the expression profile of TF and Ve−tgis the expression profile of target gene.A set of 598 experimentally validated TF–target interactions involving 35 TFs annotated as “confirmed” were downloaded from the AGRIS. These data were filtered as the following steps: we first discarded those interactions which are found no gene expression data in the TAIR database. Then, the interactions found no corresponding peptide sequence of TFs or the promoter sequence of target genes in the TAIR database were also removed. However, of all the 598 TF–target interactions, numbers of target genes regulated by different TFs vary significantly. For example, the TF AT5G11260 has 216 TF–target interactions, while TF AT5G61850 has only one confirmed interaction. This sample imbalance problem will cause the prediction result possibly dominated by the TF AT5G11260, and underestimated the effect of the TF AT5G61850. In order to alleviate this imbalance problem and expect that each TF–target interaction contributes equally to the prediction results, we reduced the number of TF–target pairs for TFs like AT5G11260, and only randomly retained up to 30 TF–target interactions in the final. After above process, a set of 178 TF–target interactions were left as the positive samples.The negative samples, which would be gene pairs have no regulatory interactions definitely, are essential for a reliable classifier. But to our knowledge, current database do not document negative samples on Arabidopsis. In the study, motivated by Qian et al. (2003), we adopted the following strategies to construct the negative samples: For the TF T whose TFBS was known, we searched for its binding site in the upstream sequence of all genes. If the promoter sequence of the target gene G contained no TFBS for transcription factor T, the pair (T, G) constituted a negative sample. Then for the TF T whose TFBS was unknown, we randomly selected a gene G to construct a gene pair (T, G). To make sure the gene G was not regulated by T, we disorganized the expression data of gene G randomly by rearrangement of the components of the vector V while keeping the expression data of TF T unchanged. Lastly, we constructed 1068 negative samples, which is 6 times the number of positive samples. The positive and negative samples constructed in this paper are list in Table 1, and all the regulatory interactions we predicted are in the case of they were common in all tissues.SVM, as a classifier of supervised learning machine algorithms introduced by Vapnik (1998), has been used for many kinds of pattern recognition problems in recent years. Given a set of labeled training samples vectors (positive and negative input samples), SVM can learn a linear decision boundary to discriminate the two classes. If the input samples are not linearly separable, SVM first maps the data into a high dimensional feature space, and then classifies the samples by the maximal margin hyperplanes. SVM training always seeks a globally optimized solution and avoids over-fitting. More detailed descriptions of SVM method can be found in Vapnik (1995). In our study, the Libsvm package is used to implement the SVM classifier (Chang and Lin, 2009). The Radial Basis Function (RBF) is chosen as the kernel function, which is defined as K(x, x′)=exp(−γ|x−x′|2). Two parameters, the regularization parameter C and the kernel width parameter γ are optimized on the training set using a grid search strategy in the Libsvm.In statistical prediction, the following three cross-validation tests are often used to examine a predictor for its effectiveness in practical application: independent dataset test, subsampling test, and Jackknife test (Chou and Zhang, 1995). Of these three, the Jackknife test is deemed the most effective that always yield a unique result for a given benchmark dataset (Mardia et al., 1979). In our study, the Jackknife test is also explored. Feature vector of each gene pair in the samples is singled out in turn as a test sample, and the remaining are used as a training sample. To evaluate the performance of the test, sensitivity (Sn), specificity (Sp) and the overall accuracy (OA) were calculated. Their definitions are as follows: Sn=TP/(TP+FN), Sp=TN/(TN+FP), OA=(TP+TN)/(TP+TN+FP+FN), where TP, TN, FP, and FN are defined as the number of true positive, true negative, false positive, and false negative obtained from the prediction, respectively.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
