@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Systematic investigation of sequence and structural motifs that recognize ATP

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Five ATP–protein interaction binding modes are discovered.Sequence motifs are refined for two known motifs and identified for three novel motifs.A method is developed to identify structurally conserved residues and structural motifs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
ATP,Binding site,Sequence motif,Structural motif,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Interaction between ATP, a multifunctional and ubiquitous nucleotide, and proteins initializes phosphorylation, polypeptide synthesis and ATP hydrolysis which supplies energy for metabolism. However, current knowledge concerning the mechanisms through which ATP is recognized by proteins is incomplete, scattered, and inaccurate. We systemically investigate sequence and structural motifs of proteins that recognize ATP. We identified three novel motifs and refined the known p-loop and class II aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase motifs. The five motifs define five distinct ATP–protein interaction modes which concern over 5% of known protein structures. We demonstrate that although these motifs share a common GXG tripeptide they recognize ATP through different functional groups. The p-loop motif recognizes ATP through phosphates, class II aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase motif targets adenosine and the other three motifs recognize both phosphates and adenosine. We show that some motifs are shared by different enzyme types. Statistical tests demonstrate that the five sequence motifs are significantly associated with the nucleotide binding proteins. Large-scale test on PDB reveals that about 98% of proteins that include one of the structural motifs are confirmed to bind ATP.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Adenosine-5′-triphosphate (ATP) is a multifunctional nucleotide that plays an important role in energy metabolism, signaling, and replication and transcription of DNA. ATP is primarily responsible for providing energy for enzymes and a multitude of cellular processes including biosynthetic reactions, motility and cell division (Kadi et al., 2007; Asenjo et al., 2006; Hu et al., 2002). Currently, the Protein Data Bank (PDB) (Berman et al., 2000) contains 6134 protein entries that are annotated as “ATP binding”. These proteins have diverse tertiary structure, molecular function and they encompass a number of different enzyme types including kinases, synthetases, hydrolases and ATPases. In spite of the ubiquity of ATP binding and the fact that ATP binding sites are regarded as valuable drug targets for antibacterial and anti-cancer chemotherapy (Maxwell and Lawson, 2003; Rock et al., 2007; Metlitskaya et al., 2006), no comprehensive attempts were made to categorize and describe similarities in the ATP binding.The sequence/structural motifs are becoming increasingly important in the analysis of protein’s function. The PROSITE (Hulo et al., 2008) database stores the sequence patterns, signatures, and profiles for specific protein families. However, some of the sequence signatures and profiles are generated computationally and they lack annotations of the associated biological functions. Since sequence patterns are usually summarized within a specific protein family, motifs shared by several superfamilies would not be included in the PROSITE. Over the last two decades, significant efforts were put into characterization of sequence motifs associated with specific families or specific molecular function. For instance, sequence motifs have been defined for subclasses of membrane-bound chemokines (Bazan et al., 1997); LXXLL was defined as the binding motif that facilitates the interaction of different proteins with nuclear receptors (Heery et al., 1997); A short amino acid (AA) segment of the monoubiquitinated endocytic proteins Eps15 and Eps15R was found to be indispensable for monoubiquitination (Polo et al., 2002); Dozens of sequence motifs were generated for serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation sites (Schwartz and Gygi, 2005). Existing works have also explored sequence and structural similarity for some of the ATP-binding proteins. The sequential p-loop, GXXXXGKS(T), motif which interacts with ATP and its analogs was described over a decade ago (Walker et al., 1982; Saraste et al., 1990; Kobayashi and Go, 1997a) and more recently sequence motifs in kinases and class II aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase (AARS) were investigated (Barker and Dayhoff, 1982; Brenner, 1987; Scheeff and Bourne, 2005; Eriani et al., 1990). A few structural motifs were also discussed for phosphate and adenosine groups of ATP, however these motifs are incomplete, they lack characterization of sequence patterns and were generated from proteins with high sequence identity (Denessiouk et al., 2001; Brakoulias and Jackson, 2004).We use a comprehensive dataset of diverse ATP–protein complexes to find and characterize, both at the sequence and structure levels, five generic binding motifs that facilitate the interaction between ATP and proteins. Although we found that the motifs share some similarities, i.e., GXG tripeptide appears in all motifs, they recognize ATP in different ways. The p-loop motif targets the phosphates of ATP, the class II AARS motif interacts with the adenosine of ATP, while the other three motifs bind to both phosphates and adenosine. We refined the known form of the p-loop motif and we show that some of the motifs that define different classes of AARSs overlap with motifs responsible for ATP binding. Three motifs including class II AARS, protein kinase and actin-like ATPase are associated with specific protein families and biological processes while the p-loop and strand-sandwich motifs are involved in a diverse range of processes. We applied the five motifs to predict ATP-binding proteins by scanning the sequences and structures deposited in PDB. Evaluation using gene ontology annotation (GOA) (Barrell et al., 2009) shows that close to 98% of the predictions are confirmed as the ATP-binding proteins.A set of all available 413 ATP–protein complexes was extracted from PDB as of December 16, 2013. The corresponding protein sequences were filtered with CD–hit (Huang et al., 2010) to reduce the pairwise sequence identity in this set to less than 40%. The resulting 137 ATP–protein complexes were used to derive the binding modes.Hydrogen bonds were calculated with HBPLUS (McDonald and Thornton, 1994). The method finds all proximal donor (D) and acceptor (A) atom pairs that satisfy specified geometrical criteria for the formation of the bond. Theoretical hydrogen atom (H) positions of both protein and ligand are calculated with REDUCE program (Word et al., 1999).A non-hydrogen atom A1 of a protein and a non-hydrogen atom A2 of ATP form van der Waals contact if the distance d between these two atoms satisfiesd<vdW(A1)+vdW(A2)+0.5Åwhere vdW(Ai) is the vdW radii of Aiand where these two atoms do not form a hydrogen bond. This definition is consistent with a recent study concerning investigation of atomic level patterns in protein–small ligand interaction (Chen and Kurgan, 2009).ATP contains 31 non-hydrogen atoms. The interactions for each of these atoms, denoted as Ai, i=1,2,…,31, are described using 120 dimensional feature vector. Consequently, we compute 31×120=3720 features for each ATP–protein complex. The features encode coordinates of non-hydrogen atoms of a given protein that are within 3.5Å from Ai; the threshold value is consistent with a previous study (Chen and Kurgan, 2009). If no such atoms are found then the 120 dimensions for Aiare set as 0. Otherwise, the selected atoms are categorized into 40 groups, denoted as Gj, j=1,2,…, 40, where each group is described by three features that represent three coordinates of the spatial position of its representative atom. Each group concerns one of the 20 AA types and two types of atoms, i.e., nitrogen and oxygen that have strong propensity to form hydrogen bonds and the remaining atoms. If none of the selected atoms belongs to Gj, then the corresponding three feature values for are set to 0. Otherwise, the atom with the minimal distance to Aiis selected as the representative atom for Gj. The coordinates of the representative atom are normalized with respect to the ATP molecule. For each of the 40 groups, Aiand two atoms of ATP that are covalently connected to Aiare set as the reference points. We perform one translational and three rotational transformations such that Aiis located at the origin and other two atoms are on the y-axis and xy-plane.We perform feature selection to find the most relevant coordinates for the ATP–protein interaction. The 3720 features correspond to 1240 sets of normalized coordinates. The normalized coordinates are spaced between 2Å and 3.5Å from the origin; the corresponding distribution is given in Fig. 1 in Supplement. For each set of coordinates, we consider a set X of its non-zero values across different structures where a given set is regarded as non-zero if at least one of its coordinates does not equal 0. The cardinality of X quantifies the number of atoms from different structures which are encoded in the coordinate set. We investigate whether the atoms from X are clustered together or spaced randomly, when compared to an average distribution of coordinates in our dataset. The randomly spaced coordinate sets, which correspond to atoms for which no similar spatial arrangement is found, are discarded. We compute average Euclidian distance D1 based on the distances for all pairs of atoms from X and we compare that value to an average distance D2 of a set of random coordinates that follow the distribution from Fig. 1 in Supplement and which are sampled 10000 times. Given that smaller D1 values correspond to a more compact distribution of the atoms, we regard X as clustered (non-random) if D1 is smaller than 95% of the 10000 D2 values. As a result, total of 192 features that correspond to 64 coordinate sets are retained for the subsequent clustering.A single linkage method, which has been widely applied in clustering of protein and DNA/RNA sequences, e.g., in BLASTClust (Altschul et al., 1997) and CluSTr (Petryszak et al., 2005), was used to cluster the 137 structures encoded using the 192 features. This is a hierarchical clustering method in which the distance between two clusters is defined as the distance between the two closest elements in these clusters. We used fifth level in the dendrogram generated by this clustering method to cluster the binding sites. This level includes 5 clusters with at least 4 proteins, which were used to derive the binding modes, while the remaining clusters are smaller and include 2 or fewer proteins. Four out of the five large clusters are confined to a single protein superfamily and the corresponding structural analysis reveals that these clusters have similar ATP binding sites. The sixth level further subdivides these clusters and thus the corresponding modes would be less generic. On the other hand, the fourth level includes 2 large clusters with proteins that belong to 3 superfamilies for which we could not derive unique structural motifs. The dendrogram of the clustering result is demonstrated in Fig. 4 in Supplement.Each cluster includes multiple structures that share similar spatial arrangement of binding residues; see Fig. 1A. The structures of the binding sites were superimposed by performing one translational and three rotational transformations such that the C5 atom of ATP is at the origin point, the C4 and N7 atoms of ATP are on y-axis and on xy-plane, respectively. The structural motif is defined using median structures of individual residues in the structures from a given cluster; see Fig. 1B. The median structure for a given binding residue is selected as the set of coordinates that gives minimal value of distance to the coordinates of the remaining corresponding residues in the clusterDi=∑i≠jRMSD(Si,Sj)where i = 1,2,…,x is a structure index, and S1, S2,…, Sxdenote normalized coordinates of this residue in x structures in the cluster.The sequence motifs were searched against a set of protein sequences that were filtered at 40% sequence similarity using CD-Hit23 from the dataset of sequences extracted from PDB as described in the “prediction of ATP-binding proteins” section. Each sequence was annotated as “nucleotide–binding” or “not nucleotide–binding” based on the GOA (Barrell et al., 2009). The statistical test is based on a method that was used by Senes and colleagues to verify significance of sequence motifs in transmembrane helices (Senes et al., 2000). The total number of protein sequences in the set is denoted as n1 and the number of sequences annotated as “nucleotide–binding” in the entire set is denoted as n2. For a given sequence motif X, the number of protein sequences that contain motif X is denoted as n3. The motif X is regarded as associated with the nucleotide binding proteins if its occurrence in n2 “nucleotide–binding” proteins is significantly higher than its occurrence Y in n2 randomly selected sequences in the entire dataset. Assuming the sequences in the set are independent (sequences that share more than 40% similarity were removed), Y satisfies binomial distribution. The probability of Y being equivalent to or greater than n3, Pr(Y≥n3), is used to evaluate the significance. Since some positions in the motifs are not invariant but rather they are conserved in majority of the aligned sequences (see Table 1in the main document and Table 1 Supplement), a protein sequence is regarded to contain motif X if a segment of the sequence is identical to X or if it differs from X at at most one position.The prediction method for the p-loop binding mode differs from the prediction for the other four modes. We use both the sequential and the structural motifs for the p-loop mode, while for the remaining modes we use only the structural motifs.First, a protein sequence of a given PDB entry is compared with the sequential GXXGXGKS(T)T motif. Protein segments that have at least four residues in common with the sequential motif are kept (the alignment between X and any amino acid is not counted); we assume no deletions or insertions in the alignment. Next, the RMSD value is computed between the structures of the main chain of the selected segments and the main chain of the corresponding structural motif. The structures with RMSD<0.5Å are predicted as the ATP-binding sites, and the corresponding proteins are predicted as ATP-binding using the p-loop mode.The structural motifs for the remaining 4 modes are defined using the median structures for each binding residue which is shaded in Table 1 in the main document and in Table 1 in Supplement, respectively. We predict a given protein structure as ATP-binding if it contains four residues that share similar spatial arrangement of their side chains with the side chains of residues in the structural motif. The similarity concerns two conditions: (1) the corresponding residues are of the same AA type; and (2) the RMSD between the structure of the four residues in the input protein and the motif <1Å.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
