@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Line-based sunken relief generation from a 3D mesh

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We focus on the problem of direct generation of line-based sunken relief from a 3D mesh.We adopt clipping, chaining and smoothing to make the lines organized in good forms.We use a continuous pitting corrosion method to simulate the cutting paths.The object-based method is flexible for stroke stylization of the engraving lines.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Line drawing,Sunken relief generation,Line engraving,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Sunken relief is an art form made by cutting the relief sculpture itself into a flat surface with a shallow overall depth. This paper focuses on the problem of direct generation of line-based sunken relief from a 3D mesh. We show how to extract, post-process and organize the messy feature lines in regular forms, applicable for lines engraving on the sculpture surfaces. We further describe how to construct a smooth height field from the input object, and derive a continuous pitting corrosion method to generate the cutting paths. The whole framework is conducted in object-space, making it flexible for stroke stylization and depth control of the engraving lines. We demonstrate the results with several impressive renderings and photographs used to illustrate the paper itself.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Artists have for centuries studied the skills of using lines to represent, emphasize or exaggerate the shape of 3D objects. In the traditional media such as pencil drawings, cartoon shading, technical illustrations, one of the most fundamental elements of art is the line. Lines also play a critical role in forming engravings and sunken reliefs, the visual contours and shape details of the sculptures are often represented by perceptual salient lines.Over the past few years, line-based shape depiction has been a popular topic in the area of non-photorealistic rendering (NPR). Researchers have made much progress in lines definition, stroke stylization, lines density control, and so on. In this paper, we adopt some ideas of NPR line drawing, and present a novel approach for line-based sunken relief generation. Sunken relief is largely restricted to the artwork of Ancient Egypt, as shown in Fig. 1. To create a sunken relief, the artist carves the relief sculpture with impressive incised lines. As a whole, the sculpture is set within a sunken area shaped round the outlines. Lines in the sunken relief have the following features: (a) Outlines are carved deeply to describe the overall shape of the object. (b) Contour depth is variable, leading to the changing of shadow thickness under strong sunlight. (c) Decorative lines are engraved on the sculpture surface to represent the object details.Our goal in this paper is to find a suitable way for the combination of lines extraction and sunken relief generation. The whole framework starts from the feature lines extraction of a 3D mesh. Then, we concentrate on the post-processing of the lines including clipping, chaining, and smoothing. On this basis, the lines are organized in good forms and appearance, appropriate for line engraving with the relief height field. Finally, the input 3D mesh is transformed into three basic layers: a contour line layer to strengthen the sense of outlines, a decorative line layer to represent the relief details, and a smooth base layer to convey 2.5D illusion of the depth. Using a continuous pitting corrosion method, we combine the three layers together and generate the sunken relief with desired line depth and stylization. Fig. 2shows the pipeline of our algorithm.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Sunken relief is a special sculpture art, in which both the overall shape and the local details are represented by lines. In this paper, we have presented an object-based method for sunken relief generation from a 3D mesh. Initially, we focus on the extraction and post-processing of the feature lines so that the messy line drawing can be converted into smooth line chains. After that, we construct a smooth transition height field based on Lambertian shading, and use a continuous pitting corrosion method to generate the engraving paths. Experimental results verify that the proposed method is effective to generate a sunken relief from a 3D mesh.Compared with the image processing algorithms, one important advantage of our method is that it can produce varying thickness strokes for the relief contours. Since we have organized the lines in chains, it’s easy to convert them into editable B-splines. Thus, the users will have more flexibility to modify the shape of the relief contours. However, intuitive editing of a sunken relief is not an easy work. Once the outlines are changed, the overall shape of the sunken surfaces needs to be modified correspondingly. We wish to work on this challenging problem in the future.One limitation of our work is the feature lines extraction. In this paper, we only use contours and suggestive contours to describe the relief shape and details. In future, we will explore more possible line types and produce a much broader space of appealing stroke styles for sunken relief generation.