@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A global energy optimization framework for 2.1D sketch extraction from monocular images

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model a layered image representation using a 2.1D sketch.A global energy framework is proposed to solve the conflict of local hints.A hybrid evolution algorithm is used to solve the global optimization problem.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
2.1D sketch,Global optimization,Local features,Hybrid differential evolution,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The 2.1D sketch is a layered image representation, which assigns a partial depth ordering of over-segmented regions in a monocular image. This paper presents a global optimization framework for inferring the 2.1D sketch from a monocular image. Our method only uses over-segmented image regions (i.e., superpixels) as input, without any information of objects in the image, since (1) segmenting objects in images is a difficult problem on its own and (2) the objective of our proposed method is to be generic as an initial module useful for downstream high-level vision tasks. This paper formulates the inference of the 2.1D sketch using a global energy optimization framework. The proposed energy function consists of two components: (1) one is defined based on the local partial ordering relations (i.e., figure-ground) between two adjacent over-segmented regions, which captures the marginal information of the global partial depth ordering and (2) the other is defined based on the same depth layer relations among all the over-segmented regions, which groups regions of the same object to account for the over-segmentation issues. A hybrid evolution algorithm is utilized to minimize the global energy function efficiently. In experiments, we evaluated our method on a test data set containing 100 diverse real images from Berkeley segmentation data set (BSDS500) with the annotated ground truth. Experimental results show that our method can infer the 2.1D sketch with high accuracy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The 2.1D sketch is a decomposition of an image domain into overlapping regions ordered by occlusion. An illustrative example is shown in Fig. 1, in which the 2.1D sketch of a domain D is a set of four overlapped regionsR1,R2,R3,R4, satisfyingR1∪R2∪R3∪R4=D, and there is a partial depth ordering≻on these regions,R1≻R2≻R3≻R4, whereRi≻RjmeansRiis in front ofRj. The 2.1D sketch was first proposed by Nitzberg et al. [1,2], and was also called layered image representation by Adelson [3–5] for image coding and motion analysis. The goal of the 2.1D sketch is, on one hand, to recover the partial layer ordering of regions in an input image, and on the other hand, to keep multiple reasonable and distinct solutions accounting for the intrinsic ambiguity caused by occlusion. Solving the 2.1D sketch is a critical step for scene understanding and other high-level vision tasks in both still image and video, such as foreground/background separation, depth estimation from a single image (also called 2.5D sketch), image and video coding, motion analysis, etc. It remains a very challenging problem in the vision literature.This paper presents a global energy optimization method for inferring the 2.1D sketch from a monocular real image. Fig. 2shows a real example. The 2D image regions in Fig. 2(b) are computed by some off-the-shelf multi-scale low-level segmentation algorithms (e.g., the Berkeley multi-scale segmentation algorithm, called gPb-owt-ucm in [6], is used in our experiments). The reason that we adopt the over-segmented 2D image regions as input is to recover the underlying latent objects in the 2.1D sketch. In this paper, we focus on inferring the partial depth ordering of objects (Figs. 2(c) and (d)) using the low-level segmented image regions as input (i.e., without resorting to the object information). We do not address the occluded contour completion problem. Meanwhile, we formulate the inference problem under an global energy optimization framework and therefore do not account for the multiple plausible solutions of the 2.1D sketch.Inferring the partial depth ordering of a set of image regions belongs to the well-known tournament problem [7] which is known to be a NP-hard and APX-hard problem in general. In the tournament problem, the objective is to rank n elements (i.e., the image regions in this paper) using some transitive properties (i.e., the depth of image regions from the observer) and some successive pairwise comparisons (i.e., the marginal information of the globally consistent partial depth ordering). To address this issue, in this paper we propose a global energy optimization framework to model the 2.1D sketch, which leads to a nonlinear optimization in inference, and we utilize a hybrid evolution algorithm to solve it.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
