@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Deformable registration using patch-wise shape matching

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A robust and efficient non-rigid registration method has been developed.Large deformations are enabled by a nonlinear elastic energy.Our hierarchical optimization with successive refinement guarantees efficiency.Several examples with real-world scans are provided.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Non-rigid registration,Nonlinear shape deformation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We present a novel approach for non-rigid registration of partially overlapping surfaces acquired from a deforming object. To allow for large and general deformations our method employs a nonlinear physics-inspired deformation model, which has been designed with a particular focus on robustness and performance. We discretize the surface into a set of overlapping patches, for each of which an optimal rigid motion is found and interpolated faithfully using dual quaternion blending. Using this discretization we can formulate the two components of our objective function—a fitting and a regularization term—as a combined global shape matching problem, which can be solved through a very robust numerical approach. Interleaving the optimization with successive patch refinement results in an efficient hierarchical coarse-to-fine optimization. Compared to other approaches our as-rigid-as-possible deformation model is faster, causes less distortion, and gives more accurate fitting results.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The need to compensate for deformation present on a set of captured data, or between modeled objects, is inbred to all dynamic 3D imaging and graphics applications, such as capturing, modeling, representation, recognition, morphing, and animation. In particular the 3D scanning of physical objects that undergo some kind of non-rigid motion leads to a space–time shape matching problem, which has to be solved to achieve a non-rigid alignment between partial views.Depending on the application and the scanning system, the type of non-rigid motion the object is undergoing and the distortion caused for local and global features can vary a lot. This mainly depends on the temporal distribution of the single scans. For real-time scanners the deformation of consecutive scans is rather small and their overlap rather large. The acquired data is typically not problematic from a registration perspective. In contrast, when high-end scanners are used to acquire precise high-resolution scans for production quality models, the delay between two consecutive scans is significantly larger, leading to more deformation and less overlap between individual scans, and therefore to a more challenging registration problem.Large-scale deformations require a more sophisticated regularization of the deformation field in order to prevent implausible deformations and to keep the surface locally rigid during the registration process (Fig. 1). Since the small strain assumption does not hold for large deformation, the regularization is typically implemented as some nonlinear physics-inspired strain measure, which is to be minimized simultaneously with the fitting error between the two scans. The resulting nonlinear minimization is challenging in terms of numerical robustness and computational performance.In this paper we present an approach for accurate and robust deformable registration of models acquired by high-quality, high-resolution 3D scanners. Our method is able to compensate for various kinds of motion and deformation the acquired data can exhibit, which is achieved by a nonlinear, physics-inspired deformation regularization. Our method is based on a space deformation approach, such that it can process arbitrary point-sampled data and is not affected negatively by degenerate input meshes. We discretize the surface into a hierarchy of partially overlapping patches, for each of which a distinct rigid transformation is found by minimizing a global objective function that takes into account both the need for accurate alignment as well as for the regularity of the deformation field. The resulting rigid transformations are then extended to all sample points in a rigid manner using dual quaternion interpolation. As a result of this as-rigid-as-possible deformation our dynamic registration avoids unnecessary distortion and faithfully preserves geometric features. Both the fitting and regularization terms are based on a global shape matching strategy, which results in a unified objective function that can be minimized in a numerically very robust manner. Finally, our hierarchical patch discretization and correspondence refinement further improves stability and accelerates convergence. An example of our deformable registration is shown in Fig. 1.Our approach demonstrates a favorable combination of fitting accuracy, geometric feature preservation, and computational performance, as we evaluate on several challenging datasets and compare to recent state-of-the-art techniques. As such, our approach can have many practical applications for the acquisition of objects that undergo undesired motion, such as acquisition of body parts for orthopedic applications, as well as for the analysis of deformation with respect to a reference surface for manufacturing quality control.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this work we presented an improved solution for the non-rigid registration of partial views which is suitable for deforming object acquisition and modeling, especially for high-resolution surfaces acquired through professional 3D scanners. The method demonstrated its capability of suitably handling different degrees of deformation for all the considered challenging datasets. The selection of a denser set of correspondences with respect to the number of node patches defined on the surface granted our approach an improved accuracy with respect to state-of-the-art techniques for high-resolution datasets, while the adoption of a fast and robust optimization scheme, as well as a lightweight correspondence selection procedure granted satisfactory computational performance. With the complex of the described features, our technique is capable to provide physically-plausible, as-rigid-as-possible deformations with accurate and effective detail-aware registration properties which are valuable for many demanding and emerging applications.