@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A two-stage approach to align two surfaces of deformable objects

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Align two partial overlapping surfaces of deformable objects.Deformation is divided into a single global rigid motion and local deformations.Combine probability approach and geometry approach to avoid deformation assumptions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Registration,Deformation,Correspondences,Optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper introduces a new approach for non-rigid registration which is able to align two surfaces under large deformation. At the first stage, the two surfaces are remeshed to create two sub-meshes. Then, correspondences between the two sub-meshes are obtained by employing a robust probabilistic method. Reliable correspondences are used to find a global rigid transformation to bring the two surfaces closer. Using these correspondences and taking one sub-mesh as a deformation graph, the second stage applies a deformation model to align the two surfaces together. This stage solves for more correct correspondences as well as for a local transformation at each node simultaneously. With these two stages, the method deals robustly with large motion and preserves small details during the alignment process of the two surfaces. The efficiency of the method is demonstrated by comparing the alignment results it achieves with the results obtained by state-of-the-art methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the development of 3D scanning technology, recent scanners can capture accurate data at high frame rates. However, occlusion is an inevitable issue since only data in a limited part of an object is captured by each scan. So, obtaining a complete model of an object at any given point in time is achieved by assembling two or several frames together using registration methods. Current rigid registration methods effectively solve the alignment problem for rigid objects by globally describing the motion between two surfaces using a rotation matrix, a translation vector and/or a scaling factor. However, these methods are not efficient when partial data is acquired from an object under non-rigid movement and when the movement between two surfaces cannot be expressed simply by a single global transformation. In the case of non-rigid motion, each point in the scan must be moved by a specific transformation with constraints to maintain the coherence between this point and its neighbors. Compared to the case of rigid registration, the solution space of non-rigid registration is high-dimensional and the number of parameters depends on the selected model to describe the deformation between the two scans.To optimally align two surfaces in a non-rigid registration process, finding correct correspondences plays a fundamental role in the outcome of the algorithm. This is achieved very well for rigid registration by using 3D descriptors which are invariant under rigid motion. However, for a deformable object, employing such descriptors is not reliable due to the local deformation (bending and/or stretching) of the surface. To overcome this issue, some assumptions can be used. For instance, the motion between two surfaces may be considered as small, some artificial markers can be used, or the deformation may be considered as being approximately isometric. However, using one of these assumptions restricts the algorithms to a given class of data. Therefore, it is highly relevant to design a non-rigid registration algorithm that is not constrained by these assumptions to improve efficiency for practical applications.In this paper we present a two-stage method to register two partially overlapping non-rigid surfaces, as shown in Fig. 1. These surfaces are represented as triangular meshes, which are the common output of many current scanners. Two sub-meshes of the two respective surfaces are created and their topologies are kept similar to those of the original surfaces in order to reduce the interpolation error associated with linear blending. In the first stage, a probability-based algorithm (CPD: coherent point drift) is used to find initial correspondences between the two sub-meshes by describing the deformation in an elastic manner. Wrong correspondences found by CPD are then eliminated to retain reliable correspondences before using singular value decomposition (SVD) to obtain one global rigid transformation T. In the second stage, under a general deformation model, a sub-mesh is used as a deformation graph in which each vertex is called a node. Because the deformation is elastic, each node is transformed into its corresponding point by an affine transformation under the influence of the movement of neighboring nodes. In addition, the obtained transformation T is used to bring the deformation graph closer to the target surface before running the optimization process. During optimization, the corresponding point of each node is refined by searching in or around a pre-defined region (potential region) on the target surface. Moreover, distances between the nodes and their corresponding points are also constrained to be as smooth as possible to adjust the movement of the deformation graph toward the target surface. Combined with a 3-cycle strategy in the optimization process, this approach converges to an optimal solution in a small number of iterations before the solution is used to interpolate the registration on the whole source surface.The main contributions of the proposed method include:•Automatic separation of the deformation between two surfaces of deformable objects into a single global rigid transformation and many local deformations. The obtained rigid transformation brings the deformation graph closer to the target surface. It not only accelerates the convergence of the optimization for local transformations but also prevents this process from becoming trapped in an incorrect minimum due to tangential drift in non-rigid registration.Reliable correspondences between deformation graph and the target surface are obtained by combining a probability-based method and a geometry-based correspondence elimination process. These correspondences play a role as initial markers to allow the algorithm to solve for non-rigid registration of elastic deformation without user intervention, avoiding the aforementioned assumptions between the two surfaces.A 3-cycle optimization process is proposed in which updated corresponding points are detected quickly in potential regions, the motion of the deformation graph toward the target surface is constrained more by a smoothed correspondence field and two distortion measures. So, the optimization converges toward the correct minimum and solves the non-rigid registration problem for challenging data sets.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: The related work and its limitation is discussed in Section 2. In Section 3, we describe the deformation model employed in our work. The first stage of the proposed method is addressed in Section 4 before moving to the second stage in Section 5. Section 6 shows the experimental results and discussion. The conclusion is drawn in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
