@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new lossless orthogonal simplification method for 3D objects based on bounding structures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a new approach to simplify binary volumes.The method produces a level-of-detail sequence of orthogonal pseudo-polyhedra.The generated sequence is encoded in a progressive and lossless way.Our method produces smaller storage sizes and good quality approximations compared with similar methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Simplification,LOD,Bounding volumes,Orthogonal polyhedra,Binary volumes,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a new approach to simplify 3D binary images and general orthogonal pseudo-polyhedra (OPP). The method is incremental and produces a level-of-detail sequence of OPP, where any object of this sequence bounds the previous objects and, therefore, is a bounding orthogonal approximation of them. The sequence finishes with the axis-aligned bounding box. OPP are encoded using the Extreme Vertices Model, a complete model that stores a subset of their vertices and performs fast Boolean operations. Simplification is achieved by using a new strategy, which relies on the application of 2D Boolean operations. We also present a technique, based on model continuity, for better shape preservation. Finally, we present a data structure to encode in a progressive and lossless way the generated sequence. Tests with several datasets show that the proposed method produces smaller storage sizes and good quality approximations compared with other methods that also produce bounding objects.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The growing size and complexity of datasets affects not only the computation speed of their characteristics, but also their disk storage and rendering efficiency. Simplification techniques can diminish these problems. Moreover, in some situations it is advantageous to exchange an exact geometric representation of an object for an approximated one, which can be processed more efficiently. Bounding structures are widely used in model simplification to accelerate or improve some tasks such as collision detection, distance computation or any basic set membership operation. The most used bounding structure is the minimum axis-aligned bounding box (AABB) although other structures are used such as spheres, oriented boxes or convex polyhedra.We present a new approach to simplify objects, which is restricted to orthogonal pseudo-polyhedra (OPP) and therefore it can be applied to 3D binary digital images or binary volume datasets as they can be represented by OPP. From an initial OPP, the method computes a level-of-detail (LOD) sequence of bounding volumes that are also OPP. The sequence is finite and ends with a convex OPP that is the AABB of all the sequence. We will denote as BOPP (bounding OPP) such bounding structures. BOPP satisfy basically two properties: (1) any BOPP contains the previous one and, therefore, all of them completely contain the original object and (2) all of the BOPP, as well as the original object, have the same AABB.OPP are represented by the Extreme Vertices Model (EVM) and the simplification is achieved using a new approach we call merging faces, which displaces sets of faces and merges them by applying 2D Boolean operations. Our approach deals with general 3D orthogonal objects with any number of shells, cavities and through holes. We analyze different strategies suitable for merging faces and we also develop a technique that relies on the object continuity in order to get a better shape preservation by avoiding abrupt changes. Finally, we propose a data structure that allows encoding in a progressive and lossless way the generated BOPP sequence. The method has been tested with several datasets and compared with several methods that also produce bounding objects, showing good quality of the approximations and smaller storage sizes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have presented an approach to simplify orthogonal polyhedra and 3D binary images, represented with EVM. It generates a LOD sequence of BOPP, which fulfill the common subset and AABB properties of bounding structures. The approach is based on a merging faces strategy and deals with OPP with any number of holes and connected components. It also includes a technique, based on model continuity, for a better shape preservation. We have pointed out the efficiency and robustness of EVM Boolean operations, specially xor, and we have taken full advantage of this operation. Finally, we have presented a data structure, PEVE, to encode in a progressive and lossless way the generated LOD sequence.From experimental results, we can conclude that the LOD sequence generated by this method is satisfactory in terms of quality of the approximation, although better quality is obtained when more orthogonal is the object shape. Compared with other approaches, PEVE gives good compression rates and processing time. Moreover, the generated bounding approximations are tighter, in general, than in other approaches, maintaining concavities, genus and other shape features at a very compressed approximations.The presented approach can be very useful in applications that require bounding volumes and deal with many 3D objects, specially where most of them are distributed in an orthogonal way, e.g. to speed up the collision detection in the automatic pipe routing in ships [6].As a future work, we are devising a new method for pore space partitioning, as an extension of our previous work, based on narrow throat detection [47]. We will apply this method to real silica nano datasets. To analyze the resulting complex forms we will simplify them with the presented method before applying the pore space partitioning. As the simplified object bounds the original, detected narrow throats on it will be also narrow throats on the original. Currently, we are preparing a new paper with these results and other benefits like those described in Section 7.2 of performing simplification using OPP.Other directions for future work include the study of an EVM and CUDB based data structure to efficiently encode time-varying datasets.