@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Efficient 3D reflection symmetry detection: A view-based approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Propose a novel and efficient view-based symmetry detection algorithm.Demonstrate better accuracy and efficiency compared with two latest approaches.Dataset-level evaluation and two related applications validate good robustness and flexibility.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Symmetry detection,Reflection symmetry,View-based approach,Viewpoint entropy,Matching,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Symmetries exist in many 3D models while efficiently finding their symmetry planes is important and useful for many related applications. This paper presents a simple and efficient view-based reflection symmetry detection method based on the viewpoint entropy features of a set of sample views of a 3D model. Before symmetry detection, we align the 3D model based on the Continuous Principal Component Analysis (CPCA) method. To avoid the high computational load resulting from a directly combinatorial matching among the sample views, we develop a fast symmetry plane detection method by first generating a candidate symmetry plane based on a matching pair of sample views and then verifying whether the number of remaining matching pairs is within a minimum number. Experimental results and two related applications demonstrate better accuracy, efficiency, robustness and versatility of our algorithm than state-of-the-art approaches.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Symmetry is an important clue for geometry perception: it is not only in many man-made models, but also widely exists in the nature [1]. Symmetry has been used in many applications such as: 3D alignment [2], shape matching [3], remeshing [4], 3D model segmentation [5] and retrieval [6].However, existing symmetry detection algorithms still have much room for improvement in terms of both simplicity and efficiency in detecting symmetry planes, as well as the degree of freedom to find approximate symmetry planes for a roughly symmetric 3D model. In addition, most of the existing symmetry detection methods are geometry-based, thus their computational efficiency will be tremendously influenced by the number of vertices of a model. Though sampling and simplification can be used to reduce the number of vertices, they also decrease the shape accuracy and cause deviations in geometry. Therefore, a symmetry detection algorithm often directly uses original models as its input, as can be found in many existing related papers.Motivated by the symmetric patterns existing in the viewpoint entropy [7] distribution of a symmetric model, we propose a novel and efficient view-based symmetry detection algorithm (see Fig. 1) which finds symmetry plane(s) by matching the viewpoint entropy features of a set of sample views of a 3D model aligned beforehand using Continuous Principal Component Analysis (CPCA) [8]. Based on experimental results, we find that our symmetry detection algorithm is more accurate (in terms of both the positions of detected symmetry planes and sensitivity to minor symmetry differences), efficient, robust (e.g. to the number of vertices and parameter settings such as view sampling), and versatile in finding symmetry planes of diverse models.In the rest of the paper, we first review the related work in Section 2. In Section 3, we present the viewpoint entropy distribution-based symmetry detection algorithm. Section 4 describes diverse experimental evaluation and comparison results of the detection algorithm. In Section 5, we show two interesting applications of our symmetry detection idea in 3D model alignment and best view selection. Section 6 concludes the paper and lists several future research directions. This paper is an extension of our prior publication [9].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we have proposed an efficient and novel view-based symmetry detection algorithm based on viewpoint entropy distribution. We have compared with the two latest symmetry detection approaches based on a common set of selected models and demonstrated the better performance of our method in terms of accuracy and efficiency. A detailed evaluation of our approach on a dataset of 400 models and the promising results of two related applications also validate its good robustness, detection rate, and flexibility.To further improve and explore the algorithm, we list several promising directions here as our next work. Firstly, traditional PCA-based approaches cannot guarantee that the directions of the largest extent are parallel to the axes of the ideal canonical coordinate frame of 3D models. One promising approach to achieve further improvement in terms of alignment accuracy is an improved version of the Minimum Projection Area (MPA) [39] alignment method. We can improve its accuracy to meet our precision requirement by applying the PSO-based method used in the first principle axis search in the search for the second principle axis as well. We are also interested in combining it with CPCA for the 3D alignment process: first performing CPCA for an initial alignment and then correcting possible tilt views (poses) by utilizing a similar idea as MPA. It is promising to help to achieve even better symmetry detection performance, especially for decreasing the percentage of False Negative (FN) since more symmetry planes can be successfully detected, thus avoiding the fail case like Fig. 6(a) because of the limitation of CPCA.Secondly, to further improve the efficiency of our algorithm, we could consider Hough transform for symmetry evidence voting. For example, each pair of matched viewpoints casts a vote for their bisecting plane, while the peaks of the voting distribution correspond to prominent symmetry planes. We need to mention that directly applying Hough voting may not work because rather like geometric values, symmetric viewpoints do not perfectly match each other based on their viewpoint entropy values, which has been explained in Section 3.3.Finally, an automatic and adaptive strategy to select an appropriate threshold δ for respective models or classes is another interesting research direction and deserves our further exploration.