@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Globally consistent rigid registration

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a globally consistent method to deal with the loop closure problem.Parametric correspondence is introduced to enhance the accuracy.Transformations and correspondences are optimized simultaneously.Complicated sub-loops can be closed automatically.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multiview registration,Consistent formulation,Loop closure problem,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper we present a novel approach to register multiple scans from a static object. We formulate the registration problem as an optimization of the maps from all other scans to one reference scan where any map between two scans can be represented by the composition of these maps. In this way, all loop closures can be automatically guaranteed as the maps among all scans are globally consistent. Furthermore, to avoid the incorrect correspondences between the points in the scan, we employ a parametric bi-directional approach that generates invertible transformations in pairwise overlapping regions. With the parameter information in use and the consistency taken into consideration, we are able to eliminate the drift that often occurred in multi-view registration process. Our approach is fully automatic and has performed better than existing approaches by various experimental results.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Creating 3D models of real world objects using scanning techniques is an attractive task with a wide range of applications in computer graphics, geometry processing, and reverse engineering. Typically, multiple data sets are captured from different viewpoints and these sets have to be registered to obtain a complete acquired object. Hence surface registration procedure is essential for the reconstruction task, especially in systems allowing scanner to move freely to avoid the occlusions [1].However, even registering two scanning sets from a static object, called rigid registration, is a challenging problem [1]. First, only subsets of the input scans overlap and their correspondence errors may lead to significant degradation in the result. Second, variations in the scans such as resolutions of data can affect the algorithm.Registering multi-view scans is a more difficult problem [2]. Generally, sequential registration of two overlapping views is performed at a time. Then an integration step is adopted to ensure all views are combined. However, it leads to the well-known loop closure problem [3,4], where the registration errors accumulate and propagate, leading to visible misalignment at the scanning borders. To overcome this problem, global registration algorithms are proposed from a global point of view [5–8]. These methods address the problem of loop closure either by distributing the transformation errors into the other scans or by distributing the accumulated errors over the other scans via distorting them which jeopardizes the rigidity of the scanned object. There are two problems in these methods. First, identifying loop closure is a nontrivial task and incorrect loop closure detections can significantly break the consistency of the data [9]. Second, when a scan locates on multiple loops, it is not easy to distribute the accumulated errors in different loops over this scan.In this paper, we propose a novel approach for global rigid registration of multi-view scan datasets. The registration between two scans is considered as a rigid transformation from one to the other. Choosing one scan as a reference scan, we regard all rigid transformations from the other scans to the reference, called basic transformations, as variables. Thus the rigid transformation between arbitrary two scans can be represented by the composite of these basic transformations. We formulate the registration as a global optimization on minimizing all registration errors among all overlapped scans. Thus all loop closures are implicitly guaranteed because the composite of all transformations from the sequential scans in any loop are automatically equal to identity. Therefore, our approach does not need to explicitly detect the loop closures.Furthermore, the traditional point to point correspondences between overlapped scans are not suitable in our optimization. Instead, we consider the correspondences from points in one scan to the other scan as parameter variables. Thus our approach allows correspondences from points in one scan to the optimal positions in the other scan, which alleviates the drift problem caused by inconsistent variable settings and point to point correspondences in the registration.The contributions of our approach for globally consistent rigid registration are summarized in the following:•A global formulation is developed to resolve the globally consistent rigid registration problem.Our approach guarantees all loop closures implicitly in a globally consistent manner.The alignments among the scans may be more precise than previous methods as the points in one scan can correspond to their optimal positions in other scans.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
