@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Splat-based surface reconstruction from defect-laden point sets

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The proposed surface reconstruction method is robust to noise and outliers.The method uses raw data point sets to compute a splat-based representation.In a second step, the splats representation is meshed through Delaunay refinement.Neither normal estimation nor the computation of global functions is required.Ransac is used at the two levels to filter outliers.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Surface reconstruction,Splat-based representation,RANSAC fitting,Delaunay refinement,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We introduce a method for surface reconstruction from point sets that is able to cope with noise and outliers. First, a splat-based representation is computed from the point set. A robust local 3D RANSAC-based procedure is used to filter the point set for outliers, then a local jet surface – a low-degree surface approximation – is fitted to the inliers. Second, we extract the reconstructed surface in the form of a surface triangle mesh through Delaunay refinement. The Delaunay refinement meshing approach requires computing intersections between line segment queries and the surface to be meshed. In the present case, intersection queries are solved from the set of splats through a 1D RANSAC procedure.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The growing variety of scanning devices and technologies nowadays provides measurements of objects in the form of point sets. Despite the advances in scanning technologies, achieving a perfect scan is very unlikely and, in general, these point sets contain two main types of defects: noise and outliers. Noise refers to the inaccuracy of the resulting measurements, and is related to the lack of precision and repeatability of the scanning process used, while outliers are wrong measurements that are produced by errors during the scanning (e.g., reflections on the surface when using laser scanners).Having the object represented as a point set complicates the interpretation of the data since the notion of visibility of the shape from a given viewpoint is lost. For this reason, surface reconstruction methods are required. We aim at obtaining the surface in the form of a surface triangle mesh, which allows further processing such as remeshing or simplification. In this paper, we present a surface reconstruction method that is able to provide a smooth approximation of the sampled shape while dealing with noise and a large number of outliers. Moreover, the method is able, to some extent, to reconstruct surfaces with boundaries.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have presented a surface reconstruction method that is able to recover smooth representations of a surface under a large quantity of outliers and noise. The separation of the splat creation and the surface meshing steps makes the method modular, and provides re-usability of the results obtained at each intermediate step. Our method works without any other information than the raw point set, and the local nature of the individual splats makes the method recover, to some extent, the boundaries of the reconstructed shape.Our approach has some limitations: The reconstructed surfaces are limited to be smooth and may be non-manifold as the surface meshing does not enforce generating manifold surfaces. Our method is not able to reconstruct largely undersampled parts, resulting in holes in areas with missing data. A uniform k parameter is clearly not sufficient when dealing with widely non-uniform point sets.Future work includes an automatic adaptive selection for k, and a parallelization of all the steps for modern multi-core architectures.