@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A model synthesis method based on single building facade

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a synthesis method via seamless stitching of each single building facade.We transform complicated 3D model synthesis into simple 2D constraints synthesis.Connection point set is used for seamless stitching.Both single and multiple examples we can handle.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Structure analysis,Global optimization,Single-example model synthesis,Multi-example model synthesis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper we present a convenient building model synthesis method. It aims at obtaining new user-defined building models through seamless stitching after synthesis of each single building facade. During the optimization process of synthesis of each single building facade, we utilize model structure analysis method to obtain the smallest structural units and the constraint graph among them, transforming complicated three-dimension (3D) synthesis problem into two-dimension (2D) constraint graph synthesis problem. Then we construct a global energy function and minimize it through iterative optimization with expectation maximization algorithm, in order to obtain new objective constraint graph. During stitching process, in order to get complete model synthesis result, we replace objective constraint graph with structural unit to transform synthesis back into 3D space, and achieve automatic stitching between neighboring construction units and neighboring facades by using the connection point sets of structural units in original samples. The experiment results demonstrate our method can generate building models of absolutely different styles quickly and efficiently based on single or multiple samples, while maintaining the continuity and visual integrity of result models well.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Since plenty of 3D building models are needed in the fields like 3D games, movies, and virtual reality, so how to generate these 3D models quickly and efficiently has become one of the most challenging problems in the field of computer graphics. Among the methods of generating 3D models, the most commonly used method is procedural modeling [1–3], which manually design the heuristic rules or parameters for creating models by experiences; however, this method is time-consuming and inconvenient to directly modify and edit the models. As the increasing appearance of plentiful sharable 3D models, constructing user-defined models based on the existing models has become a new direction in the modeling field, which has obtained a series of research achievements [4–9]. Such method can not only directly determine the pattern of models, but also simplify and accelerate the modeling process.We propose a new modeling method for existing mesh building, which enables users to reuse already known building styles to create new contents very easily. Making use of the characteristic that most of building models are constructed from the stitching and combination of each separate facade, we transform the synthesis of building models into the seamless stitching of each single building facade after respective synthesis.Aiming at key single building facade synthesis, we transform 3D synthesis into 2D synthesis of the 2D constraints between structural units (the constraints between structural units is defined as our constraint graph) by making use of the similarity between the structural unit repeatability (for example, a model includes multiple structural units like windows or doors, etc. of similar structure) and texture structure repeatability of building models, and by referring to the texture synthesis thought based on global optimization [10], constructing global energy function and solved it with optimization method, in order to obtain the objective constraint graph.Aiming at seamless stitching, we solve the problem in two aspects: one is that the seamless stitching of the structural units included in each single facade after synthesis; and the other is that the seamless stitching of each neighboring facade. In this paper, an uniform framework is adopted to solve the above problems. Namely, the minimum distance between the connection point set in original examples of each structural unit and that of neighboring structural unit is used to achieve the automatic seamless stitching between neighboring structural units and neighboring facades.The method proposed in this paper can achieve model synthesis based on both single example and multiple examples.The main contributions of this paper are:•According to the structural characteristics of building models, we have presented a new building model synthesis method. which aims at obtaining new user-defined building models through seamless stitching after synthesis of each single building facade. During single building facade synthesis, we have transformed complicated 3D model synthesis into simple 2D constraints synthesis and solved the problem based on the 2D constraints relationship between structural units of example model. During seamless stitching, we achieve automatic stitching of structural units based on the original connection point set of structural units and calculation of the minimum distance between point sets.Our method provides a new way for building modeling synthesis, which significantly shorten the modeling time and avoid the creation process from scratch. Starting from single or multiple examples, users could create new building models with various styles based on existing building models. Our method not only enriches the means of modeling for professionals, but also enables non-professionals to enjoy the fun of modeling.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
