@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Extracting feature lines from point clouds based on smooth shrink and iterative thinning

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An index SSI for measuring the degree of variation of the surface is proposed.A method for identifying potential feature points that are subordinate to different feature lines is present.Existing methods for thinning the potential feature points have been improved.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Point clouds,Feature line,Thinning,Surface variation,Curvature,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractImage, graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The extraction of feature lines, as a basic operation in geometric model processing, can provide important information for the expression and understanding of 3-d models. Therefore, it has been widely applied in the visualisation [1], optimisation [2,3], and simplification [4–6] of geometric models, surface reconstruction [7], smoothing surfaces [8,9], and so on.A feature line is the ordered connection of the feature points. Therefore, the primary step when extracting a feature line is to seek an index used for measuring the degree of variation of the surface to identify potential feature points from the whole point cloud. For this purpose, the principle component analysis(PCA) [10–13], curvature method [14–21] and M estimation [22–24] were proposed. However, the measurement of the surface variation of scattered point clouds has to be further discussed due to the lost topology, non-uniform sampling, and noise interference. Also, identified potential feature points require to be processed by the curve growing algorithm or the minimum spanning tree (MST), so as to obtain orderly connected feature lines. In this process, problems such as breakage and bifurcation of the feature lines induced by noise and non-uniform sampling must to be taken into account.A new algorithm that can extract feature lines from the non-uniformly sampled point cloud containing noise is proposed in this research. Firstly, a new index, that is, the SSI for measuring the degree of variation of the surface is constructed based on the smooth shrinkage of the model, and then used to identify potential feature points from the whole point cloud. Afterwards, the growing algorithm is used to conduct regional segmentation of the potential feature points. Finally, the potential feature points of each region are subjected to independent iterative refinement using the bilateral filter algorithm based on curvature and distance. The feature points are then connected to form the feature lines. The main contributions in this paper are as follows: (1) a new index SSI for measuring the degree of variation of the surface is proposed. Due to its integral characteristics, SSI has favourable tolerance to noise. Meanwhile, by weighting the sampling density and restraining the shrinkage direction, SSI shows favourable adaptability to non- uniformly sampled point clouds. In addition, SSI is capable of expressing the concavity and convexity of the surface by calculating the angle between the shrink direction and the normal vector. (2) A method for identifying potential feature points that are subordinate to different feature lines is proposed. This method improves the distinction of ridge and valley lines by considering the spatial distance and the concavity and convexity of the surface while conducting regional segmentation on the potential feature points. Meanwhile, after regional segmentation, a greater radius of neighbourhood can be adopted to determine trends in curves, which is favourable for improving the stability while thinning the potential feature points later on. (3) Existing methods for thinning the potential feature points have been improved. While thinning the potential feature points, PCA is used to determine the curve direction and restrain the drift of potential feature points. In this way, problems such as breakage and the shrink in the endpoints of feature lines that frequently appear in traditional methods can be avoided.The rest of the paper is arranged as follows: Section 2 reviews related work; the proposed SSI is introduced in Section 3; Section 4 describes the algorithm for extracting feature lines and its implementation; Section 5 verifies the proposed algorithm and compares it with other algorithms; and a summary of this research is presented in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The SSI is proposed to combine with the improved Laplace smoothing and thinning methods to generate a simple, effective algorithm for extracting feature lines from noisy and non-uniform sampling point clouds. SSI can accurately express the concavity and convexity of the surface and adapt to noise and non-uniform sampling very well. Moreover, after being applied to the regional segmentation of potential feature points, SSI is proven to improve the distinguish ability of spatially close feature lines and determine the trends therein adopting a greater spatial neighbourhood. Meanwhile, it can also be used to accelerate iterative thinning in Laplace smoothing, so as to determine the drifting direction of the feature points. As demonstrated in the experiment based on clean, realistic scanning data, the algorithm proposed in this work can extract feature lines from the models perfectly under the condition of noises and non-uniform sampling.As holes are a limiting form of non-uniform sampling for data clouds, our algorithm cannot extract holes delimited by boundary lines. Besides, although the distinguishing features of the algorithm in this research can be greatly improved by regional segmentation of potential feature points, the algorithm cannot distinguish the two intersected feature lines with consistent concavity and convexity. This will influence the determination of the strike for the feature lines at any intersection. Even though such a case has little influence on the convergence of the algorithm, the thinned feature lines may deviate from their real locations. Future work is expected to find a possible solution by finding an index which can distinguish, and deal with, those cases with intersecting feature lines.