@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Balanced multiresolution for symmetric/antisymmetric filters

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Devised balanced multiresolution (BMR) schemes allow balanced decomposition.Constructed balanced wavelet transform (BWT) allows perfect reconstruction.BWT provides efficient access to previously extracted details on demand.We eliminate the need for using extraordinary boundary filters.BMR schemes use symmetric/antisymmetric extensions at image and detail boundaries.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multiresolution,Reverse subdivision,Balanced decomposition,Perfect reconstruction,Lossless reconstruction,Symmetric extension,Antisymmetric extension,Focus+context visualization,Contextual close-up,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Given a set of symmetric/antisymmetric filter vectors containing only regular multiresolution filters, the method we present in this article can establish a balanced multiresolution scheme for images, allowing their balanced decomposition and subsequent perfect reconstruction without the use of any extraordinary boundary filters. We define balanced multiresolution such that it allows balanced decomposition i.e. decomposition of a high-resolution image into a low-resolution image and corresponding details of equal size. Such a balanced decomposition makes on-demand reconstruction of regions of interest efficient in both computational load and implementation aspects. We find this balanced decomposition and perfect reconstruction based on an appropriate combination of symmetric/antisymmetric extensions near the image and detail boundaries. In our method, exploiting such extensions correlates to performing sample (pixel/voxel) split operations. Our general approach is demonstrated for some commonly used symmetric/antisymmetric multiresolution filters. We also show the application of such a balanced multiresolution scheme in real-time focus+context visualization.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Applications that facilitate multiscale 2D and 3D image visualization and exploration (see [17,34,28], for example) benefit from multiresolution schemes that decompose high-resolution images into low-resolution approximations and corresponding details (usually, wavelet coefficients). Several subsequent applications of such a decomposition constructs the corresponding wavelet transform. This wavelet transform can then be used to derive low-resolution approximations of the entire image, as well as high-resolution approximations of a region of interest (ROI), on demand. Reconstructing the high-resolution approximation of a ROI involves locating the corresponding details from a hierarchy of details within the wavelet transform. One such hierarchy of details resulting from only two levels of decomposition of an Earth image (data source: Visible Earth, NASA) is shown in Fig. 1.For the purpose of demonstration, we created the wavelet transform in Fig. 1 using the short filters of quadratic B-spline presented by Samavati et al. [27,28]. In practice, images that require multiscale visualization are larger in size and may require more levels of decomposition. For each level of decomposition in this particular example, the image was first decomposed heightwise and then widthwise.Sequences of samples along each image dimension can be treated as finite-length signals. It is well-known that decomposition and reconstruction of finite-length signals require special treatments at the boundaries [1], which often involves the use of extraordinary boundary filters. The use of extraordinary boundary filters (as opposed to regular filters) for handling image and detail boundaries lead to computationally untidy reconstruction near image boundaries.From a hierarchy of details, such as the one in Fig. 1, if we need to reconstruct the high-resolution approximation of a ROI located in the low-resolution (coarse) image shown in the top-left rectangle in Fig. 1, we have to locate the corresponding details in some or all of the rectangles that contain details depending on the expected level of resolution. Locating these details will be straightforward if each of the heightwise and widthwise decomposition steps decomposes an image into two halves of equal size – one half corresponding to the coarse image and the other half corresponding to the details. Among B-spline wavelets, only the filters obtained from Haar wavelets provide such a balanced decomposition [12,29]. However, because Haar wavelets and the associated scaling functions are not continuous, it would be beneficial to achieve such a balanced decomposition for the filters obtained from higher order scaling functions and their wavelets.Existing multiresolution schemes for the local filters of second or higher order scaling functions and their wavelets (see [28,5,8,21], for example) result in unequal numbers of coarse and detail samples after decomposition (i.e.w1≠w2,w11≠w12,h1≠h2, andh11≠h12in Fig. 1). Such inequalities resulting from decomposition make locating the details corresponding to a ROI for reconstruction a cumbersome task (which involves keeping track of level-wise offsets from boundaries), specially when an interactive multilevel visualization hierarchy (see Fig. 13(a), for example) is concerned. Creation of a such an interactive visualization hierarchy requires efficient on-demand access to details.In contrast, balanced decompositions can construct balanced wavelet transforms, such as the one shown in Fig. 2(data source: Visible Earth, NASA). In Fig. 2, the rectangles containing different levels of details for the entire image are numbered with(l,1)tuples for widthwise and(l,2)tuples for heightwise decompositions, where l represents the level of resolution. Locating the details corresponding to a ROI on demand in a balanced wavelet transform includes a number of simple dyadic operations, which are known to perform significantly faster than non-dyadic operations in both hardware and software implementations. Such efficient access to details is demonstrated by means of an example in Fig. 2. In general, ifcx,yis the coarse sample at the top-left corner of a ROI rectangle, thend2l-1(wc+x),2l-1y(l,1)andd2lx,2l-1(hc+y)(l,2)are the detail samples at the top-left corners of the detail rectangles corresponding to the ROI for widthwise and heightwise balanced decompositions, respectively. Here,wc×hc(w4×h4in Fig. 2) is the resolution of the coarse image containing the ROI.In order to address the issues discussed above, in this article, we introduce a technique for devising balanced multiresolution schemes for the local filters of second or higher order scaling functions and their wavelets. Our technique uses an appropriate combination of symmetric/antisymmetric extensions near the image and detail boundaries, which correlate to sample split operations. To guarantee a perfect (lossless) reconstruction without the use of any extraordinary boundary filters, our method requires each of the given decomposition and reconstruction filter vectors (kernels) to be either symmetric or antisymmetric about their centers. Many existing sets of local regular multiresolution filters, such as those associated with the B-spline wavelets [28], biorthogonal and reverse biorthogonal wavelets [5,8], and Meyer wavelets [21,8], exhibit such symmetric/antisymmetric structures.We present a novel method to devise a balanced multiresolution scheme for a given set of symmetric/antisymmetric multiresolution filter vectors containing regular filters. Devised balanced multiresolution schemes allow balanced decomposition and perfect reconstruction without the use of extraordinary boundary filters. A balanced wavelet transform representation of an image resulting from balanced decompositions provides straightforward and efficient access to previously extracted details corresponding to a ROI on demand. We also provide ready-to-use balanced multiresolution schemes devised using our proposed method for eleven commonly used sets of symmetric/antisymmetric multiresolution filter vectors (see Table A.2). Additionally, we show the application of a devised balanced multiresolution scheme in real-time multilevel focus+context visualization of large-scale 2D and 3D images. As opposed to in-place magnification of ROIs, the presented mode of focus+context visualization uses contextual close-ups to display spatially separate magnification of ROIs constructed through perfect reconstructions.This article is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present the notations used throughout the article. Next, we formulate the problem definition in Section 3, which is followed by a brief survey of the existing related work in Section 4. Section 5 presents our method for devising a balanced multiresolution scheme accompanied by two examples – one for odd-length and the other for even-length decomposition filter vectors. We demonstrate the application of a balanced multiresolution scheme devised by our method in real-time focus+context visualization with experimental results in Section 6. In Section 7, we discuss with examples what may lead to unwanted extraordinary boundary reconstruction filters and highlight some characteristics of our method with possible directions for future work. Finally, Section 8 concludes the article. We also provide two appendices with additional examples of balanced multiresolution schemes devised by our method.In this article, we adopted the notations for representing multiresolution operations used by Samavati et al. in [28]. The superscripts k and l used in this section represent the levels of resolution. Multiresolution operations are specified in terms of analysis filter matricesAkandBkand synthesis filter matricesPkandQk. Given a column vector of samplesCk, a lower-resolution sample vectorCk-1is obtained by the application of a downsampling filter onCk. This can be expressed by the matrix equationCk-1=AkCk.The detailsDk-1, lost after downsampling, are captured usingBkas follows:Dk-1=BkCk.This process of obtaining the low-resolution sample vectorCk-1and the corresponding detailsDk-1from a given high-resolution sample vectorCkis known as decomposition. Note that the sequences of samples along each dimension of an image can be treated independently during decomposition. Therefore, any such sequence of samples can form the column vector of samplesCkfor decomposition.The process of recovering the original high-resolution sample vectorCkfrom the previously obtained low-resolution sample vectorCk-1and the corresponding detailsDk-1is known as reconstruction. The reconstruction process requires the refinement of the low-resolution sample vectorCk-1and the corresponding detailsDk-1by the application of synthesis filtersPkandQkas follows:Ck=PkCk-1+QkDk-1.This equation reverses the prior application ofAkandBkon the given high-resolution sample vectorCk. Therefore, decomposition and reconstruction are inverse processes satisfyingAkBkPkQk=I00I.If we recursively decompose a high-resolution sample vectorCkinto its coarser approximationsCl,Cl+1,…,Ck-1and detailsDl,Dl+1,…,Dk-1, then the sequenceCl,Dl,Dl+1,…,Dk-1is known as a wavelet transform. Here,l<kandClis the very coarse approximation of the dataset. Each ofCl+1,…,Ck-1,Ckcan be reconstructed from the wavelet transformCl,Dl,Dl+1,…,Dk-1.To simplify the notations for the rest of this article, we may omit the superscript k for the kth level of resolution assumingF=Ck,C=Ck-1,D=Dk-1,A=Ak, andB=Bk,P=Pk, andQ=Qk. We further assume that the matrices are of appropriate size to satisfy the following equations:(1)C=AF,(2)D=BF,(3)F=PC+QD.For use in the rest of the article, letaandbdenote the filter vectors containing the nonzero entries in a representative row ofAandB, respectively. Similarly, letpandqstand for the filter vectors containing the nonzero entries in a representative column ofPandQ, respectively. Furthermore, letsizeof(V)represent the number of elements in vector V and the widths of filter vectorsaandbbe represented bywaandwb, respectively, i.e.sizeof(a)=waandsizeof(b)=wb.Fig. 3shows three types of extensions as defined in [15]. Consider a sequence of n samples(f1,f2,…,fn), corresponding to a column vector of samplesf1f2…fnT, wheren∈Nandn⩾3. Fig. 3(a), (b), and (c) show the extended sequences obtained through half-sample symmetric, whole-sample symmetric, and half-sample antisymmetric extensions, respectively, at both ends of(f1,f2,…,fn). Whole-sample antisymmetry, not shown in Fig. 3, can be obtained by negating the samples in the extensions of Fig. 3(b). Note that the types of extensions at both ends of a sequence do not necessarily have to be the same (as used in Fig. 12, for example).To be consistent with the coloring used in Fig. 3, from this point forward in this article, notations and figures may use red, purple, and green to denote the samples introduced by half-sample symmetric, whole-sample symmetric, and half-sample antisymmetric extensions, respectively.Given a set of regular multiresolution filters in the form of symmetric/antisymmetric filter vectorsa,b,p, andq, devise a balanced multiresolution scheme applicable to a high-resolution column vector of samples F that satisfies:(i)C=AF′andD=BF′, analogous to Eqs. (1) and (2), whereF→F′through symmetric extensions at its boundaries and the nonzero entries in each row ofAandBcorrespond to the regular filters in the given filter vectorsaandb, respectively;sizeof(C)=sizeof(D)i.e. a balanced decomposition;sizeof(C)+sizeof(D)=sizeof(F)i.e. a compact representation of the resulting balanced wavelet transform; andF=PC′+QD′, analogous to Eq. (3), whereC→C′andD→D′through symmetric/antisymmetric extensions at their boundaries and the nonzero entries in each column ofPandQcorrespond to the regular filters in the given filter vectorspandq, respectively.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
