@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Upright orientation of 3D shapes with Convolutional Networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a data-driven method for 3D object upright orientation estimation using 3D Convolutional Networks.General objects, including asymmetric ones, can be handled by this approach thanks to the learning ability of ConvNets.The proposed method is at least 30 times faster than existing methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Upright orientation,Data-driven shape analysis,Voxelization,Convolutional Networks,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Posing objects in their upright orientations is the very first step of 3D shape analysis. However, 3D models in existing repositories may be far from their right orientations due to various reasons. In this paper, we present a data-driven method for 3D object upright orientation estimation using 3D Convolutional Networks (ConvNets), and the method is designed in the style of divide-and-conquer due to the interference effect. Thanks to the public big 3D datasets and the feature learning ability of ConvNets, our method can handle not only man-made objects but also natural ones. Besides, without any regularity assumptions, our method can deal with asymmetric and several other failure cases of existing approaches. Furthermore, a distance based clustering technique is proposed to reduce the memory cost and a test-time augmentation procedure is used to improve the accuracy. Its efficiency and effectiveness are demonstrated in the experimental results.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Most objects are usually posed in their upright orientations, which makes them easily recognizable. Also, it is the very first step to pose the given 3D shapes in their upright orientations (Fig. 1) in many graphics and robotics tasks, such as matching [2], retrieval [13,28], shape analysis [34] and placement planning [17]. Moreover, it can be used to generate recognizable object thumbnails, helping the management of 3D shape repositories. Due to various reasons such as modeling platforms or scanning systems, many models in existing databases are not in their upright orientation. Therefore, a number of approaches have been proposed to handle this problem. However, these methods are usually limited to shapes with some regularity and take several seconds to process each shape. Thus more efficient and effective methods are needed.In this paper, we present a learning based method to predict the upright orientation using 3D Convolutional Networks (ConvNets). Given voxel representations of 3D shapes and corresponding orientation vectors, this prediction task can be formulated as a regression problem. Leveraging the learning ability of deep neural networks, general categories of 3D shapes can be handled without making any assumptions such as symmetry or parallelism. Besides mesh models, the proposed method can deal with shapes represented in other types that can be voxelized, such as implicit surfaces and point clouds, without surface reconstruction [7].Compared with the ConvNets based approach, existing methods are limited by their predefined rules. For example, the method proposed by Fu et al. [8] is based on the observation that man-made object should have a supporting base on which it can be steadily positioned. Nevertheless, this observation is not applicable to all shapes, especially natural ones. Thus learning based methods are appreciated to deal with general objects. Although the idea of data-driven is adopted in Fu et al. [8], the learning procedure is based on the hand-crafted features such as stability, visibility and parallelism, which fall into the field of feature engineering. In one word, it is hard to define a universal rule to upright general 3D shapes effectively. By contrast, neural networks work in the style of end-to-end learning. High-level knowledges can be captured from raw data, without relying on object’s regularity such as explicit symmetry.However, a single ConvNet does not work well for all types of shapes. The key challenge is that each shape category exhibits particular characteristic on the upright orientation, for example, cars tend to be horizontal while bicycles are likely to be vertical. This is referred to as interference effect [14] which will lead to poor generalization. In other words, different strategies should be taken to handle diverse categories. Thus a divide-and-conquer scheme is used in our system. Each shape is first classified by a network and then fed into one of the orientation regression networks that are trained on each of the categories. Furthermore, a distance based clustering method is proposed to reduce the number of networks and a novel test-time augmentation procedure is used to improve the accuracy.The efficiency and effectiveness of this approach are demonstrated by extensive experiments. Our system achieved the accuracy of more than 90% on the test data and showed the generalization capability of inferring upright orientations for shapes not belonging to the training categories. Also experimental results showed that our system is able to handle several cases that other methods fail. Moreover, estimation for each shape took no more than 0.15 s on average, which is much faster than existing approaches, thus applicable to robotics tasks in which immediate feedback is required.The main contributions of our approach are summarized in the following.•General objects can be handled by this approach thanks to the learning ability of ConvNets, including asymmetric shapes.The proposed method is at least 30 times faster than existing methods.The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews several related works. In Section 3 our network system is specified. The experimental results and comparisons with related works are demonstrated in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 presents our conclusions and directions of future work to improve our method.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We proposed a data-driven method for 3D object upright orientation estimation using 3D Convolutional Networks. Thanks to the feature learning ability of ConvNets, not only man-made objects but also natural ones can be handled. In addition, a distance based clustering technique was proposed to reduce the memory costs and a test-time augmentation procedure was proposed to further improve the accuracy. The experimental results demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness of our approach. Besides this, the visualization results indicate that ConvNets are able to capture more semantic features if more informative labels are provided. At last, our method is extremely efficient, so it can be used as preprocessing to speed up several geometry processing tasks, such as 3D shape retrieval, matching and registration.On the other hand, our method can still be improved in several directions. First, this approach is not as accurate as geometric methods. We consider improving the performance by geometric technique such as finding supporting bases (if available) around our result. Second, techniques of committee machines [12] should be considered to optimize the entire system all together, other than training the networks for classification and regression independently. Third, further visualization [35] works should be done to gain more insights from the trained networks and to answer several mysterious questions, such as: Why and how do the networks work? Why does the network trained on airplane work well on bathtub and vice versa? Last and not least, we would like to adopt our system to take range image as input for robotics tasks.