@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Microfacet-based interference simulation for multilayer films

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model the interaction of light and films by the multi-beam interference equations.We introduce Fresnel coefficients for the metallic and dielectric films.We incorporate microfacet factor to take into account the geometry of rough surfaces.We model the iridescence of Morpho butterflies with the regularity and irregularity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Iridescent color,Multilayer films,Multi-beam interference equations,Fresnel coefficients,Anisotropic and isotropic scattering,Morpho butterfly,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
It has proved difficult to visualize the iridescent colors of objects coated with multilayer films in ray-based tracers. A physical-based full spectrum scattering model is proposed in this paper; this model applies the multi-beam interference equations to explain the multiple reflection and refraction of light inside the thin films in order to simulate the phase and amplitude variations of light related to iridescent colors. The Fresnel coefficients for the metallic and dielectric films are introduced respectively to photo-realistically render the wave properties of multilayer films. The solution is further extended to take into account the geometry of rough surfaces instead of a smooth averaging surface where the anisotropic and isotropic scattering characteristics are well explained. We demonstrate the validity of the proposed model by visualizing wave effects for diverse metallic or dielectric multilayer film structures and a Morpho butterfly.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
When light propagates through objects with the multilayer film structures, it undergoes multiple reflection and transmission inside films and superimposes each other to generate iridescent colors, namely amplitude-splitting interference. Rainbow colors caused by thin films or layered structures, for instance, often appear on optical lenses, soap bubbles or oil slicks [1,2].In computer graphics, it is desired to build an accurate scattering model of the interaction of light and the multilayer films for visualizing the optical effects of objects with layered structures such as soap bubbles and butterfly wings. Multiple models have been proposed to render the iridescent phenomena generated by such structures. For example, Gondek et al. [3] utilized a wavelength based bidirectional reflectance distribution function and a virtual goniospectrophotometer to analyze, and make renderings of thin films and pearlescent paints. Hirayama et al. [4] constructed an accurate illumination model to visualize the interference effects of dielectric or metallic materials. Sun [5] also proposed an iridescent shading process to render biological iridescences in RGB-based renderers using analytic calculation and numerical simulation. These methods are able to describe wave properties of films approximately, but few of them take the roughness of the microstructure into account and account for the anisotropic nature of the scattering light on the structures.To accurately rendering optical phenomena from various kinds of film materials, we propose a generalized wave bidirectional scattering distribution function (BSDF) shading model. The multi-beam interference equations are used in our model for explaining multiple reflection, interference and absorption of light inside multilayer thin films. Different from the Fresnel formulae for thin films [6,4,7], the introduced Fresnel coefficient for conductors is utilized to visualize interference effects caused by multilayer metallic films which have complex refractive indices and affect the absorption of photons. In addition, the microfacet scattering factor is incorporated into the iridescent shading model to simulate the interaction of light and the surfaces with the different roughnesses where the isotropic and anisotropic properties are taken into consideration together. For renderings, we further adopt the gamma correction to account for approximate linear relation between pixel values and display intensity. The paper also presents a set of examples to illustrate how to apply our shading model to visualize the wave effects of rough objects coated with multilayer metallic or dielectric films and Morpho butterfly wings.Section 2 briefly reviews some techniques related to the photo-realistic rendering. The analytical calculation process for the composite reflectivity and transmissivity of multilayer film structures is presented in Section 3. Section 4 discusses a new model for visualizing the iridescent colors of surfaces with high roughness. Experimental results and comparisons are showed in Section 5. Finally, we make a summary with discussions on future work in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
