@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Creature grammar for creative modeling of 3D monsters

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An inspiration-oriented approach to help artists create sets of various monsters.A creature grammar to define the way of evolving regular creatures into monsters.Iteratively synthesizes a diverse set of monsters for artists for reference.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Monster modeling,Creativity support,Creature grammar,Diversity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Monsters and strange creatures are frequently demanded in 3D games and movies. Modeling such kind of objects calls for creativity and imagination. Especially in a scenario where a large number of monsters with various shapes and styles are required, the designing and modeling process becomes even more challenging. We present a system to assist artists in the creative design of a large collection of various 3D monsters. Starting with a small set of shapes manually selected from different categories, our system iteratively generates sets of monster models serving as the artist’s reference and inspiration. The key component of our system is a so-called creature grammar, which is a shape grammar tailored for the generation of 3D monsters. Creature grammar governs the evolution from creatures with regular structures gradually into monsters with more and more abnormal structures through evolving the arrangement and number of shape parts, while preserving the semantics prescribed as prior knowledge. Experiments show that even starting with a small set of shapes from a few categories of common creatures (e.g., humanoids, bird-like creatures and quadrupeds), our system can produce a large set of unexpected monsters with both shape diversity and visual plausibility, thus providing great support for the user’s creative design.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Monsters are imaginary or legendary creatures with abnormal structures or physical deformities, which inspire horror or disgust. They are vastly found in comic books, movies and computer games. Some of them are so famous and fascinating that they keep the audiences or game players intrigued, for example, the Fate Spinner and Lamassu from Might & Magic: Heroes, and the Centaur from Harry Potter films (see Fig. 1). Modeling such kind of objects is a great challenge for artists, because of their bizarre shapes and structures, calling for creativity and imagination. Especially in a scenario where a large number of monsters with various shapes and styles are required, the designing and modeling process becomes even more challenging.Although great strides have been made to assist 3D modeling, the support of creativity in 3D modeling process is still an emerging topic. As pointed out by Shneiderman et al. in [1], free exploration of alternatives is a key characteristic of creativity support tools. Thus research on computational creativity support seeks for techniques for generating customized examples that allow the user to explore the space of possibilities. For 3D modeling, a popular approach is to provide data-driven suggestions tailored to the user’s current design. Such suggestions, either relevant parts [2,3] or complete shapes [4,5], are usually drawn from a set of pre-existing creations. Compared with part suggesting methods, shape suggesting methods not only can be used to inspire future creations, but also be used to amplify an existing shape database efficiently. Such kind of creativity support is especially useful for monster modeling since the shape and structure of monsters can be arbitrarily unexpected. However, existing methods for shape suggestions are more suitable to generate models belonging to the same category and with the same structure as input shapes, as they need pre-established correspondences among the existing creations. Monster models usually have characteristics from different categories, such as bird-like creatures, humanoids or quadrupeds. Besides, monsters are characteristic of various unexpected structures.In this paper, we present an inspiration-oriented procedural approach to help artists create sets of various monsters from regular creatures quickly. The key component of our system is the creature grammar, which formally defines the way of evolving regular creatures into monsters with abnormal structures, while preserving the semantics of biological forms. The semantics consists of part adjacency relations, the number of parts from each part category, and symmetries. Given a small set of models from different categories (e.g., humanoids, bird-like creatures, and quadrupeds), our system adopts the creature grammar to iteratively synthesize a diverse set of monsters for artists for reference. The generated monsters become more and more complex in structure during the iteration, and thus they provide artists inspirations.A key observation on monster modeling is that 3D artists commonly design monsters by firstly creating a regular creature and then modifying the shape structure to explore various possibilities to make the shape more and more abnormal. The operations which artists commonly apply can be classified into three types: (1) increase, duplicating or triplicating one part (e.g., triplicating the arm of a humanoid (Fig. 1(a)1Photos are freely available on: http://might-and-magic.ubi.com/heroes-6/en-GB/game/creatures/index.aspx.1)); (2) combine, concatenating two torsos together (e.g., attaching the upper part of a human to the torso of a horse to create a Centaur-like creature (Fig. 1(b)2The screenshot comes from film: Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix.2)); (3) insert, adding a new type of part to the current shape (e.g., adding a wing to a quadruped (Fig. 1(c)1)).Mimicking the modeling process mentioned above, we propose the creature grammar, a tailored shape grammar for the generation of monsters. Creature grammar works with a set of shapes and generates new shapes by combining the configuration of two shapes selected from the current shape set, while preserving semantics of creatures. There are three types of rules in our creature grammar: (1) selection rules, which select shapes (rules) from a shape (rule) set; (2) structure rules, which alter the topological structure of the shape based on the three operations mentioned above; (3) geometry rules, which interpret the generated configuration into a geometry instance to get a monster shape. Based on the creature grammar, our system could automatically expand the structures of regular creatures, thus producing visually plausible monster shapes with abnormal structures.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have presented an inspiration-oriented system for creative modeling of 3D monsters. Given a set of pre-segmented and labeled shapes from several different categories, our system can iteratively generate sets of monsters allowing users to explore various possibilities. The core of our system is the creature grammar, a tailored grammar, which we use to capture the way of evolving creatures with regular structures into monsters with abnormal structures, while preserving the semantics of creatures.