@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Geometry curves: A compact representation for 3D shapes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a novel surface representation, called geometry curves.Geometry curves capture the essence of the shape geometry and topology compactly.For the geometry, we extract feature lines of shapes based on the mean curvature.For the topology, we record the fundamental polygons of shapes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Geometry curve,Feature line,Fundamental polygon,Compression,Shape editing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We propose a novel compact surface representation, namely geometry curves, which record the essence of shape geometry and topology. The geometry curves mainly contain two parts: the interior and boundary lines. The interior lines, which correspond to the feature lines, record the geometry information of the 3D shapes; the boundary lines, which correspond to the boundary or fundamental polygons, record the topology information of the 3D shapes. As a vector representation, geometry curves can depict highly complex geometry details. The concept of geometry curves can be utilized in many potential applications, e.g., mesh compression, shape modeling and editing, animation, and level of details. Furthermore, we develop a procedure for automatically constructing geometry curves which obtain an excellent approximation to the original mesh.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the traditional areas of computer aided geometry design, shape representation and geometry analysis are the main research directions. These research directions originated from industry applications, e.g., the ship lofting and aircraft design. For the shape representation, Non-Uniform Rational B-Splines (NURBS) and implicit algebraic surfaces [1] are generally used and describe smooth surfaces well. In the 1990s, taking advantage of 3D laser scanners, people became capable of acquiring digital models with more details. The main representation of scan models is in the form of the triangular mesh, which discretely approximates to the original surface. The triangular mesh has two main advantages. First, it represents the models in a more detailed way; second, it provides a more direct mapping to the hardware devices used for rendering. However, this representation also has two obvious disadvantages. One is that it requires more storage space when representing models with more details. The other is that it is a type of low level representation, which is closer to hardware rendering devices, but farther away from human perception of shapes.The most important characteristics of 3D models are their geometry and topology. For the mesh representation, the geometry information is computed from the vertex’s position, and the topology information can be computed from the mesh connectivity. Isenburg et al. [2] introduce the concept of the connectivity shape that is based solely on mesh connectivity. They describe its natural geometry as a smooth embedding in space with uniform edge lengths. However, this representation depends on the mesh tessellation, and since two different shapes may have the same mesh tessellation, some information about the geometry is lost. Sorkine et al. [3] introduce the least-squares mesh as the shape representation, which contains a set of control points with a prescribed connectivity. Control points are selected based on the geometry and contain some geometry information, but generally do not coincide with important parts as selected by humans. Cole et al. [4] suggest that viewers interpret the shaded shape and the line drawn version very similarly, suggesting that feature lines can express shape information effectively. Cole et al. [5] indicate that line drawings based on differential properties of the underlying surface can be as effective in depicting shape as drawings made by artists. Therefore, the mathematical feature lines can depict shape geometry effectively, which inspires us that the shape geometry can be recorded in feature lines. Furthermore, we observe that surfaces can be reconstructed using the feature lines’ positions and mean curvatures. More precisely, the feature lines record the geometric contour of shapes, and the mean curvatures record the details of shapes. We present a novel algorithm to extract feature lines based on the variation of the mean curvature, which not only record the shape contour, but also record the mean curvature of the shape.Another important characteristic of shapes is their topology, which describes the structure of shapes. It is well known that closed orientable surface can be classified by its genus, thus the genus is the inherent property of the shape’s topology. We can record fundamental polygons in the boundary geometry curve, and discard the mesh connectivity which is not inherent in topology.In this paper, we propose a novel compact surface representation, namely geometry curves, which allow easy and intuitive manipulations of the shape (Fig. 1). This representation records the essence of shape geometry and topology. For the geometry, we design a novel algorithm to extract the feature lines of the shape, and record the positions and mean curvatures on their two sides. For the topology, we record fundamental polygons of the shape.The main contribution of this paper is the idea of introducing geometry curves as the surface representation, which can be utilized in many potential applications, e.g., shape compression, shape deformation, animation, feature preserving smoothing and simplification.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
