@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Interactive design and simulation of tubular supporting structure

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A system integrating design and simulation of freeform tube structures is presentedWe provide an intuitive shape design mechanism to manipulate the geometry of tubesWe propose a two-level subspace simulation to enable fast analysis of tube structures

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Thin shell,Swept surface,FEM,Model reduction,Domain decomposition,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a system for design and simulation of supporting tube structure. We model each freeform tube component as a swept surface, and employ boundary control and skeletal control to manipulate its cross-sections and its embedding respectively. With the parametrization of the swept surface, a quadrilateral mesh consisting of nine-node general shell elements is automatically generated and the stress distribution of the structure is simulated using the finite element method. In order to accelerate the complex finite element simulation, we adopt a two-level subspace simulation strategy, which constructs a secondary complementary subspace to improve the subspace simulation accuracy. Together with the domain decomposition method, our system is able to provide interactive feedback for parametric freeform tube editing. Experiments show that our system is able to predict the structural character of the tube structure efficiently and accurately.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Tubes serve as a type of important supporting structure and are commonly used in people’s everyday life (Fig. 1). Traditionally, such supporting structures are often hollow to conserve the manufacture cost and self-weight. They mostly consist of regular cylinders, which are more budget-friendly for mass production with traditional manufacturing techniques. On the other hand, the rapid development of prototype technology (e.g. 3D printing) makes personalized and customized tube fabrication using generalized cylinders conveniently possible, which greatly expands the designing space of supporting tubes.Although most existing computer-aided design (CAD) softwares (e.g. AutoCAD) well support the geometric design of such tubular structures. Users still need to manipulate many geometric degrees of freedom (DOFs) to model freeform tubes. Interpolatory and tangential controls at the boundary cross-sections are two widely-adopted mechanisms to control the shape of the tube. However, profile control [1] or solving higher-order differential equations [2] is still necessary to prevent shape distortion, which is often tedious or time-consuming. On the other hand, existing CAD packages merely focus on the aspect of shape editing while the structural properties of the 3D model remain unknown to novice users. Following the trend of design-simulation integration, current commercial produces start to enable user to analyze their design using finite element method. Unfortunately, an accurate simulation of the structural characteristic of a customized tubular structure is expensive because generalized shell element with high-order shape functions is usually required to avoid shear-locking artifact [3] and a simulator often possesses a large number DOFs that is prohibitive to regular desktop computers, not to mention performing interactive structural analysis of the 3D model being edited.As a response to the aforementioned challenges, we present a system for interactive design and simulation of supporting tubular structures. Tube components can be intuitively edited using boundary and skeletal controls and a complex tube system can be handily created by assembling tube components at their open interfaces. The underlying simulation is carried out using general quadratic nine-node quadrilateral element. A constraint subspace is constructed at each component, which serves as the primary subspace for the follow-up structural analysis. On the top of the constraint subspace, we build a load-dependent secondary subspace named residual subspace, which is able to precisely capture the detailed intra-component deflection due to the regional external loads without resorting to expensive full-space simulation. As a result, our system is able to provide interactive yet accurate structural analysis along with the editing operation of the tube.Contribution In general, the contribution of our work can be briefly summarized as follows:•This paper presents a system integrating parametric shape editing and finite element method based structural analysis into a unified environment for the design and simulation of freeform tubular supporting structures.We provide user an intuitive shape design mechanism with lower geometric DOFs by using the boundary and skeletal controls to manipulate the geometry of each tube component.A new simulation strategy is proposed based on the fact that the supporting tube is often of light self-weight comparing to its external loads. We use a two-level subspace simulation that is able to accurately capture the deflection induced by external loads while still keep the simulator compact.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
