@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
eQTL networks unveil enriched mRNA master integrators downstream of complex disease-associated SNPs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study the downstream transcriptome systems properties of 6432 SNPs of 574 complex diseases.eQTL network analyses unveil that downstream mRNAs are targeted by an excess number of SNPs.Thus multiple complex diseases associated SNPs tend to target the same group of mRNAs.These mRNA hubs display a novel systems property: “master integrators”.Our findings provide novel insights into the pleiotropy of mRNAs targeted by complex disease polymorphisms.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Translational bioinformatics,Centrality,Complex diseases,eQTL,Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP),Master integrator,Computational genomics,Genomics,Transcriptome,mRNA,Network biology,Big data,Computational biology,Computational medicine,Complex disease,Genetics,Systems biology,Systems medicine,Signal integration,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The causal and interplay mechanisms of Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with complex diseases (complex disease SNPs) investigated in genome-wide association studies (GWAS) at the transcriptional level (mRNA) are poorly understood despite recent advancements such as discoveries reported in the Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE) and Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTex). Protein interaction network analyses have successfully improved our understanding of both single gene diseases (Mendelian diseases) and complex diseases. Whether the mRNAs downstream of complex disease genes are central or peripheral in the genetic information flow relating DNA to mRNA remains unclear and may be disease-specific. Using expression Quantitative Trait Loci (eQTL) that provide DNA to mRNA associations and network centrality metrics, we hypothesize that we can unveil the systems properties of information flow between SNPs and the transcriptomes of complex diseases. We compare different conditions such as naïve SNP assignments and stringent linkage disequilibrium (LD) free assignments for transcripts to remove confounders from LD. Additionally, we compare the results from eQTL networks between lymphoblastoid cell lines and liver tissue. Empirical permutation resampling (p<0.001) and theoretic Mann–Whitney U test (p<10−30) statistics indicate that mRNAs corresponding to complex disease SNPs via eQTL associations are likely to be regulated by a larger number of SNPs than expected. We name this novel property mRNA hubness in eQTL networks, and further term mRNAs with high hubness as master integrators. mRNA master integrators receive and coordinate the perturbation signals from large numbers of polymorphisms and respond to the personal genetic architecture integratively. This genetic signal integration contrasts with the mechanism underlying some Mendelian diseases, where a genetic polymorphism affecting a single protein hub produces a divergent signal that affects a large number of downstream proteins. Indeed, we verify that this property is independent of the hubness in protein networks for which these mRNAs are transcribed. Our findings provide novel insights into the pleiotropy of mRNAs targeted by complex disease polymorphisms and the architecture of the information flow between the genetic polymorphisms and transcriptomes of complex diseases.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have successfully discovered many genetic variants associated with the development and progression of diverse classes of complex diseases. However, existing knowledge about the mechanisms of complex diseases is limited. One important reason may be that GWASs focus primarily on finding mere associations of genetic variants with traits, while ignoring the underlying architecture of complex diseases. Many common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are associated with complex diseases, but each SNP contributes only a small amount to the disease risk. The observation of additive and synergistic effects implies the presence of crosstalk and network of complicated regulatory mechanisms of SNPs [1–3] that can be perceived as local perturbations. However, identifying and characterizing these systematic mechanisms of SNPs, which cause the underlying complex diseases, remains a challenge.During the past decade, network analyses have increased our understanding about the underlying mechanisms of the behavior of biological systems and their higher order properties such as their topological ones [4,5]. Centrality, as a basic topological property, measures the connectivity of a node to other nodes, which represents the relative impact of that node in the network upon its perturbation. When applying this framework to a biological network: (i) proteins are modeled as nodes in protein–protein interaction (PPI) networks, while (ii) both mRNAs and SNPs are nodes in expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) networks. Edges relating the molecules of life are protein interactions in PPIs and statistical associations between SNPs and mRNAs in eQTL networks. The degree of a node is the number of connections it has to other nodes, and nodes with the highest degree are called “hubs”. In PPI networks, genetic loss of function of a hub protein can be embryologically lethal (essential genes) as shown in knock down mouse models [6,7], while genetic gain of function of the corresponding hub proteins (e.g. transcriptional factors) are known to increase cancer progression [8]. Hub proteins of non-essential genes are enriched in Mendelian diseases, with large effect sizes [7]. Missense mutations of hub protein may lead to a more subtle alteration of the biological function and has been more frequently seen in Mendelian diseases [9]. On the other hand, for other complex diseases (e.g. diabetes mellitus, hypertension), the individual impact from a polymorphism usually is not fatal, therefore, genes associated with these diseases are generally found peripherally in the PPI network [10,11].Complex disease single nucleotide polymorphisms are considered upstream discrete inputs in genetic models with outputs being multiple quantitative continuous phenotypes that characterize a disease [12]. In genetic models combined with downstream protein interaction networks, the polymorphisms or mutations of a gene may initiate an edgetic perturbation and cause a Mendelian disorder [13,14]. While edgetic effects are much more subtle in complex diseases, previous studies of biological networks identified an enrichment of intragenic SNPs in the shortest paths of complex disease associated host genes [15]. Our prior research also revealed the enrichment of the polymorphisms coding for hub proteins in PPI networks of complex diseases [16]. This finding suggests some convergence of complex and Mendelian diseases at the protein interaction level [17]. We applied this clue to Alzheimer’s disease and indeed found the candidate genes sharing molecular mechanisms between Mendelian and complex diseases coupled with shortest PPI path strategies [18]. Nevertheless, whether hubness is an intrinsic property of biological networks underpinning complex polymorphisms is not widely accepted [19].GWAS demonstrate the difference between complex diseases and single gene diseases, as dozens of polymorphisms rarely explain more than 10% of the phenotypes of the former while a single polymorphism usually determines the key phenotypes of the latter. However, there is a lack of information models that take into account the downstream transcriptomic effect of complex diseases genetics to provide formal insight about their genetic architecture. To our knowledge, previous studies focus on PPI networks and divergent centrality of hub proteins. For instance, a hub in a gene co-expression network, such as a microRNA (e.g. miR-204 [20]), can downregulate the expression of many downstream genes, acting as a divergent inhibitor (Fig. 1A). A hub in a protein signaling network, such as signal receptor binding protein Ras [21,22]), may amplify a signal it receives and activate a series of downstream processes through physical protein interactions and post-translational modifications (Fig. 1B). In a complex disease scenario, a master regulator SNP may affect the expression of many downstream mRNAs [1] (Fig. 1C). However, the mRNAs dysregulated by SNPs related to complex diseases may behave differently than other divergent hubs (Fig. 1D). An mRNA hub (e.g. HLA-DQA1 [23]) may combine the perturbation signals from various polymorphisms, consequently affecting the regulation of other downstream mRNAs such that a disease phenotype develops.Increasing our knowledge of how genetic signals are integrated (multivariate discrete inputs) is crucial to our understanding of their downstream impact on disease phenotypes (multivariate continuous outputs). Biological signal integration has been the subject of numerous studies, particularly in the context of crosstalk between individual signaling pathways [24]. Unsurprisingly, cells must integrate a large number of signals in order to maintain their homeostasis and regulate complex cellular processes. Recent studies shifted their signal integration focus from canonical pathways to more complex biological networks [25]; however, to our knowledge eQTL networks have not been studied for signal integration.Few studies report convergent integration for disease genes from different scales of gene regulation networks [5]. Some network studies indicate the prevalence of the divergent and convergent topology in biological networks as compared to alternatives, such as densely connected modules [26]. Particularly, these studies focus more on divergent hubs than on convergent integrative ones [27]. In this regard, we hypothesize that networks of genomic loci affecting expression levels of mRNAs would provide novel insight into systems properties of complex diseases. We concentrate specifically on expression Quantitative Trait Loci association (eQTL) [28] networks and investigate whether mRNAs related to complex disease SNPs are more central than the remaining mRNAs in the network of eQTL associations. We term the mRNAs related to an excessive number of SNPs (e.g. top 20%) mRNA master integrators, and use the eQTL data of two human cell types from lymphoblastoid (LCL) and liver tissues to examine the enrichment of mRNA master integrators in the eQTL networks. We further hypothesize that mRNA master integrators play important roles in integrating multiple perturbation signals from genetic polymorphisms and are closely related to the physiopathology of complex diseases. Our aim is to reveal a novel type of mRNA master integrators that appears to characterize in part systems biology of complex diseases.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Network theory has increased our knowledge of the higher order characteristics of various classes of human diseases, both complex and Mendelian. Among the distinct properties of disease networks, protein interaction hubness centrality of nodes is of biological and clinical importance due to its correlation with lethality; however, studies have seldom investigated the network properties of regulatory networks that are perturbed by intergenic SNPs. Using eQTL network centrality metrics, our study shows that mRNAs associated with SNPs of complex diseases are systematically more likely to be master integrators than mRNAs associated with non-disease SNPs in significant eQTL associations. Further, we confirm this pattern within each complex disease class and verify that these mRNA master integrators are independent of the hubs of the proteins coded by these mRNAs. Our findings provide novel insights into the possible pleiotropy of mRNAs targeted by complex disease polymorphisms and the architecture of the information flow between the genetic polymorphisms and transcriptomes of complex diseases. Despite the limitations of our study, our findings are still of clinical importance, as they indicate that the mRNA expression values of the genes contributing to the development and progression of complex disease are associated with an increasing number of genetic variations. The findings outlined here highlight the importance of developing combinatorial therapy approaches with the ultimate goal of improving quality of life for patients.The authors declare they have no direct or indirect conflict of interest.