@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Using personas to tailor educational messages to the preferences of coronary heart disease patients

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Patient education is crucial for self-management.A method to tailor health educational messages to patients’ preferences is proposed.Personas can aid in developing patient-centered tailored health educational messages.Personas also show potential in assessing patients’ preferences for message features.The method was, in general, positively assessed by coronary heart disease patients.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Health education,Cluster analysis,Persuasive communication,Personas,Message features,Tailoring,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
PurposeAlthough tailoring health education messages to individual characteristics of patients has shown promising results, most patient education materials still take a one-size-fits-all approach. The aim of this study was to develop a method for tailoring health education messages to patients’ preferences for various message features, using the concept of personas. This is a preliminary study focused on education for coronary heart disease (CHD) patients.MethodsThis study used a three-step approach. First, we created personas by (i) performing k-means cluster analysis on data from an online survey that assessed the preferences of 213 CHD patients for various message features and, (ii) creating a vivid description of the preferences per patient cluster in an iterative process with the research team. Second, we developed adaptation rules to tailor existing educational messages to the resulting personas. Third, we conducted a pilot validation by adapting nine existing educational messages to each of the personas. These messages and the resulting personas were then presented to a separate group of 38 CHD patients who visited the cardiology outpatient clinic. They were first asked to choose their most preferred, second most preferred, and least preferred persona. Subsequently, they were asked to rate three of the adapted messages; one for every of the persona choices.ResultsWe created five personas that pertained to five patient clusters. Personas varied mainly on preferences for medical or lay language, current or future temporal perspective, and including or excluding explicit health risks. Fifty-five different adaptation rules were developed, primarily describing adaptations to the message’s perspective, level of detail, sentence structure, and terminology. Most participants in the validation study could identify with one of the five personas, although some of them found it hard to choose. On average, 68.5% of all participants rated the messages that matched their most preferred persona more positively than, or in the same way as, the messages that matched their least preferred persona.ConclusionsThe persona-based method developed in this study can be used to create a manageable set of patient-centered tailored messages, while additionally using the developed personas to assess patients’ preferences.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Patient education is a key component in many self-management interventions, including those for patients with coronary heart disease (CHD). Self-management has become a major point of interest within CHD care contexts. This is due to the growing number of people living with CHD, and there is increasing evidence that highlights the negative influence of risk behavior on disease progression (e.g., physical activity and regular medication intake). When patients self-manage their illness, they make decisions every day on such things as whether to continue with the medication regime and what to eat. Patient education is crucial to making well-informed decisions. Therefore, patient education is a key component in many disease management guidelines, including those for patients with CHD [1].In the Netherlands, health professionals usually provide self-management education to CHD patients. As part of this, patients are often provided with written information in the form of leaflets. The emotional shock and speed of events surrounding and during patient-doctor encounters influence patients’ ability to process information, and supplementary material they can refer to at their own pace at home is particularly valuable to them [2]. Current information provision practices regarding cardiovascular medication do not meet patients’ information needs sufficiently [3]. Information leaflets are often difficult to understand, can cause anxiety in some patients, and many patients find them unsatisfactory [4]. Various researchers have postulated a need for tailoring information to patients’ individual needs [2–6]. Currently, however, most patient education materials take a one-size-fits-all approach. The increasing use of health information technology offers prospects for providing patients with education materials that accommodate their information needs.While tailoring health communication materials to specific types of pathology, therapies, behaviors, or psychological characteristics of patients has been found to be beneficial [6–17], individual differences in patients’ preferences for message features are rarely considered. Studies that do explore various message features (i.e., aspects of the message’s style, structure, or content) mainly investigate how messages can be designed to make them more salient to readers [18]. For example, studies have shown that message features can influence reactions to HIV disclosure [19] and the perceived credibility of health messages (e.g., [20,21]). However, research has shown that effectiveness of health education increases if the information provided matches patient preferences [22]. In a previous study, we found considerable variation in the preferences of CHD patients for nine different message features; these preferences appeared to be related to socio-demographic and psychological characteristics [23]. For example, more highly educated patients preferred messages written in medical language, while less educated patients, and those lacking social support, preferred messages written in lay language.Although an extensive number of studies describe the effectiveness of tailoring messages according to patients’ behavior and how information is received (e.g., [17,24–26]), studies describing structured methods for constructing such tailored messages are scarce [27]. Kukafka summarized tailoring techniques currently used in the health communication domain [28], concluding that new, innovative adaptation methods are needed. This conclusion is based mainly on the challenge of assembling pieces of text or sentences to produce a coherent, understandable health message without losing its potential persuasiveness [28]. In the present study, we explore the use of personas as an intermediate construct in the task of tailoring health education materials for CHD patients. Personas stem from the field of product marketing, and are generally used to represent different user types within a target population, and are typically captured in short descriptions that include the behavioral patterns, goals, skills, and attitudes of these user types [29].The aim of this study was to develop a method for tailoring health education messages to patients’ preferences for message features using the concept of personas. This is a preliminary study focused on education for CHD patients.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The persona-based method described in this study provides a methodology for developing a manageable set of patient-centered tailored messages, while simultaneously using the developed personas as a way to assess patients’ preferences. The method proposed in this study shows potential in (a) making a complex process manageable and understandable, (b) forcing researchers and designers to consider patients’ preferences during the entire message-tailoring process, and (c) aiding in the assessment of patients’ preferences for message features. Participants were generally positive about the idea of receiving tailored information by choosing a persona, and were able to choose between them. On average, messages that matched the persona chosen by patients were rated more positively than, or in the same way as, those that did not match the chosen persona. However, issues addressed by participants in the interview indicated that the personas need to differ more, and that five personas in text form might be too much to process and choose from.It has been suggested that patient-centeredness is crucial to self-management, and the proposed method is a step in the direction of more patient-centered health education. Ultimately, this method might be helpful in composing health messages that better fit patients’ needs and preferences, which might lead to an increase in their engagement in and processing of the message content. In turn, this might contribute to improvements in patient self-management and health outcomes.