@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Towards probabilistic decision support in public health practice: Predicting recent transmission of tuberculosis from patient attributes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a probabilistic decision support algorithm for tuberculosis control.A logistic regression model was used to estimate the probability of transmission.Multiple imputation was used to estimate missing values of predictive features.Bayesian model averaging was performed to identify an accurate classification model.The performance of the model suggests that field application may be appropriate.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Decision support model,Statistical prediction,Public health,Tuberculosis,Transmission,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveInvestigating the contacts of a newly diagnosed tuberculosis (TB) case to prevent TB transmission is a core public health activity. In the context of limited resources, it is often necessary to prioritize investigation when multiple cases are reported. Public health personnel currently prioritize contact investigation intuitively based on past experience. Decision-support software using patient attributes to predict the probability of a TB case being involved in recent transmission could aid in this prioritization, but a prediction model is needed to drive such software.MethodsWe developed a logistic regression model using the clinical and demographic information of TB cases reported to Montreal Public Health between 1997 and 2007. The reference standard for transmission was DNA fingerprint analysis. We measured the predictive performance, in terms of sensitivity, specificity, negative predictive value, positive predictive value, the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve and the Area Under the ROC (AUC).ResultsAmong 1552 TB cases enrolled in the study, 314 (20.2%) were involved in recent transmission. The AUC of the model was 0.65 (95% confidence interval: 0.61–0.68), which is significantly better than random prediction. The maximized values of sensitivity and specificity on the ROC were 0.53 and 0.67, respectively.ConclusionsThe characteristics of a TB patient reported to public health can be used to predict whether the newly diagnosed case is associated with recent transmission as opposed to reactivation of latent infection.Tuberculosis (TB) is a communicable disease caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB). Despite organized control efforts, TB continues to occur in developed countries. In Canada, TB is concentrated in immigrants from high TB incidence countries, inner-city residents, and Aboriginal persons [1]. Upon infection, approximately 90% of individuals remain asymptomatic and non-infectious with latent tuberculosis infection (LTBI). After months or years of latency, approximately 5–10% of persons with LTBI develop active TB disease due to a complex array of biological, genetic and environmental factors [2]. Individuals with reactivated TB can transmit infection to others in the absence of timely detection and intervention.Contact investigation is a core public health strategy to prevent and control TB. It involves identification, medical evaluation, and treatment of individuals who have had contact with a newly diagnosed case, often called an index case. Evidence of recent infection or active TB disease among contacts suggests ongoing transmission, and treatment is provided to infected individuals to prevent subsequent active TB, thereby interrupting transmission.A more recent approach to identifying TB transmission is DNA fingerprint analysis. With this approach, DNA is isolated from the MTB organisms cultured from patient samples. Mycobacterial DNA is then characterized with respect to the presence and number of target sequences; transmission is assumed to have occurred between cases with matching “fingerprints”. Although this method is capable of identifying transmission involving persons with limited contact, results can take weeks [3], and the method can be applied only to persons with active disease from whom it is possible to obtain a positive MTB culture. In particular, DNA fingerprinting is not able to establish transmission to individuals with LTBI, or to those with culture-negative active TB (a frequent manifestation in children, for example). For these reasons, contact investigation remains critical to the rapid assessment and interruption of transmission.Ideally, contact investigation should be conducted for all infectious cases immediately upon diagnosis. In practice, however, limited resources in public health may necessitate prioritization of contact tracing among multiple infectious individuals. In general, patient features related to infectiousness, such as pulmonary and laryngeal disease, cavitary lesions on chest radiography, positive sputum acid fast smears, and younger age are considered when assessing the urgency of investigation [4].Previous molecular epidemiological investigations of TB transmission have identified additional clinical and demographic predictors associated with involvement in transmission chains. These features include HIV infection, drug-resistant TB, homelessness, and intravenous (IV)-drug use [5]. The degree to which these features are used to prioritize contact tracing depends on the intuition and experience of public health officials, and the potential use of these patient features to predict the probability that a case is involved in recent transmission has not been explored.Statistical and machine learning algorithms, which estimate the probability of an event as a function of input variables, can analyze many patient variables to assist medical decision making. Such prediction models can inform decisions about diagnosis and therapy when applied to patient data contained in electronic health records (EHR) [6]. Although the models are most frequently used for clinical decision support, their application in public health is rare. In TB control, using known risk factors for transmission associated with a newly diagnosed active TB case to predict recent transmission appears feasible and should aid timely and evidence-based decision making in prioritization of contact investigation.The rapid identification of community transmission allows timely intervention. Although it is often considered the gold-standard for detection of transmission, the impact of DNA fingerprinting is hampered by its slow turnaround time. A decision-support tool that uses readily available clinical and demographic features of an active TB case would permit more rapid, evidence-based decision making in prioritizing contact investigation. As an initial step towards creating such a decision-support tool, we developed and evaluated a statistical learning model to estimate the probability of a given case of active TB being involved in recent transmission.The data used to develop and evaluate the model were obtained from 1844 active TB cases reported to the public health department between January 1, 1996 and December 31, 2007 in Montreal, Quebec, Canada. In Quebec, as in all provinces in Canada and states in USA, every diagnosis of active TB must be reported by name to the local public health department along with standardized demographic, clinical, and microbiologic information. Hence, as part of routine public health practice, clinical and epidemiological data were collected by public health nurses from patients and treating clinicians and were stored in a database. We extracted these data in non-nominal form for our study, which was approved by the McGill Faculty of Medicine Institutional Review Board.We used DNA fingerprinting based on the IS6110 target sequence, by restriction-fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis, to assess the involvement of each case in recent transmission. IS6110 is a repetitive DNA sequence in the MTB genome, and its frequency and insertion location vary from one MTB strain to another. This sequence is highly preserved, however, as the bacteria propagate from one host to another, thus making it possible to identify the same MTB strain in cases belonging to a chain of transmission [7]. Based on standardized IS6110 – RFLP methodology [8], cases with MTB isolates that shared identical numbers and insertion locations of the IS6110 sequence were deemed members of the same TB “cluster.” Cases with unique IS6110 patterns were deemed unique. As the discriminative ability of the RFLP method is compromised for MTB strains with few copies of the IS6110 element [9], we used the results of a secondary genotyping method, spoligotyping, for strains that contain less than six IS6110 elements.Table 1lists the independent variables initially included in the prediction model, which were selected by review of previous epidemiological studies exploring transmission of TB. For the countries of origin variable, we created three categories: Canadian born, Haitian born, and born in other countries. In previous work, Haitian birth was identified as a risk factor for transmission in Montreal [10], hence we used a distinct category for these individuals. For the Area of residence variable, we used health administrative areas on the island of Montreal (Centres de santé et de services sociaux – CSSS) as a unit of the analysis. There are 10 CSSS areas in Montreal, and areas with a similar frequency of genotype-defined clustering were merged to create four areas of residence. Multi-drug resistant TB (MDR-TB) disease, which is resistant to at least two of the main anti-TB drugs, Isoniazid (INH) and rifampicin, has been most strongly associated with recent transmission [11–13]. However, MDR-TB disease rarely occurs in Canada [14], so we considered for inclusion in our model the more frequently observed INH resistance. The Previous diagnosis of TB variable included previous diagnosis of active disease and LTBI.Because excluding the cases with missing data would reduce the size of the dataset and possibly introduce bias [15], we filled in the missing values using multiple imputation, which replaces missing information with plausible values drawn from a conditional distribution formed by the observed covariates [16]. We used fully conditional specification approach [17], where multivariable imputation model is specified for each incomplete variables. As an example, a linear regression model was fit to the observed data in order to predict the missing values of the continuous age variable. Similarly, logistic regression and multinomial regression models were specified to predict the missing values of binary and categorical variables. We used all the variables in our dataset shown in Table 1 as the predictor variables for the imputations models.Imputation was repeated multiple times to generate m different complete datasets, each of which was used to train and test the model [16]. The resulting m measured performances of prediction and their corresponding variances were pooled into a single final estimate using Rubin’s rule [16]. In this study, 15 imputed datasets were created, which should be sufficient given the proportion of missingness [16]. We used the MICE (Multivariate Imputation by Chained Equation) package [18] in the R programming environment [19] to generate imputed datasets. Homelessness and Aboriginal status were not useful predictors and were not explored further, since both variables had a very large proportion of missing values. Missing values in all other predictors, including HIV infection, were imputed.A logistic regression model was used to predict whether a given case was involved in recent transmission or was reactivation of LTBI. We selected logistic regression due to its wide recognition in the medical community [20], and its comparable classification performance to other methods such as artificial neural networks and support vector machines [21–24]. In addition, it provides a straightforward interpretation of the predictive power of independent variables in the form of an odds ratio [23].Interaction of predictor variables may occur, so the plausibility of adding interaction terms was assessed by the following selection approach; the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) of a model containing all the predictors (i.e. main model) was compared to the BIC derived from the same model plus the interaction term. Lower BIC indicates better model fit, and BIC tends to penalize the larger model (i.e. the model with additional parameter) [25]. Therefore, the interaction term was considered a strong predictor if the model containing the term showed a lower BIC than the main model. Because BIC-based model selection is substantially more conservative than other statistical criteria such as Akaike’s Information Criterion and the likelihood ratio test due to its stronger penalization mechanism, we were less likely to select interaction terms resulting from noise of the development data. All possible combinations of two variables were tested in this fashion. We performed the screening of interaction terms before the model selection process described below, since testing all possible combinations of interaction terms by the model selection method (Bayesian Model Averaging) can result in a very large model space. As well, we assessed the linearity of the continuous age variable in relation to the logit of the dependent variable. To do this analysis, we used a fractional polynomial, which tests the feasibility of linear and various non-linear functions of continuous variables [26].We identified the optimal model using Bayesian Model Averaging (BMA). BMA estimates the posterior probabilities of all possible models given the training data, chooses a set of candidate models according to their posterior probability distributions, and averages the coefficients of the selected models using the posterior probabilities as weights [27]. Posterior model probability for each of candidate models can be analytically approximated by BIC, as described by Hoeting et al. [27].BMA assumes that no single model will correctly explain the observed data and creates a synthetic model as an approximation to a true unobserved model. Unlike conventional model selection approach for generalized linear model, such as stepwise selection which bases inference and prediction on a single best model, BMA offers a solution to account for model uncertainly by averaging the coefficient of multiple models [27]. Compared to stepwise model selection, BMA was shown to perform superior in selecting collect model [28] and often estimate smaller standard deviations for the parameters of interest [29].Instead of determining the effect of a predictor by its p-value from statistical significant test, BMA reports the posterior probability of each predictor. This value is simply the sum of the posterior probabilities of the models that contain a given variable, and represents the normalized probability of a coefficient having a non-zero value given the training data, P(β≠0|D). A posterior effect probability of more than 0.5 indicates evidence for the effect of a variable. For prediction, we included in the final model variables whose posterior effect probability were not zero. We implemented our model in the R programming environment using the BMA package [30].The discriminative performance of the model was assessed by plotting the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve and calculating the Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC). In addition, we calculated negative predictive value (NPV) and positive predictive value (PPV) of the model over a range of classification thresholds. All estimates were obtained through 10 repeats of 10-fold cross-validation. Since we generated 15 imputed datasets, we applied the ten repeats of 10-fold cross-validation to each of these imputed data sets, producing 15 sets of estimates (i.e. AUC, ROC, PPV, NPV, sensitivity, and specificity), which we pooled using Rubin’s rule [16].

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have demonstrated that patient attributes available at the time of disease reporting can be used to predict whether a TB case reported to public health is involved in recent transmission. Models such as the one we developed have the potential to be embedded in a decision support tool and guide evidence-based public health practice. The use of such models and decision-support tools are likely to become increasingly feasible in the future as clinical and demographic data become rapidly available in an electronic format to public health authorities.