@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-perspective workflow modeling for online surgical situation models

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Multi-perspective representation of surgical processes.Pipeline-based network of different process model types.Online generation of a surgical situation description from low-level tasks.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Surgical workflow,Workflow modeling,Machine learning,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
IntroductionSurgical workflow management is expected to enable situation-aware adaptation and intelligent systems behavior in an integrated operating room (OR). The overall aim is to unburden the surgeon and OR staff from both manual maintenance and information seeking tasks. A major step toward intelligent systems behavior is a stable classification of the surgical situation from multiple perspectives based on performed low-level tasks.Material and methodsThe present work proposes a method for the classification of surgical situations based on multi-perspective workflow modeling. A model network that interconnects different types of surgical process models is described. Various aspects of a surgical situation description were considered: low-level tasks, high-level tasks, patient status, and the use of medical devices. A study with sixty neurosurgical interventions was conducted to evaluate the performance of our approach and its robustness against incomplete workflow recognition input.ResultsA correct classification rate of over 90% was measured for high-level tasks and patient status. The device usage models for navigation and neurophysiology classified over 95% of the situations correctly, whereas the ultrasound usage was more difficult to predict. Overall, the classification rate decreased with an increasing level of input distortion.DiscussionAutonomous adaptation of medical devices and intelligent systems behavior do not currently depend solely on low-level tasks. Instead, they require a more general type of understanding of the surgical condition. The integration of various surgical process models in a network provided a comprehensive representation of the interventions and allowed for the generation of extensive situation descriptions.ConclusionMulti-perspective surgical workflow modeling and online situation models will be a significant pre-requisite for reliable and intelligent systems behavior. Hence, they will contribute to a cooperative OR environment.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Surgical workflow management is expected to enable situation-aware adaptation and intelligent systems behavior in an integrated operating room (OR). The overall aim is to unburden the surgeon and OR staff from manual maintenance and information seeking tasks introduced by new technologies [1,2]. Therefore, a cooperative technical environment should be established [3–5]. The idea is to implement an automatic adaptation of assistance functions to the situation in the OR. For example, this might include the semi-automatic configuration and parameter adaptation of medical devices and the situation-dependent presentation of information. However, such applications of surgical workflow management essentially rely on an abstract understanding of the current situation. The desired technical assistance functionalities must be based on a symbolic representation of the surgical condition with information on various aspects of the ongoing surgical process. This necessity requires approaches to recognize the surgical activities on a fine-granular level, as well as methods for the stable classification of the surgical situation. Additionally, an infrastructure in the OR is required to manage and share process-related information for distributed adaptation of medical devices and systems.The present work proposes a method for the classification of surgical situations based on multi-perspective workflow modeling. The method interconnected different types of surgical process models, and an intraoperative online model processing pipeline was implemented. Additionally, a study was conducted to evaluate the performance of the proposed approach.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We proposed a framework for multi-perspective workflow modeling and on-line classification of a surgical situation based on low-level activity input. The method combined a fine-granular process representation with contextual information. Multi-perspective surgical workflow modeling will be a significant pre-requisite for reliable and intelligent systems behavior in the OR. However, the proposed principle might also be applied to other treatment and healthcare processes using different perspective.The present work contributes to bridging the gap between the recognition of surgical activities and the need for contextual information in situation-aware medical devices. The long-term goal of future OR developments could apply the provided process-related information to support efficiency, effectiveness and patient safety with workflow-driven assistance technologies. The study also demonstrated the feasibility of the method for applications beyond the adaptation of medical devices to surgical situations. The resource models included in the process model network had a predictive character and provided qualitative information for department-wide resource management system. Hence, the present work represents an important step toward a managed OR with a cooperative technical environment.