@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Model-driven approach to data collection and reporting for quality improvement

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Addressing the challenge of the second translational gap is key to improving healthcare processes.Data-driven methodologies improve likelihood of success.We propose the Improvement Data Model (IDM) for data collection and reporting for local improvement.WISH, a prototype software tool based on IDM is used by over 600 users in 50+ improvement projects.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
D2.1 (Software engineering) requirements/specification J.3 (life and medical sciences): Health model-driven architectures,Healthcare analytics,Quality improvement,Data collection,Metrics,Performance analytics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Continuous data collection and analysis have been shown essential to achieving improvement in healthcare. However, the data required for local improvement initiatives are often not readily available from hospital Electronic Health Record (EHR) systems or not routinely collected. Furthermore, improvement teams are often restricted in time and funding thus requiring inexpensive and rapid tools to support their work. Hence, the informatics challenge in healthcare local improvement initiatives consists of providing a mechanism for rapid modelling of the local domain by non-informatics experts, including performance metric definitions, and grounded in established improvement techniques. We investigate the feasibility of a model-driven software approach to address this challenge, whereby an improvement model designed by a team is used to automatically generate required electronic data collection instruments and reporting tools. To that goal, we have designed a generic Improvement Data Model (IDM) to capture the data items and quality measures relevant to the project, and constructed Web Improvement Support in Healthcare (WISH), a prototype tool that takes user-generated IDM models and creates a data schema, data collection web interfaces, and a set of live reports, based on Statistical Process Control (SPC) for use by improvement teams. The software has been successfully used in over 50 improvement projects, with more than 700 users. We present in detail the experiences of one of those initiatives, Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease project in Northwest London hospitals. The specific challenges of improvement in healthcare are analysed and the benefits and limitations of the approach are discussed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Rising demand for efficiency and effectiveness in health services with increasingly limited resources puts health systems world-wide under pressure to continuously deliver high quality care [1–4]. More rapid implementation of research into practice has the potential to improve outcomes and value, however it is recognised that implementation in health systems is slow, incomplete, and often not sustainable, with variation in compliance to best practice [5]. This challenge of implementing new approaches into practice has been identified as the second translational gap [6] and research bodies such as Institute for Healthcare Improvement (IHI) in the US, UK’s Institute for Innovation and Improvement, and Australian Institute for Health and Welfare, have been set up to investigate the mechanisms behind effective and sustainable improvement initiatives.Local improvement initiatives represent an important part of achieving change in a healthcare system, complementing the top-down institutional and national initiatives. Local improvement is also well-suited to implementing clinical research into practice. The proximity of the implementation teams, consisting of, among others, doctors, nurses, administrative staff, pharmacists, patients and members of the public, to front line care delivery ensures relevance and focus of such improvement projects. However such projects face their own set of challenges, including the complex nature of the internal organisational processes, lack of capability and capacity for improvement work in busy staff with diverse responsibilities, and low visibility of the changes being effected.Data-driven methods are recognised as essential to achieving improvement in healthcare. Boaden’s report on quality improvement in healthcare [7], established that appropriate and rigorous use of data, both quantitative and qualitative, is essential to test out interventions during an improvement initiative. Such reliance on data improves the chances for success, and for a higher-level evaluation to determine whether the initiative has a significant impact upon quality for patients and carers. Meyer et al. [8] also stresses the need for appropriate selection of metrics to be used in measurement to fit the needs of both end-users and service providers. However, improvement data required by local improvement initiatives are often not available in hospital EHR systems, not at the required level of granularity, not appropriately reported, or not easily accessible to the implementation team members. While national and regional improvement programmes can invest resources in overcoming these problems through adapting their software and information systems, such facilities are rarely available to smaller teams.To address this need for targeted data to drive local improvement initiatives, we developed an approach based on Improvement Data Model (IDM), a novel computational model of improvement, and a prototype software Web Improvement Support for Healthcare (WISH) to demonstrate its use. Local teams in medical organisations use IDM to specify the metrics to track their performance during the intervention, together with the data points necessary to calculate these metrics. Based on the team’s IDM specification, the WISH software automatically generates appropriate data collection pages, and a set of live reports containing the required metrics for team members to access as the improvement project progresses. The standardised reports use Statistical Process Control (SPC) [18,19] as the statistical tool for visual analysis.The IDM/WISH model-based approach started as the core part of UK’s NIHR-funded CLAHRC NW London initiative, where it was used and refined on over 50 projects in Northwest London hospitals between 2007 and 2013. WISH supports multiple concurrent improvement projects inside a single enterprise, with users being parts of several initiatives, potentially with differing administrative privileges, e.g. improvement team members, managers, or administrators.In order to demonstrate the feasibility of a model-driven approach to improvement data collection and reporting, we describe the usage of IDM and WISH in one CLAHRC NWL improvement project focused on improving care for patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease at discharge from a hospital. The aim of the project was to improve outcomes by ensuring a set of care elements (COPD bundle) is offered to all patients admitted to hospital with a diagnosis of acute exacerbation of COPD. The exemplar IDM model is provided for the project, including the data items captured and metrics defined. The WISH data capture and reporting components generated from the model are presented, together with the user experiences.Performance metrics are increasingly derived from routinely collected data [9,10] to achieve efficiency and effectiveness in health systems. Availability of up-to-date simple measures of performance linked to the improvement aim has been shown to help the understanding of the relationship between actions and outcomes, inform decision making, and drive success [11–13]. For example, if a local improvement team is implementing a change in a particular patient pathway, such as community acquired pneumonia treatment, hospital EHR systems can be used to measure high-level outcome measures (e.g. mortality rates) whilst a change is being implemented, but are poorly suited to providing more finely grained data specific to the local task (e.g. number of anti-smoking leaflets handed out in the ward each week).Effective data feedback for quality improvement has a number of characteristics: timeliness, specificity to local context, credibility, and sustainability over time [14]. However, routinely collected data often fails to meet these criteria. Measurement should always reflect the current state, requiring data collection in good time and efficient and fast sharing of results within the team. In a large institution, this is typically a lengthy process since the routinely collected data need to be extracted, curated, and analysed before it can be used for performance analysis and the results sent to the improvement implementation team. Furthermore, the specificity to local context is missing, since the local improvements may require bespoke data that do not reside in an existing EHR system. In order to avoid compromising on measure definitions, by restricting them to data available in the EHR system, such data is often collected in spreadsheets or other local data collection instruments, with no central oversight and no visibility to teams. While potentially useful in the short-term, without a common information model and shared quality standards, this approach fails to produce comparable results that can be used for learning best practices. Finally, analysis techniques used should reflect the needs and skills of the improvement team to achieve credibility and sustainability. Popular Electronic Data Collection (EDC) tools for clinical trials, such as REDCap [25], lack the integrated user-defined analytics that is required for providing understandable and current improvement information to the users. For example, REDCap provides inline frequency counts for individual questions, but any further data analysis is left to specialist researchers using external analytical tools [40].Quality improvement has been extensively studied in business and manufacturing domains. Continuous data collection, analysis, and feedback form the core of Langley’s influential Model for Improvement [15–17]. The Model for Improvement uses Statistical Process Control (SPC) [18,19] as the preferred statistical approach for establishing significant changes in time-series data. Quantitative data in Model for Improvement is enriched by the qualitative Plan-Do-Study-Act (PDSA) cycles [20,21], which provides qualitative description of a change that should result in the improvement, encompassing hypothesis, testing, analysis, and refinement.The informatics challenge in healthcare local improvement initiatives consists of providing a mechanism for rapid modelling of the local domain by non-informatics experts, including performance metric definitions, and grounded in established improvement techniques. The Improvement Data Model (IDM) provides a flexible information model to local improvement initiatives, similarly to CDISC’s ODM standard that provides structure for trial data collection [22]. Such model-based approach encourages sharing of information and data between different departments and/or organisations and overcoming the culture of internal silos to share best practices, compare results, and preserve generated knowledge. Our work goes further than just being based on a model, and is fully model-driven in that the system responds dynamically to changes in the model, such as addition of new improvement projects.A key challenge in model-driven healthcare software [24–26] is the simplification of the model development and the workflow deploying the model to its translation into practice. To address this challenge when using IDM, we have developed the WISH software platform and an associated methodology for developing the IDM models. WISH is a collaborative framework for local improvement teams to specify the quality metrics for their improvement projects, and rapidly deploy the data collection web interfaces for the required data. The basic steps for using WISH are:1.Define the metrics that will be used to measure the effect of an improvement initiative.Specify the data items needed to calculate those metrics and formally express the metrics using those items.Encode the data specification and metrics into the IDM model, together with question labels, data types, and reporting parameters.Load the IDM model into the WISH tool. At this point, data collection and reporting become available to users.The initial modelling work was performed through a series of meetings and workshops where the teams would establish ideas for improvement aims and interventions and capture them in an Action-Effect Diagram, a type of cause-effect chart derived from Driver Diagrams [15] which expresses how the interventions are intended to achieve the aims and defines the key actions that need to be performed. Users also perform process mapping to produce a flow diagram in order to understand and document how the actions fit into the healthcare workflow that they are trying to improve. Following this, a system of measures is developed to track the translation of actions into concrete changes in delivery of patient care. The WISH team would assist in the development of these measures from the conceptual stage through to detailed operational definitions to ensure consistency of data collection and interpretation. The data collection is then piloted, to collect baseline data prior to the intervention, and initial data from early tests of change, initial experiences of which may necessitate a redesign of some or all of the measures. This iterative approach ensures the quality of the final IDM model. The full process is shown in Fig. 2.IDM represents the full data and metric specification of an improvement initiative, as shown in Fig. 3. The core model concept is that of an improvement process, which may contain several data collections. These collections represent logical groupings of improvement data, related to a particular set of improvement metrics. Each data collection consists of a set of typed data elements, with associated textual labels for data entry and display, default values and graphical data entry widgets (e.g. drop-down lists, checkboxes, radio buttons, text boxes). Basic data types that are supported are text, integers, floating point values, and dates, together with sets of predefined categorical values. Simple verification logic is present to ensure individual values are within defined ranges. In addition to user-defined data items, a data collection has to contain a nominated date attribute that is used for time-based aggregations in reports.Named aggregated variables are defined over the basic data measures in IDM, using aggregation operators (count, sum, cumulative sum, maximum, minimum, average, median). These variables are used in metrics that are associated with each data collection. The metrics are defined by a JavaScript expression using aggregated variables, and standard JavaScript functions. Each metric also contains a title and scale information. The metrics are combined into reports for each data collection, including parameters and filters to be applied, e.g. retrieving results only for the specified wards inside a hospital. An example of a concrete IDM model is shown in Fig. 6, together with generated data collection and reporting artifacts.IDM maintains separate definitions of data elements for each model instance, so as to support finely-grained customisations that are frequently required. Therefore, the sharing of knowledge happens on the level of model instances, which are analysed and adapted by the local teams to best suit their purposes. For example, a project looking to implement its own Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) improvement project may look at a similar COPD projects in another setting, directly copy several data elements and measure algorithms, modify labels and numerators in some other measures, and add several new ones to construct the IDM instance that best addresses their local problem. This is in contrast to the data collection models used in clinical trials, which are commonly formally validated, strictly regulated, and reused verbatim.The WISH software is an Electronic Data Collection and Reporting framework based on the IDM model. The tool extends several open source technologies, and is hosted inside a JBoss application server, making it compatible with all major operating systems. A deployment tool converts the XML files containing the IDM models into objects in the database, and generates the data collection pages and web reports as shown in Fig. 4.All collected data is stored inside a MySQL database. The relational schema, shown in Appendix A contains a project registry, with user authentication and role authorisation tables that are used upon login to present each user only with the projects they are participating in, and in accordance with the roles they have had granted. Each project model is mapped onto one table, named after that projects acronym. Project tables store the user identifier and a time stamp for each data entry, while qualitative data (e.g. PDSA cycles and text comments) are stored in separate tables with similar user attribution information.The data collection tool is implemented using the JBoss SEAM technology, with user interfaces for data viewing and editing dynamically generated from the underlying database objects that are mapped through Hibernate technology. This fits in well with the overall model-based approach and ensures both the logical integrity of the system and the ability to rapidly generate new interfaces once a new IDM model has been added.The reporting framework is based on the Eclipse BIRT technology, which was extended with custom code libraries for Statistical Process Control (SPC) functions, and layering of qualitative and quantitative metrics within a single chart. The qualitative and management reports are shared between all projects, and parameterised with individual project identifiers passed on from the invoking instance of the tool. The quantitative reports are constructed from the model at project creation time. The deployment tool extracts the data elements and the improvement metrics from the XML model, and creates individual tables and graph elements in the chart, together with all the user parameters and default values, and uploads it to the server.The data collection pages are dynamically constructed from the data elements defined in the IDM, with the input data persisted into the relational database. Forms consist of graphical widgets (text fields, drop-down boxes, calendars, etc.) associated with the data elements that the users fill in, with the field error checking provided at entry. The hidden elements that are automatically captured by the tool include the unique identifier for the entry made, exact date and time the entry was made, and the identity of the user making the entry.In addition to the IDM-generated pages that are specific to a particular project, a number of standard data collection forms are available in all projects. These include forms for collecting Sustainability Model data [27], PDSA cycles [20,21], qualitative data on the level of patient and public involvement in the initiative, and free-text comments on progress of the initiative. These additional data provide a qualitative view of the improvement process that adds a new dimension to the quantitative IDM data expressed through project metrics.IDM reports are based on the Statistical Process Control (SPC) approach [17,16] which is specifically intended to provide insight into the nature of the variation exhibited in a measure, and is often applied to healthcare [28]. The SPC XmR charting in particular is a highly flexible and robust method of analysis, that is suitable for time series analysis in improvement [29].The XmR charts in WISH plot monthly- or weekly-aggregated data against time. SPC limits can be switched on or off by the user, together with the additional parallel moving range plot used for detecting large jumps in the data; this is shown in Fig. 1. The user also has the option to overlay the run chart with annotations derived from qualitative data. Resulting graphs show PDSA cycles and free-text comments. Clicking on any of the annotations opens a new window with the dedicated report for that PDSA cycle or comment.Dedicated qualitative improvement reports display the different types of qualitative data that are collected in all WISH projects. The Sustainability Model report uses custom bar charts that compare the weighted sustainability results in several categories with the maximum possible result, as specified in the sustainability metric definition document [27]. PDSA cycles, Patient-Public involvement and free-text comments, are all available as tabular reports to facilitate export into other document types.The reporting component allows the user to export either the entire report in a graphical format, with PDF, Excel, and Powerpoint supported, or only export the core data into a delimited text file. In the case of the latter, a subset of metrics can be specified so that they can easily be imported into an external statistics tool for further analysis.To support deployments in large environments with users participating in multiple improvement projects, several enterprise features were implemented in the WISH software.The WISH authentication and authorisation is based on a hierarchical role model in which users can have varying access permissions on different project, from just viewing entered data to adding new users. Typical user can enter new data, view and edit the data they entered, and run project reports. Lower permission levels are meant for external auditors and project observers who do not have edit rights and can only run reports. Higher permission levels are intended for project managers and administrators who can see and/or edit all data entered, run cross-project reports, and manage user permissions.To enhance security and ensure auditability of collected data, whenever a user logs into the system, the details of the session are stored in the database, together with the mode in which the session ended – whether the user logged out manually or the session timed out.Project managers have access to activity reports, such as the one shown in Fig. 5. They depict the integrated view of activity across multiple projects, e.g. within the CLAHRC NWL programme there is a need to target support to projects who need it within a particular funding round. The key generic indicators include the number of entries, the number of distinct active users entering data, and days since last data entry. A traffic-light colouring system is employed to quickly identify problem areas, and key figures in the table are hyper-linked to the detailed data report about the measure displayed.Finally, to facilitate communication between team members, a messaging system has been implemented that allows intra-project, inter-project and direct messages to be exchanged, with the group messages effectively acting as a news feed for project members.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
