@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Partial least squares and logistic regression random-effects estimates for gene selection in supervised classification of gene expression data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Gene selection is needed in supervised classification of gene expression.Respecting the characteristics of data is a key aspect to consider in gene selection.Selection based on logistic regression estimates is recommended in general.Selection based on PLS estimates is recommended when the number of samples is low.Selection based on modified t-statistics performs well on data with high variability.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Supervised classification,Gene selection,Filtering,Partial least squares,Logistic regression,Random effects,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Our main interest in supervised classification of gene expression data is to infer whether the expressions can discriminate biological characteristics of samples. With thousands of gene expressions to consider, a gene selection has been advocated to decrease classification by including only the discriminating genes. We propose to make the gene selection based on partial least squares and logistic regression random-effects (RE) estimates before the selected genes are evaluated in classification models. We compare the selection with that based on the two-sample t-statistics, a current practice, and modified t-statistics. The results indicate that gene selection based on logistic regression RE estimates is recommended in a general situation, while the selection based on the PLS estimates is recommended when the number of samples is low. Gene selection based on the modified t-statistics performs well when the genes exhibit moderate-to-high variability with moderate group separation. Respecting the characteristics of the data is a key aspect to consider in gene selection.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In supervised classification of gene expression data, our main interest is to classify samples’ characteristics based on the gene expression, for description or prediction purposes. For example, whether the gene expression can be used to predict the malignancy of a tumor. In this regard, logistic regression, discriminant rule, and neural networks have been successfully employed in classification and prediction (e.g. [1–3]). With thousands of gene expressions to consider, many of them are not relevant for the classification because they do not have enough information to discriminate the samples’ characteristics. So, selecting the genes that are relevant for classification, or gene selection, is a critical issue in the classification using gene expression data (e.g. [4–6]). This is simply because classification performance, in terms of number of samples that are classified, depends on which genes that are selected into the classification model. In this paper, our main focus is to investigate how different gene selection methods determine the discriminating quality of the selected genes, which, when evaluated in a classification model, would determine the overall classification performance.For this purpose, the process of gene selection combined with supervised classification can generally be identified to fall into three different approaches: wraper method, embedded method, and filtering method (see [7] for a review). The wrapper method takes the performance of genes as the evaluation criterion of selection. Two examples of this method are genetic algorithm and k-nearest neighbor (e.g. [8,9]). The embedded method builds classification model and gene selection simultaneously, such as support vector machine (e.g. [10]).In this study, we concentrate and limit ourselves in the context of filtering method. In the filtering method, we ‘score’ and rank the genes based on their importance using a gene selection method, and we select the top few genes to be included and evaluated in a classification model. The gene selection method is separated from the classification model. We introduce new selection methods based on partial least squares (PLS) and logistic regression random-effects (RE) estimates. Specifically, we perform PLS and logistic regression on all of the genes once to obtain gene-wise statistics, and we select the top genes to be included in classification models based on those statistics.PLS itself can be regarded as a classification model [11–14]. However, as we will discuss later, when we look into the individual PLS estimates, they contain gene-wise discriminating information that are useful for gene selection. In this setting, we perform a PLS regression on all of the genes, and the estimate for each gene is used to rank the genes based on their importance for classification. Hence, the use of PLS in this case is not for evaluating the selected genes for classification, but rather for producing gene-wise statistics, on which our gene selection will be based.As outlined in the methods section, gene selection based on the PLS estimates ignores the correlations between genes. When relatively high correlations between genes are present, a gene selection method that exploits the correlations is expected to produce genes with better discriminating power. For this purpose, we also consider the logistic regression RE estimates as the basis to rank the genes in the gene selection. In this context, we perform a logistic regression on all of the gene expressions to obtain gene-wise parameter estimates. If a gene exhibits a high estimate, it indicates that the gene has high information in the classification, given the correlation that the gene has with other genes in the data. Based on the estimates, we rank and select only the top genes to be included in a classification model. The use of logistic regression to obtain gene-wise statistics is separated from the use of logistic regression to evaluate selected genes as a classification model. In the former, logistic regression is performed once where all of the genes are included in the model.The proposed methods for gene selection will be compared to a common practice where we rank and select the genes based on gene-wise t-statistic (two-sample Student’s t-test) or ranking of the Pearson correlation of each gene expression with the group labels. For example, in West et al. [15], the top genes are selected by taking the ones that are most correlated with the group labels before employing them in a probit regression. van’t Veer et al. [2] also select the top genes into a classification model based on the ranking of Pearson correlation with the group labels, which is equivalent with the selection based on the ranking of t-statistics. Nguyen and Rocke [11] also select the top genes based on the ranking of t-statistics prior to evaluating them in the partial least squares (PLS) and principal component analysis (PCA) models for discrimination of tumor samples. Dudoit et al. [3] use the ranking of BW criterion to select the top genes, where BW is the (gene-wise) ratio of between- over within-groups sum-of-squares. This is also equivalent to select the top genes based on the ranking of t-statistics. Selection based on the t-statistics has also been considered in Liu et al. [16] and Wu et al. [17]. Another statistic related to the t-statistics that has been considered for selection is F-statistics as described in Bhanot et al. [18].In our study, we propose to select the genes based on the PLS estimates, logistic regression RE estimates and standardized RE estimates, and modified t-statistics. We also perform a gene selection based on the commonly used t-statistics. The top genes are then included one-at-a-time into a classification model and the classification errors are recorded for an increasing number of genes in the model [19]. By looking at the classification error across different number of genes, we expect to have better understanding of the behavior of the top genes selected by the different statistics. The classification models that we consider are logistic regression, discriminant analysis (DA), and neural networks (NN). The main reason that we consider these models is because they are regularly used in common practice to perform supervised classification and prediction.The outline of the paper is as follows. The different statistics to rank the genes are discussed in Section 2 and datasets involved are described in Section 3. The results are presented in Section 4 and Section 5 presents the discussion.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
