@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Contrasting lexical similarity and formal definitions in SNOMED CT: Consistency and implications

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
SNOMED CT is a large and complex terminology and imperfections are inevitable.We propose an algorithmic quality assurance method to find inconsistent concepts.We formulate similarity sets: groups of concepts with similar lexical structure.Five different set types are formed and a sample of each is evaluated.Evaluation of the samples revealed 38–70% of the sets having inconsistencies.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
SNOMED CT,Meaningful use,Electronic health record,Formal definition,Lexical analysis,Quality assurance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveTo quantify the presence of and evaluate an approach for detection of inconsistencies in the formal definitions of SNOMED CT (SCT) concepts utilizing a lexical method.Material and methodUtilizing SCT’s Procedure hierarchy, we algorithmically formulated similarity sets: groups of concepts with similar lexical structure of their fully specified name. We formulated five random samples, each with 50 similarity sets, based on the same parameter: number of parents, attributes, groups, all the former as well as a randomly selected control sample. All samples’ sets were reviewed for types of formal definition inconsistencies: hierarchical, attribute assignment, attribute target values, groups, and definitional.ResultsFor the Procedure hierarchy, 2111 similarity sets were formulated, covering 18.1% of eligible concepts. The evaluation revealed that 38 (Control) to 70% (Different relationships) of similarity sets within the samples exhibited significant inconsistencies. The rate of inconsistencies for the sample with different relationships was highly significant compared to Control, as well as the number of attribute assignment and hierarchical inconsistencies within their respective samples.Discussion and conclusionWhile, at this time of the HITECH initiative, the formal definitions of SCT are only a minor consideration, in the grand scheme of sophisticated, meaningful use of captured clinical data, they are essential. However, significant portion of the concepts in the most semantically complex hierarchy of SCT, the Procedure hierarchy, are modeled inconsistently in a manner that affects their computability. Lexical methods can efficiently identify such inconsistencies and possibly allow for their algorithmic resolution.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The U.S. is in the midst of a transformational change to a more efficient and coordinated healthcare delivery system. The ability to share data among providers, researchers, and consumers is essential to the success of this effort. Despite increased adoption of electronic health record (EHR) technology, the data collected within will remain in information silos unless methods are implemented to ensure its interoperability in respect to format and content. Therefore, integral to current health information technology initiatives is the adoption of applicable standards for various domains. One such standard is SNOMED CT (SCT), adopted for encoding problem lists. The lists, however, are only a starting point. Eventually, sophisticated algorithms and reasoning engines will utilize the conceptual representations within SCT for research and decision support, analytics, and various other tasks. Incomplete, inconsistent, or erroneous representations will negatively influence the performance of such engines and, directly or indirectly, negatively impact patient care. SCT is large and complex and imperfections are inevitable but quality assurance (QA) resources are scarce and manual auditing is time consuming, rendering manual QA of SCT impractical. Algorithmic QA must be developed to efficiently detect, and possibly resolve, inconsistencies and errors. While most terminological QA is retrospective, algorithmic QA can be incorporated into the authoring process.It is reasonable to expect similarly worded strings, as represented by concepts’ preferred names, to be modeled similarly. In SCT, such sets of concepts may harbor higher rate of inconsistencies [1]. In this study we explore efficient methodologies to detect high-probability, high-yielding similarity sets. We set to better quantify the consistency of the formal logical representations in the Procedure hierarchy, the most semantically rich hierarchy of SCT with the most complex conceptual representations. We utilize a lexical methodology, and evaluate the potential yield of different set building approaches.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
