@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Usability study of clinical exome analysis software: Top lessons learned and recommendations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
First application of usability methods to evaluate exome analysis software.Key list of user desiderata on exome software from clinical geneticists is compiled.Identified usability challenges and design features for reengineering opportunities.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Exome,Genome,Whole-genome,Next-generation sequencing,Software interface,Usability,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectivesNew DNA sequencing technologies have revolutionized the search for genetic disruptions. Targeted sequencing of all protein coding regions of the genome, called exome analysis, is actively used in research-oriented genetics clinics, with the transition to exomes as a standard procedure underway. This transition is challenging; identification of potentially causal mutation(s) amongst ∼106 variants requires specialized computation in combination with expert assessment. This study analyzes the usability of user interfaces for clinical exome analysis software. There are two study objectives: (1) To ascertain the key features of successful user interfaces for clinical exome analysis software based on the perspective of expert clinical geneticists, (2) To assess user-system interactions in order to reveal strengths and weaknesses of existing software, inform future design, and accelerate the clinical uptake of exome analysis.MethodsSurveys, interviews, and cognitive task analysis were performed for the assessment of two next-generation exome sequence analysis software packages. The subjects included ten clinical geneticists who interacted with the software packages using the “think aloud” method. Subjects’ interactions with the software were recorded in their clinical office within an urban research and teaching hospital. All major user interface events (from the user interactions with the packages) were time-stamped and annotated with coding categories to identify usability issues in order to characterize desired features and deficiencies in the user experience.ResultsWe detected 193 usability issues, the majority of which concern interface layout and navigation, and the resolution of reports. Our study highlights gaps in specific software features typical within exome analysis. The clinicians perform best when the flow of the system is structured into well-defined yet customizable layers for incorporation within the clinical workflow. The results highlight opportunities to dramatically accelerate clinician analysis and interpretation of patient genomic data.ConclusionWe present the first application of usability methods to evaluate software interfaces in the context of exome analysis. Our results highlight how the study of user responses can lead to identification of usability issues and challenges and reveal software reengineering opportunities for improving clinical next-generation sequencing analysis. While the evaluation focused on two distinctive software tools, the results are general and should inform active and future software development for genome analysis software. As large-scale genome analysis becomes increasingly common in healthcare, it is critical that efficient and effective software interfaces are provided to accelerate clinical adoption of the technology. Implications for improved design of such applications are discussed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Discovery of the underlying genetic cause of a disease or condition can provide critical insights into the biochemical mechanisms and, in a subset of cases, reveal therapeutic avenues to pursue [1]. In the long-term, whole-genome sequencing will be clinically cost effective, but in the near-term the targeted sequencing of all protein coding regions of the genome, called exome analysis, is already actively used in select clinics. Over the past 5years, more than 600 papers have appeared reporting exome results for clinical research studies. While these research successes have been dramatic (e.g. [2–4]), the transition to regular clinical access to exome analysis is challenging. The data output from exome sequencing is immense and computationally complex, and finding relevant sequence variations amongst the hundreds of thousands of variants in each individual remains an ongoing challenge [5–7]. Various software packages have been developed for visualization and interpretation of sequence variation data to address this challenge, but to date no comprehensive usability studies have been reported to identify and investigate user interface features required for efficient clinical work involving exome analysis.Prior studies illustrate how a lack of systematic consideration of users, the tasks they are involved with, and their work environments can result in poorly designed user interfaces, leading to low adoption rates [8–10]. Such systems are likely to be abandoned [11,12]. In healthcare systems, poorly designed systems may also jeopardize the quality of patient care, and pose a threat to patient safety and waste precious resources [13–15]. Usability studies in the field of health informatics focus on analyzing user behavior to reveal cognitive and behavioral patterns that may explain such suboptimal outcomes [16,17], as well as reveal technological considerations that impede clinical translation of patient genomics [18–20].In the context of usability studies in bioinformatics, Bolchini and colleagues have identified a need for the application of usability analysis to the evaluation of bioinformatics resources and tools [21]. However, there have been few published studies on the usability of such technologies. Usability analysis, involving standard usability testing techniques, have recently been described by Neri and colleagues in the analysis of a user interface for genetic results that are presented to healthcare providers for managing patient genetic profiles. Neri found that usability testing resulted in the identification of problems which were resolvable with simple alterations leading to substantial impact on the quality of user interactions [22].The framework of our research study is based upon cognitive task analysis (CTA), a cognitive engineering technique that has been successfully applied in informing the design of systems across a variety of clinical domains [23–28]. In this paper, we present the first evaluation of the usability of next-generation sequencing interpretation software, exploring the impacts of different user interface designs on analysis workflows and outcomes. Our methodology builds upon well-established CTA to observe ten clinical geneticists examining two simulated scenario cases using think-aloud protocols [29] to assess end user cognitive behavior. Each subject worked through two hypothetical exome analysis scenarios with two dissimilar exome analysis software interfaces. We highlight the top user desiderata to inform software developers working on the next generation of exome interpretation software, and to inform clinical users who are in the process of choosing a software from this domain. The discussion of this paper addresses recurring usability challenges to overcome and critical features that this class of analysis software should possess. We emphasize that the ultimate goal of the study is not the collection of software-specific usability analysis results, rather the intent is to highlight findings that generalize to all software geared for the clinical interpretation of exome and eventually whole genome sequencing data.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Software to support exome sequencing is a cost-effective technology increasingly incorporated in clinical genetics [48]. Without a reliable and practical clinical system, complex exome data cannot be processed by most clinicians. In this study we highlighted recurring usability problems, and reported user recommendations and requests for key functionality. Our findings point to the need for changes and/or updates to current exome interfaces. The results should further help clinical users who are choosing what analysis software would suit their needs.The user desiderata represent a key feature set for future systems to deliver. Our evaluations highlight the many types of filters and prioritization strategies that are needed by the clinicians, and the limitations of simple column-based filtering layouts. In addition, the software can accelerate analysis by reporting findings based on classical genetic models of inheritance where appropriate. The software should retain the ability for the users to define their own custom workflow, providing step-wise reports so the impact of each step can be assessed. As the community moves to whole genome data, the resulting size and complexity will exacerbate concerns about the speed of processing – thus it is critical for the software to provide time estimates whenever a job cannot be completed rapidly (i.e. >10s). Since each case is rarely evaluated by only one specialist, the ability for clinical exome interpretation software to support team collaborations for collective annotation and review of data is desired. The users indicated a need for the software to be compatible with multiple data formats used in the field, as well as providing connectivity to popular online databases and tools.All of the subjects in the study worked within the same academic health research hospital. While this likely introduces bias, our subjects are clinical geneticists with prior experience with exome analysis that by nature are not to be found in a general healthcare facility. The focus on a single healthcare center offered advantages regarding the number of experts we were able to gather, and the time they were able to spend on the study. Most clinical exome analyses are currently performed in similar academic health centers, and therefore we anticipate that the results will have broad relevance to the field. Nonetheless, one future direction from this work would be to perform similar evaluations with clinicians from multiple centers.Each clinical geneticist was allotted 45min to become acquainted with the software, which is a recognized constraint. However, all of the subjects had performed similar tasks as given in the simulations, and had worked with other exome interpretation software. Furthermore, based upon the nature of the software, and the type of analysis that we asked the clinicians to perform, the 45min training period was sufficient for subjects to gain a basic understand the basic functionalities for the purposes of conducting usability testing.The study was limited to two specific open-source software packages. One could argue for the inclusion of other tools, including commercial packages. We believe the two tested tools present a suitable range of features in order to gain general feedback about software in this specific field. Given the rapidly moving developments in the field, there will always be more new software emerging. We did query the subjects about their experience with other packages throughout the evaluations, such that the user perspectives presented in this study are not restricted to the evaluated tools but also informed by exposure to various commercial and open-source platforms.As access to low-cost DNA sequencing grows, it is anticipated that whole genome sequence analysis will become a standard diagnostic tool for many fields [49,50]. The complexity of genome data and annotations will continue to increase as the technologies mature, making it imperative to develop better interfaces that streamline analyses and improve quality.Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2014.05.004.Supplementary data 1