@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Interestingness measures and strategies for mining multi-ontology multi-level association rules from gene ontology annotations for the discovery of new GO relationships

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study describes a data mining algorithm for the discovery of new gene ontology relationships.This study presents new interestingness metrics for multi-ontology multi-level relationships.Cross-ontology relationships offer GO co-annotation candidates and cross-ontology connections.Our results indicate that our methods outperform QuickGO in generating co-annotation suggestions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Gene ontology,Association rule mining,Data mining,Interestingness measures,Gene ontology relationships,Interpro relationships,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The Gene Ontology (GO), a set of three sub-ontologies, is one of the most popular bio-ontologies used for describing gene product characteristics. GO annotation data containing terms from multiple sub-ontologies and at different levels in the ontologies is an important source of implicit relationships between terms from the three sub-ontologies. Data mining techniques such as association rule mining that are tailored to mine from multiple ontologies at multiple levels of abstraction are required for effective knowledge discovery from GO annotation data. We present a data mining approach, Multi-ontology data mining at All Levels (MOAL) that uses the structure and relationships of the GO to mine multi-ontology multi-level association rules. We introduce two interestingness measures: Multi-ontology Support (MOSupport) and Multi-ontology Confidence (MOConfidence) customized to evaluate multi-ontology multi-level association rules. We also describe a variety of post-processing strategies for pruning uninteresting rules. We use publicly available GO annotation data to demonstrate our methods with respect to two applications (1) the discovery of co-annotation suggestions and (2) the discovery of new cross-ontology relationships.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The use of biomedical ontologies for annotation of experimental data has exploded with the advent of modern high throughput technologies for genomics, transcriptomics, and proteomics. The Gene Ontology (GO), one of the most well developed and widely used of the bio-ontologies, is a collection of three sub-ontologies: Molecular Function, Cellular Component and Biological Process. Extensive and constantly growing repositories of GO annotated gene products provide valuable resources for mining co-annotation patterns among GO concepts. These co-occurrence patterns can be utilized to annotate new gene products, to learn inter-ontology relationships, and for many other applications. Association rule mining is a widely used data mining approach for discovering patterns and relationships between variables from data [1] and has been used for mining relationships from the GO by a number of research groups [2–6]. However, most of this research ignores the ontology structure of the GO [2,7] and/or does not deal with issues encountered in cross-ontology data mining [4,6]. Association rule mining extracts implicit relationships between items from a set of transactions T={t1, t2,…,tn} where each transaction is a set of one or more co-occurring items [1]. In our research, each transaction is a gene and the items are GO terms from the three sub-ontologies assigned to that gene. An association rule is defined as an implication of the form x→y where x (the antecedent) and y (the consequent) are disjoint subsets of items. Association rules mined at multiple levels of abstraction from data represented using a domain ontology are called multi-level association rules [8,9]. While multi-level association rules have typically been mined from data represented using a single ontology, they can also be mined from data represented using multiple ontologies resulting in multi-ontology multi-level (MO_ML) rules. We present a method called Multi-ontology data mining at All Levels (MOAL) for mining association rules from GO annotation data. MOAL utilizes the structure and semantics of the GO, uses interestingness measures tailored for rules mined from multiple ontologies at multiple levels of abstraction, and employs pruning strategies for removing closely related, irrelevant, or known rules.Key innovations in the MOAL approach are the combined use of (1) derivation of all annotations implied by transitive relationships in the GO prior to rule mining; (2) modified definitions of the commonly used interestingness metrics of support and confidence for more appropriate calculations of background probabilities for multi-ontology rules; and (3) pruning strategies that focus on cross-ontology rules, remove rules closely related via ancestor relationships, remove general versions of a rule when a specific version is also mined, remove rules containing terms belonging to the same InterPro model and consolidate symmetric rules.We demonstrate the utility of MOAL for mining annotation data for two tasks: (1) generating GO annotation candidates and (2) deriving new relationships between terms in the three sub-ontologies of the GO. We show that our method for generating and ranking annotation candidates produces more suggestions for annotations and provides more informative interestingness measures compared to the widely used QuickGO approach [10]. Previous approaches for discovering or verifying relationships between terms in the GO have focused on single ontology rules [4] or have used logical extensions or lexical analysis and are thus dependent on known relationships or lexical similarities of terms [5,11]. We demonstrate that our method can be used to produce interesting cross ontology rules that both verify known relationships and suggest new relationships not likely to be suggested by lexical analysis.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
As ontologies become increasingly popular as methods of data representation, efficient methods for mining knowledge from ontologies representing related domains of knowledge are essential. It is also important to design metrics to identify the most interesting associations with little manual input. The MOAL algorithm is used to mine cross-ontology multi-level rules through the use of generalization techniques. The pruning strategies described in this study are effective in removing a large percentage of uninteresting rules thereby reducing the necessity for manual analysis. We also introduce MOConfidence and MOSupport to assess the interestingness of multi-ontology multi-level rules along with pruning strategies. We describe two applications for our multi-level multi-ontology association rules and demonstrate the effectiveness of our methods for both applications.Our experiments have applied MOAL to discovery of cross-ontology relationships between sub-ontologies of the GO; we anticipate that additional complications may occur when ontologies developed by different groups are used. We plan to explore these issues and to adapt information theoretic interestingness measures for cross-ontology data mining in future work.Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2013.06.012.Supplementary data 1Formal definitions for sets used to define MOSupport and MOConfidence.Supplementary data 2Cross-ontology-relationships.Supplementary data 3Co-annotation-candidates.