@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Supervised methods for symptom name recognition in free-text clinical records of traditional Chinese medicine: An empirical study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Symptom name recognition from free-text clinical records of TCM is well studied.Supervised methods are investigated and helpful strategies are proposed.Elaborate experiments are implemented and results are explained carefully.Effectiveness of the investigated methods is validated.This work is a fundamental task to other clinical researches of TCM.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Symptom name recognition,Free-text clinical records,Traditional Chinese medicine,Supervised sequence classification,Natural language processing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Clinical records of traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) are documented by TCM doctors during their routine diagnostic work. These records contain abundant knowledge and reflect the clinical experience of TCM doctors. In recent years, with the modernization of TCM clinical practice, these clinical records have begun to be digitized. Data mining (DM) and machine learning (ML) methods provide an opportunity for researchers to discover TCM regularities buried in the large volume of clinical records. There has been some work on this problem. Existing methods have been validated on a limited amount of manually well-structured data. However, the contents of most fields in the clinical records are unstructured. As a result, the previous methods verified on the well-structured data will not work effectively on the free-text clinical records (FCRs), and the FCRs are, consequently, required to be structured in advance. Manually structuring the large volume of TCM FCRs is time-consuming and labor-intensive, but the development of automatic methods for the structuring task is at an early stage. Therefore, in this paper, symptom name recognition (SNR) in the chief complaints, which is one of the important tasks to structure the FCRs of TCM, is carefully studied. The SNR task is reasonably treated as a sequence labeling problem, and several fundamental and practical problems in the SNR task are studied, such as how to adapt a general sequence labeling strategy for the SNR task according to the domain-specific characteristics of the chief complaints and which sequence classifier is more appropriate to solve the SNR task. To answer these questions, a series of elaborate experiments were performed, and the results are explained in detail.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) provides a distinctive way to perceive the human body and is becoming a medical theory complementary to Western medicine [1–4]. TCM knowledge is held largely in the minds of clinically experienced TCM doctors. Consequently, the clinical records of TCM, which are documented by TCM doctors during their routine diagnostic work, naturally constitute an abundant clinical knowledge source of TCM that can be inherited by the next generation of practitioners. However, with the increase in the accumulation of clinical records, comprehensive summarization of complicated TCM regularities is difficult. Fortunately, with the modernization of TCM clinical practice, clinical records have begun to be digitized. This provides an opportunity for researchers to discover, with the help of data mining (DM) and machine learning (ML) methods, TCM regularities buried in the large volume of digitized clinical records.There has been some work on applying DMs and MLs to TCM knowledge discovery, such as discovering TCM knowledge from well-structured literature by using Bayesian networks [5,6] and establishing TCM expert systems for decision support by the naïve Bayes classifier based on a limited amount of manually structured data [7]. However, the contents of most fields in the clinical records, e.g. the chief complaints, are unstructured (or free-text). The result is that the methods that are verified on the well-structured data, cannot be directly applied to knowledge discovery in the free-text clinical records (FCRs) of TCM. These methods, consequently, require FCRs to be structured in advance.Manually structuring the large volume of TCM FCRs is tedious, time-consuming, and labor intensive. Hence there is an urgent need for the development of an effective method to automatically structure the FCRs, i.e. recognizing medical named entities in FCRs [8]. Named entity recognition (NER) in general text has been widely studied in the natural language processing (NLP) community [9]. For example, a hybrid Chinese NER model based on multiple features was proposed in [10], and the model was evaluated on the general text dataset called “People’s Daily”. In [11], a lexicalized hidden Markov model (HMM) approach to NER was designed and validated on “newswire” data, which is also a general text dataset. In addition, a pragmatic approach to Chinese word segmentation was proposed in [12]. This approach was implemented in an adaptive Chinese word segmenter (MSRSeg), which can simultaneously segment general Chinese text and perform NER. However, FCRs of TCM are different from general text. They have domain-specific characteristics [13] and therefore the methods designed for NER in general text might need a domain-specific adaptation for NER in the FCRs.Medical information extraction in English FCRs of Western medicine has become a topic of great interest in recent years, and has been extensively studied due to the efforts of the Informatics for Integrating Biology and the Bedside (i2b2) project, which has released clinical record datasets that can be used as gold standards by the medical NLP research community. In 2009, i2b2 organized a medical information extraction challenge on extracting medications, dosages, modes, durations, etc. from the English discharge summaries [14]. In the following year, a medical problem, test, and treatment concept extraction challenge was organized by i2b2 [15]. Subsequently, based on the public clinical record datasets, a series of excellent work on NER in English discharge summaries of Western medicine has been published. These NER tasks are usually treated as a sequence labeling problem, and then the open-domain sequence classifiers, e.g. Conditional Random Field model (CRF), are adapted to the medical domain [16–26] with the help of domain knowledge and domain-specific sources. For example, the domain vocabulary used in [16], the domain-specific rules in [17], and the knowledge-rich sources utilized in [18–20] have been used for these purposes. Because of the differences between English and Chinese [27] and owing to the distinctive characteristics of TCM FCRs [13], methods, that could be borrowed from English NER in the discharge summaries of Western medicine need adaptation for NER in FCRs of TCM.The development of NER in FCRs of TCM has fallen behind the progress of English NER in FCRs of Western medicine. NER in the TCM community was first attempted in 2012 [13]. Symptom name recognition (SNR) in the chief complaints, which is one of the most important tasks of NER in FCRs of TCM, was accomplished by the bigram-based dictionary-matching method. However, various literal forms of symptoms were generated during the routine diagnostic work of TCM doctors [28]. Consequently, the application of the dictionary-matching method in clinical practice requires maintenance of a symptom name dictionary. However, the dictionary-matching method is laborious, making it less appropriate for use in practice. SNR in the chief complaints was also studied in [29]. Based on method for English NER in discharge summaries of Western medicine, SNR in chief complaints was treated directly as a sequence labeling problem and solved by CRF with two types of useful features. This preliminary work still leaves many questions waiting to be answered, such as:(1)Is it suitable to treat SNR in the chief complaints as a sequence labeling problem? In other words, are there any domain-specific characteristics that would facilitate SNR completion by the sequence classifiers?The chief complaints in TCM FCRs have domain-specific characteristics. Some domain-specific adaptation to the general sequence labeling strategy for the SNR task might be needed. How can an appropriate adaptation be made?Several sequence classifiers, e.g. HMM, maximum entropy Markov model (MEMM), and CRF, can be used to solve the sequence labeling problem. Each sequence classifier has its own specializations. Which is most suitable to SNR and which can achieve the best performance?To answer these questions, we focus our attention in this paper on studying SNR in chief complaints. First, the SNR task is treated as a sequence labeling problem reasonably. Second, a new sequence labeling strategy is designed for SNR in the chief complaints based domain-characteristics. These approaches are introduced in Section 2. In Section 3, three typically supervised sequence classifiers (HMM, MEMM, and CRF) are applied to the SNR task with an empirical analysis. Elaborate experiments are performed and described in Section 4 aiming to answer the previously raised questions. Finally, Sections 5 and 6, respectively, provide further discussion and conclusions.Symptom names in TCM are usually composed of three aspects of descriptions: body location, sensation, and intensity. For example, the symptom name “头痛剧烈” (a severe headache) consists of three aspects of descriptions including a body location “头” (head), a sensation “痛” (ache), and a intensity “剧烈” (severe).These three aspects preferably appear in sequence and should not be split by other descriptions (e.g. possessives or temporal descriptions). For instance, the sensation “晕” (dizziness) should come after the body location “头”, but the temporal description “昨天” (yesterday), which is used to indicate the occurring time of the symptom, should be written before the symptom name “头晕” (dizziness) rather than in between the body location and the sensation.Furthermore, technically, words used in the symptom names of TCM should have different distributions from other words that are used outside of symptom names (see Fig. 1as an example). Therefore, it is appropriate to treat SNR in the chief complaints as a sequence labeling problem; the characteristics described above should facilitate the completion of SNR by the sequence classifiers.The commonly-used sequence labeling strategy for NER in general text or in English discharge summaries of Western medicine is to label each word (defined as a “labeling unit”) in each sentence (defined as a “labeled sequence”) with a predefined tag that is used to indicate the role of the labeling unit, e.g. that it is a beginning, an intermediate, or an outside part of the named entity, usually symbolized by “B”, “I”, and “O” respectively [30]. However, chief complaints in TCM FCRs have domain characteristics [13]. The general sequence labeling strategy might need an adaptation for SNR in chief complaints. Therefore, in this section, we describe the adaptation of general sequence labeling strategy, based on several empirical reasons.Generally, labeling units are words in the text [30]. However, there are no natural whitespaces between Chinese words in general text, including chief complaints. First, a Chinese word segmentation task should be completed before recognizing symptom names in the chief complaints based on sequence labeling [12]. Unfortunately, the Chinese word segmentation methods designed for general text will not work effectively for segmenting the chief complaints into words due to the distinctive characteristics of the chief complaints [13]. Thankfully, Chinese is different from Western languages in that its characters can bear specific meanings. Therefore, in this paper, we change the labeling units from Chinese words to Chinese characters in the chief complaints.The chief complaints in FCRs of TCM are documented by TCM doctors during their routine diagnostic work through Physician Visit procedures. In order to improve work efficiency, TCM doctors directly note the physical conditions described by patients without organizing the content and rewriting the text, which loses contextual coherence. For example, a more coherent description of the physical conditions “昨日肠鸣, 失气多, 心中不适” (Yesterday, the patient had borborygmus and more flatulence, and his/her heart was uncomfortable) may described by different patients in different incoherent forms, such as “昨日肠鸣, 心中不适, 失气多” (Yesterday, the patient had borborygmus, his/her heart was uncomfortable, and the patient had more flatulence) or “肠鸣, 心中不适, 失气多 (昨天)” (The patient had borborygmus, his/her heart was uncomfortable, and the patient had more flatulence (all these symptoms appeared yesterday)). They would be recorded by TCM doctors directly in the chief complaints section of the record.Moreover, various kinds of punctuations can appear in chief complaints, and they are used by TCM doctors without any standard criteria. For instance, TCM doctors may like to use a comma instead of all other punctuations (e.g. the period, which is used to divide natural sentences) for convenience. The result is that several natural sentences in chief complaints are combined into one. Taking the chief complaint “昨日肠鸣, 失气多, 心中不适, 早晨大便提早, 头昏.” (Yesterday, the patient had borborygmus, his/her heart was uncomfortable, and had more flatulence. This morning, the patient had a bowel movement earlier than before and felt dizziness.) as an example, it should be two natural sentences “昨日肠鸣, 失气多, 心中不适.” (Yesterday, the patient had borborygmus, his/her heart was uncomfortable, and had more flatulence.) and “早晨大便提早, 头昏.” (This morning, the patient had a bowel movement earlier than before and felt dizziness.), but the period, which is used to represent the end of a sentence, is replaced by a comma.For these reasons, general labeled sequences (sentences in the text) need a domain-specific adaption. We define clauses in the chief complaints as the labeled sequences instead of the sentences. The clauses in this paper are groups of sequential Chinese characters separated by commas in the chief complaints. For example, a chief complaint “昨日肠鸣, 心中不适, 失气多” (Yesterday, the patient had borborygmus and more flatulence, and his/her heart was uncomfortable) will be divided into three clauses “昨日肠鸣” (the patient had borborygmus), “心中不适” (his/her heart was uncomfortable), and “失气多” (the patient had more flatulence). This adaptation would bring about two advantages:(1)Clauses in chief complaints as labeled sequences keep the internal coherence of every clause and, at the same time, reduce the possibility of incoherent sentences occurring.Defining the clauses as labeled sequences is similar to empirical feature selection. It reduces the number of noisy features extracted from the disorganized context in the chief complaints.The predefined tag set is usually {“B”, “I”, “O”}, denoted as BIO. However, according to the results reported in [29], the end of symptom names in the chief complaints is more difficult to identify. Therefore, we consider defining a specific tag, e.g. “E”, to individually identify the end of the symptom names in order to improve sequence labeling performance. Thus the predefined tag set is adapted to {“B”, “I”, “E”, “O”}, denoted as BIEO.Referring to the introduced domain-specific adaptation to general sequence labeling strategy, SNR in chief complaints can be naturally defined as follows:Given a clause x=x1,x2,…,xnin a chief complaint, the goal is to construct a sequence classifier to accurately label each xi, which is the ith Chinese character in x, with the most reliable predefined tag yi, where yiis one of the elements in BIEO. Accordingly, the most reliable tag sequenceyˆ=yˆ1,yˆ2,…,yˆngiven x would be:(1)yˆ=arg maxyP(y|x)This problem can be effectively solved by the supervised sequence classifiers.In Section 2, SNR in the chief complaints is reasonably treated as a sequence labeling problem and, at the same time, a new sequence labeling strategy that is adapted from the general sequence labeling strategy based on several empirical reasons is proposed for the SNR task. To complete the SNR task, supervised sequence classifiers are employed. Different sequence classifiers have their own specialties. In this section, we aim to compare three typically supervised sequence classifiers (HMM, MEMM, and CRF) and introduce them to the SNR task.HMM is a statistical structure with stochastic state transitions (e.g. a transition from a hidden state to another hidden state, where the hidden states refer to the corresponding predefined tags of the labeling units in the SNR task) and observation generation processes (e.g. an observed Chinese character “气” (pneuma) in the clause “失气多” could be generated from a hidden state “I”). HMM can be flexibly used to solve sequence labeling task [31]. According to the definition of HMM, Eq. (1) can be modified to:(2)yˆ=argmaxyP(y0)∏i=1n+1P(yi|yi-1)∏i=1nP(xi|yi)where y0 and yn+1 refer to a default start tag “START” and a default end tag “STOP” respectively, P(y0) equals to 1, P(yi|yi−1) represents the state transition probability, and P(xi|yi) is the observation generation probability. The state transition probabilities and the observation generation probabilities can be estimated through the Maximum Likelihood method based on a training dataset. And thenyˆcan be efficiently predicted by using the Viterbi algorithm based on the estimated state transition probabilities and observation generation probabilities [31].HMM models SNR in the chief complaints as a probabilistic generative process in which the Chinese characters in the chief complaints are sequentially generated by their corresponding hidden tags. However, considering the SNR task from the perspective of simulating the human labeling process, the corresponding tag of an observed Chinese character is determined by a human labeler through by observing the chief complaint, finding and analyzing the evidence that can help the labeler to judge which predefined tag is the best choice of a current Chinese character, and then labeling it with the best tag. In other words, there many useful features (e.g. the evidence mentioned previously) can be utilized to help the sequence classifiers to complete the SNR task. Unfortunately, generative models (e.g. HMM) are known to be unable to conveniently incorporate additional features, whereas discriminative models are known to have an advantage in this respect. Therefore, the typical discriminative sequence classifier MEMM [32] is investigated. It is an extension of HMM in which the state transition probability and the observation generation probability in HMM are replaced by a single discriminative probability P(yi|x,yi−1). This discriminative probability allows MEMM to conveniently incorporate additional features into the sequence labeling procedure.Mathematically, P(yi|x,yi−1) is a conditional probability of current tag yigiven its previous tag yi−1 and the observed Chinese characters in x. Then, Eq. (1) can be redefined as:(3)yˆ=argmaxy∏i=1nexp∑j=1Nωjfj(x,yi-1)∑yi=tBIEOexp∑j=1Nωjfj(x,yi-1)where y0 refers to a default start tag “START” of every labeled sequence, n is the length of x, ωjis the weighting parameter of the feature fj(x,yi−1), j∊[1,…,N], and N represents the number of features incorporated. The features are fetched from x and the previous tag yi−1 of yi, and yiis the potential corresponding tag of xi. In Eq. (3), t is one of the predefined tags chosen from BIEO.The key to MEMM is to learn the weighting parameter ωjfor each feature. This can be efficiently solved using quasi-Newtonian methods, such as L-BFGS, gradient descent, conjugate gradient descent, and various iterative scaling algorithms [33]. In this paper, L-BFGS [34] is employed. Finally,yˆcan also be predicted by using the Viterbi algorithm efficiently based on the learned weighting parameters [31].Compared to HMM, MEMM has an advantage in incorporating useful features into the sequence labeling procedure. However, MEMM suffers from the label bias problem [35]. This problem is serious if the hidden states have a small number of possible outgoing transitions. In other words, the hidden states would like to make light of their corresponding observations when they have low-entropy next-state distributions [35]. As shown in Fig. 2, SNR in the chief complaints by MEMM is, unfortunately, a victim of the label bias problem. In order to cope with the label bias problem in MEMM, we employ CRF [35] which is an undirected graphical model. To avoid the label bias problem, CRF represents the conditional distribution over yglobally conditioned on x. Therefore, Eq. (1) can be modified to:(4)yˆ=arg maxyexp∑i=1n∑k=1Kλkfk(yi-1,yi,yi+1,x,i)∑TSexp∑i=1n∑k=1Kλkfk(yi-1,yi,yi+1,x,i)where fkis an indicator feature function, k∊[1,K], and K is the number of global features. Moreover,λkis a weighting parameter of fkthat would be learned based on a training dataset. TS is the number of all possible tag sequences. In this paper, CRF is implemented by the CRF++ tool [36] for estimating the weights, and the default settings are used.Commonly used features are words and other higher level syntactic features. However, in Section 2 we show that splitting the chief complaints into Chinese words, let alone extracting the higher level syntactic features form the chief complaints, is not a trivial task due to the distinctive characteristics of the chief complaints [13]. Therefore, referring to [29], two types of empirical features are utilized in this paper and explained below.Contextual words are the obvious and informative features that can be utilized by MEMM and CRF for SNR in the chief complaints. However, as previously noted, splitting the chief complaints into Chinese words is not trivial. Fortunately, Chinese characters bear specific meanings and are viable alternatives to Chinese words as the features. Furthermore, because the content of the chief complaints recorded by TCM doctors is concise [13] and the average length of Chinese words approximates 2 [37], Chinese character unigrams, bigrams, and trigrams cover most of the meaningful words and some other useful features in the chief complaints, e.g. the prefixes and the suffixes of symptom names, etc. Therefore, we choose Chinese character unigrams, bigrams, and trigrams as the features used by MEMM and CRF in this paper, and they are denoted by the symbols “U”, “B”, and “T” respectively.Empirically, TCM doctors prefer initially to record background information about the patients’ symptoms, e.g. the temporal information, and then note the patients’ symptom information concisely. This means that symptom names are not likely to appear at the beginning of the sentences in the chief complaints. Instead, they appear more frequently at the beginning of the subsequent clauses in the sentences. For example, the chief complaint “昨日肠鸣, 失气多, 心中不适.” (Yesterday, the patient had borborygmus and more flatulence, and his/her heart was uncomfortable) starts with a temporal background description (i.e. “昨日” (yesterday)), and then the following clauses in this chief complaint all start with the symptom names, i.e. “失气多” (more flatulence) and “心中不适” (his/her heart was uncomfortable). Therefore, the positions of the Chinese characters in the chief complaints are useful features for the SNR task. In this paper, the position features are represented as “[SubSID-PosID]”, where “SubSID” is the index of current clause in a chief complaint and “PosID” indicates the position of current Chinese character in the clause SubSID.To evaluate the feasibility of the adapted sequence labeling strategy and the performance of the introduced sequence classifiers for SNR in the chief complaints, two groups of evaluation metrics are employed. The first group is symptom name recognition precision (Prec), recall (Rrec), and F-Measure (FMrec). The second group is labeling precision (Plab), recall (Rlab), and F-Measure (FMlab) of each predefined tag.Prec,Rrec, and FMrec are used to comprehensively assess the feasibility of the sequence labeling strategy with a domain-specific adaptation and appraise the performance of HMM, MEMM and CRF for the SNR task. They are formulated as follows.(5)Prec=|NSRC||NSR|(6)Rrec=|NSRC||NS|(7)FMrec=2·Prec·RrecPrec+Rrecwhere |NSRC| is the number of symptom names recognized correctly, |NSR| is the number of symptom names recognized, and |NS| is the number of symptom names in the test dataset. A symptom name is correctly recognized, if and only if its beginning, intermediate and end positions are all accurately labeled.Plab,Rlab, and FMlab are designed for validating the feasibility of the sequence labeling strategy with a domain-specific adaptation and evaluating the performance of HMM, MEMM and CRF for the SNR task in detail. They are defined below.(8)Plab=|NCLC||NCL|(9)Rlab=|NCL||NC|(10)FMlab=2·Plab·RlabPlab+Rlabwhere |NCLC| represents the number of Chinese characters in the test dataset that are correctly labeled with their corresponding tags, |NCL| is the number of Chinese characters labeled, and |NC| is the number of Chinese characters that should be labeled.The gold standard experimental dataset of the chief complaints used in our experiments is from a TCM clinical record dataset, which was collected by TCM doctors during their routine diagnostic work from April 2006 to June 2008. The dataset contains 11,613 clinical records; an excerpt is shown in Fig. 3. The gold standard experimental dataset is constructed through following steps:(1)Two TCM experts are invited to independently annotate symptom names mentioned in the chief complaints according to an annotation guideline, which was developed jointly by the two annotators and the authors in advance (the detailed information of the annotation guideline is described in Appendix 1). The Inter-Annotator Agreement [38] on the annotating results reaches 0.84. This value lies in “the almost perfect agreement interval” [39] or in “the excellent agreement interval” [40].In our experiments, only the symptom names agreed on by both annotators are treated as the gold standard symptom names. The Chinese characters in these symptom names are labeled with the predefined tags “B”, “I” and “E” when validating our method or “B” and “I” when performing comparative experiments. Incompatible symptom names in the annotating results are viewed in the same way as other general descriptions, and their corresponding Chinese characters are labeled with the predefined tag “O”.For convenience, a further process is performed on the gold standard experimental dataset. Every number, e.g. integers, decimals, and fractions, etc., in the dataset is uniformly replaced by an English character “N”. Moreover, the punctuations are all replaced by the English character “P”. These “N”s and “P”s will be all labeled with the predefined tag “O”.Finally, the gold standard experimental dataset is randomly divided into two parts. One contains 3483 chief complaints (about 30% of the original dataset), which is to be treated as the training dataset. The remaining 8130 chief complaints form the test dataset. Detailed information of the training and test datasets is listed in Table 1.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
SNR in chief complaints is an essential and fundamental task for exploiting the content of FCRs of TCM, discovering valuable clinical knowledge of TCM, and constructing clinical expert systems for TCM. It provides an opportunity to effectively and efficiently make use of an abundant clinical knowledge source – FCRs of TCM – and, consequently, further assist TCM modernization. In this paper, SNR in chief complaints is reasonably treated as a sequence labeling problem. According to the domain-specific characteristics of FCRs of TCM, the general sequence labeling strategy is appropriately adapted for the SNR task for several empirical reasons. Moreover, three typically supervised classifiers are investigated, and their specializations for the SNR task are interpreted carefully. A series of elaborate experiments were performed. The results demonstrate that the domain-specific adaptation of sequence labeling strategies is appropriate and effective, and that CRF outperforms HMM and MEMM for the SNR task.