@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Reuse of termino-ontological resources and text corpora for building a multilingual domain ontology: An application to Alzheimer’s disease

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Method which exploits corpora and existing ontological resources for ontology construction.Used for building a bilingual ontology dedicated to Alzheimer’s disease.Ontology enriched by integrating new entities through a parallel corpus and syntactic dependencies.The resulting ontology was validated by domain experts.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Ontology development,Alzheimer’s disease,Ontological resource reuse,Term alignment,Parallel corpus,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Ontologies are useful tools for sharing and exchanging knowledge. However ontology construction is complex and often time consuming. In this paper, we present a method for building a bilingual domain ontology from textual and termino-ontological resources intended for semantic annotation and information retrieval of textual documents. This method combines two approaches: ontology learning from texts and the reuse of existing terminological resources. It consists of four steps: (i) term extraction from domain specific corpora (in French and English) using textual analysis tools, (ii) clustering of terms into concepts organized according to the UMLS Metathesaurus, (iii) ontology enrichment through the alignment of French and English terms using parallel corpora and the integration of new concepts, (iv) refinement and validation of results by domain experts. These validated results are formalized into a domain ontology dedicated to Alzheimer’s disease and related syndromes which is available online (http://lesim.isped.u-bordeaux2.fr/SemBiP/ressources/ontoAD.owl). The latter currently includes 5765 concepts linked by 7499 taxonomic relationships and 10,889 non-taxonomic relationships. Among these results, 439 concepts absent from the UMLS were created and 608 new synonymous French terms were added. The proposed method is sufficiently flexible to be applied to other domains.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Among the many challenges that Public Health is faced with, Alzheimer’s disease and related disorders appear as one key issue. In France, the number of people suffering from Alzheimer’s disease is estimated at 860,000. Every year, 220,000 new cases are identified in this country. Nearly 350,000 people benefit from care for the long-term complaint of Alzheimer’s-type illness and related disorders. The French Alzheimer’s Plan has been launched in this context. The 2008–2012 Plan included 44 measures related to three main objectives: (i) improving the quality of life for patients and caregivers, (ii) knowing how to act better and (iii) raising awareness around the social issue. Among these measures, number 32 in particular addresses the training in clinical epidemiology.1http://www.plan-alzheimer.gouv.fr/measure-no32.html.1More practically, the aims are to improve the quality of medical practice by educating practitioners in clinical epidemiology and evidence-based medicine and to increase the number of medical practitioners capable of participating in clinical investigation and taking part in research protocols. To develop research and to involve a larger number of physicians either in including patients in protocols or conducting studies, they must be offered training using different incentives from those of observational medicine, reading the medical literature critically and analyzing the variability of practice.Conversely, rapid and efficient decision making is a crucial issue in the public health domain and especially in the Alzheimer’s disease domain. Decision-makers should refer to various experts’ opinions as they cannot screen themselves all the scientific facts reported in different sources including online scientific literature and results of clinical trials.Within this framework, the BiblioDem Digital Library (referred as BiblioDem in this paper)2http://www.isped.u-bordeaux2.fr/CDD/FR_HTML_BIBLIONET.aspx.2was launched in January 2004. It provides a critical review of scientific papers dealing with Alzheimer’s disease and related diseases coming from reference journals in the topic. Thus, it is an expert review (written in French) of Alzheimer’s disease related international literature. A bibliographic foresight is manually performed by a librarian and the BiblioDem advisory board selects between 30 to 50 papers among the average 1000 retrieved each month. A critical analysis of each selected article is then carried out by a domain research expert. All the papers which have been reviewed are integrated into an online bibliographic database, BiblioDem. Note that the papers which are too theoretical are discarded because the main objective is to help daily practice of healthcare workers and caregivers. Finally, the 15 most relevant and original papers are included in a monthly newsletter, called BiblioDémences.BiblioDem currently contains over 1500 documents, each of them being recorded with the title, the abstract, the critical analysis in French, and the name of the expert who carried out the analysis. The search engine associated with BiblioDem remains simple as only an exact match is performed: papers are retrieved only if the term(s) constituting the query is (are) present as such in the title and/or abstract of papers. Moreover, the variety of users and their level of expertise are not taken into account. The users may be medical students, research scientists, clinical investigators, general practitioners, administrative people from the French Department of Health, experts from the French National Authority for Health and neophytes (including caregivers). These users have different access preferences to BiblioDem.The Semantic BiblioDem Portal (SemBiP) was proposed in this context. It aims at addressing the above mentioned limitation by delivering a semantic portal which provides advanced features for improving decision making in Alzheimer’s disease and related disorders. More precisely, the main objective of SemBiP is to provide semantic web-based technologies enabling users to easily find papers in BiblioDem with the corresponding critical reports according to their needs and to access to educational content.The SemBiP project is designed to offer a semantic access to scientific resources on Alzheimer’s disease and related disorders. Its objectives are: (i) providing a multilingual (English and French, at first) knowledge resource dedicated to the description of Alzheimer’s disease and related diseases supporting both content indexing and educational purpose. The evolution of this vocabulary has to be managed; (ii) providing a semantic portal enabling semantic search and browsing of approved available evidence about Alzheimer’s disease and related disorders; (iii) taking into account the specificity and variety of users. According to the user profile, adapted search functionalities should be offered; (iv) allowing multilingual access of both the original abstract (and the full paper if freely available) and their critical analysis in order to improve decision making. The multilingual aspects are very important for supporting both indexing and cross-lingual information retrieval in the portal.The aforementioned objectives will be achieved by respecting a set of requirements that SemBiP must fulfill in order to efficiently serve its purpose. The main requirement to ensure added-value for BiblioDem as described previously is the availability of an Alzheimer’s disease (and related illnesses) knowledge resource. This knowledge will serve as the backbone for semantic indexing, searching and resource browsing. It should hold synonymous terms in French and English, which have to be clustered into concepts. Taxonomic3In this paper, we use the term “taxonomic” to denote the subsumption relation.3and non-taxonomic relations4The term “relation” is used for the relation name and relationship to denote the triple using that relation to relate concepts.4should be defined between concepts. These characteristics are necessary for efficient medical resource annotation and semantic information retrieval [1]. Building this knowledge resource is the object of the present paper.Although many terminologies and ontological resources have been developed in the biomedical domain [2], there is still a need to cover emerging subdomains such as Alzheimer’s disease of which domain knowledge is regularly enriched. Therefore, modeling relevant knowledge about the domain is an important issue for a better understanding of the disease and a better support for patients. The focus of this paper is the reuse of existing knowledge resources and the exploitation of parallel corpora for building a bilingual domain ontology of Alzheimer’s disease.The proposed approach is based on representative and domain specific corpora and reuses a wide specialized resource (UMLS) to assist the task of structuring knowledge. Concretely, it uses NLP tools to identify candidate terms from texts. The conceptualization process is based on the UMLS and consists of clustering these terms into concepts and organizing them through semantic relations. In addition, since we exploit a particularly abundant resource (UMLS), we used its Semantic Network (extraction of semantic types), specific non-taxonomic relations of the Metathesaurus to structure the concepts better. The resulting ontology is then enriched semi-automatically with new relevant terms absent from the UMLS, concepts and relationships using syntactic dependencies.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
