@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Developing the FARSEEING Taxonomy of Technologies: Classification and description of technology use (including ICT) in falls prevention studies

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A classification system, using a common language, has been developed.The online tool ensures consistency in describing and reporting studies.The classification system can be modified to accommodate technological development.The taxonomy will continue to develop iteratively through feedback from users.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Technology,ICT,Falls,Detection,Prediction,Prevention,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundRecent Cochrane reviews on falls and fall prevention have shown that it is possible to prevent falls in older adults living in the community and in care facilities. Technologies aimed at fall detection, assessment, prediction and prevention are emerging, yet there has been no consistency in describing or reporting on interventions using technologies. With the growth of eHealth and data driven interventions, a common language and classification is required.ObjectiveThe FARSEEING Taxonomy of Technologies was developed as a tool for those in the field of biomedical informatics to classify and characterise components of studies and interventions.MethodsThe Taxonomy Development Group (TDG) comprised experts from across Europe. Through face-to-face meetings and contributions via email, five domains were developed, modified and agreed: Approach; Base; Components of outcome measures; Descriptors of technologies; and Evaluation. Each domain included sub-domains and categories with accompanying definitions. The classification system was tested against published papers and further amendments undertaken, including development of an online tool. Six papers were classified by the TDG with levels of consensus recorded.ResultsTesting the taxonomy with papers highlighted difficulties in definitions across international healthcare systems, together with differences of TDG members’ backgrounds. Definitions were clarified and amended accordingly, but some difficulties remained. The taxonomy and manual were large documents leading to a lengthy classification process. The development of the online application enabled a much simpler classification process, as categories and definitions appeared only when relevant. Overall consensus for the classified papers was 70.66%. Consensus scores increased as modifications were made to the taxonomy.ConclusionThe FARSEEING Taxonomy of Technologies presents a common language, which should now be adopted in the field of biomedical informatics. In developing the taxonomy as an online tool, it has become possible to continue to develop and modify the classification system to incorporate new technologies and interventions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Healthy independent living is a key aim for ageing populations. Improving or maintaining levels of physical activity, function and independence, as well as the prevention of falls and fall related injuries, are two key factors to promote this aim. Falls are a leading cause of injury, immobility and premature residential and nursing home admission, and an important public health issue. Falls occur in 30–60% of older adults each year and rates rise steadily with age [1,2]. High incidence is seen among those in long-term care institutions [3]. Some 10–20% of these result in serious injury, hospitalisation or death [4]. In about 1% of the patients who fall, a femur fracture occurs [5] which is the most common serious injury related to falls and is associated with substantial mortality, morbidity, and economic costs [6].Falls in older adults have multiple causes. Intrinsic risk factors include a history of falls, advanced age, impaired mobility and gait, medical diseases, medication, sedentary behaviour, fear of falling, visual impairments, foot problems, nutritional deficiencies and impaired cognition. Extrinsic risk factors include environmental hazards (like poor lighting, slippery floors and uneven surfaces), footwear and clothing, and inappropriate walking aids or assistive devices [7]. Meta‐regression analysis of the predisposing risk factors has shown that gait difficulties, muscular weakness and an impaired standing balance are the most prevalent risk factors for fall [8].Cochrane reviews on falls and fall prevention have shown that it is possible to prevent falls significantly in older people both living in the community [9] as well as in care facilities and hospitals [3]. However, a comprehensive approach mixing strategies according to the ‘integrated care concept’ [10], targeting those at high risk of falling and population‐based policies has been identified as both lacking and essential to tackle this population‐wide problem [11,12].Over recent years a number of technologies, including Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs), have emerged aimed at fall detection (including personal alarms for use in case of fall), fall assessment, fall prediction and fall prevention. The fields of falls prevention and biomedical informatics have become closely aligned. The use of body worn inertial sensors has been found to be a promising approach to fall risk assessment [13], in particular when combined with further fall risk factors (e.g. visual impairment, peripheral neuropathy) [14] or the walking environment where physical activities are performed. There is a range of ICT based approaches with wearable or ambient devices that have been applied to automatic fall monitoring and alarm systems [15,16], as well as being used to assess fall characteristics (e.g. velocity and force characteristics) and to build predictive models of fall risk [17–19]. ICTs are also used in exercise interventions (e.g. exercise games or “exergames”), such as those that provide strength and balance training to older adults. Such exergames are seen as a promising potential way to provide a fun and motivating interactive training environment for older adults in the future, helping to increase their adherence while training both cognitive and motor skills [20–22]. Furthermore, wearable motion sensor data are used for valid information about physical performance [23], a better understanding of falls [17] and real-world physical activities [24] in the context of activity promotion and fall-prevention [25]. Interconnected (mobile) devices such as smartphones and tablets may make these applications easily accessible for end-users: including people at risk, carers and researchers.All these examples underline the relevance and potential of technologies in this field. Terms such as eHealth, digital health, mobile health and mHealth are becoming common parlance. As technology use in the health field increases, data from devices will play an important role in fall prevention strategies; our strategies will be data driven. However, the fast growing literature in this emerging research area lacks appropriate documentation with consistent descriptions to enable the identification of goals, research designs, settings, and influential components including the used technologies or ICTs. The Cochrane review on smart home technologies [26] recommends a need for “International consistency in describing and reporting on technology-enabled interventions … this could enhance the design, delivery, implementation and dissemination of research projects and … quality and accessibility of the evidence base”. Previous classification approaches have not included ICTs [27], or were very specific in terms of focussing on single technologies [28].The “FAll Repository for the design of Smart and sElf-adaptive Environments prolonging INdependent livinG (FARSEEING)” project (www.farseeingresearch.eu) was an EC FP7 funded research project on health promotion, fall prevention and technical development. One element of this project was the development of a taxonomy as a classification system to characterise the major influential components of studies with ICTs in the field of fall prevention, which would be useful for researchers, clinicians and technologists. In common with the previous work on a taxonomy for fall-prevention interventions [27] we wished to encourage investigators to report all studies on the development, the use, and the uptake of technologies in the field of fall-prevention and mobility promotion in a standardised and comprehensive manner, and to produce a taxonomy that could be used to classify existing and future interventions across international boundaries.Here, we report the process of development, involving repeated testing and refinement, from the initial stages of design through to the final version of the taxonomy (online FARSEEING Taxonomy V1.0). In the methods section, we present the development of the taxonomy in two stages. In the results section, we report the outcomes from testing the final version of the taxonomy through the evaluation of five selected studies on use of technology for falls prevention.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper reports on the process of developing the FARSEEING Taxonomy and the difficulties encountered by the expert panel TDG. The improvements made to the taxonomy throughout the process led to the development of the online tool, which is active and available to researchers, clinicians and technologists. As more people access and apply the taxonomy to their studies, we will receive feedback that will enable us to develop and improve the taxonomy through an iterative process. The TDG will reconvene in 2016 to review and update the FARSEEING Taxonomy.What was already known on the topic•Technologies aimed at fall detection, assessment, prediction and prevention are emerging.•There are difficulties in comparing the efficacy of studies due to a lack of consistency in the language used.•A common language and classification system is required for describing and reporting studies using technologies.What this study has added to our knowledge•Studies using technologies can be classified using a common language.•The pace of technological development requires a classification system that can be modified and expanded.•The FARSEEING Taxonomy of Technologies online classification system presents an accessible tool for ensuring consistency in describing and reporting studies using technologies.The authors declare that they have no proprietary, financial, professional, or other personal competing interests of any nature or kind.EB wrote the first draft of the paper with input from KP and CT for the introduction; HHH, AH, SM and AB for the methods and results; FC for the online application; BV, AC and NG for the discussion. All subsequent drafts were prepared by EB. EB and HHH managed the development of the different versions of the taxonomy and the handbook. All authors critically revised the paper for publication.