@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
R.A.P.I.D. (Root Aggregated Prioritized Information Display): A single screen display for efficient digital triaging of medical reports

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Invariant single screen EHR visual display.All data within data sets of all sizes represented on a single screen.Data physically partitioned-critical or non-critical for prompt response or work triage.One screen representation of all reports from all EHR systems with interface.Data mining enabled.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data display,Patient safety,Intuitive design,Critical result sign-off,Work triage,Button array,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveThe timely acknowledgement of critical patient clinical reports is vital for the delivery of safe patient care. With current EHR systems, critical reports reside on different screens. This leads to treatment delays and inefficient work flows. As a remedy, the R.A.P.I.D. (Root Aggregated Prioritized Information Display) system represents all data on a single screen, and its simple and intuitive “button” array structure allows triaged sign-off/sign-out of critical and non-critical reports.Materials and methodsWith 100 hematology and chemistry reports from each of two EHR systems Meditech (Westwood, MA) and Orchard Labs, Inc. (Carmel, IN), we generated files of the reports in their individual standard display formats (enhanced Meditech-EM and enhanced Orchard-EO). We also displayed the same 200 reports in the R.A.P.I.D. format. We then conducted a randomized trial to compare the time and accuracy of acknowledgement of critical and non-critical results.ResultsThe sign-off times for reviewing the results for physician and non-physician providers, respectively, in seconds (with 95% confidence intervals) were for EM 1.78 (1.40–2.26) and 1.99 (1.72–2.30), for EO 2.69 (2.12–3.42) and 2.78 (2.40–3.21), and for R.A.P.I.D. 0.83 (0.70–0.98) and 1.58 (1.43–1.76). Non-physician providers reassigned system-defined non-critical results as critical with a frequency of 15.2% for EM, 18.4% for EO, and 7.83% for R.A.P.I.D., and critical results as non-critical with a frequency of 14.7%, 5.6%, and 5.8% respectively.DiscussionThe new display system was superior to two standard EHR systems that were significantly enhanced by first collecting the reports from their usual distributed locations and then by creating for each of the two standard EHRs a single file of reports for acknowledgement.ConclusionsFrom a single screen display of all reports, the new display system enables timely acknowledgement of critical reports for patient safety and non-critical report triage for improved provider work flows.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Many Electronic Health Records (EHR) systems have structures that require complex navigation and work flows. The inevitable consequence is that providers are now burdened in delivering timely patient care [1–4]. A $17billion British health-service information-technology upgrade was terminated after $9.9billion in expenditures, because the program was “not fit to provide the modern information-technology services” needed by the country’s healthcare system; the article further noted that information technology systems are sometimes designed without “enough input from doctors and nurses who [then] rebel against the product” [5].Communication of what one provider considers important needs to be understood by other individuals involved in the care of mutual patients. Recent articles suggest that the EHR should improve communication between nurse practitioner and primary care physicians [6,7]. This problem of communication might be eased if the EHR display facilitated the digital triage of work flow, as in report sign-off/sign-out. By “signing off” we mean the acknowledgement of a result. By “signing out” we mean the transfer of the task of acknowledgement to someone else.However, there are a number of barriers to improving EHR performance. Currently, fully deployed EHR systems are generally not compatible with each other. At present no standard mechanism exists to test the structural re-design of fully deployed EHR systems. The serious concerns about potential compromise to patient data confidentiality further burden any effort at EHR redesign.We determined as practitioners (JF, EA) the aspect where current EHR performance most lagged our current EHR need. We chose the development of a single screen display that could show all the data from a medical practice and highlight the critical data. Vital to optimal care delivery is the prompt acknowledgement of and response to critical reports. The notion of critical reports is well established and is a feature of current EHR systems, including the EHR systems in this study [8–12]. If a display could be developed that physically separates reports with critical results from those with non-critical results, the display could become the basis for a rational scheme for work triage.Also, we structured the investigation to test if the provider always agreed with the EHR system-defined critical/non-critical designations. If providers frequently reassign results that the EHR designated critical as non-critical, and non-critical as critical, then the display design should have the capability, beyond that of acknowledging system-defined critical results, to allow the provider to set critical ranges and mine the patient data.We wanted to create a standalone display system that relies only on an interface, agnostic to software language of EHR of report origin, to work easily with all existing EHR systems.Finally, we decided that an initial off-line test of such a display system would provide important answers as to whether the effort to conduct a full-scale implementation of the display system would be justified.The goal of the present work is to improve the cognitive ergonomics for health care providers. The widespread adoption of EHRs presents the provider with an ever escalating cognitive load from the ever increasing volume of archived patient data. An improved EHR may help lighten this cognitive load. The starting point of this work was the observation that optimal data visualization compared to tabular displays improves access to data and improves patient care delivery [13,14].Edward Tufte in his classic study of the history of graphic displays in print format stated that “graphical excellence is that which gives the viewer the greatest number of ideas in the shortest time with the least ink in the smallest space” [15]. With Tufte’s perspective as background there have been many visual display systems implemented, often in the monitoring of health care and often for use as heuristic tools. Scatter plots have been used in a visual display to monitor changes in multiple patients for a small number of characteristics over time [16]. With a hierarchical tree or tree map design a display has been used to monitor the quality of health care delivery [17,18]. Another data display system with tree map-based icons uses clustering to detect common features among a heterogeneous population to define more precisely different groups of patients [19]. Spider plots have been used with individual patient data in the ICU against the historical patient data of many patients and many parameters to predict outcome [20]. A bubble chart design has been used to follow the quality of care adherence for colorectal cancer patients [21]. One limitation of these designs for use by practitioners in health care delivery is that only a limited number of parameters can be tracked (e.g. x-axis, y-axis, bubble size, and colour of bubble). This limitation exists also for data displays using histograms and contour maps [22].A recent comprehensive review of EHR data visualization identified several challenges to be overcome for optimal data visualization and health care delivery [23]. These challenges include: clutter-resulting from the size and complexity of the data, the difficulty of presenting a great deal of data on a single screen and compliance, the time it takes practitioners to learn to navigate a display system in an unfamiliar display format [23]. A successful display format for health care delivery must meet the twin challenges of embracing data complexity while resisting display complexity.The design simplicity of the dashboard may allow for these twin challenges to be met. A clinical dashboard “enables easy access to multiple sources of data being captured locally, in a visual, concise and usable format” [24]. To this point most medical dashboards have been used much more in patient care monitoring rather than in the improvement of the real time delivery of patient care. A recent review of the use of dashboards to improve medical care found 543 citations [25]. Of these citations, only 11 full reports had data on the use of dashboards to improve medical care. Among the 11 reports only 1 report was assessed to be of high quality [26]. The high quality report used colour-coding to track level of compliance in real time with a patient management protocol.For the present study the novel display design had to meet the requirement for the provider to handle correctly and in real time a huge volume of patient results. The display needed to provide the provider a “vectored alert” to the fraction of those results that are critical and require immediate provider acknowledgement.New display design approaches may help providers manage the novel challenges in data acknowledgement posed by the computerized EHR. To that end Wickens et al. proposed thirteen principles of display design for best human–computer interaction [27]. These principles are: (1) legible displays, (2) avoid single variable (rather a dynamic range/analog display), (3) top down processing (familiar/constant format), (4) redundancy gain (present data more than once), (5) similarity causes confusion-use clearly distinct elements, (6) pictorial realism (make display look like variable that it represents), (7) principle of the moving part (moving design features should move as the measured element moves), (8) minimizing information access cost (convenient to use), (9) proximity compatibility principle (related items near each other but avoid clutter), (10) principle of multiple resources (different sensory input, as audio and visual), (11) replace memory with visual information: knowledge in the world (calibrate the need for background information on the basis of the user’s subject familiarity), (12) principle of predictive aiding (including information about possible implications of data), and (13) principle of consistency (invariant design).Using the principles of Wickens et al., with the goal of improving patient care delivery as well as optimizing health care resource utilization, we created a novel data visualization dashboard design that “minimizes access cost” (principle 8) and minimizes the number of clicks. The design adheres to the principle of “multiple resources” (principle 10) in displaying reports from different EHR systems in their original format but representing them in the invariant novel display. Adhering to the principle of “predictive aiding” (principle 12) critical and non-critical reports are separate in the display. The novel display design is invariant and thus consistent with principle of consistency (principle 13).As mentioned before, the current data visualization designs share a common feature. With increasing data these designs become increasingly complex. This aspect of these designs violates Wickens et al. principles (9) avoiding clutter and (13) having an invariant design. We chose, instead, a display of absolutely invariant design. An invariant design allows an unlimited number of reports to be queued or stacked and the “above” view can still be intelligible. To minimize the hierarchical character of the data structure and the resultant time required for data discovery, we attempted to maximize the “active” surface of the display as a fraction of the total text on the screen. All reports in the data set are enumerated in “buttons” by data category. This structure enables each click of any “button” to the display the first and then progressively all subsequent and underlying reports in the queue (or stack).The current display partitions data into reports with non-critical reports represented on the circumference of the circle and reports with critical data partitioned and distributed around the outside of the circle. The display can be the basis for work triage. In the present case clinical reports with critical results that lie outside the circle are be dealt with immediately. The reports with non-critical results can be either dealt by the provider with at a later time or triaged to another member of the health care team. This display with its binary partition of reports is a model that can be applied in all other areas in health care where reports with critical results occur among a vast excess of reports with non-critical results. Areas such as compliance and accounting are examples.At present, a major problem in EHRs is the lack of compatibility across different EHR systems. The novel design with its invariant display represents all reports both those with critical and those with non-critical results on a single screen. This structure enables the single screen display of all the reports from one or many EHR systems regardless of the primary EHR software. The requirement for a robust two way interface to the different EHR systems is the only modification needed for its deployment. The novel display design represents all reports but displays the actual report in the format of the original EHR system.The current study is formative, and is limited to a test of laboratory data only. The value of the current display will be much clearer after it has undergone a real time test in a functioning EHR (see Section 5).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
