@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Recommendations for the design, implementation and evaluation of social support in online communities, networks, and groups

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Researchers should address the interaction of online and real-world social support.Online social support systems should include individuals’ existing social networks.Evaluation methods should be specific to online environments.Analyses should include interpersonal to community-wide outcome measures.General social support research approaches are useful in online support research.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Social support,Online community,Social networking,Consumer informatics,Cancer survivorship,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A new model of health care is emerging in which individuals can take charge of their health by connecting to online communities and social networks for personalized support and collective knowledge. Web 2.0 technologies expand the traditional notion of online support groups into a broad and evolving range of informational, emotional, as well as community-based concepts of support. In order to apply these technologies to patient-centered care, it is necessary to incorporate more inclusive conceptual frameworks of social support and community-based research methodologies. This paper introduces a conceptualization of online social support, reviews current challenges in online support research, and outlines six recommendations for the design, evaluation, and implementation of social support in online communities, networks, and groups. The six recommendations are illustrated by CanConnect, an online community for cancer survivors in middle Tennessee. These recommendations address the interdependencies between online and real-world support and emphasize an inclusive framework of interpersonal and community-based support. The applications of these six recommendations are illustrated through a discussion of online support for cancer survivors.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The field of biomedical informatics is undergoing a major transformation in the design of personal health information systems. Social networking technologies are changing the ways that individuals manage their interpersonal and community relationships throughout all aspects of their lives. A new model of health care is emerging in which individuals can take charge of their health by connecting to online communities for personalized support and collective knowledge [1,2]. These systems are social in nature and emphasize communication and collaboration among groups and individuals. The increasingly social functions of web-based technologies and their increasing use suggest that online social support for patients and families will be an essential component of a comprehensive approach to health care. However, in order to take advantage of this opportunity safely and effectively, biomedical informaticians must incorporate a more inclusive conceptual framework of social support and community-based research methodologies into the design of new systems to address the potential roles and impacts of social networking.No gold standard currently exists for the design of informatics-based social support interventions, although there have been some efforts at systematic description of studies [3–6]. Studies of existing health-related virtual communities and online support groups emphasize perceived social support as an outcome, but research has failed to demonstrate a consistent significant effect of these systems on measures of social support [7–10]. These results may be due to the use of evaluation tools that do not appropriately target the unique forms of support that occur in online environments [11,12]. The concept of social support is historically and operationally complex, with many different definitions and dimensions identified in the social science literature [13]. The seminal studies of online support in informatics research typically focused only on a more narrow definition of emotional and informational support [3,11,14]. Researchers must target the types of support that occur in the online intervention, and this may be broader than what traditionally has been measured.In light of the current trends towards patient-centered information systems, it is essential that informatics researchers and developers revisit the fundamental conceptualizations of online social support and how these concepts inform the design and evaluation of online support interventions. Coiera has called for a greater awareness of the social context for communication in online clinical communication systems [15,16]. The same awareness of social context is needed in the informatics systems designed for patients, their families, and their communities.Although not focusing specifically on health-related support groups, Kraut and his colleagues have been advocates in using social psychological theories and research to inform design of online communities [17] and they also highlight the challenges of doing so [18]. They used these theories to make recommendations on the design of systems and how to engage participants. Similarly, we used ecological systems theory and principles of community-based participatory research (CBPR) to develop a framework of six recommendations to guide future design of online interventions for social support in healthcare. The six recommendations framework emphasizes community-wide conceptualizations of support, and the interdependencies between online and real-world social relationships. These recommendations will be explained along with examples of their application to support for cancer survivors. The uniqueness of these recommendations is that they draw on relevant theories that have not been systematically or explicitly incorporated into online interventions and that they address the full life-cycle of the interventions: design, implementation, and evaluation of online support interventions (Table 1).To begin our quest for the most effective design for a social networking system we conducted a narrative literature review. Search terms included “participatory research” “cancer support” “social support” “social capital” “sense of community” and “online communities.” Databases included Medline and Google Scholar. Iterative searching based on review of references and MeSH terms from relevant articles was conducted.We expanded on the information from the literature review with extensive community based participatory research with cancer survivors, their families and cancer based organizations. The CBPR was designed to discover what was important to the greater cancer community. This subsequent work of the authors consisted of individual interviews, modified Delphi needs gathering sessions and iterative design and review sessions with the community. Both the needs gathering and the review sessions used the nominal group process method to arrive at consensus about what would be most useful to the community. In turn this research translated into clarification of the final six recommendations.The views expressed in this paper are based on a narrative review of the social support, biomedical informatics, social networking, and community psychology literatures, as well as the authors’ work in using CBPR with cancer survivors, their families and organization to discover what online support for cancer survivors would be the most helpful. The recommendations presented in this article evolved after the narrative literature review and the subsequent work of the authors.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
