@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Disambiguation of PharmGKB drug–disease relations with NDF-RT and SPL

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We disambiguate PharmGKB drug and disease associations by NDF-RT and SPL.Detailed clinical associations are clearly represented in PharmGKB.The work helps to understand drug and disease relations in details from PharmGKB.Reveals standardized drug information will accelerate clinical drug integration.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pharmacogenomics,Clinical associations,PharmGKB,NDF-RT,SPL,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
PharmGKB is a leading resource of high quality pharmacogenomics data that provides information about how genetic variations modulate an individual’s response to drugs. PharmGKB contains information about genetic variations, pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic pathways, and the effect of variations on drug-related phenotypes. These relationships are represented using very general terms, however, and the precise semantic relationships among drugs, and diseases are not often captured. In this paper we develop a protocol to detect and disambiguate general clinical associations between drugs and diseases using more precise annotation terms from other data sources. PharmGKB provides very detailed clinical associations between genetic variants and drug response, including genotype-specific drug dosing guidelines, and this procedure will armGKB. The availability of more detailed data will help investigators to conduct more precise queries, such as finding particular diseases caused or treated by a specific drug.We first mapped drugs extracted from PharmGKB drug–disease relationships to those in the National Drug File Reference Terminology (NDF-RT) and to Structured Product Labels (SPLs). Specifically, we retrieved drug and disease role relationships describing and defining concepts according to their relationships with other concepts from NDF-RT. We also used the NCBO (National Center for Biomedical Ontology) annotator to annotate disease terms from the free text extracted from five SPL sections (indication, contraindication, ADE, precaution, and warning). Finally, we used the detailed drug and disease relationship information from NDF-RT and the SPLs to annotate and disambiguate the more general PharmGKB drug and disease associations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The Pharmacogenomics Knowledge Base (PharmGKB [1]) is a publicly available internet resource for pharmacogenomics data and knowledge that provides information about genes involved in modulating the response to drugs. PharmGKB includes data about genetic variations, pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic pathways, and the effects of genetic variations on drug-related phenotypes. PharmGKB also provides integrated knowledge including relationships among genes, drugs, and diseases. The importance of this resource is widely recognized, and it has been used in several investigations. For example, Pathak et al. [2] investigated pharmacodynamics (PDs) and pharmacokinetics (PKs) relationships between drugs and diseases in PharmGKB, and compared them with the drug–disease relationships in NDF-RT. Theobald et al. [3] extracted the relationships between drugs, disease and genes from PubMed guided by the relationships from PharmGKB.While PharmGKB collects, encodes, and disseminates knowledge about the impact of human genetic variations on drug response [4], the detailed semantic relationships between drugs and diseases are not often captured during the curation process. For example, PharmGKB contains a generic relationship between the drug donepezil (PA449394) and the disease dementia (PA443853), but no detailed information about that relationship is provided. The availability of more precisely annotated drug and disease associations would be invaluable to the research community, especially for drug repositioning studies.Detailed information about drug–disease relationships would also be valuable to studies that focus on Adverse Drug Events (ADEs). Vilar et al. [5] combined data from the US Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA) Adverse Event Reporting System (AERS) with similarity measures of molecular structure, a process that achieved significant improvement in precision in computationally detecting ADEs. Benton et al. [6] conducted a study to identify potential ADEs by using medical message boards and online resources. Jiang et al. [7] developed ADEpedia by using ADE information from SPLs to create a RDF triple store. Each of these studies improve our ability to detect ADEs, which is a crucial step for identifying diseases associated with particular drugs. The detailed annotation of drug and disease associations from PharmGKB that is described in this paper adds significant value to existing resources, thereby facilitating studies like those mentioned above.The overall goal of this study is to enrich the drug and disease associations in PharmGKB with more detailed semantic relationships. We present a method to disambiguate the clinical associations between drugs and diseases in PharmGKB. We utilized the Veterans Affairs National Drug File Reference Terminology (NDF-RT [8]) and DailyMed Structured Product Labeling (SPL [9]) as the sources of detailed information about drug–disease associations, and demonstrated how existing data sources can be used to semantically enrich each other.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
