@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Feature-expression heat maps – A new visual method to explore complex associations between two variable sets

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Feature-expression heat maps provide insight into complex associations.It utilizes effect ordered data display on two variable sets.Effect size (color) and statistical significance (radius) are depicted in circles.Its applications are found in complex biological systems.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Graph,Heat map,Method,Phenotype,Genotype,Associations,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
IntroductionExisting methods such as correlation plots and cluster heat maps are insufficient in the visual exploration of multiple associations between genetics and phenotype, which is of importance to achieve a better understanding of the pathophysiology of psychiatric and other illnesses. The implementation of a combined presentation of effect size and statistical significance in a graphical method, added to the ordering of the variables based on the effect-ordered data display principle was deemed useful by the authors to facilitate in the process of recognizing meaningful patterns in these associations.Materials and methodsThe requirements, analyses and graphical presentation of the feature-expression heat map are described. The graphs display associations of two sets of ordered variables where a one-way direction is assumed. The associations are depicted as circles representing a combination of effect size (color) and statistical significance (radius).ResultsAn example dataset is presented and relation to other methods, limitations, areas of application and possible future enhancements are discussed.ConclusionThe feature-expression heat map is a useful graphical instrument to explore associations in complex biological systems where one-way direction is assumed, such as genotype-phenotype pathophysiological models.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Tukey emphasized that exploratory data analysis relies more on graphical display, whereas confirmatory data analysis is easier to computerize [1,2]. Existing graphical methods to explore associations in a set of multiple variables are cluster heat maps and correlation plots. Heat maps originated from two-dimensional displays of a two-by-two data matrix. Larger values were represented by darker squares and smaller values by lighter squares [3]. E.g., in gene expression studies, these values correspond to the amount of a particular RNA or protein expressed. The further development of the cluster heat map, which includes ordering of the columns and rows to reveal structure, has been a multi-step process. Facilitating the process of detecting meaningful patterns in the visual presentation, Sneath [4] displayed the results of a cluster analysis by permuting the rows and the columns of a matrix to place similar values adjacent to each other according to the clustering, which is based on the effect-ordered data display principle [5]. This principle says that in any data table or graph, unordered variables should be ordered according to what we aim to show. The ideas of similarity and grouping are derived from Gestalt psychology, but have shown to be equally useful in biology [6]. Ling ultimately formed the idea for joining cluster trees to the rows and columns of the heat map [7]. Technical advances in printing let the presentation of the graphs develop from overstruck printer characters to the use of computer programs to produce cluster heat maps with high-resolution color graphics [8], as can be seen in Fig. 1.Correlation plots are used to visualize association matrices. These plots can be regarded as heat map style displays of multiple correlation statistics. These statistics may be drawn in several forms: as numbers, circles, ellipses, squares, bars or “pac-man” symbols. In each symbol both the sign and magnitude of the correlation coefficient is represented. This is done so by using two colors printed with varying intensity. The color indicates the sign of the coefficient and the intensity of the color increases proportionally with the magnitude of the correlation coefficient [5].We entertained the idea that these visual methods could be of help in the exploration of associations between genetic data and phenotypical presentation in the investigation of the pathophysiology of psychiatric disorders. The pathophysiology of these disorders is still largely unknown. In an effort to unravel the genetic basis of mood disorders, many genome-wide association studies have been performed. However, these studies found evidence for only a few susceptibility genes, which in turn accounted for a very minor part of disease liability. This fuelled the idea that to grasp the mechanism of these complex illness, it is important to have a framework integrating biology and clinical phenotype [9]. In this model the intermediary processes that occur between the genetic information and the specific phenotypical expression of these illnesses are regarded as a black box[10].To achieve a better understanding of these intermediary underlying pathophysiological processes, we wanted to investigate patterns in the associations between specific symptoms and specific gene expression [11]. We hypothesized that patterns in these associations would come to light most effectively at the intersection of related genes and related symptoms, embroidering on the above mentioned principle of effect-ordered data display.Because we were exploring the physiology of these intermediary black box processes, we preferred to use an effect size measure instead of the correlation coefficient. Contrary to the correlation coefficient effect size measures describe the magnitude of an association in measurement units. This is generally of more interest in the biomedical sciences than just the degree of linearity of an association, which is measured by the correlation coefficient. This is of special importance in explorative biology based research, which can be compared to a field biologist visiting a new habitat who will begin describing the most striking features, i.e. analogous to the largest effects sizes. In addition to a measure of the magnitude of the associations of interest we wanted to implement inferential statistics to aid in drawing conclusions incorporating their certainty. Statistical significance for the given sample size was used in this regard.Summarizing, the scope of the method we had in mind was to visualize a large set of associations of variables in two sets in which one-way association was assumed, i.e. from gene expression to phenotype. This approach required a contiguously and ordered arrangement of the variables, incorporating the direction of the associations, an effect size measure and the statistical significance of individual associations. Elaborating on this reasoning we developed feature-expression heat maps.In this article we will first describe the method of creating a feature-expression heat map. Secondly we will present an example. Finally we will comment on this method and theorize on other areas of application.The dataset for a feature-expression heat map analysis needs to consist of two sets of variables that differ in their nature. The variables in these sets are assumed to represent phenomena that occur in a certain time order according to an underlying theoretical model and have a one-way relationship. The variables of each set are then transformed in a way that facilitates comparability within the set, such as Z-transformation. Because of reasons of in-between comparability, similarity in data type (binary, ordinal, continuous) of the variables within each set is a stringent requirement.In order to be able to recognize meaningful patterns in the final feature-expression heat map the variables need to be arranged contiguously and ordered a priori in a way that similar variables are placed adjacent to each other in both variable sets, consistent with the effect ordered data display principle. This may be achieved by performing a cluster analysis on a correlation matrix of the variables in each variable set. Alternatively, the variables can be arranged on phenomenological similarity.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
