@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Semantic distance-based creation of clusters of pharmacovigilance terms and their evaluation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Semantic methods are exploited for improving pharmacovigilance survey.Terms clustering is used for intensifying the pharmacovigilance signal.Semantic similarity measures are suitable for the creation of ADR term groupings.Generated clusters are smaller and more precise than the reference groupings.Clusters may gather terms which are missing in the reference groupings.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pharmacovigilance,Terminology,Clustering,Semantic distance and similarity,MedDRA,SMQs,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundPharmacovigilance is the activity related to the collection, analysis and prevention of adverse drug reactions (ADRs) induced by drugs or biologics. The detection of adverse drug reactions is performed using statistical algorithms and groupings of ADR terms from the MedDRA (Medical Dictionary for Drug Regulatory Activities) terminology. Standardized MedDRA Queries (SMQs) are the groupings which become a standard for assisting the retrieval and evaluation of MedDRA-coded ADR reports worldwide. Currently 84 SMQs have been created, while several important safety topics are not yet covered. Creation of SMQs is a long and tedious process performed by the experts. It relies on manual analysis of MedDRA in order to find out all the relevant terms to be included in a SMQ. Our objective is to propose an automatic method for assisting the creation of SMQs using the clustering of terms which are semantically similar.MethodsThe experimental method relies on a specific semantic resource, and also on the semantic distance algorithms and clustering approaches. We perform several experiments in order to define the optimal parameters.ResultsOur results show that the proposed method can assist the creation of SMQs and make this process faster and systematic. The average performance of the method is precision 59% and recall 26%. The correlation of the results obtained is 0.72 against the medical doctors judgments and 0.78 against the medical coders judgments.ConclusionsThese results and additional evaluation indicate that the generated clusters can be efficiently used for the detection of pharmacovigilance signals, as they provide better signal detection than the existing SMQs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
During new drug development, clinical trials are performed in order to test them, to study the reaction of human subjects to them and to detect the most common adverse drug reactions (ADRs) and risks. However, the clinical trials involve several thousand patients at most. As a result, less common ADRs, although they may be severe, remain often undiscovered at the end of the clinical trials and when a drug is put on the market. Continuous surveillance of the safety topics (i.e., Haemorrhages, Anaphylactic shock, Rhabdomyolysis, Acute renal failure, Cardiac failure) and of the use of the drugs is then necessary. It is done through pharmacovigilance activity accomplished at regional, national and international levels. This activity relies on collection and analysis of spontaneous reports submitted by health professionals and, in some countries, by patients. Although the collection of spontaneous reports is not exhaustive [1,2], the resulting pharmacovigilance databases are very large. To facilitate pharmacovigilance data recording and analysis, the ADRs from the spontaneous reports are coded using a controlled vocabulary, usually MedDRA (Medical Dictionary for Drug Regulatory Activities) [3]. Then, pharmacovigilance experts perform a manual review of these reports. More recently, in some countries, statistical data mining techniques are also applied [4,5]. However, it was observed that because pharmacovigilance terminologies are often fine-grained (i.e., MedDRA contains over 80,000 terms), the combination of multiple terms denoting similar notions (e.g., Hepatitis infectious, Hepatitis infectious mononucleosis, Hepatitis viral) is necessary during the signal detection1Pharmacovigilance signal is a new or unknown relation between a drug and an ADR.1[6,7]. In this context, the groupings of semantically close ADR terms can be useful.Our objective is to propose new and efficient methods for assisting signal detection and for grouping pharmacovigilance terms. This is a poorly investigated area. More precisely, we propose to rely on semantic distance and clustering methods, which we assume to be likely to produce relevant clusters because semantically close terms may be detected and grouped together with these methods. We chose the MedDRA terminology because it is used worldwide in the pharmacovigilance domain.In the remainder of this article, we first present the related work. We then describe material and methods we propose for testing and evaluating our approach. In order to better assess the proposed method relevance, special attention is paid to the evaluation of the generated clusters. We finally discuss the obtained results and conclude with some perspectives.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
