@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Circles of Health: Towards an advanced social network about disabilities of neurological origin

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Data is automatically collected, standardized, represented and integrated to support multicenter studies.Bio-psycho-social data is standardized into multidimensional indicators (ICF).Graphical representations are useful to diagnose and compare deficiencies quickly.Users find it useful to obtain information to generate knowledge and to promote knowledge democratization and informed opinions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Knowledge-based systems,Biomedical ontologies,ICF,Medical health records,Decision-support systems,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectivesThis research is concerned with the study of a new social-network platform, which (1) provides people with disabilities of neurological origin, their relatives, health professionals, therapists, carers and institutions with an interoperable platform that supports standard indicators, (2) promotes knowledge democratization and user empowerment, and (3) allows making decisions with a more informed opinion.MethodsA new social network, Circles of Health, has been designed, developed and tested by end-users. To allow monitoring the evolution of people’s health status and comparing it with other users and with their cohort, anonymized data of 2675 people from comprehensive and multidimensional medical evaluations, carried out yearly from 2006 to 2010, have been standardized to the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health, integrated into the corresponding medical health records and then used to automatically generate and graphically represent multidimensional indicators. These indicators have been integrated into Circles of Health’s social environment, which has been then evaluated via expert and user-experience analyses.ResultsPatients used Circles of Health to exchange bio-psycho-social information (medical and otherwise) about their everyday lives. Health professionals remarked that the use of color-coding in graphical representations is useful to quickly diagnose deficiencies, difficulties or barriers in rehabilitation. Most people with disabilities complained about the excessive amount of information and the difficulty in interpreting graphical representations.ConclusionsHealth professionals found Circles of Health useful to generate a more integrative understanding of health based on a comprehensive profile of individuals instead of being focused on patient’s diseases and injuries. People with disabilities found enriching personal knowledge with the experiences of other users helpful. The number of descriptors used at the same time in the graphical interface should be reduced in future versions of the social-network platform.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A disease or injury may have multiple disabling effects of various levels of severity, and cause varying degrees of health problems. The global burden of disease (GBD) links average loss of health to disease and injury’s causes through disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) [1] and disability weight factors. The DALY extends the concept of potential years of life lost due to premature death to include equivalent years of healthy life lost by virtue of being in states of poor health or disability. The weight factor reflects the severity of the disease on a scale from 0 (perfect health) to 1 (death). The term disability has a number of different meanings and, in particular, is not seen by some as a synonym or proxy for loss of health. However, the World Health Organization (WHO) uses the term disability to refer to loss of health, where health is conceptualized in terms of functioning capacity in a set of health domains such as mobility, cognition, hearing and vision, and we adopt this use for the term. According to the WHO, of the world’s population of 6.5billion in 2004, 19million (3%) were severely disabled and another 80million (12%) had moderate longterm disability, which is a barrier for personal development as well as social integration. People with disabilities of neurological origin are mainly people with spinal cord injuries (SCIs) and people with acquired brain damage (ABD). SCIs correspond to classes S14.0-S14.1, S24.0-S24.1, S34.0-S34.1 and T09.3 of the international classification of diseases version 10 (ICD-10) [2], while ABD (which includes non-traumatic ABD or stroke, and traumatic brain injury), corresponds to classes I60-I69 of the ICD-10. In Catalonia (Spain), 50% of people with traumatic SCI are 16–30years old; and 60% of the ones with traumatic brain injury (TBI) (the most common cause of ABD, mostly due to road traffic accidents) are younger than 25 [3]. It is reasonable to assume that similar figures are valid in general for high-income countries.Because a relevant percentage of people with disabilities of neurological origin is young and, supposedly, used to social networks, in their broadest definition, these networks may be adapted or made accessible to these people, and then used to generate a positive impact on their health [4]. Furthermore, previous research [5] suggests that a significant number of patients with disabilities of neurological origin would benefit from accessible information that is relevant to them, and social networks can be providers of such information.The objectives of the research described in this paper are:•To provide stakeholders (people with disabilities, their family, health professionals and therapists, carers and institutions) with the Circles of Health social-network platform from now on Circles of Health, aimed at supporting multicenter studies using standard indicators. These multicenter studies use a data set that is collected periodically and forms the basis of rehabilitation processes. Standardized, multidimensional indicators are automatically and dynamically collected, transformed, represented and shared.To promote knowledge democratization, user empowerment and making decisions with a more informed opinion, with Circles of Health that allows people to monitor their evolution and compare with others, and which is not limited to people with disabilities (participation of other stakeholders is encouraged). This facilitates the e-inclusion of people with disabilities of neurological origin.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In this section, some background is provided on Circles of Health, the generation of indicators, knowledge democratization and user empowerment. Section 1.1 presents the people with disabilities’ data used for the study and the users of Circles of Health. Section 2 describes technically Circles of Health and the methods for its evaluation. Section 3 describes Circles of Health functionalities and results of its evaluation. Section 4 discusses results obtained and usefulness; and future work is detailed at Section 5. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 6.In Qvidlab framework [6] carried out at Institut Guttmann, a committee of experts in sociology, psychology, neuropsychology, social work and neurorehabilitation from several institutions identified a set of evaluation questionnaires for describing the bio-psycho-social profile of SCI and brain-injury people, which are the core of periodic, comprehensive evaluations (PCEs). This led to an improvement of the information about the problems of people with disabilities, which can have an impact on new laws, decision policies, knowledge democratization, and promotion of research and funding.In addition, a Ministerial European Conference [7] identified the following needs: (1) achieving the inclusion of each and every individual and community in each and every aspect of the information society; (2) achieving a level of access to information that leads to knowledge democratization and user empowerment; (3) building a global community of support to allow immediate access to resources for people with disabilities an other people in a similar situation so as to encourage them to talk openly about their problems and help to: avoid isolation, alleviate suffering, and build and cement relationships.Following the idea of using social networks to understand better the specific problems faced by people with certain illnesses or disabilities and to facilitate e-inclusion of people with disabilities of neurological origin, this study develops Circles of Health, which allows belonging to a community of people associated by the same problem, with whom to share knowledge and experiences. Furthermore, Circles of Health allows people with disabilities to monitor their individualized, standardized, multidimensional health indicators, extracted from medical health records (MHRs) or online self-administrable questionnaires, and compare themselves with other people in similar situations. In addition, Circles of Health provides personalized access to resources (about medical advances, symptoms, financial support and volunteering) supervised by professionals of healthcare institutions. Circles of Health is centered on people with disabilities of neurological origin, but it also includes other stakeholder. In fact, users of Circles of Health are all people interested in disability, and more specifically:•People with disabilities, who will be able to access personalized representations of indicators about themselves and people like them, and share information in a social environment: population representations are automatically personalized allowing them to compare themselves to people with similar personal factors, such as disease, cause of disease and lesion level. A real scenario would be the following. Pol is a man who suffered an accident 47years ago while driving to Barcelona. Pol’s accident resulted in paraplegia with a severe lifelong disability, which changed his life dramatically. After finishing his rehabilitation in Institut Guttmann, he returned to his hometown, but once a year he returns to Institut Guttmann to perform PCE. At home he does not meet new people who share his problems. Furthermore, he finds it difficult to access updated and reliable information from experts. For this reason, he is very enthusiastic when he finds out about Circles of Health and he starts looking at his bio-psycho-social information.The family of people with disabilities, who has, depending on the disability, a different degree of access to resources.Health professionals, such as doctors, psychologists, neuropsychologists, psychotherapists and social workers, who will be able to administer questionnaires, and access individual and population representations of indicators. They will be able to filter population representations by disease, cause of disease, lesion level and gender.Healthcare institutions, which will be able to: (1) access population representations of indicators and read and share information in a social environment; (2) filter population representations by disease, cause of disease, lesion level and gender.Circles of Health intends to set up easy-to-use communication, participation and access to information to people who suffer from a disability of a neurological origin. Table 1shows a comparison between Circles of Health and existing tools which integrate bio-psycho-social information in the healthcare domain.Today, most healthcare organizations systematically collect relevant information derived from each clinical event in their MHRs [8]. An MHR is a set of both written and graphical documents, referring to information on health and illness of a patient, and on the healthcare activity related to this information, stored in electronic form. Therefore, a MHR can be associated to the concept of a patient’s profile and is taken into account in the identification of the necessary and sufficient indicators to describe patients’ health status. Questionnaires (sometimes self-administered) are often used to gather part of the information on the status of a patient or an activity; are in general validated by a healthcare institution; and then are stored in MHRs. Questionnaires are usually tailored to specific problems or patients. Moreover, their selection depends on cultural aspects, organizations and countries. Consequently, there are often different, conflicting instruments for capturing the same type of information, with a consequent lack of interoperability. Minimum standardized data sets exist, called core sets, but their introduction implies changes in the way each organization represents knowledge, and changes in established protocols for patient’s assessment may be costly. Furthermore, changes in assessment tools often result in the loss or devaluation of historical MHRs, so that organizations can be reluctant to change. Core sets have been created as a selection of indicators of international standards such as the International Classification of Functionality, Disability and Health (ICF) [9] or the Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine – Clinical Terms (SNOMED CT) [10], relevant to patients affected by specific diseases. Specific studies exist about SCI and ABD core sets [11–13] and about putting ICF into practice [14].Currently, the monitoring of a patient’s health status and evolution is based on a bio-psycho-social model, in which the physical, psychological and social aspect of the patient and environmental factors are considered as facilitators or barriers (see, for example, Schalock and Verdugo’s model [15]). Implementations of multidimensional, standard-based bio-psycho-social indicators have been proposed [16], but they lack the automatic aggregation and the monitoring of the generated information. Recently a unified view of a federated environment of multi-scale biomedical data sources has been introduced [17,18]. Nevertheless, they do not deal with the particularities of the ICF standard (which require a normalization of both attributes and values), the integration with MHRs, nor the integration of several standards, such as ICF and SNOMED CT. Although relationships of the concepts of ICF have been explored [19], an implementation of automatic generation of interoperable and multidimensional data has not been provided.The adoption of information and communication technologies (ICTs) is one of the aspects which will link the e-inclusion of the person with his empowerment. New technologies (and especially the Internet) can facilitate the creation of a communication environment that enables knowledge democratization, empowerment [20] and participation. Currently, there is a lack of visual and personalized comparison involving individuals and populations, showing personal factors and their evolution in an indicator-driven representation, although there are already some initiatives for representing semantic similarity in biomedical ontologies [21] and for extracting knowledge from data sets over time [22]. This potentially involves the comparison of the functioning of a patient (represented by ICF) with anonymous people with similar factors such as disease, cause of disease, lesion level or gender, among others.A general need exists for specific tools and services which offer social networking [23], participation, guidance to high quality information, collaboration and openness in medicine [24]. There are some initiatives which share biomedical information in a social environment such as the popular social network PatientsLikeMe [25,26]; others which analyze biomedical information disclosed in YouTube [27]; and some others which aim to improve patients’ quality of life (QoL) [28]. However, none of them integrates standardized and multidimensional data nor allows automatic personalization of visualization of biomedical information depending on the patient’s profile.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have presented a social-network platform called Circles of Health, focused on people with disability, open to the participation of people with disabilities, family members, health professionals, education and social services. Circles of Health uses a new methodology which automatically collects, transforms, shares and graphically represents standardized and multidimensional indicators. Circles of Health includes main aspects of a person’s life (development, participation, and environment) using the ICF instead of solely focusing on his or her diagnosis. Results indicate Circles of Health has great potential for users. Professionals found Circles of Health useful to generate new knowledge. People with disabilities found helpful to enrich personal knowledge with the experiences of other users and to perform online follow up questionnaires after clinical discharge. As a consequence, Circles of Health has potential to promote knowledge democratization, user empowerment and making decisions with a more informed opinion. For future work, it would be interesting to establish no more than nine ICF categories for each user’s interface and to involve other institutions.