@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A smartphone-driven methodology for estimating physical activities and energy expenditure in free living conditions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A smartphone use for physical activity evaluation in free living conditions.The smartphone algorithm competes with sensors for energy expenditure.The algorithm takes advantages of the smartphone accelerometers without extra sensors.The performance does not require knowing the initial phone position.Evaluation and monitoring of physical activity in large and distant populations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Energy expenditure estimation,Physical activity,Smartphone accelerometers,Normal-weight subjects,Actiheart,Armband,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper introduces a function dedicated to the estimation of total energy expenditure (TEE) of daily activities based on data from accelerometers integrated into smartphones. The use of mass-market sensors such as accelerometers offers a promising solution for the general public due to the growing smartphone market over the last decade. The TEE estimation function quality was evaluated using data from intensive numerical experiments based, first, on 12 volunteers equipped with a smartphone and two research sensors (Armband and Actiheart) in controlled conditions (CC) and, then, on 30 other volunteers in free-living conditions (FLC). The TEE given by these two sensors in both conditions and estimated from the metabolic equivalent tasks (MET) in CC served as references during the creation and evaluation of the function. The TEE mean gap in absolute value between the function and the three references was 7.0%, 16.4% and 2.7% in CC, and 17.0% and 23.7% according to Armband and Actiheart, respectively, in FLC. This is the first step in the definition of a new feedback mechanism that promotes self-management and daily-efficiency evaluation of physical activity as part of an information system dedicated to the prevention of chronic diseases.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, obesity and type 2 diabetes have become emergent epidemics in Western countries. One of the main reasons is the imbalance between energy intake and TEE, which is the consequence of poor dietary habits and lack of physical activity.Knowledge of TEE and, in particular, quantification of daily physical activity, could improve personal health through better management of energy balance and thus weight. That is why the estimation of TEE variations in free-living conditions over one day and on a day-to-day basis is of major interest in clinical trials as well as for individual use. This paper aims to introduce a predictive function for the estimation of total energy expenditure under current living conditions using dedicated mass-market sensors similar to those found in widespread smartphones and tablets.There are two reference methods to measure TEE: indirect calorimetry based on gas exchange (IC), and doubly-labeled water (DLW). In the first one, the TEE is calculated from Weir’s equation, taking oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide production into account [1]. This method requires sophisticated laboratory equipment in controlled measurement conditions (calorimetric rooms or facemasks for short periods). The second method requires a biochemical technique that involves the intake of two tracers (18O and 2H), followed by the collection of urine samples for 10–14days. The disappearance of those tracers makes it possible to evaluate the CO2 production and thus provides an evaluation of the TEE. This method is well-designed for TEE evaluation in FLC.Both methods have the potential to be used for accurate non-invasive routines but they involve costly medical material, and biochemical analyses are not feasible in the context of epidemiological studies. Mellone et al. therefore focused on mass-market sensors, similar to the smartphone sensor [2], as a second research priority. The authors reported that measurement systems could use mobile phones that are the most ubiquitous consumer electronic device in the world.Some recent dedicated electronic devices have obtained good results for estimating TEE by using several sensors for monitoring variables such as heart rate, body acceleration, body temperature, heat flux and impedance. Thus, Actiheart and Armband have received a great deal of attention in various experimental conditions. However, Actiheart was evaluated and compared to the DLW method only three times in free-living conditions [3–5]. The gap between TEE estimation and DLW was −9.1±5.1kJkg−1day−1, −6.8±26.3kJkg−1day−1 and −5.0±16.2kJkg−1day−1 when the group calibration was used in the studies [3–5], respectively. Armband sensors are commonly used in free-living conditions and provide appropriate estimation of TEE (−0.4kJkg−1day−1[6], −0.6±4.1kJkg−1day−1[4]), except in the case of some intensive physical activities performed by athletes [7]. Other sensor devices such as Actigraph, Actical and RT3 that predict TEE from accelerometers only have emerged since the 1990s. They are older, simpler and cheaper than Armband and Actiheart. However, accelerometry results did not yield accurate estimations of TEE across a range of activities. Indeed, Lyden et al. showed that devices using accelerometer signals averaged over a one-minute-period may obtain similar results for two different activities such as walking and boxing [8]. The technology of accelerometry devices that estimate TEE has changed since then. Some of them use additional sensors. For all these recent or older devices, the experimental data collection generates strong constraints on the population size and on the location of volunteers who have to come to the laboratory to be equipped. An alternative device to these research sensors could be developed in the perspective of studying the physical activity of cohorts at a low cost.Since smartphones are basically mobile computers and are widespread among the general population, they offer a convenient alternative to standard data gathering systems and promote new approaches that contribute to redefining medical education and information distribution, especially if we consider the variety of medical domains covered by publications over the last five years. As stressed by Mellone [2], smartphones are attractive for delivering health information for the following reasons: (1) the widespread adoption of phones with increasingly powerful capabilities; (2) the fact that people tend to carry their phones everywhere; (3) people’s attachment to their phones; and (4) context awareness features that are enabled through sensing and phone-based personal information [9]. Smartphones now encompass but are not limited to: a camera, altitude and three-dimensional coordinates provided by the GPS and accelerometers [10]. However, as stressed by numerous authors [10], since long-term monitoring using a smartphone is wireless, it could require periodic power supply. Nevertheless, smartphone applications have received a considerable amount of attention in medical science.To estimate physical activity TEE, it is necessary to recognize activity intensities. Several recent studies deal with physical activity recognition from accelerometry data collected by smartphones [11–14]. Activity recognition rates were phone-position-dependent in [11,12]. This methodology induced a strong constraint for the accurate smartphone position that could affect the results if the phone is not correctly worn. Thus, the initial fixed smartphone position is a major disadvantage in free-living conditions. Anjum and Ilyas collected data with a phone placed in the hand, pants pocket, shirt pocket and handbag [11]. This sophisticated method to measure the periodicity of movements was used for short periods. This method of calculation used by [12] would quickly consume not only the battery power but the mobile CPU as well when applied for long recording periods (12h).Our research encompasses the definition of a function using a smartphone’s accelerometer without any assumption about its initial position in the X–Y–Z framework because its information is the major constraint for its use in free-living conditions. When people wear a smartphone in a pants pocket, its position cannot be known with certainty. However, in some previous research on this topic, the TEE estimation depended on the phone’s position.The performance of the proposed function was compared to the TEE calculated from the sum of the metabolic equivalent tasks (MET) in controlled conditions (CC) [15], and the TEE provided by the Armband and the Actiheart in both CC and FLC. The experiments were carried out with 12 volunteers in CC (3.5h) and 30 volunteers in FLC for approximately 12h.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
