@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
TRAK ontology: Defining standard care for the rehabilitation of knee conditions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
TRAK ontology models domain-specific knowledge about the rehabilitation of knee conditions.TRAK provides terminology, definitions and graphical illustrations of knee treatments.TRAK supports shared understanding of standard care in knee rehabilitation.TRAK provides the framework that can be used to collect data for epidemiologic studies of knee conditions.TRAK can support randomized control with a control intervention that is well defined and reflects clinical practice.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Ontology,Taxonomy,Knee,Rehabilitation,Physiotherapy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper we discuss the design and development of TRAK (Taxonomy for RehAbilitation of Knee conditions), an ontology that formally models information relevant for the rehabilitation of knee conditions. TRAK provides the framework that can be used to collect coded data in sufficient detail to support epidemiologic studies so that the most effective treatment components can be identified, new interventions developed and the quality of future randomized control trials improved to incorporate a control intervention that is well defined and reflects clinical practice. TRAK follows design principles recommended by the Open Biomedical Ontologies (OBO) Foundry. TRAK uses the Basic Formal Ontology (BFO) as the upper-level ontology and refers to other relevant ontologies such as Information Artifact Ontology (IAO), Ontology for General Medical Science (OGMS) and Phenotype And Trait Ontology (PATO). TRAK is orthogonal to other bio-ontologies and represents domain-specific knowledge about treatments and modalities used in rehabilitation of knee conditions. Definitions of typical exercises used as treatment modalities are supported with appropriate illustrations, which can be viewed in the OBO-Edit ontology editor. The vast majority of other classes in TRAK are cross-referenced to the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) to facilitate future integration with other terminological sources. TRAK is implemented in OBO, a format widely used by the OBO community. TRAK is available for download from http://www.cs.cf.ac.uk/trak. In addition, its public release can be accessed through BioPortal, where it can be browsed, searched and visualized.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Knee injuries are frequent and account for 40% of musculoskeletal injuries with 40–50% not fully recovering and becoming chronic [1–3]. Rehabilitation is recommended for knee conditions that range from acute soft tissues injuries to chronic knee pain, osteoarthritis and post surgical interventions [4–7]. Its aim is to help individuals maximize their functional performance in interaction with the environmental and personal factors. Successful rehabilitation has been defined as being patient-centered and empowering individuals to take back control of their lives following injury or illness [8]. A vast amount of research and systematic reviews have evaluated the clinical effectiveness of rehabilitation modalities for knee conditions. Despite this it is difficult to develop specific rehabilitation guidelines because of limitations in the methodology or design of such research, which has failed to demonstrate statistically significant difference between ‘standard’ care and the ‘experimental’ rehabilitation under investigation [9–13].Models of care have been applied to the management of knee conditions to accommodate the complexities related to the spectrum of conditions and individual modifying factors related to the person, pathology, environment and psychosocial factors [14–16]. Recurring limitation of these models is failure to define rehabilitation content in sufficient detail, acknowledge the complexity of intervention and use standardized terminology to describe treatment [17]. In clinical practice multiple modalities will often be administered within a treatment session or over the course of rehabilitation, but the most beneficial part of this intervention to the patient remains unknown [17]. This means that ‘standard care’ needs to be defined so that the most effective treatment components can be identified, new interventions developed and the quality of future randomized control trials improved to incorporate a control intervention that is well defined and reflects clinical practice. A formal ontology of rehabilitation concepts and modalities based on current research evidence and expert clinical opinion is the first step towards this goal. Such an ontology, as a scientific model that support clear communication between users and stores information in a structured form, thus providing support for automated processing [18], can be incorporated into a documentation tool to support systematic data capture in the domain of knee rehabilitation. Finally, data mining methods can be applied against the collected data in order to quantify the relation between rehabilitation modalities and their outcomes so that ‘optimal care’ for knee conditions can be defined.The immediate aim of this investigation was to define ‘standard care’ by assembling a taxonomy of treatment concepts and modalities that comprehensively describes the most prevalent approaches to rehabilitation of knee conditions used in current practice. The long term aim was to develop an ontology that can support systematic data capture of all information relevant for studying the effectiveness of different approaches to rehabilitation of knee conditions. In addition to information about treatments, this task requires other types of relevant information to be coded, including information about symptoms, tests, diagnoses, epidemiologic factors and anatomy.In this paper we describe the development of TRAK (Taxonomy for RehAbilitation of Knee conditions), an ontology that formally models information relevant for epidemiologic studies of knee conditions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study we defined standard care for the rehabilitation of knee conditions and incorporated its formal description into an ontology called TRAK. The investigation into the standard care was supported by evidence from a systematic literature review and expert opinions elicited with a questionnaire, which was used to compile the initial taxonomy of treatment concepts and their modalities. Clinician feedback, where each treatment was quantified with the time typically spent on it in clinical practice, was used to establish content validity. The UMLS was searched in order to standardize knee rehabilitation terminology and integrate TRAK with other relevant knowledge sources. By formally distinguishing a variety of treatment concepts and modalities, TRAK allows their individual quantification and analysis in predictive models that evaluate recovery. This addresses the limitations of previous randomized control trials (RCTs) where multiple treatment modalities have been applied simultaneously [60–62] so that the modality that is most beneficial to the patient is unknown. Alternative studies have focused on individual modalities, but did not reflect the complexity of clinical practice [63], which was highlighted in this study. TRAK can be used to improve the standard of future RCTs so that the most effective treatment components can be identified and new interventions developed that focus on these. Moreover, TRAK can support RCTs by allowing an experimental intervention to be compared to a control intervention that is well defined and reflects clinical practice. The machine readable format of TRAK can also support development of data collection tools, which, when embedded into the Web 2.0 environment, can be incorporated into a web-based intervention and allow studying of knee rehabilitation outside of the traditional clinical boundaries. This capability is essential in light of the findings of our investigation into the standard care, which indicated that physiotherapists use a range of treatment modalities but spend most of their treatment time on providing advice and information. This suggests that physiotherapists may be using a self-care treatment model [64], therefore RCTs need to be supported by data provided by patients themselves. TRAK provides formal framework with sufficient clinical relevance, which can be seamlessly integrated into user-friendly web and smartphone applications (e.g. self-monitoring tools for remote feedback on the rehabilitation progress), in order to support the necessary quality of such data.Ethical approval for this study has been granted from the South East Wales Research Ethics Committee (ref: 10/WSE03/5) and School of Healthcare Studies Research Ethics Committee, Cardiff University.