@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Pharmaceutical drugs chatter on Online Social Networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Psychotherapeutic drugs dominate health OSNs, especially non-moderated health OSNs.Genitourinary tract agents and nutritional drugs chatter dominates general OSNs.Respiratory and hormonal drugs appear more often in OSNs that require registration.OSNs with a question and answer format are less subjective.Users ask more questions about gastrointestinal and metabolic drugs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Social media,Health social media,Text mining,Sentiment analysis,Pharmaceutical drugs,Frequent itemsets,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The ubiquity of Online Social Networks (OSNs) is creating new sources for healthcare information, particularly in the context of pharmaceutical drugs. We aimed to examine the impact of a given OSN’s characteristics on the content of pharmaceutical drug discussions from that OSN. We compared the effect of four distinguishing characteristics from ten different OSNs on the content of their pharmaceutical drug discussions: (1) General versus Health OSN; (2) OSN moderation; (3) OSN registration requirements; and (4) OSNs with a question and answer format. The effects of these characteristics were measured both quantitatively and qualitatively. Our results show that an OSN’s characteristics indeed affect the content of its discussions. Based on their information needs, healthcare providers may use our findings to pick the right OSNs or to advise patients regarding their needs. Our results may also guide the creation of new and more effective domain-specific health OSNs. Further, future researchers of online healthcare content in OSNs may find our results informative while choosing OSNs as data sources. We reported several findings about the impact of OSN characteristics on the content of pharmaceutical drug discussion, and synthesized these findings into actionable items for both healthcare providers and future researchers of healthcare discussions on OSNs. Future research on the impact of OSN characteristics could include user demographics, quality and safety of information, and efficacy of OSN usage.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Numerous Online Social Networks (OSNs)2Abbreviation note: we use the term Online Social Networks (OSNs) to define social media platforms where users share content through messages; we further define these messages as posts. Examples of OSNs include Twitter and WebMD.2host Medicine 2.0 applications that focus specifically on user reviews of drugs [1–7]. Previous work has analyzed these discussions and confirmed that online drug reviews serve their purpose – i.e. users discuss medications and their effect on a disease or physical condition [8]. However, research is lacking on the impact of a given OSN’s characteristics on the content of that OSN’s discussions; e.g., if an OSN requires registration (e.g., providing an email address), does that affect the types of drugs users are willing to discuss?Medicine 2.0 applications foster online communities where patients discuss their own healthcare decisions and experiences [9,10]. These applications allow clinical researchers and citizen scientists to conduct crowdsourced health studies that complement traditional clinical trials in the public health research ecosystem [11,12]. Such studies benefit other forms of knowledge generation, such as consumers’ opinions of pharmaceutical drugs [13]. This knowledge is important: 24% of adults that use the Internet have read online reviews of a particular drug or medical treatment [14].Moreover, there is increased interest from the research community in analyzing health-related content of OSNs. Previous work includes analyzing the content of health-related OSN discussions in terms of safety and quality, and detecting adverse drug reactions and events in OSN discussions; yet, previous work has not covered the impact of an OSN’s characteristics on its discussions.Therefore we analyzed the effect of four distinguishing characteristics of OSNs on a given OSN’s content. These characteristics include: (1) OSN type – general (e.g. Twitter) versus health (e.g. WebMD); (2) if a given OSN moderates its posts; (3) if a given OSN requires registration; and (4) if a given OSN’s discussions are in a Question and Answer (Q&A) format. We analyzed these characteristics both quantitatively (e.g., distribution of posts by drug type) and qualitatively (e.g., examining posts with the most frequent co-occurring medical concepts). Our results show that these OSN characteristics indeed affect the content of discussions related to pharmaceutical drugs. These effects include the type of discussions, the type of drugs discussed, the subjectivity of discussions, and the medical concept content.In addition to the analysis results, this work also has the following key methodological contributions. We used sequences of carefully selected Web queries to identify important online drug review forums. We modified a previous tool on medical concepts annotation to work on OSN posts. We enhanced the performance of an existing sentiment analysis dictionary to account for stemming and part of speech. We compared the drug distribution frequencies against a baseline, which assumes that all drugs have equal probability of being mentioned. Lastly, we mined OSN posts for frequent itemsets, where medical concepts were considered as items and each post is considered a transaction.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
