@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A biological continuum based approach for efficient clinical classification

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A significant speedup of 4.73-fold was achieved with the employment of BCEN.BCEN provides a reusable framework for clinical feature pre-selection.Efficient redevelopment of up-to-date clinical classification models is possible with BCEN.Risk factors identified in BCEN highly overlap those found in previous clinical studies.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Classification,Dimensionality reduction,Etiological network,Feature selection,Genetic algorithm,Support vector machine,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Clinical feature selection problem is the task of selecting and identifying a subset of informative clinical features that are useful for promoting accurate clinical diagnosis. This is a significant task of pragmatic value in the clinical settings as each clinical test is associated with a different financial cost, diagnostic value, and risk for obtaining the measurement. Moreover, with continual introduction of new clinical features, the need to repeat the feature selection task can be very time consuming. Therefore to address this issue, we propose a novel feature selection technique for diagnosis of myocardial infarction – one of the leading causes of morbidity and mortality in many high-income countries. This method adopts the conceptual framework of biological continuum, the optimization capability of genetic algorithm for performing feature selection and the classification ability of support vector machine. Together, a network of clinical risk factors, called the biological continuum based etiological network (BCEN), was constructed. Evaluation of the proposed methods was carried out using the cardiovascular heart study (CHS) dataset. Results demonstrate a significant speedup of 4.73-fold can be achieved for the development of MI classification model. The key advantage of this methodology is the provision of a reusable (feature subset) paradigm for efficient development of up-to-date and efficacious clinical classification models.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The efficient development of accurate clinical classification models has been a challenge for many reasons. One problem that is commonly encountered is the ‘curse of dimensionality’ [1], where the linear growth of clinical features (i.e. predicators) results in an exponential growth in the search space. This inevitably hinders the development of classification models as it becomes computationally expensive to investigate a plethora of clinical features simultaneously using search heuristics that analyze features in combinations (particularly, when performing multivariate analysis based on wrapper approach). This situation is exacerbated by the fact that up-to-date and sophisticated clinical classification models need to be constantly developed in order to continually improve the quality of clinical diagnosis. Specifically, the clinical classification models need to be rebuilt whenever new clinical risk factors that could potentially ameliorate the performance of the classification model are introduced. An example of such clinical effort is the perpetual studies of different types of clinical risk factors and approaches that could improve the ability to identify events of myocardial infarction (MI) [2,3]. This is of paramount importance as MI is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in many developed countries, such as the United States (US) and the United Kingdom (UK) [4–6]. Despite considerable advances in medicine, MI approximately occurs every 34s in the US and about 15% who experience MI will die from it [4]. Moreover, MI is difficult to ascertain in patients presenting to the emergency department with anterior chest pain [2]. This advocates for the need of an efficient approach to develop up-to-date MI classification models for performing accurate diagnosis.Furthermore, investigation of the association between a range of clinical observations (e.g. medical history, chemotherapy, stage of disease, gene, etc.) and the disease at the human population level is important as it has demonstrated promising potential for improving disease classification performance [7,8]. However, when such an investigation is carried out on a larger scale, this would involve a large amount of clinical features, making analysis challenging and even computationally infeasible. Additionally, it also hinders the ability for any machine learning method to perform accurate disease classification. One approach to mitigate the aforementioned problems is through dimensionality reduction – where significant clinical risk factors are identified, reducing the total number of predicators that need to be analyzed.In this paper, we introduce a novel clinical feature selection methodology for the development of MI classification model. This approach utilizes on the conceptual framework of biological continuum (BC) [9,10], the optimization capability of genetic algorithm (GA) [11] for performing feature selection and the classification ability of support vector machine (SVM) [12–14] for dichotomizing patients experiencing a phenotypic manifestation from healthy individuals. The BC is the hierarchy of the human organism comprising body, systems, viscera, tissue, cells, proteins and genes. In this study, it provided the biological paradigm necessary for segregating a range of available clinical features; offering the advantage of reducing the number of clinical features that needs to be analyzed concurrently. A GA based wrapper approach using SVM, which selects significant clinical features capable of dichotomizing patients experiencing a phenotypic manifestation from healthy individuals, was implemented. This hybrid algorithm (called GA-SVM) was used to identify important clinical features at each level of the BC and incrementally built a network of clinical risk factors, called the biological continuum based etiological network (BCEN). The primary advantage of BCEN used for the construction of up-to-date clinical classification model is that it allows new clinical features to be considered for incorporation into the classification model without the need for a total reanalysis from scratch.The reliability of the constructed BCEN was assessed by comparing the set of identified risk factors found in the (obesity-system) sub-network, with the risk factors found in previous clinical studies. Promising results were obtained from this analysis. An MI classification model was subsequently developed based on the clinical features identified and present in the BCEN. Significant reduction in the computational time required to develop the classification model was achieved. It is noteworthy that comparable classification accuracy was obtained between the proposed method (i.e. pre-selection of clinical features using BCEN) and the baseline approach (i.e. no pre-selection was performed). The Cardiovascular Health Study (CHS) [15] dataset was analyzed in this study.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the background information on feature selection. In section 3, the experimental methodology involved in the development of the clinical feature selection technique and the clinical classification model is presented. The experimental results are presented in Section 4 and discussed in Section 5. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In view of the high prevalence of MI worldwide, better ability to characterize and classify the disease is both appropriate and necessary. In this paper we have presented an integrated approach to build a single probabilistic network (i.e. BCEN which identifies and relates the etiological factors associated with MI) that aims to provide an efficient approach for the development of MI classification model.Validation of the constructed BCEN was conducted and our results indicate that the network is reliable and capable of identifying significant etiological factors. There is a large overlap between the relationships identified by our approach and those found in previous work. Out of the 34 clinical features identified at the obesity-system level, 28 (82.4%) of them were found in the previous clinical studies. However, 6 new clinical features, that had not been identified previously, were found to be associated with obesity in this study. These new clinical features could be probable risk factors for MI. They indicate the need for further clinical investigations to improve the understanding and treatment of the disease.Based on the distinct risk factors identified and present in BCEN, a classification model for MI was developed. The classification model obtained demonstrated high balanced accuracy of 0.933. It was developed at a rate of 4.73-fold faster than its counterpart that does not adopt any pre-selection strategy. This suggests that BCEN may be a desirable approach for developing clinical classification models when a large number of clinical features need to be considered.Although further validation of this methodology is necessary, this approach may be valuable in exploring and identifying risk factors that underpin a disease. To conclude, the BCEN is an etiological network that is simply built but profoundly useful. It has the potential to provide insights, from a novel perspective, into the characteristics of (current/new) diseases - allowing more efficient and effective understanding, analysis, management and classification to be undertaken. We look forward to a more comprehensive understanding of the disease etiology and eventually, towards personalized medicine.