@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An Integrated Model for Patient Care and Clinical Trials (IMPACT) to support clinical research visit scheduling workflow for future learning health systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We created software Integrated Model for Patient Care and Clinical Trials (IMPACT).IMPACT coordinates clinical research visits with patient care visits.IMPACT recommends optimal dates and times for pending research visits.IMPACT can increase efficiency where clinical and research activities occur.IMPACT received satisfactory user acceptance in a formative evaluation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Workflow,Software,Personnel staffing and scheduling,Health resources,Clinical research informatics,Learning health systems,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We describe a clinical research visit scheduling system that can potentially coordinate clinical research visits with patient care visits and increase efficiency at clinical sites where clinical and research activities occur simultaneously. Participatory Design methods were applied to support requirements engineering and to create this software called Integrated Model for Patient Care and Clinical Trials (IMPACT). Using a multi-user constraint satisfaction and resource optimization algorithm, IMPACT automatically synthesizes temporal availability of various research resources and recommends the optimal dates and times for pending research visits. We conducted scenario-based evaluations with 10 clinical research coordinators (CRCs) from diverse clinical research settings to assess the usefulness, feasibility, and user acceptance of IMPACT. We obtained qualitative feedback using semi-structured interviews with the CRCs. Most CRCs acknowledged the usefulness of IMPACT features. Support for collaboration within research teams and interoperability with electronic health records and clinical trial management systems were highly requested features. Overall, IMPACT received satisfactory user acceptance and proves to be potentially useful for a variety of clinical research settings. Our future work includes comparing the effectiveness of IMPACT with that of existing scheduling solutions on the market and conducting field tests to formally assess user adoption.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Randomized controlled trials provide quality medical evidence to guide medical decision-making. However, their high cost severely threatens the clinical research enterprise [1] showing a need for cheaper clinical trials and comparative effectiveness research (CER) in patient care settings [2,3]. Electronic health records (EHRs) potentially provide a new digital infrastructure for less expensive large-scale and pragmatic clinical trials [4]. The use of EHR data for CER has also been recognized as a new paradigm for clinical research [5], though the potential of EHRs has yet to be fully realized [6]. A major challenge is to integrate clinical research and patient care workflows. The low adoption of clinical trial management systems (CTMSs), general lack of interoperability between CTMSs and EHRs, and poorly coordinated patient care and clinical research workflows often result in unnecessary or redundant visits or tests for patients and a considerable administrative burden for practice administrators [7,8].Consequently, tools are needed to facilitate interoperability between EHRs and CTMSs. Some encouraging developments have occurred, including the creation of core research data elements that can be exchanged readily between EHRs and CTMSs [9], the establishment of the EHR Clinical Research Functional Profile, a specification of functional requirements for using EHR data for regulated clinical research [10], and the development of Retrieve Form for Data Capture by the Clinical Data Interchange Standards Consortium (CDISC) for automatically populating a research form using EHR data with minimal workflow disruption [11]. In 2011, the Partnership to Advance Clinical Electronic Research (PACeR) consortium was formed to enable secondary use of clinical data for research [12]. The American Medical Informatics Association (AMIA) also published a taxonomy of secondary use of EHR data to support clinical research [13].Although such standards help to reduce redundant data entry by clinicians who also conduct research, researchers have found that facilitating electronic data exchange is necessary but not sufficient. Coordination of clinical research and patient care workflows is needed. As part of the NIH Roadmap for Reengineering Clinical Research project [14], we conducted formal ethnographic studies and identified the inefficiency in clinical research workflow and the needs of clinical research coordinators (CRCs) for better informatics support [8,15,16]. Similarly, in a randomized trial using electronic data, Mosis found that requiring clinicians to conduct patient recruitment during routine clinical encounters discourages participation in clinical trials [17]. This is because patient recruitment, especially the process of obtaining informed consent is a time-consuming disruption of the normal clinical workflow. In the United States, less than 2% of physicians pursue a research career and this rate continues to decline [18]. Many physicians consider research tedious and expensive [19]. Clinical research sites are extremely under-supported [20]. At these sites, competition for resources (e.g., exam rooms) contributes to awkward tension between staff involved in patient care and those involved in clinical research [21].The Institute of Medicine (IOM) proposed a “learning healthcare system” model to accelerate the generation of new evidence [22]. This model supports a “culture of shared responsibility for evidence generation and information exchange, in which stakeholders (researchers, providers, and patients) embrace the concept of a healthcare system that learnsand works together” [22]. This model is conceived as dynamic and collaborative but is largely untested. Although this model is conceptually ideal to support patient-centered outcomes research, rarely is there alignment between clinical care and clinical research needs in clinical practices that conduct research.A key to achieving cost-effective clinical research is to make research an extension of patient care by facilitating collaboration between researchers and patients [23]. It would be ideal for both patients and staff if a research visit could occur on the same day as a scheduled clinical visit. Synchronizing research and clinical visits can also ameliorate two barriers to clinical trial recruitment: determining eligibility and obtaining informed consent. Both routinely require face-to-face meetings between researchers and patients. Such meetings can be inconvenient and sometimes intimidating for patients. One solution is to electronically prescreen patients to determine who is potentially eligible and then arrange for CRCs to meet with these patients in conjunction with their next clinical visit, provided their primary care providers (PCPs) have been notified in advance [24].Coordinating research and clinical visits is not a trivial task. Sometimes there is a designated scheduler for research visits but more often CRCs perform this task themselves [16]. Every research visit must occur within a protocol-specified visit window, such as “visit 1 must occur 1month, plus or minus 15days (i.e., the visit ‘window’), after the randomization visit.” The services to be performed during a particular research visit determine the choice of dates for that visit. For some visits, a protocol might require only questionnaires to be completed whereas, for other visits, time-consuming exams, diagnostic tests and blood work may be required. CRCs often seek a date when all resources are available and there is sufficient time to perform the required research services.Scheduling a joint appointment can be difficult, even with several weeks of advance notice. The problem can be further complicated if the patient reschedules a visit or fails to appear for one. Rescheduling may require repeating all the necessary steps to find a date that satisfies all the requirements of patients, research staff, equipment, and protocols. Moreover, research visits that do not occur within visit windows may require advanced approval by the sponsor, which, in turn, requires extra paperwork. In addition, routinely clinical staff and CRCs work independently, even when both teams work in the same practice. Fig. 1shows how scheduling a research visit requires CRCs to manually collect and synthesize information about the target date, time window, activities that need to be performed, and the availability of both the research resources and the patient.We believe that utilizing the patient care information in EHRs to streamline research workflow is essential to realize the learning health system envisioned by the IOM [3]. To this end, we developed a system called Integrated Model for Patient Care and Clinical Trials (IMPACT) for coordinating research visits with patient care visits using resource optimization. IMPACT is designed to be loosely coupled with an EHR’s clinical practice management functions to import information (e.g., patient identifier, date of birth, and clinical appointments) needed for the clinical research workflow and to recommend the optimal dates and times for clinical research visits so that the two types of visits can co-occur to minimize travel costs for patients.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper contributes a unique design, IMPACT, to relieve busy clinical research staff from time-consuming tasks during research visit scheduling. As a result of the Participatory Design process, IMPACT revealed unmet needs of clinical research coordinators and provides unique design features to meet these needs. On this basis, IMPACT leverages the increasing availability of EHR infrastructure for clinical research. Our scenario-based evaluation confirmed IMPACT’s potential usefulness in a variety of clinical research settings. IMPACT represents a new model for clinical research decision support that interoperates with EHRs and hence can potentially help achieve learning health systems. We plan to make this software available as an open source tool.One of our ongoing longitudinal evaluation studies is using mixed methods, combining time-motion analysis, software log analysis, qualitative studies via observations and interviews, and quantitative studies via surveys, to rigorously assess the user perceived usefulness, ease of use, and behavioral control, as guided by the TAM model, for IMPACT at the following three conceptual levels: (1) human–computer interaction design, (2) impact on the team work efficiency, and (3) the socio-technical factors that may affect clinical research coordinators’ perception of the usefulness and usability of IMPACT. We will report these results in the near future.This research was supported by Grants R01LM009886 and R01LM010815 from the National Library of Medicine, R01HS019853 from Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, and UL1 TR000040 from the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences.