@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A comparative study of covariance selection models for the inference of gene regulatory networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Three different models for inferring gene networks from microarray data are proposed.The most sensitive approach is selected by an exhaustive simulation study.The method reveals a cross-talk between the isoprenoid biosynthesis pathways in Arabidopsis thaliana.The method highlights 9 genes in HRAS signature regulated by the transcription factor RREB1.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Gaussian graphical models,Gene networks,Pathway analysis,Covariance selection,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
MotivationThe inference, or ‘reverse-engineering’, of gene regulatory networks from expression data and the description of the complex dependency structures among genes are open issues in modern molecular biology.ResultsIn this paper we compared three regularized methods of covariance selection for the inference of gene regulatory networks, developed to circumvent the problems raising when the number of observations n is smaller than the number of genes p. The examined approaches provided three alternative estimates of the inverse covariance matrix: (a) the ‘PINV’ method is based on the Moore–Penrose pseudoinverse, (b) the ‘RCM’ method performs correlation between regression residuals and (c) ‘ℓ2C’ method maximizes a properly regularized log-likelihood function. Our extensive simulation studies showed that ℓ2Coutperformed the other two methods having the most predictive partial correlation estimates and the highest values of sensitivity to infer conditional dependencies between genes even when a few number of observations was available. The application of this method for inferring gene networks of the isoprenoid biosynthesis pathways in Arabidopsis thaliana allowed to enlighten a negative partial correlation coefficient between the two hubs in the two isoprenoid pathways and, more importantly, provided an evidence of cross-talk between genes in the plastidial and the cytosolic pathways. When applied to gene expression data relative to a signature of HRAS oncogene in human cell cultures, the method revealed 9 genes (p-value<0.0005) directly interacting with HRAS, sharing the same Ras-responsive binding site for the transcription factor RREB1. This result suggests that the transcriptional activation of these genes is mediated by a common transcription factor downstream of Ras signaling.AvailabilitySoftware implementing the methods in the form of Matlab scripts are available at: http://users.ba.cnr.it/issia/iesina18/CovSelModelsCodes.zip.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A challenging goal of systems biology is to provide quantitative models for the study of complex interaction patterns among genes and their products that are the result of many biological processes in the cell, such as biochemical interactions and regulatory activities [23]. Among these models, gene regulatory networks (GRNs) are essential representations for the comprehension of the development, functioning and pathology of biological organisms. Indeed, it is widely believed that the GRNs embody the comprehensive information of the mechanisms that govern the expression of the genes in the cell [28]. In particular, the GRNs inferred by genome-wide expression data depend on environmental factors, tissue type, disease-state and experimental conditions. This condition-specificity of GRNs play a major role for the study of biological processes in distinct phenotypical conditions. Indeed, under different conditions, networks exhibit different interaction patterns that can enlighten the understanding of cell development and the identification of key drivers such as disease-related genes or altered biological processes [28,51,31].One of the simplest and most popular approaches in bioinformatics is to compute the sample Pearson correlation between every pair of genes [7]. The resulting relevance network considers two genes ‘not-linked’ in the case of marginal independence. This method, although useful for unveiling co-expression of genes implicated in the same biological process, has important shortcomings for the investigation of GRNs. For assessing co-expression between two genes, the Pearson correlation does not take into account the activities of the remaining genes in the cell. Moreover, this method does not distinguish between direct and indirect interactions, and is not able to highlight regulations by a common gene.These drawbacks may be overcome exploiting partial correlation, a more sophisticated statistical model which is able to infer relations of conditional dependences among random variables [10,47]. In this framework, Gaussian Graphical Models (GGMs) have been exploited to study and describe dependency structures between random variables [14,26]. In our context, partial correlation assesses association between two genes by removing the effects of a set of controlling genes. Moreover, in a GGM an edge uniquely indicates a direct interaction between a gene A and a gene B, that can be interpreted biologically as one of the following mechanisms [32]:•A and B are regulated by the same transcription factor (TF) which is not included in the network;A encodes a TF which directly regulates B;A encondes a TF which directly regulates an intermediate gene C which encodes a TF that in turn regulates gene B, and C is not included in the network;A encodes a protein which interacts with the TF encoded by an intermediate gene, and modifies its action on the transcription of gene B.In recent years, several reverse-engineering approaches have been proposed for inferring regulatory networks from gene expression data. The nature of the data makes this problem clearly ill-posed. Indeed, the genomic data are typically characterized by a huge number p of genes and by a small number n of samples. The simplest solution proposed to overcome this problem was to reduce the numbers of genes in order to reach the n>p regime [45]. Other solutions have been proposed to circumvent the problem of computing full partial correlation coefficients by using only zero and first order coefficients [48,8,19]. However, these approaches do not take into account all multi-gene effects on each pair of variables. More sophisticated approaches determine regularized estimates of the covariance matrix and its inverse [50,17,49]. A fundamental assumption usually adopted by these methods in n<p regime is the sparsity of biological networks: only a few edges are supposed to be present in the gene regulatory networks, so that reliable estimates of the graphical model can be inferred also in small sample case [8]. A regularized GGM method based on a Stein-type shrinkage has been applied to genomic data [13] and the network selection has been based on false discovery rate multiple testing. The same procedure to select the network has been adopted, with a Moore–Penrose pseudoinverse method to obtain the precision matrix [39]. Finally, the authors in [34] suggested an attractive and simple approach based on lasso-type regression to select the non-vanishing partial correlations, paving the way to a number of analysis and novel algorithms based on lasso ℓ1 regularizations [50,17,49,18].To date, a comparative analysis of these methods is missing. In this work, we focus on recently proposed methods developed in the general framework of regularization and statistical learning theories which provide the state-of-art approaches for the study of ill-posed problems as the ones in which the signal is overwhelmed by the noise and the number of variables is much larger than the number of observations [46]. In particular, we focus on regularized methods for the estimation of the precision matrix in an undirected GGM. We present a comparative study of three methods in terms of AUC (area under the Receiving Operative Characteristic curve), mean square error (MSE), positive predictive values (PPV) and sensitivity (SE). The first method is based on Moore–Penrose pseudoinverse (PINV); the second one provides an estimate of the partial correlation coefficients based on Regularized Least Square regression (RCM); the third method determines an estimate of the precision matrix by maximizing a log-likelihood function properly regularized by an ℓ2 penalty term (ℓ2C). The conditional dependence between each pair of variables was assessed by using the Efron’s bootstrap method [22]. Due to the lack of a perfectly known ground truth related to real biological networks [4], we measured the performance of the three methods by generating simulated data based on golden standard interaction patterns, built according to biological inspired different topologies [18,40]. We found that the ℓ2Cmethod exhibited the most predictive partial correlation estimates. More importantly, this method had the highest values of sensitivity showing its ability to infer true conditional dependencies between genes also when a few number of observations is available.We assessed the ability of the ℓ2Cmethod to infer GRNs in two real biological contexts: the isoprenoid biosynthesis pathways in Arabidopsis thaliana and the HRAS oncogenic signature in human cell cultures. In the first case, the method enlightened known relevant pathway properties. In particular, it revealed a negative partial correlation coefficient between the two hubs in the two isoprenoid pathways. This suggests a different response of the pathways to the several tested experimental conditions and, together with the high connectivity of the two hubs, provides an evidence of cross-talk between genes in the plastidial and the cytosolic pathways. In the second case, ℓ2Cmethod highlighted 34 genes directly interacting with HRAS. In particular, 9 of these genes (p-value<0.0005) shared the same Ras responsive transcription factor binding site, suggesting that their transcriptional activation is mediated by a common transcription factor downstream of Ras signaling.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In the last few years many studies have highlighted the importance of analyzing direct as well as indirect interactions among genes and proteins for unveiling their roles in the onset and progression of complex and multifactorial diseases like tumors. This type of approach is alternative to the classical studies which address the problem of analyzing the association between genes and pathways with the phenotype [1,43]. To this end, many methods have been recently developed to infer gene regulatory networks by using gene expression data [4] in order to reveal putative dependencies among genes and their products. In this paper, we present a comparative study of three different methods to infer networks of conditional dependencies by estimating partial correlation coefficients in the typical situation when the number of observations n is small respect to the number p of variables. The methods and the procedures exploited for their comparison have been developed in the general frameworks of statistical learning theory and regularization theory [46], which constitute state-of-the-art approaches for the analysis and interpretation of data sets composed of a huge number of variables when only a few number of observations is available.Methods which exploit partial correlation estimates for inferring gene regulatory networks from expression data offer a number of advantages with respect to methods based on mutual information (see for example [33]. In particular, although these methods provide a natural generalization of correlation since they take into account also non-linear dependences between variables, they are not able to assess conditional dependences between two variables in the case the number of conditioning variables is huge as in the context of gene regulatory networks [41].In our simulation study, we limited our attention to methods which embody an L2 regularization term in their analytical formulation. Such methods, in general, offer more stable solutions with respect to Lasso methods which incorporate L1 regularization terms [27]. The main disadvantage of the adopted techniques for inferring conditional dependency graphs is that they provide non-sparse solutions. To circumvent this problem we have adopted a bootstrap technique which is able to reveal the conditional dependency between two variables with a given statistical significance.The three analyzed methods were compared through an extensive and biologically inspired simulation study. This choice was adopted because the lack of a validated ground truth relative to biological networks prevents to compare methods by using real gene expression data. In particular, the need of simulated data arises from imperfect knowledge of real networks in cells, from the lack of suitable gene expression datasets, and of control of noise levels. In silico data enable one to check the performance of algorithm against a perfectly known ground truth [4].Different measures were adopted for assessing the performances of the analyzed methods. Although we did not find a method which consistently outperformed the others in all the carried out simulations, we found that the ℓ2Cmethod provided the most predictive partial correlation estimates, as highlighted by the AUC analysis. More importantly, this method had the highest values of sensitivity showing its ability to infer true conditional dependencies between variables also when a few number of observations is available. Our study has shown that the ℓ2Cmethod is well suited for revealing conditional dependencies when the number of really conditioning variables is small if compared to p as in the case of genomic data.The application of this method to real biological contexts allowed to infer gene networks with some known regulatory signals. In particular, it revealed a negative significant correlation between the expressions of HMGS and HDS, that we found to be the two hubs in the two isoprenoid pathways in A. thaliana.This means that they respond differently to the several tested experimental conditions and, together with the high connectivity of the two hubs, provides an evidence of cross-talk between genes in the plastidial and the cytosolic pathways. This evidence did not result from studies at level of single gene. Moreover, studies that infer this network by using only low-order partial correlation coefficients find more interactions between the two pathways with respect to the ℓ2Cmethod. A reduced number of edges between the two pathways is plausible considering the different cell compartmentalization of the two isoprenoid biosynthesis pathways.Moreover, the application of this method to a signature of HRAS oncogene permitted to reveal the presence of nine genes connected to HRAS, sharing the same Ras-responsive binding site for the transcription factor RREB1. This result suggests that the transcriptional activation of these genes is mediated by a common transcription factor downstream of Ras signaling.In conclusion, our study has shown that the ℓ2Cmethod is able to infer GRNs with relevant putative interactions and to provide interesting biological hypotheses that should be biochemically validated.NA, PFS, SM and FPS conceived the study. PFS, TMC and RA designed the algorithms and conduced the experiments; VCL analyzed the results from a biological point of view and, together with SM and NA they evaluated and compared the experimental results. All the authors read and approved the final manuscript.