@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Semantic concept-enriched dependence model for medical information retrieval

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We incorporated semantic concept enriched dependence into the medical IR algorithm.The semantic concept-enriched dependence model showed robust performance.Performance gain was achieved independently from other previous approaches.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Search engine,Term dependence model,Ranking,Semantic concept,Unified medical language system,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveIn medical information retrieval research, semantic resources have been mostly used by expanding the original query terms or estimating the concept importance weight. However, implicit term-dependency information contained in semantic concept terms has been overlooked or at least underused in most previous studies. In this study, we incorporate a semantic concept-based term-dependence feature into a formal retrieval model to improve its ranking performance.DesignStandardized medical concept terms used by medical professionals were assumed to have implicit dependency within the same concept. We hypothesized that, by elaborately revising the ranking algorithms to favor documents that preserve those implicit dependencies, the ranking performance could be improved. The implicit dependence features are harvested from the original query using MetaMap. These semantic concept-based dependence features were incorporated into a semantic concept-enriched dependence model (SCDM). We designed four different variants of the model, with each variant having distinct characteristics in the feature formulation method.MeasurementsWe performed leave-one-out cross validations on both a clinical document corpus (TREC Medical records track) and a medical literature corpus (OHSUMED), which are representative test collections in medical information retrieval research.ResultsOur semantic concept-enriched dependence model consistently outperformed other state-of-the-art retrieval methods. Analysis shows that the performance gain has occurred independently of the concept’s explicit importance in the query.ConclusionBy capturing implicit knowledge with regard to the query term relationships and incorporating them into a ranking model, we could build a more robust and effective retrieval model, independent of the concept importance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the growing availability of medical literature and clinical records in digital form, as well as predominant evidence-based medicine (EBM) philosophy [1], having an effective information search technique has become increasingly important in the medical domain. Semantic knowledge has been actively used for medical information retrieval (IR) research, by virtue of extensive resources such as UMLS® [2]. In previous studies, semantic concept information has been used mostly in two different directions. The first direction is to recognize important concepts that belong to semantic types such as Problem, Intervention, Comparison and Outcome (PICO) and to strengthen their term weights appropriately in a ranking formula [3,4]. The second direction is to expand the original query terms or document terms with lexical variants or synonymous terms to resolve the term mismatch problem [5–7].In a separate line of work, recent studies in general information retrieval research attempted to combine query term dependencies into a ranking formula to utilize the mutually interdependent characteristics of term occurrences [8,9]. In most of these studies, sequential query terms are blindly assumed to be dependent, which is a fairly reasonable conjecture, but this approach still leaves a substantial amount of opportunity for improvement.In a specialized domain such as the medical field, people strongly tend to use standardized terms when they communicate, whether in the spoken or written form. For example, ‘Disseminated intravascular coagulation’ is a medical concept; this concept will be less-often described as ‘Coagulations are spreading out through the entire blood vessel’ or ‘Coagulations are observed, and they are intravascularly disseminated’ by medical professionals, although the alternatives could convey similar meanings. Those preferred terms are combined to represent a single semantic concept and would more often occur in a static pattern rather than appearing separately.In this study, we assumed that the implicit term dependencies provide information on a search user’s behavior, on the way that the users perform their work, and on the way that they choose words and arrange them in sentences. Utilizing domain-specific semantic tools such as MetaMap, we can capture implicit term dependencies that are contained in a query automatically. We hypothesized that, by elaborately revising the ranking algorithms to favor documents that preserve those implicit user requests, we can improve the ranking performance further.In this paper, our main contributions can be summarized as follows. First, we propose a semantic concept-enriched dependence model, which utilizes semantic knowledge to refine query term dependency elements in a ranking formula. Second, we conduct extensive experiments on both a clinical document corpus (TREC Medical records track) and a medical literature corpus (OHSUMED). Experimental results show that our semantic concept-enriched dependence model is more effective compared to the state-of-the-art baseline. Third, we show that these performance gains are achieved independently of the concept importance, which is distinct from previous approaches.In the following section, we provide a detailed summary of related studies. In Section 3, we describe other state-of-the-art methods and introduce our semantic concept-enriched dependence model. In Sections 5 and 6, experimental results are presented, and in-depth analysis is performed. In Section 7, we summarize our entire work and introduce future research directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, we proposed a semantic concept-enriched dependence model for medical information retrieval.First, semantic concepts in the original query are identified using MetaMap. Second, we assumed that each group of query terms within the same semantic concept boundary has implicit term dependency with the others. Therefore, we revised the ranking algorithm to favor documents that preserve those implicit dependencies by incorporating semantic concept-enriched dependence features into the formal language model framework. The experimental results show that the semantic concept-enriched dependence model is both effective and robust, in contrast to the sequential dependence model, which blindly assumes sequential query term dependency and failed to derive consistent improvement.This work proceeds in a direction that is orthogonal to the two prevailing approaches that utilize semantic concepts: (1) lexical query expansion and (2) term weighting by semantic concept importance. For academic purposes, this study focused on a rigorous evaluation of the impact of semantic concept-enriched dependence features on ranking performance, maintaining all of the other conditions uniformly and prohibiting another way of utilizing semantic concept information. In our future work, we would like to perform comprehensive experiments that encompass other previous approaches. By combining all of the explicit and implicit information that is contained in the medical semantic resource, we hope to make a unified medical information retrieval model in the future.Summary tableWhat was already known on the topic• By expanding the original query with synonymous words that utilize a semantic concept, medical information retrieval performance could be improved.• By applying a term weighting method based on concept importance estimation, medical information retrieval performance could be improved.• A sequential dependence model showed good performance in general information retrieval, especially in web search tasks.What this study added to our knowledge• We can refine the medical IR ranking algorithm based on term-dependence constraints harvested from semantic concepts.• Compared to a sequential dependence model based on the sequential query term-dependence assumption, which failed to show consistent improvement over the baseline, our semantic concept-enriched dependence model showed robust performance.• The semantic concept-enriched dependence model achieved a performance gain independently from the query expansion or concept importance weighting approach, which means that these three approaches could be used in a complementary way to make more effective medical IR ranking models.