@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Prediction of clinical risks by analysis of preclinical and clinical adverse events

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The predictive value of animal safety studies for humans is studied.The statistical impact of specific adverse events for drug withdrawal is studied.Specific animal adverse events which impact human safety are identified.A model for predicting risk of withdrawal or drug failure due to safety is reported.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Bayesian,Translational medicine,Animal–human concordance,Adverse events,Drug risk,Likelihood ratio,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study examines the ability of nonclinical adverse event observations to predict human clinical adverse events observed in drug development programs. In addition it examines the relationship between nonclinical and clinical adverse event observations to drug withdrawal and proposes a model to predict drug withdrawal based on these observations. These analyses provide risk assessments useful for both planning patient safety programs, as well as a statistical framework for assessing the future success of drug programs based on nonclinical and clinical observations.Bayesian analyses were undertaken to investigate the connection between nonclinical adverse event observations and observations of that same event in clinical trial for a large set of approved drugs. We employed the same statistical methods used to evaluate the efficacy of diagnostic tests to evaluate the ability of nonclinical studies to predict adverse events in clinical studies, and adverse events in both to predict drug withdrawal. We find that some nonclinical observations suggest higher risk for observing the same adverse event in clinical studies, particularly arrhythmias, QT prolongation, and abnormal hepatic function. However the lack of these events in nonclinical studies is found to not be a good predictor of safety in humans. Some nonclinical and clinical observations appear to be associated with high risk of drug withdrawal from market, especially arrhythmia and hepatic necrosis. We use the method to estimate the overall risk of drug withdrawal from market using the product of the risks from each nonclinical and clinical observation to create a risk profile.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nonclinical animal models have long been accepted as a means to examine both the efficacy and toxicity of drugs before administration to humans. The motivation has always been to reduce risk to humans by observing the outcomes in animals [1]. The desire for animal testing for toxicity was increased after public tragedies of the “Lash-Lure” case in which aniline eyelash dyes caused blindness, the toxicity associated with the formulation of sulfanilamide with ethylene glycol, and the teratogenic effects of thalidomide [2–4].Animal models for toxicity have been shown to correctly represent human toxicities in many cases [5]. However there are relatively few statistical studies evaluating the concordance of nonclinical and clinical observations [6]. The study of 30 compounds in various species by Goldsmith et al found that animals well predicted the maximum tolerated dosages for clinical trials [7]. Fletcher examined 45 compounds and found a low concordance between animal and human adverse events [8]. The current canonical work in animal–human concordance for toxicity is the Olson study which examined animal and human toxicity of 150 compounds from a variety of therapeutic areas. In that work, the overall true positive animal–human concordance rate was 7% for rodent only, 36% for combination of rodent and non-rodent, 27% for single non-rodent species, and 70% for observation in any species [9]. Several other studies have been published since then with generally similar results [10–13]. However, the majority of the evidence for the efficacy of animal studies is based on true positives, with limited analysis of the false positives and false negatives [14,15].Evaluation of the ability of animal models to predict human responses and toxicities is critical now that there are increasing pressures to reduce animal testing in favor of in-vitro and computational predictive methods [16]. In this work we compared data for drugs that have matched nonclinical and clinical data presented in FDA and EMEA submissions and analyze the results to measure the concordance between nonclinical and clinical adverse event observations. The human–animal concordance is measured using Bayesian statistical methods similar to those used to evaluate the efficacy of diagnostic tests. In addition, we study the relationship between the events and eventual drug withdrawal to look for observations that are statistically correlated to drug failure.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study we proposed a framework based on likelihood ratio computed using 2×2 contingency matrices for studying the relationship between nonclinical and clinical adverse events in order to create robust analyses to understand the implications of nonclinical adverse events to clinically observed adverse events. The framework was also used to understand the implication of various nonclinical and clinical adverse events for drug withdrawal.From this study we learned that some adverse events observed in nonclinical studies are strongly associated with the observation in corresponding clinical studies. For example nonclinical observation of cardiac arrhythmia and QT interval prolongation is strongly suggestive that it will be observed in clinical studies. Others, such as hepatitis, are far less strongly associated and many more. such as cholestasis, do not have statistically significant relationships between nonclinical and clinical observations. While observation of many nonclinical adverse events appear to be related to a high risk of seeing the same event in humans, little statistical inference for clinical results could be made for most cases when a particular adverse event was not observed.In addition analysis of the relationship between both nonclinical and clinical adverse events and drug withdrawal showed that some adverse events are much more strongly associated with drug withdrawal than others, particularly arrhythmias and hepatic necrosis. The idea of using the product of the individual risk factors as an overall metric was tested on hydrochlorothiazide and trovafloxacin and for those two cases the product was consistent with the known safety of the first, and withdrawal of the latter drug. The concept of using the product of the individual risk factors for withdrawal as an overall metric was tested on hydrochlorothiazide and trovafloxacin and for those two cases the product was consistent with the known safety of the first, and withdrawal of the latter drug.