@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A methodology for interactive mining and visual analysis of clinical event patterns using electronic health record data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Differences in patient progression can significantly impact outcomes.We present a methodology for interactive pattern mining and analysis of patient data.Our approach combines ad hoc visual queries, mining, and interactive visualization.Our methods uncover key event patterns and their associations with outcome over time.Prototype implementation applied to population of 32,000 cardiology patients.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Outcome analysis,Pattern mining,Interactive visualization,Visual analytics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Patients’ medical conditions often evolve in complex and seemingly unpredictable ways. Even within a relatively narrow and well-defined episode of care, variations between patients in both their progression and eventual outcome can be dramatic. Understanding the patterns of events observed within a population that most correlate with differences in outcome is therefore an important task in many types of studies using retrospective electronic health data. In this paper, we present a method for interactive pattern mining and analysis that supports ad hoc visual exploration of patterns mined from retrospective clinical patient data. Our approach combines (1) visual query capabilities to interactively specify episode definitions, (2) pattern mining techniques to help discover important intermediate events within an episode, and (3) interactive visualization techniques that help uncover event patterns that most impact outcome and how those associations change over time. In addition to presenting our methodology, we describe a prototype implementation and present use cases highlighting the types of insights or hypotheses that our approach can help uncover.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Patients’ medical conditions can evolve in complex and seemingly unpredictable ways. Variations in symptom and diagnosis progression vary widely even within a cohort of patients battling the same underlying illness. Similarly, clinicians may use a range of procedures, medications, and other interventions as they develop treatment plans that yield the desired patient outcomes.For this reason, scientists have long studied how variations in disease progression and care lead to different outcomes. Often, studies are conducted as randomized controlled trials (RCTs) [10,34]. RCTs offer statistical rigor and serve as a “gold standard” for evidence-based medicine, but they are expensive and time-consuming to conduct. This makes it cumbersome to generate and explore new hypotheses.Researchers have therefore started to perform retrospective studies using the ever-growing repositories of observational data stored in electronic medical record (EMR) systems. For example, a number of platforms have been developed to analyze and make available such data for ad hoc retrospective analyses [4,15].A common type of retrospective study is temporal event analysis. These investigations represent each patient’s medical history as a sequence of time-stamped events. The temporal properties of these events, such as sequence and timing, are then analyzed to discover associations with patients’ eventual outcomes. A variety of techniques have been used to gain insights from clinical event sequence data, ranging from data mining systems [27] to interactive visualizations [5].While mining-based and visualization-based methods have proven useful, they both suffer from significant limitations. Mining-based methods often identify short snippets of frequently occurring patterns. However, the context in which these patterns occur is typically lost. This makes it hard to answer many meaningful questions: “Do the patterns typically appear early in an episode? Late in an episode? Does the importance of a pattern change over time?” In contrast, visualization-based methods can illustrate episodes from start to finish, making clear the context surrounding intermediate events. However, temporal visualization technologies are typically limited to a small number of event types before becoming so complex that they are difficult to interpret.In this paper, we propose a novel visual analytics technique that combines both mining and visualization techniques to overcome the limitations outlined above. Our approach integrates visual queries, on-demand analytics, and interactive visualization to enable exploratory analysis of clinical event sequence data. The query capabilities allow users to intuitively and quickly retrieve cohorts of patients that satisfy complex clinical episode constraints. The system then automatically leverages event pattern mining algorithms to uncover important events within the returned cohort. Finally, an interactive visual interface lets users answer a range of interesting questions.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We begin with a review of related work before presenting the details of our methodology. We then briefly describe our prototype implementation and highlight sample use cases demonstrating the utility of our approach. We conclude with a summary and discussion of future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
