@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Development and validation of a continuous measure of patient condition using the Electronic Medical Record

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
New method to estimate patient condition during a hospital visit.Patient condition is computed by summing risks measured in each of 26 variables.Leverages data already in the EMR: vital signs, lab results, nursing assessments.Rothman Index, a measure of patient condition, is independent of diagnosis and spans all acuity levels.May help clinicians to improve continuity of care and to detect trends.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Health status indicators,Deterioration,Nursing assessments,Electronic health records,Acuity score,Patient condition,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Patient condition is a key element in communication between clinicians. However, there is no generally accepted definition of patient condition that is independent of diagnosis and that spans acuity levels. We report the development and validation of a continuous measure of general patient condition that is independent of diagnosis, and that can be used for medical-surgical as well as critical care patients.A survey of Electronic Medical Record data identified common, frequently collected non-static candidate variables as the basis for a general, continuously updated patient condition score. We used a new methodology to estimate in-hospital risk associated with each of these variables. A risk function for each candidate input was computed by comparing the final pre-discharge measurements with 1-year post-discharge mortality. Step-wise logistic regression of the variables against 1-year mortality was used to determine the importance of each variable. The final set of selected variables consisted of 26 clinical measurements from four categories: nursing assessments, vital signs, laboratory results and cardiac rhythms. We then constructed a heuristic model quantifying patient condition (overall risk) by summing the single-variable risks. The model’s validity was assessed against outcomes from 170,000 medical-surgical and critical care patients, using data from three US hospitals.Outcome validation across hospitals yields an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve(AUC) of ⩾0.92when separating hospice/deceased from all other discharge categories, an AUC of ⩾0.93 when predicting 24-h mortalityand an AUC of 0.62 when predicting 30-day readmissions. Correspondence with outcomesreflective of patient condition across the acuity spectrum indicates utility in both medical-surgical unitsand critical care units. The model output, which we call the Rothman Index, may provide clinicians witha longitudinal view of patient condition to help address known challenges in caregiver communication,continuity of care, and earlier detection of acuity trends.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The increasing adoption of Electronic Medical Records (EMRs) enables the consistent and accurate manipulation of large amounts of clinical data for computational purposes. This provides an opportunity to use a wide range of clinical variables to quantitatively determine the acuity of a hospitalized patient’s condition without risking the burden of complexity or miscalculation on the part of clinicians [1–4].Clinicians can currently choose among many tools [4] designed to quantify some aspect of patient acuity. In almost all cases these tools assess risk for a specific event such as cardiopulmonary arrest, mortality, or transfer to the ICU [5–11], specific disease or procedure [12–16] or are specific to an environment, such as PRISM [15], APACHE III [17] and SOFA [18] in the ICU.These systems were developed using one of two approaches. In some cases researchers compute acuity based on a set of easy-to-apply rules that are derived from expert opinion; the Modified Early Warning Score (MEWS) is a well-known example of this approach [19]. In other cases researchers have developed models using standard regression methods applied against specific events, such as unexpected death or transfer to the ICU [20,21].One characteristic of MEWS [19] and related scores such as VitalPAC [22], PEWS [2], Bedside-PEWS [23], C-CHEWS [24], is that they depend on experts to specify the input variables and the risk associated with particular values or states of each input variable. For example, the Behavior/Neuro sub-score used in the C-CHEWS model is assigned a value of zero when the patient state is “playing/sleeping appropriately”, a value of 1 when “sleepy, somnolent when not disturbed”, a value of 2 when “irritable, difficult to console”, and a value of 3 when displaying “reduced response to pain”. There are about 40 values in the model that have similarly assigned risk weightings. These expert distinctions form the basis of this model. In general their implied risk functions do not have any rigorous validation, although some authors follow iterative processes based on the model’s performance [24]. Difficulties arise in application of expert-based models; for example, to identify 44% of transfers to ICU occurring in the next 12h, MEWS generates 69 false positives for every correctly identified event [19].A more rigorous approach is to build a regression model, which is then evaluated on an independent test set. Kirkland et al. [20] have taken a parsimonious modeling approach (using only 4 parameters) to predict within 12h: Rapid Response Team calls, unplanned transfers to the ICU, or unexpected death (AUC=0.71). Escobar et al. [21] have taken advantage of a large dataset from 14 hospitals to develop a model using approximately 100 data items, from which are derived about 40 regression parameters. The three outcomes which they chose to regress against were, within the next 12h: unplanned transfer from ward to ICU; or unplanned transfer from transitional care unit (TCU) to the ICU; or sudden unexpected death on ward or TCU without a “do not resuscitate” order in place (AUC ranged from 0.57 to 0.84 depending on the disease specific sub-model). A problem with both these regression models is the use of infrequent heterogeneous events as targets, which lessens their practical applicability and lowers their signal to noise ratio. For example, Escobar makes a direct comparison with the MEWS statistic above: to identify 44% of transfers to ICU occurring in the next 12h, his model generates 34 false positives for every correctly identified event.Rather than attempting to forecast a particular adverse event,we argue that intervention during early deterioration can help prevent such an adverse event from occurring [25,26]. Quantifying each patient’s condition on a continuous basis could provide an opportunity to detect a declining trend in time for clinicians to act, enabling an appropriately graded response to changes in patient condition [26,27].We report the development and validation of a general measure of individual patient condition using 26 clinical variables commonly available in the EMR including vital signs, lab results, cardiac rhythms and nursing assessments. We describe our approach to variable selection, the evaluation of risk represented by the value of each variable, and the creation of a heuristic model to compute overall risk. We have named the resulting score of patient condition the “Rothman Index” in memory of Florence A. Rothman, whose death inspired this work.Leveraging the EMR realizes the vision [4,28] of a continuously updated patient condition score independent of specific events, diseases, procedures or environments, and incorporating sufficient clinical variables to provide sensitivity to patient risk across the spectrum of acuity, from the unimpaired to the gravely ill. In developing this patient condition model we have taken a new methodological approach to quantify patient risk by following a data-intensive process that avoids the ad-hoc nature of MEWS-type models while using more frequent outcome events to assign risk values to the model inputs.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The RI is a general measure of patient condition spanning the acuity spectrum, from relatively well patients, to acutely ill patients. It is computed using data commonly available in hospital EMRs, specifically 26 clinical metrics including vital signs, laboratory results, cardiac rhythms and particularly nursing assessments, which are an important source of dynamic clinical information. It is independent of diagnosis, demographics, or comorbidities. Leveraging data now electronically available in the EMR enables the RI to be updated continually throughout the duration of a patient’s hospital stay.The RI has been tested using construct validators and demonstrates excellent correlation with measures reflective of patient condition. Validation work was conducted using data from 170,000 in-patient admissions at 3 US hospitals. This technology may provide clinicians with a longitudinal view of patient condition to help address known challenges in caregiver communication and the early detection of deterioration.The authors are employees and shareholders of PeraHealth, Inc. of Charlotte NC, a company that uses the Rothman Index within its products, which are currently installed at several major medical research centers and hospital systems. The modeling methodology described herein was performed prior to the formation of the company. PeraHealth did not manage, approve or affect any aspect of the writing of this article. Research contributing to improvements in the Rothman Index is being conducted both by the company and by an independent nonprofit foundation, the F.A.R. Institute of Sarasota, FL.The authors will provide access to software for computation the Rothman Index, at no cost to qualified researchers.