@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Toward a complete dataset of drug–drug interaction information from publicly available sources

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
There is currently no single complete potential drug–drug interactions (PDDIs) source.This is the first study to attempt to combine all publically available PDDIs sources.The merged dataset consists of fourteen different sources of PDDIs information.The dataset might help pharmacovigilance researchers develop better NLP corpora.Making the sources interoperable enables a better synthesis of PDDI knowledge.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Drug–drug interaction,Record linkage,Natural language processing,Pharmacovigilance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Although potential drug–drug interactions (PDDIs) are a significant source of preventable drug-related harm, there is currently no single complete source of PDDI information. In the current study, all publically available sources of PDDI information that could be identified using a comprehensive and broad search were combined into a single dataset. The combined dataset merged fourteen different sources including 5 clinically-oriented information sources, 4 Natural Language Processing (NLP) Corpora, and 5 Bioinformatics/Pharmacovigilance information sources. As a comprehensive PDDI source, the merged dataset might benefit the pharmacovigilance text mining community by making it possible to compare the representativeness of NLP corpora for PDDI text extraction tasks, and specifying elements that can be useful for future PDDI extraction purposes.An analysis of the overlap between and across the data sources showed that there was little overlap. Even comprehensive PDDI lists such as DrugBank, KEGG, and the NDF-RT had less than 50% overlap with each other. Moreover, all of the comprehensive lists had incomplete coverage of two data sources that focus on PDDIs of interest in most clinical settings. Based on this information, we think that systems that provide access to the comprehensive lists, such as APIs into RxNorm, should be careful to inform users that the lists may be incomplete with respect to PDDIs that drug experts suggest clinicians be aware of. In spite of the low degree of overlap, several dozen cases were identified where PDDI information provided in drug product labeling might be augmented by the merged dataset. Moreover, the combined dataset was also shown to improve the performance of an existing PDDI NLP pipeline and a recently published PDDI pharmacovigilance protocol. Future work will focus on improvement of the methods for mapping between PDDI information sources, identifying methods to improve the use of the merged dataset in PDDI NLP algorithms, integrating high-quality PDDI information from the merged dataset into Wikidata, and making the combined dataset accessible as Semantic Web Linked Data.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Exposure to a potential drug–drug interaction (PDDI) occurs when a patient is prescribed or administered two or more drugs that can interact, even if no harm ensues [1]. “Known” interactions involve drug combinations for which (a) physiological data exists from clinical studies pointing to a potential interaction, (b) mechanistic assertions point toward a potential interaction, or (c) a potential interaction can be inferred based on reasonable extrapolation [2]. While exposure to a known PDDI does not always result in an adverse drug event [3], such events are a significant source of preventable drug-related harm. Sixteen cohort and case-control studies reported an elevated risk of hospitalization in patients who were exposed to PDDIs [4]. Clinically important events attributable to PDDI exposure are estimated to occur in 5.3–14.3% of inpatients, and are responsible for 0.02–0.17% of the nearly 130 million emergency department visits that occur each year in the United States [5,6].At the time of this writing, there is no single complete source of PDDI information. While several proprietary and public PDDI information sources exist to help improve prescriber knowledge, they differ substantially in their coverage and agreement in the inclusion of PDDIs. One recent study found that only one quarter of 59 contraindicated drug pairs were listed in three proprietary PDDI information sources [7]. Another recent study comparing drug product labeling to the published literature for information on pharmacokinetic DDIs found that 40% of the 44 pharmacokinetic drug–drug interactions affecting 25 psychotropic drugs were located exclusively in product labeling [8]. These findings suggest that there is a pressing need for informatics research on how to best organize both existing and emerging PDDI information for search and retrieval.Several groups would benefit from a more effective synthesis of existing available PDDI knowledge. For those individuals researching text mining of the pharmacovigilance literature, one possible benefit would be to enable a better understanding of the representativeness of a given natural language processing (NLP) corpus relative to all known PDDIs. A merged PDDI dataset might help improve existing text mining algorithms by providing computable domain knowledge. Text mining researchers might also find the PDDI synthesis useful for identifying gaps in PDDI information sources that text mining might be able to address. The development of a common PDDI framework could also benefit United States healthcare organizations who are currently striving to incorporate PDDI screening along with other strategies to achieve meaningful use of electronic medical records [9,10]; drug-safety scientists who monitor post-market data related to drug use for new concerns [11]; researchers in drug development who build in silico models to help identify new drug candidates or drugs that can be ‘repositioned’ for new uses [12]; those who create and maintain drug information resources that help clinicians guide patients to safe and effective medication therapies [1]; and patients seeking information on the safety of the medicines they take [13].The objective of the project described here was to assess the feasibility and potential value to different stakeholders of interlinking all publicly available PDDI data sources using a common data model. We first conducted a comprehensive and broad search of public PDDI knowledge sources. We then established links between the PDDI sources and evaluated their information coverage. This resulted in single integrated PDDI dataset, and list of the specific data elements provided by each source. Finally, we conducted some preliminary analyses of the potential value of the merged dataset. These included (1) examining the overlap between the data sources including existing NLP corpora relative to other PDDI datasets, (2) testing if the PDDI dataset could improve the performance of a PDDI NLP algorithm, (3) examining cases where PDDI information provided in drug product labeling might be augmented by the merged dataset, and (4) testing if the combined dataset would improve the performance of a recently published pharmacovigilance protocol [14].The scope of the PDDI source search included drug interaction lists designed for use in clinically oriented applications, annotated text corpora used for NLP research, knowledge bases used for clinical and translational research, and suspected PDDI associations (i.e., pharmacovigilance signals) [15]. We searched for all potentially relevant resources by querying bibliographic databases (PubMed and Google Scholar), reviewing the tertiary literature, and scanning conference proceedings for papers describing drug-related resources. This search was augmented by requests for input from members of various pharmacoinformatics and chemoinformatics interest groups and maintainers of major meta-repositories for RDF data such as Bio2RDF [16]. We then manually inspected each potentially relevant resource to determine if it (1) supported NLP experiments, (2) provided information for use by clinicians, or (3) supported bioinformatics or pharmacovigilance research. These three categories were chosen because we think that they cover the three primary use cases for PDDI knowledge. We considered the resources that are non-proprietary and represented as structured data or require minimal efforts to structure. Fig. 1demonstrates the resources within each category and an overview of the study framework.We acquired all publicly available PDDI datasets identified by the aforementioned search and then designed a simple PDDI data model (i.e., an associative array or “dictionary”) to combine the data elements provided from each source. We then developed custom scripts to translate the PDDIs listed in each source to the model. This activity and all analyses described below were conducted between June and September 2014 using the versions of the data sets current at that time.With the goal of integrating publicly available PDDI datasets, we first performed an analysis of the overlap between drug entities found across the sources. The first step in this analysis involved identifying attributes across the sources that could be used to match records that refer to the same drug entity (i.e., linkage points). Because our goal was to facilitate drug mappingacross different drug resources while avoiding erroneous mappings, we restricted linkage points to:•Existing mappings where one source provided an unambiguous drug identifier from another source (e.g., Source A provides the exact unique identifier for drug X in Source B).An exact case insensitive match of the string name or synonym for the drug as provided in two sources.An intermediate source provided a data item (e.g., a chemical structure string) that could be used to create an unambiguous mapping between a drug entity to other sources.Drug entities in each dataset were mapped to DrugBank identifiers [17] wherever possible to enable cross-dataset comparisons. DrugBank was chosen for this purpose because of its broad inclusion of drugs, including drugs marketed in different countries. The resource also provides a variety of identifiers for drugs including string names, codes from various terminologies, and chemical structure identifiers.Once the drug entities used by each source was mapped to DrugBank we use simple counts and percentages to compare PDDI overlap. We created a tabular representation of the results so that the overlap of the datasets, including those supporting NLP experiments, could be easily compared with each other. We also queried the merged dataset to identify specific PDDI instances that were in common across sources.We tested if a merged PDDI dataset could improve the performance of the existing PDDI NLP pipeline created by Bui et al [18]. The Bui pipeline was chosen because (1) its performance is well characterized for three different NLP corpora, and (2) the code implementing the pipeline is available as an open source project. The system uses three steps to classify sentences for the mention of a PDDI. First, it pre-processes the input text to convert input sentences into a structured representation. During this phase, the sentence text is scanned to identify “trigger” words from a list of more than 200 words similar to “alteration”, “blocked”, “caused”, and “potentiated.” Sentences for which no trigger words are found are dropped from further processing. Sentences that mention trigger words are mapped into a suitable syntactic structure and then used to generate feature vectors. The third step in the process is to use the obtained feature vectors to train a support vector machine (SVM) classifier.We added one additional step during pre-processing for those sentences that lacked a trigger word. Rather than simply exclude the sentence, a version of the merged PDDI dataset was queried for each drug pair mentioned in the sentence. If the query returned a result, the associated sentence was passed to the remaining steps of the NLP pipeline. Our reasoning for this approach is that the list of trigger words compiled by the Bui et al. might be an imperfect filter for PDDI NLP because it arose from their research on NLP of protein–protein interactions. We expected that there might be cases where a PDDI mention uses terms not present in the trigger list. In those cases, the presence in the merged PDDI dataset of a drug pair from the sentence might be sufficient “domain knowledge” to justify retaining the sentence for further NLP.We altered the code written by Bui et al. [18] to use the test method when flagged. We then tested the Bui pipeline using the NLP corpora that they used in their original evaluation, both with and without the use of the merged PDDI dataset during pre-processing. The merged PDDI dataset used for testing the approach was slightly different from the one used to compare PDDI overlap (Section 2.3). Specifically, datasets that included the exact same set of PDDIs as the two NLP corpora were excluded. Also excluded were PDDI datasets generated using NLP or by pharmacovigilance signal generation. These were excluded because the number of false positives in these datasets is not known. All tests were run on a 64-bit Dell XPS configured with Ubuntu Linux 14.04 and using Java 1.7.0_72. The source code for the modified NLP pipeline was made available for download to interested researchers.1https://github.com/dbmi-pitt/pk-ddi-role-identifier/tree/master/nlp-ddi-role-identifier.1The drug product label, also known as a “package insert” in the United States (US) and the summary of product characteristics in Europe, is a document required by law, written for clinicians and patients containing information on the drug by the drug manufacturers. In this respect, it differs from an NLP corpus, which is a large collection of texts, written or spoken material upon which a linguistic analysis is based and used in the development of NLP tools, and a knowledge base, which is a technology used to store complex structured and unstructured information used by a computer system. US Drug product labeling information is provided to the public for free by the National Library of Medicine DailyMed web site.Once all datasets were interlinked by DrugBank identifiers, we investigated the potential value of the interlinked dataset for augmenting PDDI information provided in drug product labeling. Studies have shown product labeling to be incomplete [19, 20] and one motivation for this activity is to extend previous pilot work on methods to address known limitations of the information source [21]. To do this, we examined cases where there existed an overlap between the PDDI datasets designed for NLP research with product labeling and other data sources.We tested the potential value of the interlinked PDDI dataset for improving the performance of a pharmacovigilance protocol for making PDDI predictions [14]. The protocol generates new PDDI candidates through the integration of chemical, structure, and drug interaction similarity measures via linear algebra techniques. The protocol specifies that drug interaction similarity measures should be integrated into a reference standard of well-established PDDIs. To apply the protocol, the drugs described in the different sources were mapped to 928 DrugBank drugs used in previous studies for which the chemical and structure similarity information had already been calculated.A key component of the protocol is a PDDI reference standard that is representative of the many different mechanisms by which drug–drug interactions might occur. We experimented with four different methods for creating such a reference standard: (1) combining all clinically oriented applications (except one left out for validation, see below), (2) combining all text corpora developed for NLP research, (3) combining all knowledge bases used for bioinformatics/pharmacovigilance, and (4) combining all datasets into a single dataset.The performance of the protocol using each dataset as the reference PDDI knowledge base was evaluated by comparing the list of predicted PDDIs with a list of PDDIs from the VA NDF- RT [22] – a dataset that, until September of 2014, covered all drugs used in United States Veteran’s Administration (VA) formulary. Plots of area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were used for performance comparisons. We selectedthe VA NDF-RT as the comparison information source because it was designed to be a comprehensive and clinically-orientedPDDI information source. Some drug–drug interactions data sources, such as DrugBank, contain sets of theoretical DDIs with limited implications at clinical level.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
