@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Computer-interpretable clinical guidelines: A methodological review

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Computer interpretable guidelines (CIG) methods papers are classifies into eight themes.The themes cover the life-cycle of CIG development.CIG research published in JBI and four additional prominent journals are reviewed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Computer-interpretable clinical guidelines,Clinical practice guidelines,Knowledge representation,Decision-support systems,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Clinical practice guidelines (CPGs) aim to improve the quality of care, reduce unjustified practice variations and reduce healthcare costs. In order for them to be effective, clinical guidelines need to be integrated with the care flow and provide patient-specific advice when and where needed. Hence, their formalization as computer-interpretable guidelines (CIGs) makes it possible to develop CIG-based decision-support systems (DSSs), which have a better chance of impacting clinician behavior than narrative guidelines. This paper reviews the literature on CIG-related methodologies since the inception of CIGs, while focusing and drawing themes for classifying CIG research from CIG-related publications in the Journal of Biomedical Informatics (JBI). The themes span the entire life-cycle of CIG development and include: knowledge acquisition and specification for improved CIG design, including (1) CIG modeling languages and (2) CIG acquisition and specification methodologies, (3) integration of CIGs with electronic health records (EHRs) and organizational workflow, (4) CIG validation and verification, (5) CIG execution engines and supportive tools, (6) exception handling in CIGs, (7) CIG maintenance, including analyzing clinician’s compliance to CIG recommendations and CIG versioning and evolution, and finally (8) CIG sharing. I examine the temporal trends in CIG-related research and discuss additional themes that were not identified in JBI papers, including existing themes such as overcoming implementation barriers, modeling clinical goals, and temporal expressions, as well as futuristic themes, such as patient-centric CIGs and distributed CIGs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Trustworthy clinical practice guidelines (CPGs) are statements that include recommendations intended to optimize patient care that are informed by a systematic review of evidence and an assessment of the benefit and harms of alternative care options [1]. Clinical guidelines aim to improve the quality of care, limit unjustified practice variations and reduce healthcare costs. In order for them to be effective, clinical guidelines need to be integrated with the care flow, and provide appropriate recommendations when and where needed. Hence, their formalization as computer-interpretable guidelines (CIGs) [2] makes it possible to develop CIG-based decision-support systems (DSSs) through computer-based reasoning and execution of these formalized models. Such CIG-based DSSs match formalized guideline knowledge with updated patient clinical data to provide patient-specific advice at the point of care, increasing the chance of impacting clinician behavior compared to using only the narrative guidelines [3].Research on CIGs started about 20years ago and became more wide-spread in the late-1990s and early 2000s. Different approaches have been developed to represent and execute clinical guidelines over patient-specific clinical data. They include document-centric models, decision trees and probabilistic models, and “Task-Network Models” (TNMs) [2], which represent guideline knowledge in hierarchical structures containing networks of clinical actions and decisions that unfold over time. This review does not concern modeling of CPGs using case-based reasoning, chaining of individual decision rules (e.g., Arden syntax [4] or rule-based systems), or using CIG formalisms to represent individual decision rules (e.g., rules for adverse drug event prevention [5]). Both formal and semi-formal CIG representations are included in this review; formal models represent decision criteria in a formal interpretable language that enables binding of individual patient data item values to determine the value of the decision criteria, whereas semi-formal representation structures the clinical guideline as linked CIG elements where decision criteria can be represented informally, either as text or structured, but without an interpreter that can bind decision variables to values of patient data and evaluate complex criteria. Semi-formal CIGs could still be interpreted with user assistance (e.g., by making selections between decision options) and they have been used as intermediate step to simplify development of formal models (e.g., the Many-headed Bridge approach [6] which allows bridging the gap between knowledge contained in one or several narrative guidelines and one or several CIG formalisms).In this paper, I review CIG-related methodologies since the inception of CIGs, while focusing and drawing themes for classifying CIG research from past JBI issues. Being a methodology-focused journal, this paper’s hypothesis is that the papers related to this area published in JBI since 2001 would be representative of the different themes found in other medical informatics journals. Creating a manual classification of JBI papers was more tractable than categorizing the full set of papers from the five journals. While adding the remaining papers, I reviewed the themes that had been identified to see whether changes were needed.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the methods used to construct this review. Section 3 presents the emerging themes identified through the methodology papers already published in JBI, ordering them in a life-cycle approach. Section 4 reviews the CIG-related literature in the five selected medical informatics journals, as well as older papers that presented important methods developed in the CIG field. The paper ends with a discussion of additional themes that were not identified in JBI papers, including existing and futuristic themes, trends identified in CIG research, and limitations of this review.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
