@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Scenarios, personas and user stories: User-centered evidence-based design representations of communicable disease investigations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We modeled communicable disease (CD) workflow at health department using user-centered design.Public health CD work is mobile and episodic yet CD reporting systems are stationary and fixed.Health department efforts are focused on CD investigation and response rather than reporting.Current CD information systems do not conform to PH workflow thus affecting their usefulness.Personas, scenarios and user stories provide evidence-based representations for designers.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Human centered design,Public health informatics,Communicable disease reporting,Information workflow,Personas,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
PurposeDespite years of effort and millions of dollars spent to create unified electronic communicable disease reporting systems, the goal remains elusive. A major barrier has been a lack of understanding by system designers of communicable disease (CD) work and the public health workers who perform this work. This study reports on the application of user-centered design representations, traditionally used for improving interface design, to translate the complex CD work identified through ethnographic studies to guide designers and developers of CD systems. The purpose of this work is to: (1) better understand public health practitioners and their information workflow with respect to CD monitoring and control at a local health agency, and (2) to develop evidence-based design representations that model this CD work to inform the design of future disease surveillance systems.MethodsWe performed extensive onsite semi-structured interviews, targeted work shadowing and a focus group to characterize local health agency CD workflow. Informed by principles of design ethnography and user-centered design we created persona, scenarios and user stories to accurately represent the user to system designers.ResultsWe sought to convey to designers the key findings from ethnographic studies: (1) public health CD work is mobile and episodic, in contrast to current CD reporting systems, which are stationary and fixed, (2) health agency efforts are focused on CD investigation and response rather than reporting and (3) current CD information systems must conform to public health workflow to ensure their usefulness. In an effort to illustrate our findings to designers, we developed three contemporary design-support representations: persona, scenario, and user story.ConclusionsThrough application of user-centered design principles, we were able to create design representations that illustrate complex public health communicable disease workflow and key user characteristics to inform the design of CD information systems for public health.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Despite years of effort and millions of dollars spent to create unified electronic communicable disease reporting system, the goal remains elusive. The timely monitoring and control of communicable infectious diseases is critical to maintaining the health of communities and is a primary activity of local health agencies (LHA) [1]. Post 9/11, the application of information technology (IT) to support disease monitoring efforts at public health agencies has been a high priority [2]. However, efforts to implement communicable disease (CD) information systems into public health practice have been slow, with costly mistakes [3]. Independent implementations of in-house and commercial-off-the-shelf technology have resulted in great variability in purpose, function and capacity of these CD information systems [4,5]. As a result, effective and efficient surveillance systems that support CD work remain a goal of the future.Research into the factors that influence the adoption of IT in clinical healthcare suggests that adoption is hindered by economic barriers, contextual barriers, lack of training, user resistance, policy constraints, and legal constraints [6–9]. System design and usability are important to the adoption of health IT. A systematic review of usability methods used in health informatics found that the majority of studies failed to report an explicit qualitative design approach, focused only on a single aspect of the work environment, and rarely used task and/or workflow analysis to contextualize the fit of users, tasks, systems and work environments in the early stages of design [10]. To reduce barriers introduced at the early stages of system design, design approaches that address these oversights are necessary.Over the last several years, we have seen increased efforts to improve interoperability and electronic data exchange between public health agencies and clinical systems [11]. However, budget cuts and resource constraints [12] have limited the ability of staff to dedicate time to provide input into the design of information systems used in their work. Despite recent state-level improvements in disease surveillance capacity enabled by information systems, tools and representations to assist system designers in understanding CD work at the local level are needed.Recent research that characterized barriers to the work of disease surveillance recommended further study of public health information work and inclusion of public health practitioners in the early stages of system design [13]. User-centered design has been used to explore interface design for public health services during emergencies [14], to develop tools that visualize simulated outbreaks for disease detection and control training [15] and to create research tools for data mining and visualizations of health data [16]. However, these studies focused primarily on applying user-centered design for improving functionality of interphase design of an existing system. They do not address the need for a more complete understanding of disease surveillance case investigation workflow nor do they demonstrate how user-centered design methodology can be used to produce verified design artifacts that illustrate to designers the users, tasks and context of public health work early in the system design process. Therefore, this study was conducted to fill the gap in knowledge regarding CD investigation and reporting information workflow and apply user-centered design to inform system designers about users of CD systems.To address this problem our study had two aims:(1)Describe the work processes, influences and environment of CD monitoring and control at an LHA.Based on the data produced by the first goal, develop both traditional and novel evidence-based design representations that model CD monitoring and control as references for system designers to inform design of future disease surveillance systems.To achieve our first aim, we conducted a workplace ethnographic study to produce workflow diagrams and descriptions of themes that influence work. To achieve our second aim we employed methods of design ethnography and user-centered design to produce personas, scenarios of use and user stories to convey key findings based on the workflow analysis. We describe here the initial ethnographic studies of CD information workflow at a Washington State LHA and the application of user-centered design as a novel way to represent these findings to designers.The workflow diagram is a common representation from traditional task analysis [17–19] that schematically presents structures and relationships of work tasks in a flowchart. Workflow studies can include people [20], groups [21,22], context of work [23], and human values and beliefs [24]. The use of ethnographic methods and thematic analysis can complement workflow diagrams with descriptions of themes of work [23]. Design ethnography is a research practice that draws on traditional ethnography and focuses on common patterns that are important to the design of information systems [25]. A form of action research, design ethnography focuses closely on discovering opportunities for design interventions in the situation under study. To make research findings as vivid as possible to designers, user-centered design offers alternative forms of representation for user and workflow data. Three common representations of user/task data in forms that are useful to designers are personas[14,26], scenarios[14,27–29], and, more recently, user stories[30,31] (see Table 1for definitions). These representations have been used primarily to describe user behavior for improving Internet interface design. These representations have not heretofore been used in public health informatics research to represent users and complex workflow to designers early in the process of developing CD systems.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
