@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Can–Evo–Ens: Classifier stacking based evolutionary ensemble system for prediction of human breast cancer using amino acid sequences

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We developed a novel classifier-stacking based evolutionary system for cancer prediction.Improved performance of the prediction system is reported using the optimal threshold obtained through PSO algorithm.We found PseAAC-S feature space as the most informative.Experimental results demonstrate that our cancer prediction system is better than other proposed system.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Breast cancer,Amino acids,Physicochemical properties,Genetic programming,Stacking ensemble,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The diagnostic of human breast cancer is an intricate process and specific indicators may produce negative results. In order to avoid misleading results, accurate and reliable diagnostic system for breast cancer is indispensable. Recently, several interesting machine-learning (ML) approaches are proposed for prediction of breast cancer. To this end, we developed a novel classifier stacking based evolutionary ensemble system “Can–Evo–Ens” for predicting amino acid sequences associated with breast cancer. In this paper, first, we selected four diverse-type of ML algorithms of Naïve Bayes, K-Nearest Neighbor, Support Vector Machines, and Random Forest as base-level classifiers. These classifiers are trained individually in different feature spaces using physicochemical properties of amino acids. In order to exploit the decision spaces, the preliminary predictions of base-level classifiers are stacked. Genetic programming (GP) is then employed to develop a meta-classifier that optimal combine the predictions of the base classifiers. The most suitable threshold value of the best-evolved predictor is computed using Particle Swarm Optimization technique. Our experiments have demonstrated the robustness of Can–Evo–Ens system for independent validation dataset. The proposed system has achieved the highest value of Area Under Curve (AUC) of ROC Curve of 99.95% for cancer prediction. The comparative results revealed that proposed approach is better than individual ML approaches and conventional ensemble approaches of AdaBoostM1, Bagging, GentleBoost, and Random Subspace. It is expected that the proposed novel system would have a major impact on the fields of Biomedical, Genomics, Proteomics, Bioinformatics, and Drug Development.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cancer is one of the rapidly growing diseases in the world. Nearly, fourteen million people are diagnosed per year with cancer. It is estimated that this figure will increase up to 19million in 2025. It is assessed that out of 24million cancer patients, half of them could be prevented in 2035 [1]. There are many types of cancers associated with human organs such as breast, colorectum, lung, and prostate. The most commonly diagnosed cancers are related to lung (1.8million, 13.0% of the total), breast (1.7million, 11.9%), and colorectum (1.4million, 9.7%) [2]. Human breast cancer is the second foremost cause of worldwide cancer related deaths. It is most widespread cancer among women. Like other cancers, breast cancer can be successfully treated if predicted in early stages. Approximately 1.5million cases of women breast cancer are registered per year, worldwide. About 88% of women diagnosed with breast cancer would survive at least 10years. In US, due to early detection and treatment, more than 2.9million women diagnosed with breast cancer were alive in 2012 [3]. In Pakistan, approximately 36,750 new women breast cancers cases are estimated for 2015 and about 17,5521This figure is estimated using the population forecasts that are extracted from the United Nations, World Population prospects, the 2012 revision (GLOBOCAN 2012).1women would die due to breast cancer. In order to increase the survival rate and to reduce cost, early prediction of breast cancer with reliable decision support system is essential. Such a system would also be helpful in avoiding unnecessary toxicity to the patient.Human body cells normally grow in a regular and controlled pattern. However, during cancer development, body cells grow without control. The causes of uncontrolled growth of abnormal cells are due to mutation in genes. Cancer genomes are very unstable and usually show extensive genomic alterations. These changes vary from intragenic mutations to gross gains and/or loss of chromosomal material [4,5]. Genetic mutations, deletions, and allelic loss of tumor suppressor genes produce aberrant RNA transcript that mostly affects normal function of the translated protein. Examples of commonly mutated tumor suppressor genes in human cancer are BRCA1, BRCA2, and P53. Usually, majority of the mutations influence these genes and effect in protein sequences with deletions, insertions or truncations. This variation in protein sequences of amino acids would be helpful for developing cancer diagnosis system.Breast cancer refers to a malignant tumor that occurs in human breast cells. It is a genomically complex and heterogeneous disease [6]. Breast cancer is widely studied with genomic technologies with efforts to develop molecular predictors of clinical outcomes and drug response. It is very different from other types of cancers. For instance, breast cancer and prostate cancer are two types of diseases. Their response could vary under different diagnosis and treatment methods. That is why for diagnosis, treatment, and drug discovery of breast cancer different types of signatures/features are required. The molecular signatures of breast cancer are identified using fundamental knowledge of system biology, cell biology, structural biology, genomics, and proteomics. However, in our view, proteins molecules based features that we have extracted using hydrophobicity (Hd) and hydrophilicity (Hb) properties of amino acids of protein would be quite helpful for breast cancer prediction. These physicochemical properties have been used in the study of protein foldings, structures, protein–protein interaction, and sequence-order effects [7].In literature, several breast cancer prediction systems are developed using different feature extraction strategies [8–13]. A review of different feature extraction and selection techniques related to protein sequence analysis is presented in [14]. Protein sequences of amino acids have been utilized for the prediction of ovarian cancer, lung cancer [15], colon cancer, and breast cancer [16]. Jene-Sanz et al. have identified levels of 1200 genes expression [17]. They are directly controlled by enzyme, EZH2, which is correlated with the aggressiveness of breast cancer cases. Ahmad et al. have used Bayesian network technique to construct a gene regulatory network from microarray data [18].Research interest is growing exponentially by integrating various classifiers to improve the performance. The integration approach is referred to as ensemble or collective decision-making system. Xin Ma et al. have applied Random Forest based ensemble system using protein sequence-based features for prediction of DNA-binding residues [19]. Goodman et al. have used non-evolutionary methods Optimized-LVQ (Learning Vector Quantization), Big-LVQ, and Artificial Immune Recognition System (AIRS) [20] with clinical features computed from digitized image of a fine needle aspirate (FNA) of breast mass. The combination of Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs) and SVM, with clinical features obtained from digitized image of FNA of breast mass have yielded 97.07% accuracy [21]. Protein features of malignant and benign cancers are evaluated using different screening methods. For example, Decision Tree models, generalized rule induction, and clustering methods for identification of similarity patterns in benign and malignant breast cancer tissues [22]. In another study, Aminzadeh et al. have developed RotBoost ensemble approach with microarray genes and attained 94.39% accuracy [23]. RotBoost ensemble is constructed by integrating the ideas of Rotation Forest and AdaBoost. Lavanya and Rani have applied Bagging and Boosting for ensemble based decision making systems [24]. Their ensemble systems have used Classification and Regression Trees for feature selection and achieved prediction accuracies up to 97.85% and 95.56%, respectively.Though, several ensemble systems are proposed for various applications. However, it is still a challenging task to develop a high performing ensemble system for cancer prediction. Earlier, Boosting, Bagging, and RF based ensemble systems are developed by generating a set of classifiers that are trained from single learning algorithm. These approaches attempt to improve the prediction performance by iteratively retraining the base classifiers with a subset of most informative training data. These approaches have limited performance due to small number of biological samples and class imbalance. Another limitation is that these approaches have merely one level by taking the original input data to give single output prediction. On the other hand, our proposed stacking ensemble system has generated a set of classifiers that are trained from different learning algorithms.Our approach effectively combines multiple level models for prediction [25–27]. It has two level classifier structures; (i) base classifiers are used for generation of preliminary predictions, and (ii) meta-classifiers are used for fusion of base classifiers. The 1st level base classifiers are trained on the original input dataset, and their predicted results are extracted called meta-data. Then, 2nd level meta-classifier is trained on this new dataset to obtain final prediction. The role of 2nd level classifier is to find out how best to combine the results of the base classifiers. However, to the best of our knowledge, in previous studies, GP based evolutionary ensemble as stacking classifier is not tailored for early prediction of breast cancer using amino acid sequences. GP technique is based on the principles of natural selection and recombination under defined fitness criterion. It is a powerful evolutionary approach, which searches for possible solutions in the defined problem space. This approach was used effectively in different applications of pattern recognition [28–31]. Here, we employed GP to develop a new ensemble system of ameliorated performance by taking advantage of its ability to explore and exploit the search space in an effective way for breast cancer prediction.The proposed evolutionary ‘Can–Evo–Ens’ system is developed by exploring diversities in both feature and decision spaces. The input data of protein primary sequences is converted into features of Amino Acid Composition (AAC), Split Amino Acid Composition (SAAC), Pseudo Amino Acid Composition-Series (PseAAC-S), and Pseudo Amino Acid Composition-Parallel (PseAAC-P). We have chosen four diverse types of ML algorithms of Naïve Bayes (NB), K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN), Support Vector Machines (SVM), and Random Forest (RF) as base-level classifiers/predictors. These predictors are trained in different feature spaces. Next, predictions of base-level predictors are stacked. During GP evolution process, predictions of the base-level predictors are combined using fitness criterion of Area Under Curves of Receiver Operating Characteristic (AUCs-ROC). Finally, the performance of best individual evolved at the end of GP simulations is computed using optimal threshold obtained from Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) algorithm. The performance is evaluated on two benchmark cancer datasets using various quality measures of AUC, Accuracy (Acc), Specificity (Sp), Sensitivity (Sn), G-mean, F-score, and Mathews Correlation Coefficient (MCC). The overall performance of individual predictors is reported using 10-fold cross-validation data sampling technique [32]. Our results show that evolutionary ensemble systems are more accurate than either Bagging or Boosting ensembles. The comparative performance highlights that the proposed approach is superior to individual, conventional ensemble, and previous approaches. It is observed that PseAAC-S feature space has better discrimination power over the rest of feature extraction strategies for cancer prediction.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
