@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Annotating temporal information in clinical narratives

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper describes the creation of a temporally annotated clinical corpus.It is the largest publically available clinical corpus with full temporal information.This paper informs the MLP researchers about the temporal data preparation process.This paper guides the development of future clinical temporal annotation guidelines.It cautions against pitfalls and the issues often raised in the temporal representation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Natural Language Processing,Temporal Reasoning,Medical Informatics,Corpus Building,Annotation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Temporal information in clinical narratives plays an important role in patients’ diagnosis, treatment and prognosis. In order to represent narrative information accurately, medical natural language processing (MLP) systems need to correctly identify and interpret temporal information. To promote research in this area, the Informatics for Integrating Biology and the Bedside (i2b2) project developed a temporally annotated corpus of clinical narratives. This corpus contains 310 de-identified discharge summaries, with annotations of clinical events, temporal expressions and temporal relations. This paper describes the process followed for the development of this corpus and discusses annotation guideline development, annotation methodology, and corpus quality.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Electronic Medical Records (EMRs) contain significant amounts of unstructured narrative text, which can be turned into structured data with help from automated medical language processing (MLP) systems. Some sub-areas of MLP, such as de-identification and clinical concept (e.g. disorder, medication) extraction are well-studied. Other areas, such as analysis of the temporal structures embedded in clinical texts, are less so [1]. Besides being a more complicated task, we believe that the lack of availability of manually annotated clinical corpora with temporal information also hindered the progress of MLP in this area [2].Temporal information in clinical narratives plays an important role in medical decision-making and care assessment [3]. Some examples of clinical applications that utilize temporal information include: diagnosis, prognosis and treatment decision support [3,4], time specific clinical information extraction [5–7], and time-related question answering [8–10]. These applications rely on temporal reasoning systems which extract temporal information from natural language, and perform temporal inference over the extracted information. Temporal information in narrative texts includes the events and the temporal expressions that appear in the text, as well as the temporal relations among them.In order to develop and evaluate temporal reasoning systems, we need clinical corpora annotated with temporal information. Given this need, the 2012 Informatics for Integrating Biology and the Bedside (i2b2) project provided the community with a corpus of temporally annotated clinical narratives [2] This corpus contains the clinical history and the hospital course sections of 310 de-identified discharge summaries from Partners Healthcare and the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, for a total of approximately 178,000 tokens. The corpus was annotated for three layers of information: events, temporal expressions and their normalization, and temporal relations. Our annotation scheme was adapted from TimeML [11]. More specifically, we annotate three types of temporal information: (1) EVENTs which represent the semantic events mentioned in the text that affect the patient’s clinical timeline; (2) TIMEX3s that represent temporal expressions of date, times, durations, and frequencies; and (3) TLINKs which represent the temporal relations between EVENTs and TIMEX3s. We refer to this corpus as the i2b2 temporal relations corpus.In this paper, we present the process followed for the development of the i2b2 temporal relations corpus, including the creation of a temporal annotation scheme tailored to clinical narratives, the methodology for applying the scheme to the i2b2 temporal relations corpus, the evaluation of the resulting annotation quality, and a description of the resulting annotated corpus. We hope that this paper will: (1) inform the MLP researchers about the temporal data preparation process, (2) guide the development of future clinical temporal annotation guidelines, (3) caution against pitfalls and the issues often raised in the representation of temporal information, and (4) share our solutions to these problems with the community.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 summarizes the related work in temporal representation and existing temporally annotated corpora in the general as well as the MLP domains. Section 3 summarizes our annotation guidelines. Section 4 presents our annotation methodology and procedures. The annotation quality evaluation and corpus statistics are presented in Sections 5 and 6, respectively.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
i2b2 created a temporally annotated discharge summary corpus that is accessible by the research community. The i2b2 temporal relations corpus provides a rich resource for temporal reasoning study in the clinical domain. The annotation quality of this corpus is on par with stable and proven temporal annotation corpora in the general domain. The temporal reasoning systems that perform well on this corpus can potentially support time-related downstream clinical applications on narrative discharge summaries, such as time-specific question answering, medication reconciliation, and computer assisted coding.We identified several challenges in temporal annotation, including: the handling of TLINK conflicts in annotation time; the TLINK closure representation in adjudication and the trade-off between the administrative overhead in multi-pass annotation and the quality of the single-pass annotation. We believe that addressing these issues will help increase annotation efficiency and accuracy in future temporal annotation tasks.This project was supported by Informatics for Integrating Biology and the Bedside (i2b2) award No. 2U54LM008748 from the National Institutes of Health (NIH)/National Q5 Library of Medicine (NLM), by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI), and by award No. 1R13LM01141101 from the NIH NLM. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NLM, NHLBI, or NIH.Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2013.07.004.Supplementary data 1The 2012 i2b2 Clinical Temporal Relations Challenge Annotation Guidelines