@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Restricted natural language based querying of clinical databases

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A generic querying solution in the clinical domain.Translation of restricted natural language queries to SQL queries.Resolving the complexity of data extraction from Entity–Attribute–Value data model.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Restricted natural language querying,Knowledge discovery and reuse,Data analytics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
PurposeTo elevate the level of care to the community it is essential to provide usable tools for healthcare professionals to extract knowledge from clinical data. In this paper a generic translation algorithm is proposed to translate a restricted natural language query (RNLQ) to a standard query language like SQL (Structured Query Language).MethodsA special purpose clinical data analytics language (CliniDAL) has been introduced which provides scheme of six classes of clinical questioning templates. A translation algorithm is proposed to translate the RNLQ of users to SQL queries based on a similarity-based Top-k algorithm which is used in the mapping process of CliniDAL. Also a two layer rule-based method is used to interpret the temporal expressions of the query, based on the proposed temporal model. The mapping and translation algorithms are generic and thus able to work with clinical databases in three data design models, including Entity-Relationship (ER), Entity–Attribute–Value (EAV) and XML, however it is only implemented for ER and EAV design models in the current work.ResultsIt is easy to compose a RNLQ via CliniDAL’s interface in which query terms are automatically mapped to the underlying data models of a Clinical Information System (CIS) with an accuracy of more than 84% and the temporal expressions of the query comprising absolute times, relative times or relative events can be automatically mapped to time entities of the underlying CIS and to normalized temporal comparative values.ConclusionThe proposed solution of CliniDAL using the generic mapping and translation algorithms which is enhanced by a temporal analyzer component provides a simple mechanism for composing RNLQ for extracting knowledge from CISs with different data design models for analytics purposes.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Extracting knowledge from data is essential in clinical research, decision making and hypothesis testing. These tasks are necessary for healthcare professionals to improve the level of services of care to the community. The important dichotomy between health care professionals and IT (Information Technologies) staff is that innovative tools and methods in computer science and web technologies are not applied with all their potential in the clinical domain, and the IT staff are not familiar with the clinical terminologies to create language-aware user-friendly tools. So, providing a general solution or methodology to create such tools is of prime importance.Our substantive goal is to create a special purpose query language for clinical data analytics (CliniDAL) that can answer any answerable question from the CIS. A category scheme of six classes of increasing complexity, including point-of-care retrieval queries, descriptive statistics, statistical hypothesis testing, complex hypotheses of scientific studies, semantic record retrieval and predictive modeling has been designed to capture the scope encompassed by CliniDAL’s objectives. The formal definition of CliniDAL has been proposed in [1]. The proposed solution for CliniDAL includes automatic mapping of query terms to the underlying model of the CIS, storing the mapping result in a generic context model and then translation of the recognized query elements to the standard formats of SQL or XML based query languages. The innovative aspect of CliniDAL is that a user would be able to compose a query in the restricted natural language form of CliniDAL without any knowledge of the underlying schema of the CIS or any SQL-like or XML based query languages. In the current work, the aim is to propose a generic translation algorithm based on the mapping solution which is proposed in [2]. The proposed algorithms for mapping and translation are only implemented for ER and EAV based CIS design models in the current work and they will be extended to support XML based CIS design models as the next step. CliniDAL is a generic query language as all its underlying solutions for parsing, mapping, translation and temporal expression interpretation are generic and not dependent on any CIS, however the current version is only tested on a specific CIS [ICIP: ICU section, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital (RPAH), Sydney, Australia]. The earlier versions were successfully tested on a number of other CISs. They have been used by small number of users at RPAH on a weekly basis.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: The next section provides an overview of the keyword-based querying approaches in the general domain. Then the proposed translation method which has been implemented as a prototype componentQuery Translatorin CliniDAL is explained together with the details of challenges and solutions related to different data models which should be covered and the flexibilities that need to be added to CliniDAL. After that, the experimental results of translating a set of test queries are explained and finally there will be an evaluation together with conclusions and future work suggestions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The test results show that, CliniDAL’s grammar performs correctly for all types of its defined query classes and the initial goal of composing restricted natural language queries is accomplished using the current grammar. However, we believe attaching a well-designed user interface based on the grammar will simplify CliniDAL query composition extensively.In addition, the generic CliniDAL architecture ensures the portability and common characteristics with EAV data model, can be easily extended to support XML based CISs as well. However, the accuracy of the translation algorithm depends on the mapping algorithm which is more than 84% of the current implementation. One more point is that, the most popular data analytics functionalities in the clinical domain are now available in CliniDAL’s post-processing module which can be extended to support other analytics functions as required. Our experimental results revealed that composing queries in CliniDAL is much easier for clinical staff than SQL queries. An equivalent SQL query with a CliniDAL query can be hundreds of lines. This issue will be considerable for more complex queries like hypothesis testing queries and scientific experiments queries. A separate study is ongoing to use CliniDAL for scientific experimentation.Furthermore, integrating a clinical terminology like SNOMED-CT to CliniDAL using the TTSCT service helps unify the expression of clinical concepts which can be applied to formalize the terminologies used by different CISs. However, the performance of the TTSCT module needs improvement to get better results on categorization of query terms and their unifications.More experiments are ongoing on the RPAH-ICU corpus to test the system in answering clinically relevant questions. But the important point based on our current experiments is that the current implementation is only able to answer queries for which their answers come from structural part of the CIS. These queries are mostly related to raw charted data. Two more improvements are targeted for CliniDAL in later developments. One is the ability to answer questions whose answers are not stored in structural part of the CIS while implications of valid answers can be found in the free text part of the CIS. The other is enhancing text searching by semantic searching when the answer to queries stored in the structural part but in a text fields of the data base. The solution to these improvements is using NLP techniques which have been extensively used in our Laboratory and also integrating a clinical terminology like SNOMED-CT into CliniDAL.The main contribution of this paper is proposing a generic solution for translation of CliniDAL queries to SQL queries. The solution enables the clinical staffs to compose simple retrieval/aggregated queries or more complex research oriented queries in the restricted natural language form of CliniDAL without any knowledge of the underlying schema of the CIS or any SQL-like query language. Particularly, the proposed method simplifies the complexity of handling data mining from CISs with EAV design model.