@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
eTACTS: A method for dynamically filtering clinical trial search results

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A dynamic tag cloud may reduce information overload for clinical trial search.We present eTACTS, a novel method to dynamically filter clinical trial search results.eTACTs relies on tags automatically mined from the eligibility criteria.eTACTS is available at http://is.gd/eTACTS.eTACTS may be a valuable enhancement for available clinical trial search engines.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Information storage and retrieval,Clinical trials,Dynamic information filtering,Interactive information retrieval,Tag cloud,Association rules,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveInformation overload is a significant problem facing online clinical trial searchers. We present eTACTS, a novel interactive retrieval framework using common eligibility tags to dynamically filter clinical trial search results.Materials and methodseTACTS mines frequent eligibility tags from free-text clinical trial eligibility criteria and uses these tags for trial indexing. After an initial search, eTACTS presents to the user a tag cloud representing the current results. When the user selects a tag, eTACTS retains only those trials containing that tag in their eligibility criteria and generates a new cloud based on tag frequency and co-occurrences in the remaining trials. The user can then select a new tag or unselect a previous tag. The process iterates until a manageable number of trials is returned. We evaluated eTACTS in terms of filtering efficiency, diversity of the search results, and user eligibility to the filtered trials using both qualitative and quantitative methods.ResultseTACTS (1) rapidly reduced search results from over a thousand trials to ten; (2) highlighted trials that are generally not top-ranked by conventional search engines; and (3) retrieved a greater number of suitable trials than existing search engines.DiscussioneTACTS enables intuitive clinical trial searches by indexing eligibility criteria with effective tags. User evaluation was limited to one case study and a small group of evaluators due to the long duration of the experiment. Although a larger-scale evaluation could be conducted, this feasibility study demonstrated significant advantages of eTACTS over existing clinical trial search engines.ConclusionA dynamic eligibility tag cloud can potentially enhance state-of-the-art clinical trial search engines by allowing intuitive and efficient filtering of the search result space.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Randomized controlled trials generate high-quality medical evidence for disease treatment and therapeutic development but still face longstanding recruitment problems. In fact, more than 90% of trials are delayed because of difficulties recruiting eligible patients [1–3]. Using Web applications, health consumers are becoming increasingly comfortable searching online for clinical research opportunities [4]. However, information overload is a common and significant problem with most existing clinical trial search engines (e.g., ClinicalTrials.gov [5], UK Clinical Trials Gateway [6]). For example, searching “diabetes mellitus, type II” on ClinicalTrials.gov returns a list of more than 5,000 trials (as of April 2013), which are sorted just by their probabilistic relevance to the search terms, with those containing the query in the title ranked highest [7]. Supplying additional parameters, such as location or study type, can only modestly improve search specificity, especially for searches of eligibility criteria. Moreover, identifying terms that are effective at retrieving relevant trials can be difficult for the average user [8].One major limitation of existing clinical trial search engines is the underutilization of free-text eligibility criteria. This is mostly due to varied and complicated semantic structures (e.g., inclusion vs. exclusion and negation) that make it difficult to define standardized parsers as well as user-friendly representations to exploit in search applications [9–11]. Yet, we hypothesize that filtering clinical trials by eligibility criteria can greatly increase the specificity of the search engines.This article presents eTACTS (eligibility TAg cloud-based Clinical Trial Search), a faceted search method to filter the list of clinical trials returned by any type of initial search (e.g., simple free-text query terms, advanced form-based). In particular, the resulting trials are indexed through a small number of facets, each defining a distinct property of the text, and users can select facets to filter the search results [12–15]. eTACTS defines eligibility tags as facets for the clinical trial search results. An eligibility tag is a meaningful multi-word pattern, e.g., “breast carcinoma”, “active malignancy”, that frequently appears within the free-text eligibility criteria of clinical trials [16]. Eligibility tags are presented to users as a dynamic tag cloud to assist with iterative filtering of the resulting trials. A tag cloud is a visual representation of key concepts associated with textual documents. In this domain, individual tags are displayed as hyperlinks to a set of clinical trials that contain the tags in their eligibility criteria, with each tag’s “importance” or relative frequency indicated by a mix of font size and color. When the user selects a tag, the cloud is updated according to the tag distribution in the remaining trials, which contain all of the selected tags in their eligibility criteria. By using common tags, we allow the users to quickly identify common and intuitive facets that lead to efficient and effective result filtering [16].In this paper, we (1) describe the design of a novel interactive clinical trial search framework named eTACTS; (2) demonstrate that a dynamic tag cloud can efficiently reduce the trial search results based on interactive search parameters expressed by eligibility tags; (3) demonstrate that eTACTS helps users discover trials not highlighted by conventional search engines; and (4) demonstrate that searching by eTACTS effectively produce more relevant results than other available search engines.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presented eTACTS, a novel clinical trial search framework that can potentially reduce the information overload for people searching for clinical trials online. eTACTS combines tag mining of free-text eligibility criteria and interactive retrieval based on dynamic tag clouds to reduce the number of resulting trials returned by a simple search. Evaluation on ClinicalTrials.gov showed the feasibility of this approach in terms of its scalability, diversity of the resulting information, and effectiveness in retrieving trials for which users are eligible.The research described was supported by grants R01LM009886 and R01LM010815 (PI: Weng) and T15LM007079 (PI: Hripcsak) from the National Library of Medicine, and grant UL1 TR000040 (PI: Ginsberg), funded through the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS).