@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The clinician in the Driver’s Seat: Part 1 – A drag/drop user-composable electronic health record platform

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
EHRs which let clinician users create and share tools and layout are feasible.Theory suggests HCI/cognition, efficiency, produsage advantages.Drag/drop software design allows clinicians to create patient-specific displays.User control of EHR design can leverage user expertise to fit tools to medical tasks.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
User-configurable EHR,Human–computer interaction,Electronic health record,Composable EHR,Electronic medical record,MedWISE,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Creating electronic health records that support the uniquely complex and varied needs of healthcare presents formidable challenges. To address some of these challenges we created a new model for healthcare information systems, embodied in MedWISE,2Medical widget-based information sharing environment.2a widget-based highly configurable electronic health record (EHR) platform. Founded on the idea that providing clinician users with greater control of the EHR may result in greater fit to user needs and preferences, MedWISE allows drag/drop user configurations and the sharing of user-created elements such as custom laboratory result panels and user-created interface tabs.After reviewing the current state of EHR configurability, we describe the philosophical, theoretical and practical rationales for our model, and the specific functionality of MedWISE. The alternative approach may have several advantages for human–computer interaction, efficiency, cognition, and fit of EHR tools to different contexts and tasks. We discuss potential issues raised by this approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Developing systems that best fit the needs of healthcare is a complex endeavor. Although decades of research have focused on defining requirements for systems that support clinicians and their tasks, studies suggest that healthcare information systems often fail to support effective and efficient clinical decision making and completion of relevant tasks [1,2]. Systems may fail to take into consideration the significant variability of medical information needs that differ according to context, specialty, role, individual patient, and institution. They may also fail to address the highly collaborative nature of the work, and challenges of addressing rapidly changing or emergent needs. User control of modular user-composable systems has promise for addressing these issues [3]. This approach involves supplementing automation by letting the nonprogrammer clinician user create and share systems (including patient-specific displays) by assembling information elements from multiple sources on screen via drag/drop actions. They can also share their creations (individual widgets or interface tabs or templates) with a click, making them available to colleagues or to all clinicians in a setting.We expect three main advantages of this approach. First, the ability to move and assemble elements together on the same page has several desirable properties that can impact the cognitive efficiency and efficacy of coordinated interaction with an electronic health record (EHR) system. To substantiate this claim, we draw on theory from human computer interaction (HCI) and the theory of distributed cognition [4]. Second, we anticipate that clinicians can create a system that affords them the capability to solve problems and that better fits the tasks that they are required to perform. The premise is that by providing a set of building blocks that the user assembles to create novel elements and structures, we can leverage the fact that clinician data users have greater medical, contextual and tacit knowledge than do programmers. Their creations may also be more congruent with their mental models of the patients or the tasks. Third, the features that enable sharing may be used to facilitate communication/collaboration and ‘produsage’, which refers to the construction of a large set of user-created resources and tools adapted to specific user needs and different contexts.3Produsage has been defined by Alan Bruns as collaborative and continuous building and extending of existing content in pursuit of further improvement, by creation of shared content in a networked, participatory environment, in a way that breaks boundaries between consumers and producers [5] Bruns. Produsage, 2009. All participants are users and producers, (hence ‘produser’). Usage is necessarily also productive, as the participant’s very patterns of usage become direct inputs. An example is Amazon recommendations based on aggregated user browsing and purchasing actions.3The purpose of this paper is to describe this novel approach to EHRs, as embodied by our system, MedWISE. We briefly state the theoretical rationale that supports this innovation. However, the primary purpose of this paper is to allow readers to understand the system’s capabilities. Empirical studies of users engaging with the system are reported in other papers [6–9]. The conceptual model is covered in more depth in [3]. As background, we describe problems and user configurability in current EHRs, followed by concepts from theory and research in cognition and HCI. These suggest the relative value in this kind of approach. We then discuss our rationale, and describe the system.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We propose a new modular, user-composable platform approach to developing healthcare IT that can adapt to variable or rapidly changing needs. In developing an illustrative system that gives clinicians greater control of the EHR, we demonstrated the technical feasibility of this approach. User-configurable interfaces have relevance to system design for other fields in which deep user expertise in complex critical processes is paramount. The system flexibility opens new options for developing EHRs as real tools for information organization and thinking, beyond the storage and retrieval (paper-like) paradigm from which current systems originate. Precisely how much control should be assumed by the user is a matter for empirical study. Some studies of user behavior are described in separate papers [6,7,59,60].There is still much left to learn if we are to produce the simplifying inventions that could shift some control to the user and perhaps increase widespread productive EHR use, analogous with similar change as has been realized in other spheres such as the public web. The current project provided building blocks toward achievement of that goal.