@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Federated Aggregate Cohort Estimator (FACE): An easy to deploy, vendor neutral, multi-institutional cohort query architecture

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
FACE is a federated, multi-platform approach for clinical study cohort estimation.Data is aggregated from both i2b2 and Virtual Data Warehouse (VDW) data models.The architecture helps meet IRB and security requirements easily with local control.RESTful web services preserve security, logging, and features for i2b2 sources.The virtual machine delivery model reduces the burden at each data sharing site.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cohort discovery,Federated query,Grid architecture,Data sharing,i2b2,TRIAD,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Cross-institutional data sharing for cohort discovery is critical to enabling future research. While particularly useful in rare diseases, the ability to target enrollment and to determine if an institution has a sufficient number of patients is valuable in all research, particularly in the initiation of projects and collaborations. An optimal technology solution would work with any source database with minimal resource investment for deployment and would meet all necessary security and confidentiality requirements of participating organizations. We describe a platform-neutral reference implementation to meet these requirements: the Federated Aggregate Cohort Estimator (FACE). FACE was developed and implemented through a collaboration of The University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB), The Ohio State University (OSU), the University of Massachusetts Medical School (UMMS), and the Denver Health and Hospital Authority (DHHA) a clinical affiliate of the Colorado Clinical and Translational Sciences Institute. The reference implementation of FACE federated diverse SQL data sources and an i2b2 instance to estimate combined research subject availability from three institutions. It used easily-deployed virtual machines and addressed privacy and security concerns for data sharing.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cross-institutional data sharing is a fundamental component in the development and implementation of large-scale clinical studies. Whether within existing research consortia or for proposed collaboration, the identification across sites of patient populations suitable for participation in clinical and translational research is critical to decision-making. While there are many valuable applications of data sharing, cohort discovery (identifying research subject sample populations) is an important first step for many clinical and translational research initiatives. Identification of clinical study participants beyond a single institution is required both for rare disease research, where even the largest individual institutions are not always able to find a sufficient patient population, and for many studies where very large or diverse populations are needed.Despite strong and ongoing efforts to develop data sharing mechanisms within research networks such as the CTSA consortium [1] by using a common technological architecture, e.g., i2b2 [2], the ability to include all sites in such consortia remains an unmet challenge. While some purpose-specific research networks rely on use of a common repository such as i2b2 [3], have a common data model like the VDW [4], used by the HMO Research Network [5], or have a common vendor-supported data warehouse, these approaches fail to address an inherent limitation: no specific data warehousing technology infrastructure is common to all sites.Data sharing strategies that rely on all sites having the same internal technical architecture will not succeed in involving all potential sites, especially sites outside the large academic medical centers. In addition, current data repository approaches typically require substantial infrastructure investment by each site, even with open-source software such as i2b2, through commercial data warehousing solutions. In addition, some sites with fewer resources still do not have an enterprise data warehouse or have limited access to clinical repositories for research collaborations. As clinical and translational research expands to involve more multi-center collaborations and community healthcare sites, the issue of personnel and other resource limitations is a growing concern.Despite efforts to address broad scale data sharing and interoperability, there are still significant challenges: (1) labor intensive deployment models, (2) sites using a variety of source data models, (3) varying data exchange security models and the ability to navigate multiple IRB and institutional security requirements, and (4) semantic interoperability requirements assuring that data from each of the sites are consistent and understood.We addressed these problems by developing an innovative clinical research informatics approach to create a simple, platform-neutral cohort discovery tool that can be implemented by institutions with minimal technical expertise and resources. The approach, known as the Federated Aggregate Cohort Estimator (FACE) provides an easy way to facilitate cross-institutional data sharing and supports cohort discovery across the translational continuum.The FACE project involved collaboration among The University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB), The Ohio State University (OSU), the Denver Health and Hospital Authority (DHHA), which is a clinical affiliate of the Colorado Clinical Translational Sciences Institute (CCTSI), and the University of Massachusetts Medical School (UMMS). UAB was the lead institution and was also responsible for developing the user interface and query controller. The grid infrastructure security was provided by OSU’s TRIAD project (authentication, authorization, etc.) [6], and UMMS and DHHA were the test sites. All sites contributed to the design of the user interface and the overall design of the system.The project implements an architectural model leveraging an existing grid-based infrastructure that supports federated queries to multiple data sources. It includes a central user interface and query controller, a Virtual Machine (VM) appliance deployment model, a common query expression structure, and a series of query translators.We utilized several elements from the TRIAD project (www.triadcommunity.org), which has implemented and extended a grid infrastructure service for translational research [6]. This service includes components to address security and data interoperability issues, data service representation and discovery, and communication across multiple institutions. OSU provided the TRIAD grid services infrastructure, and the central authentication service (Dorian Authentication and Grid Grouper Authorization components of TRIAD).A single user interface (UI) and supporting application was developed for use across all participating sites. This UI provides a query construction interface and access to aggregate results from that query from each participating institution. There is a secure, centrally-managed query controller which implements query distribution and management based on federated end-user authentication.Each site received a standard virtual machine (also called virtual server or VM) which included all necessary components to accept requests for data, apply security rules as configured by local system administrators, map requests for data to the local data source, query the local data source, and return results. The VMs could easily be deployed within institutional firewalls on existing hardware, reducing the resource burden on participating sites.A key component of the VMs is the common query processor, which allows an identical query to be sent to each site based on the central query construction interface. This query processor is the same for any deployment regardless of the underlying data source, and enables consistent communication between the central infrastructure and the various sites.The VM queries for count data only, and only count information is sent to the secure central query controller and represented by the user interface. Therefore, protected health information (PHI) and other patient-level data in source systems are protected. While only aggregate data leave each site, obfuscation is still necessary in order to reduce the risk of re-identification [7]. FACE implements obfuscation both at the central query controller, and, optionally, local obfuscation settings can be supported at each institution.Because of the federated nature of the architecture, participating sites maintain control of their own data. End user credentials are passed through to the local data services and local administrators retain full ability to control which users and/or user groups are able to query data from their local data source.The VDW data model and content standards were used for the common federated queries. The HMO Research Network VDW data structure specification defines content, format and valid values in 13 domains including demographics, encounter, diagnosis, and lab results. Valid value definitions adhere to standard code sets such as ICD-9, and NIH designations of race, ethnicity and gender. Additionally the VDW specification includes a table structure with fields, field types, and structures. While this data structure was used in the project as one of the target source data systems, it was also used as the content and structure for the construction of the common query definition. This choice was because VDW is a reasonably simple data model, with effectively a single table for each of the most commonly used elements for a cohort discovery solution (diagnosis, demographics, laboratory test results, vital signs, procedures), and a content specification that is oriented towards frequently used standards such as ICD-9. As such it accommodates the types of content and queries expected for cohort discovery, and is already well specified and documented [4]. The VDW specification contained the required data and was simple to implement. While our current use is limited to diagnosis and demographics, extension to laboratory test result, medications, procedures, etc. are accommodated by the specification.If cohort discovery query parameter requirements were to expand beyond what is represented in the VDW specification, then either the specification would need to be expanded, or a supplemental specification could be implemented for specific subdomains. The intent of this project is to consider a broadly applicable common set of data commonly used for cohort discovery. Any self-service cohort discovery method should be kept at a simple enough level to be easily navigable. These two factors have guided what content to prioritize within the highly successful collaborative approach of the HMO Research network and VDW enhancement over time.The query construction interface provides the opportunity to use drop down lists as well as Boolean operators to select the query parameters. Users are able to constrain the query based on current age, gender, race and ethnicity. See Fig. 1. Diagnoses can be searched, with auto complete based on either diagnosis code or description. Diagnosis constraints can be defined as either “all of the following” or “at least one of the following”. Results are returned in aggregate at the institution level, in order to gain a quick indication of organizations of interest. See Fig. 2. Organization’s results can then be either excluded or included in the representation of the stratified aggregate results. Users can dynamically drill down by applying a stratification based on age, race, gender, or any combination thereof (see Fig. 3).The query translators hosted on the VMs translate from the VDW-specified model to the model and terminology of the local data store.For our reference implementation, we developed query translators for the i2b2 Hive and the VDW SQL schema. For i2b2, we executed queries via i2b2’s RESTful web service API provided by the CRC Cell, and, as such, the FACE queries are visible within the standard i2b2 interface and appear like i2b2 queries. The queries are executed with i2b2 application credentials rather than direct database credentials. For VDW, which includes no such API, queries are executed directly against the source database. The VDW translator maps the query structure to the native VDW schema using hibernate over a JDBC connection. Non-VDW schemas are supported using database views to map the required attributes to the VDW specification (the approach implemented at UAB).The query content, such as the diagnosis, is expected to meet the content standards of the specification. In VDW, the physical structure is known and the query translator is aware of the logical data model to which the query structure is translated. For i2b2, while the content standard is expected, and the REST web service limits the need to define physical structure, there is an additional configuration step. As an example, while the ICD-9 diagnosis may be used across multiple i2b2 instances, it is possible that the way in which the concepts are navigated might be different. Each i2b2 implementation may have a different hierarchy, or navigation path to their ICD-9 codes. These navigation paths are defined and manifested as a set of concept paths in an ontology within i2b2. To make the FACE query translator aware of the specific concept paths within an institution’s i2b2 instance there are two choices. If the core hierarchy is the same, the standard configuration file can be updated to indicate the root nodes that contain the concept. If a custom hierarchy or ontology is used to house the ICD-9 concepts, a script is run to consume those concept paths. The script extracts the local i2b2 ontology and makes it available to the data service. The query translator uses the resulting configuration file to insert the appropriate concept path for a given ICD-9 code as it constructs the messages to send to i2b2. Construction of a new query translator, to a new underlying data structure would be a moderate development effort, but would then be usable by any data source of the same type. Additionally not all variations in an underlying data source would result in the construction of a new query translator. Rather, creation of a database view to represent the data as expected by an existing query translator would sometimes be a less resource-intensive approach. This approach was used very effectively for a second instance of UAB’s data as part of the proof of concept and is a much simpler approach than constructing a new translator. This approach proved to require only limited resources to construct the view based on the VDW specification, which is purposefully simplified.The cohort discovery tool project was designated by the participating Institutional Review Boards as “Not engaged in human subjects research”. As appropriate, the architecture was also reviewed by healthcare institutions’ data security process. Attributes of the architecture that are beneficial for mitigating security concerns are described in the discussion.The project components were deployed and instantiated at each site, but were only accessible to the project team as a proof-of-concept implementation. Though the infrastructure was put into place, with a live user interface and queries to institutional data sources, the system was not deployed as a production system and was not made accessible to those outside the project team.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
