@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
LGscore: A method to identify disease-related genes using biological literature and Google data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We constructed disease-related gene network using literature and Google data.We identified disease-related genes using analysis of the gene network.The proposed method found more disease-related genes than comparable methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Text-mining,Data mining,Gene,Disease,Google,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Since the genome project in 1990s, a number of studies associated with genes have been conducted and researchers have confirmed that genes are involved in disease. For this reason, the identification of the relationships between diseases and genes is important in biology. We propose a method called LGscore, which identifies disease-related genes using Google data and literature data. To implement this method, first, we construct a disease-related gene network using text-mining results. We then extract gene–gene interactions based on co-occurrences in abstract data obtained from PubMed, and calculate the weights of edges in the gene network by means of Z-scoring. The weights contain two values: the frequency and the Google search results. The frequency value is extracted from literature data, and the Google search result is obtained using Google. We assign a score to each gene through a network analysis. We assume that genes with a large number of links and numerous Google search results and frequency values are more likely to be involved in disease. For validation, we investigated the top 20 inferred genes for five different diseases using answer sets. The answer sets comprised six databases that contain information on disease–gene relationships. We identified a significant number of disease-related genes as well as candidate genes for Alzheimer’s disease, diabetes, colon cancer, lung cancer, and prostate cancer. Our method was up to 40% more accurate than existing methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Since the human genome was sequenced, a large number of gene-based studies have been performed, and vast amounts of gene data have been generated. These data are stored in databases such as the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database [19]. Extracting hidden information from these databases offers new research opportunities and challenges. One of the best known tools with which to extract knowledge is text-mining.In the biomedical area, text-mining has been used to identify biological entities such as protein and gene names in the literature. Furthermore, text-mining can reveal novel relationships among biological entities. Text-mining can provide opportunities to reduce the time and effort needed to extract relationships between biological entities from a large amount of publications. Interest in text-mining is increasing due to the increasing number of electronic publications stored in databases such as PubMed [26]. Furthermore, Swanson’s ABC model [1,2] makes text-mining a feasible approach.Network analysis also plays an important role in biological research. Gene networks, which describe gene–gene interactions, and protein networks, which describe protein–protein interactions, allow the visual relationships among biological entities in complex biological systems to be presented in a simple, clear manner. Network analysis also provides an opportunity to analyze which relationships are meaningful among various candidates. A network analysis provides several analysis measures as well, such as degree centrality, closeness centrality, and betweenness centrality to identify novel relationships among the large numbers of relationships in the network.Several techniques have been developed to extract hidden information using text-mining and network analysis. Li et al. [16] tried to integrate both literature and microarray gene-expression data. They constructed a gene network using the co-occurrence-based text-mining method and then refined the network using microarray data. Their results showed that the network by Li et al. is more reliable than the co-occurrence-based network. Gonzalez et al. [10] presented a method which uses literature data and interactions. They extracted an initial set of genes and proteins from the literature and then integrated the set with interactions from the curated databases of BIND and DIP. They then constructed a network based on these data, ranking the genes and gene products using a combination of the two scores. One of the scores measures the strength of the relationship with the initial set of genes, and the other score measures the importance of each gene in maintaining the connectivity of the network. Their method showed high accuracy levels for atherosclerosis. Chen et al. [4] presented a method that constructs a gene-regulatory network using micro-array data and literature-based knowledge. They first extracted gene–gene relationships from the literature and then assigned random weights to the relationships. Through this process, they generated 2000 chromosomes. Subsequently, they used a genetic algorithm to optimize the strength of the interactions using a microarray and an artificial neural network fitness function. Their results demonstrated the advantage of combining gene interactions extracted from the literature with microarray analysis in generating contribution-weighted gene-regulatory networks. Ozgur et al. [20] determined the relationships between prostate cancer and genes using text-mining and network analysis. They constructed a disease-related gene network using the biomedical literature and seed genes, and extracted disease-related genes based on an analysis of the gene network using different scoring methods. A seed gene is a gene known to be involved in a disease. Although this approach by Ozgur et al. inferred prostate cancer-related genes successfully, it cannot be used to determine the relationships between genes and diseases for which there are no seed genes. Furthermore, the experimental results are influenced by the choice of the seed gene. The PRINCE algorithm [24,25] is another method that was developed to infer relationships among genes and diseases using network analysis based on disease–disease similarity and protein–protein interaction data. The PRINCE algorithm can be applied to all diseases; however, it is less accurate than the method by Ozgur et al.In this paper, we propose a novel approach to infer disease-related genes based on Google data and literature data. We constructed a disease-related gene network by means of co-occurrence-based text-mining for specific disease-related studies in the literature. We then extracted the Google search result value for the every gene pair which has an edge in the gene network from Google. The Google search result value is then used to re-enforce the gene network. The disease-related gene network has two weights between gene pairs which are linked. One of the weights is a frequency value which is obtained from the literature data, and the other weight is Google search result value which is obtained from Google data. After constructing a disease-related gene network, we calculated the LGscore using the two weights in the network. Using the LGscore, we extracted disease-related genes from the disease-related gene network. Our method has three steps. First, we obtain genes and gene–gene relationships from the literature on a certain disease. We then construct a disease-specific gene network based on text-mining results. In the next step, we supplement the gene–gene relationships in the gene network using Google data. In the last step, we calculate the LGscores of the genes using the frequency and Google search result values to identify disease-related genes based on the LGscore.The rest of the paper is divided into four sections. In Section 2, we describe previous studies related to our current work. We described the proposed method in Section 3, and present our results and a discussion based on them in Sections 4 and 5, respectively. We conclude the paper by discussing the implications of our findings in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
