@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Prioritization of potential candidate disease genes by topological similarity of protein–protein interaction network and phenotype data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We construct a reliable heterogeneous network by fusing multiple networks.We devise a random walk based algorithm on the reliable heterogeneous network.Combining topological similarity with phenotype data helps to predict causal genes.The algorithm is still in good performance at low parameter values.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Disease genes,Random walk,Topological similarity,Protein–protein interaction networks,Phenotype,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Identifying candidate disease genes is important to improve medical care. However, this task is challenging in the post-genomic era. Several computational approaches have been proposed to prioritize potential candidate genes relying on protein–protein interaction (PPI) networks. However, the experimental PPI network is usually liable to contain a number of spurious interactions. In this paper, we construct a reliable heterogeneous network by fusing multiple networks, a PPI network reconstructed by topological similarity, a phenotype similarity network and known associations between diseases and genes. We then devise a random walk-based algorithm on the reliable heterogeneous network called RWRHN to prioritize potential candidate genes for inherited diseases. The results of leave-one-out cross-validation experiments show that the RWRHN algorithm has better performance than the RWRH and CIPHER methods in inferring disease genes. Furthermore, RWRHN is used to predict novel causal genes for 16 diseases, including breast cancer, diabetes mellitus type 2, and prostate cancer, as well as to detect disease-related protein complexes. The top predictions are supported by literature evidence.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Elucidating the underlying molecular mechanisms basis of diseases has become increasingly important in disease prevention, diagnosis, and drug design. Understanding the relationship between causal genes and their associated genetic diseases is an important topic in systems biology. Candidate gene prioritization is the process of identifying new genes as potential candidates of being associated with a phenotype or a disease. This process is an important issue in current biomedical research.Many approaches have been developed to identify candidate genes [1]. A common approach is the analysis of inherent sequence characteristics and similarities between candidate genes and known disease causal genes based on characteristics such as protein sequence properties [2], gene expression data [3], functional annotations [4], and relevant biomedical literature [5]. However, these approaches suffer from inherent limitations. That is, these methods rely on the quality and completeness of biological information.Network-based approaches have been recently developed and applied to candidate gene prioritization [6–9]. Studies on the properties of disease genes in molecular networks have shown that two genes sharing higher-order topological similarities are likely to interact with each other and may be associated with the same or similar phenotypes [10–12]. In addition, disease phenotypic data can help increase the gene prediction accuracy for less-studied disease phenotypes. These findings have become the basis for the development of computational approaches to predict and prioritize potential candidate genes for inherited diseases. Dezso et al. [6] applied an adapted version of shortest path betweenness to prioritize candidate genes in PPI networks. A candidate gene was scored more relevant to the disease of interest if it laid more on significantly shorter paths connecting nodes of known disease genes than other genes in the network. Wu et al. [7] established a regression model that measures the correlation between gene closeness and phenotype similarities in the PPI network to prioritize potential candidate genes for inherited diseases on the basis of correlation scores. Li and Patra [8] proposed a new method to prioritize disease genes by extending the random walk with restart algorithm on a heterogeneous network constructed by connecting the gene network and the phenotype similarity network using known gene-phenotype relationships. Yang et al. [9] recently exploited known gene–phenotype associations to represent higher-level complex phenotype associations on the basis of the modular nature of complex diseases. They then prioritized potential candidate disease genes for disease phenotypes through network propagation on the complex interaction network. Of these network approaches, the random walk with restart algorithm is a state-of-the-art approach. Tong et al. [13] proposed fast solutions to the problem in which random walk with restart did not scale for large graphs. Zhu et al. [14] proposed a method to prioritize potential candidate disease genes based on the linear correlation coefficient and cosine angle of corresponding diffusion profiles. The diffusion profile of a disease was defined as the stationary distribution of all genes under a random walk with restart on the phenotype similarity network. The diffusion profile of a gene was obtained by smoothing the probability distribution over the PPI network when starting a walk from this gene.However, the experimental PPI network usually contains spurious interactions. Therefore, combining the topological similarities of the PPI network with gene–phenotype relationship information is essential to accurately predict disease genes. PPI network reconstruction is proposed to improve the prediction accuracy of disease genes further. Gene–gene interactions are measured according to topological similarity, after which the phenotype similarity network is connected with the use of known gene–phenotype relationships to construct a reliable heterogeneous network. The novel algorithm RWRHN (Random Walker on the Reliable Heterogeneous Network) is proposed to predict and prioritize potential candidate genes for inherited diseases on such a heterogeneous network. Comparisons of RWRHN with CIPHER [7] and RWRH [8] show that the novel algorithm has better performance. Furthermore, RWRHN is used to predict novel causal genes for 16 diseases, including breast cancer, diabetes mellitus type 2, and prostate cancer, and to detect disease-related protein complexes. The top predictions are supported by literature evidence.The protein–protein interaction (PPI) data were downloaded from the Human Protein Reference Database (HPRD) [15]. The phenotype similarity network which was a k nearest neighbor (KNN) graph presentation of the phenotypic similarity matrix constructed by van Driel et al. [16] was downloaded from MimMiner [17]. Gene–phenotype relationships were obtained from the OMIM database [18] and extracted using BioMart [19]. The data sources are available in the Supplementary Material.Two genes that share higher-order topological similarities are likely to interact with each other and may be associated with the same or similar phenotypes [10–12]. The RWRHN method is predicated on the basis of this simple observation together along with a novel link prediction algorithm [20]. The topological profile is calculated for each gene to measure the “distances” between the target gene and all other genes in the network. Then, the similarities of topological profiles are calculated between each gene pair. Finally, interactions are created to connect topologically similar genes. The PPI network is reconstructed from the topological similarity matrix by connecting pairs of genes whose similarities are above a certain threshold. Then, a reliable heterogeneous network is constructed by fusing a PPI network reconstructed by topological similarity with a phenotype similarity network and known associations between diseases and genes. Finally, the random walk with restart on the heterogeneous network model [8] is used to prioritize candidate genes. Fig. 1shows the overall framework of the RWRHN algorithm.The experimental PPI network usually contains spurious interactions. Thus, a novel link prediction algorithm [20] consisting of the random walk with resistance algorithm (RWS) and using the Pearson correlation coefficient to compute similarity is used to reconstruct the network. This algorithm combines the simple common neighbor-based method with ideas from the distance-based method. The PPI network is reconstructed from the topological similarity matrix by connecting pairs of genes whose similarities are above a certain threshold. Compared with the original data, the reconstructed data contain some new edges with high topological similarities and lack edges with low topological similarities. Lei et al. have reported that the new protein–protein interactions have high functional relevance and are likely bona fide physical interactions [20]. The PPI network can be regarded as an undirected graph G(V, E), where V is the set of genes and E is the set of interactions. For v∊V, N(v)={u∊V|(v, u)∊E} is the set of neighbors of v and d(v)=|N(v)| is the degree of v.RWS is used to compute the topological profiles for each gene. With the basic random walk idea, the probability of an initial gene i to move to its neighbor gene j in the next step is Pij=1/d(i) for (i, j)∊E. When the random walker initiates at a gene v, then the probability of the random walker sitting at gene i at a discrete time point k isqv,i(k). The stationary probability distribution obtained from the simple random walk cannot be directly used to measure the distance between nodes [21]. Thus, RWS uses two resistances, ε and β. The former is used to differentiate the final convergence status from each gene based on its topology within the PPI network. The latter is used to control the depth of a random walk and avoid the hub gene effect. The probability of a random walker initiating from gene v to take the interaction (i, j) at time point k+1 can be calculated by Eq. (1).(1)fv,ij(k+1)max(0,qv,i(k)Pij-ε),ifqv,j(k)>0;max(0,qv,i(k)Pij-ε),ifqv,j(k)=0maxt(qv,t(k)Pij)⩾β;0,otherwise.At time point k+1, the probability of the random walker to reach gene j can be calculated as(2)qv,j(k+1)=∑ifv,ij(k+1)In our method, ε and β are set to |V|/|E|2 and 1/|E|, respectively. The topological profiles are obtained for each gene when the RWS algorithm is applied to the original PPI network.The Pearson correlation coefficients of the topological profiles between all pairs of genes are calculated to represent the topological similarity between two genes. The pairs of genes with similarities that are above a certain threshold are connected to retain the same number of interactions as in the original network in our method. The PPI network is reconstructed from the topological similarity matrix.A reliable heterogeneous network is then constructed. This network is composed of a PPI network U(n×n) reconstructed by topological similarity, a phenotype similarity network V(m×m), and known associations between diseases and genes. The gene–phenotype relationship is represented as a bipartite graph G(n×m). Therefore, the adjacency matrix of our reliable heterogeneous network can be represented asA=UGGTV, where GTrepresents the transpose of G.The random walk with restart (RWR) [22] algorithm is a common approach to prioritize candidate genes. This algorithm mimics a walker that moves from a seed gene to a randomly selected neighbor gene or returns to seed genes with a probability γ. All genes in the network are ranked by the probability of the random walker reaching this gene. Formally, the random walk with restart can be given by:(3)ps+1=(1-γ)MTps+γp0where γ∊(0,1) is the restart probability, p0 is the initial probability vector, and psis a vector in which the i-th element holds the probability of finding the random walker at gene i at step s. M is the transition matrix of the network, and Mijis the transition probability from gene i to gene j. The probability will reach a steady state after some steps. This state is obtained by performing iterations until the change between psand ps+1 (measured by the L1 norm) falls below 10−10. If p∞(i)>p∞(j), then gene i is more proximate to seed genes than gene j.In RWRHN, the random walk with restart on the reliable heterogeneous network model [8] that utilizes a phenotype similarity network with a PPI network is used to prioritize candidate genes. The transition matrix of the reliable heterogeneous network is represented asM=MUMUVMVUMV. The parameter λ is the jumping probability that the random walker shifts from the PPI network to the phenotype similarity network, or vice versa. The known associations between diseases and genes are represented as a matrix G=(gij)(n×m), where gij=1 indicates that the j-th gene is associated with the i-th phenotype, and gij=0 otherwise. The transition probability from uito vjor from vito ujcan be described as(4)(Muv)i,j=λgij∑jgij,if∑jgij≠00,otherwise(5)(Mvu)i,j=λgji∑jgji,if∑jgji≠00,otherwiseThe reconstructed PPI network is represented as a matrix U=(uij)(n×n), where n denotes the number of genes. The element of Muis the probability of the random walker to transit from uito uj. This element can be described as(6)(Mu)i,j=uij∑juij,if∑jgij=0(1-λ)uij∑juij,otherwise.The phenotype similarity network is represented as a weight matrix V=(vij) (m×m), where m denotes the number of phenotypes and vijis the similarity score between the i-th phenotype and the j-th phenotype. The element of Mvis the probability of the random walker to transit from vito vj. This element can be described as(7)(Mv)i,j=vij∑jvij,if∑jgji=0(1-λ)vij∑jvij,otherwise.The parameters u0 and v0 represent the initial probability of the reconstructed PPI network and phenotype similarity network, respectively. With the sum of the probabilities equal to 1, the vector u0 is constructed such that equal probabilities are assigned to all the seed genes in the network. Similarly, the vector v0 is given. The parameter η∊(0,1) represents the probability that the walker will select the query phenotype of interest as the starting point. The initial probability vector of the reliable heterogeneous network is represented asp0=(1-η)u0ηv0. The transition matrix M and the initial probability p0 are substituted into the equation Eq. (3). After some steps, the probability will reach a steady statep∞=(1-η)u∞ηv∞. Then genes are ranked based on the steady probability.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
