@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Robust gene signatures from microarray data using genetic algorithms enriched with biological pathway keywords

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel two-stage procedure to find genetic profiles is presented.Biological information and an evolutionary strategy are combined.Biological information improves robustness and prognosis.Better accuracy results are obtained over the three datasets analyzed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
DNA analysis,Evolutionary algorithms,Biological enrichment,Feature selection,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Genetic algorithms are widely used in the estimation of expression profiles from microarrays data. However, these techniques are unable to produce stable and robust solutions suitable to use in clinical and biomedical studies. This paper presents a novel two-stage evolutionary strategy for gene feature selection combining the genetic algorithm with biological information extracted from the KEGG database. A comparative study is carried out over public data from three different types of cancer (leukemia, lung cancer and prostate cancer). Even though the analyses only use features having KEGG information, the results demonstrate that this two-stage evolutionary strategy increased the consistency, robustness and accuracy of a blind discrimination among relapsed and healthy individuals. Therefore, this approach could facilitate the definition of gene signatures for the clinical prognosis and diagnostic of cancer diseases in a near future. Additionally, it could also be used for biological knowledge discovery about the studied disease.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The term cancer encompasses more than 100 potentially life-threatening diseases affecting nearly every part of the body. Cancer is a complex, multifactorial, genetic disease involving structural and expression abnormalities of both coding and non-coding genes. In this sense, gene expression profiling plays an important role in a wide range of areas in biological science for handling cancer diseases [1–4]. The analysis of DNA microarray data requires a selection of features (genes) due to the small number of samples available (mostly less than a hundred) and the large number of features (in the order of thousands). This problem is well-known in the literature as the “large-p-small-n” paradigm or the curse of dimensionality [5].Evolutionary models have been proposed in several works [6–12] and constitute one of the most widely used techniques for feature selection and prognosis analysis in microarray datasets. Despite all the variety of feature selection techniques proposed in the literature, it still remains a problematic intrinsic to the domain of DNA microarrays. Genetic algorithms (GAs) [13–18], as a particular case of evolutionary models, use classification techniques within the algorithm to evaluate and evolve the population. Producing stable or robust solutions is a desired property of feature selection algorithms, in particular for clinical and biomedical studies. Nevertheless, robustness is a property difficult to be analyzed and is often overlooked. In [19–21] different approaches are proposed, addressing the main drawbacks related to overfitting and robustness, through a modified GA that includes an early-stopping criteria and establishing a feature ranking method that leads to more robust solutions. Although some proposals use biological information to analyze DNA microarray data [22], none of them includes it into the mechanisms that guide the searching procedure in the GA. In our opinion, this strategy would, on one hand, produce more robust feature subset selections and, on the other hand, permit to obtain signatures more relevant for clinicians and biomedical researchers.In this approach, a two-stage procedure is proposed in order to obtain robust feature subset selections with good performance rates in test future data. Bootstrap Cross-Validation (BCV) is used since its good behavior related to misclassification error with small samples has been previously demonstrated [23,24], including DNA microarray datasets. A novel feature scoring method within the GA is also proposed, taking into account biological information related to the studied disorders. One widely used source of biological information is the Gene Ontology (GO) database [25] since it provides a controlled vocabulary for the description of cellular components, molecular functions, and biological processes. However, GO is sub-classified using a hierarchy of unclear reasoning with no validation analysis, contains insufficient number of rules for determining whether a given concept is present or not in GO, and most importantly, most GO terms have been assigned by sequence similarity through an automatic analysis, without laboratory validation [26]. Therefore, we have discarded the use of GO and moved to the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database [27]. Since many years, this database has been one of the most important sources for building initial pathway models because it can be used as a reference knowledge base for deciphering the genome and linking genes/proteins to biological systems and also to the environment. Its main strength is that it is manually drawn and the assignment of a KEGG code to a sequence implies experimental evidence support. On the contrary, if a protein coded by a sequence does not produce enzymatic activity or is not part of a signaling pathway, it will never have a KEGG code. Fortunately, most genes involved in cancer have enzyme activity and belong to signaling pathways. This makes KEGG a valuable and highly reliable source of pathways and lead us to obtain robust and biologically important feature subset selections. In fact, KEGG codes 05200 to 05223 are specifically dedicated to cancer.1http://www.genome.jp/kegg-bin/get_htext?htext=br08901&query=“Human%20Diseases”&option=-s.1As an example, KEGG pathways have allowed the generation of systems biology models [28], the identification of disease virulence factors [29], the emergence of molecular pathway perturbations in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis [30], or the analysis of the lipidomic and transcriptomic changes showing the distinct roles of STAT1 and STAT3 on apoptosis, immunity and lipid metabolism [31].The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents the methodology of our approach and Section 3 shows the experimental results over different databases. Section 4 provides the final conclusions of the work drawn from the analysis of the selected genes and from the study of the influence of the biological information in the performance of the strategy.Three free-public high-dimensional biomedical datasets have been used within this work. Each of them is related to an specific cancer study disorder: leukemia,2http://datam.i2r.a-star.edu.sg/datasets/krbd/Leukemia/ALLAML.html.2prostate3http://datam.i2r.a-star.edu.sg/datasets/krbd/ProstateCancer/ProstateCancer.html.3and lung4http://cilab.ujn.edu.cn/datasets.htm.4cancer diseases.This dataset was taken from a collection of leukemia patient samples reported in [32] and it often serves as benchmark for microarray analysis methods. It contains measurements corresponding to acute lymphoblast leukemia (ALL) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML) samples from bone marrow and peripheral blood. The dataset consists of 72 samples (25 of them of AML and 47 samples of ALL) and each one is measured over 7129 genes. The ID for the leukemia Affymetrix GeneChip HuGeneFL array is hu6800. In particular, the R package “hu6800.db” [33] has been used to manage and preprocess the biological information related to this microarray.This dataset was reported in [34]. Prostate tumors are among the most heterogeneous of cancers, both histologically and with respect to highly divergent clinical outcomes. The dataset consists of 102 samples (52 of them are tumor samples and 50 samples are non-tumor ones) and each one is represented by 12,600 genes. The Affymetrix ID for the prostate cancer microarray is HGU95av2 and the R package “hgu95av2.db” [35] was used to manage and preprocess biological information related to this microarray.This dataset presents a classification between malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) and adenocarcinoma (ADCA) of the lung, being reported in [36]. It consists of 181 tissue samples (31 corresponds to MPM samples and 150 to ADCA) and each one is described by 12,533 genes. The Affymetrix ID for the prostate cancer microarray is hgu95a and the R package “hgu95a.db” [37] was used to manage and preprocess biological information related to this microarray.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The authors have analyzed in this work three cancer data sets using a combined approach of genetic algorithms and biological relevant information, in order to obtain a robust feature subset selection with good performance rates. The approach incorporates a novel feature scoring method within the GA, taking into account biological information about proteins (mostly enzymes) involved in the pathways of the studied disorders. The most remarkable finding is that our proposal improves the standard GA strategy regardless of the classification model used (LDA or SVM) in the three analyzed data sets (Table 4, Accuracy column), leading to statistically significant results in two of them (Leukemia and Lung). Even more important from the biological and clinic point of view, the robustness, in terms of the most selected genes that can be used to define gene signatures, is also improved in all three analyzed databases (Table 4, Robustness column). The main consequence of both facts is that the results of a KEGG-improved GA can provide more repetitive and consistent results that will facilitate the definition of gene signatures for further clinical diagnostic and prognostic. Moreover, the comparative analysis done among the KEGG-improved GA (Table 5) and three alternative filter methods (Cons, IG and ReliefF) demonstrated a similar or higher performance of the KEGG-improved GA, with the additional benefit of the biological information about the disease dynamics provided by this new GA-based strategy.Regarding the summarizing results of Fig. 3it can be seen that the best placed pathways in Table 4 provide more accurate and robust results. This opens the possibility of a deeper study of which KEGG-pathway(s) provide(s) the better results for any disease dataset. It should be noted that those feature subsets that include more genes of the analyzed pathways analyzed might indicate that this particular pathway has a greater biological impact on the disease.But the proposed KEGG-improved GA not only can be used for diagnostic and prognostic, but also for biological knowledge discovery about the disease. Regarding the most remarkable genes of Tables 6–8 that even not originally present in the selected pathways, form part of the final selection thus playing an important role for obtaining robust and accurate prediction results. For example, in Table 6 (Leukemia set), the gene ZYX7http://www.genecards.org/cgi-bin/carddisp.pl?gene=ZYX.7is repetitively selected in all but one pathways; it codes zyxin, a adhesion plaque protein that prompts the formation of actin-rich structures at which signal transduction assemble. In the case of the lung database (Table 7), several adhesion pathways are involved in this cancer (cf., 04530, 04514) while the ZYX gene does not seem to be significant. The gene SEMA3C8http://www.genecards.org/cgi-bin/carddisp.pl?gene=SEMA3C.8corresponds to a semaphorin, a protein including an inmunoglobulin domain. It seems to play an important role in the regulation of developmental processes and axon growing. Its presence suggests that pathways 04360 and others should be considered for future analysis. Also, gene ALDH1A29http://www.genecards.org/cgi-bin/carddisp.pl?gene=ALDH1A2.9is related to an aldehyde dehydrogenase enzyme that synthesises retinoic acid (RA) from retinaldehyde. RA is a hormonal signaling molecule that functions in developing and adult tissues and has been involved in spina bifida. As a result, might high levels of RA be involved in lung cancer? Gene GFPT210http://www.genecards.org/cgi-bin/carddisp.pl?gene=GFPT2.10corresponds to D-fructose-6-phosphate amidotransferase, an enzyme involved in regulating the availability of precursors for N- and O-linked glycosylation of proteins. Protein glycosilation might be affected in lung cancer, and thus it deserves further analysis. PTGIS,11http://www.genecards.org/cgi-bin/carddisp.pl?gene=PTGIS.11although selected only in two pathways, is a prostaglandin I2 (prostacyclin) synthase, a protein of cytochrome P450 superfamily of enzymes, involved in the synthesis of prostacyclin, a potent vasodilator and inhibitor of platelet aggregation that is also related to myocardial infarction, stroke, and atherosclerosis, and thus could be also involved in lung cancer.As an overall conclusion, the results obtained suggest the important role that the incorporation of biological information might play for carrying out a robust feature selection procedure for cancer (and may be any other disease) diagnostic. Moreover, this may open the way to use GA for the prognosis of cancer diseases in a near future, a clinical aspect that is still concerning most oncologist and cancer patients.