@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
CRFs based de-identification of medical records

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The method used in our work is completely machine-learning-based.Pattern-matching techniques are used in the preprocessing module.Three groups of features are extracted to train the de-identifier model.Missing errors are the main component of the errors in system output.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Protected health information,De-identification,Medical records,Conditional random fields,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
De-identification is a shared task of the 2014 i2b2/UTHealth challenge. The purpose of this task is to remove protected health information (PHI) from medical records. In this paper, we propose a novel de-identifier, WI-deId, based on conditional random fields (CRFs). A preprocessing module, which tokenizes the medical records using regular expressions and an off-the-shelf tokenizer, is introduced, and three groups of features are extracted to train the de-identifier model. The experiment shows that our system is effective in the de-identification of medical records, achieving a micro-F1 of 0.9232 at the i2b2 strict entity evaluation level.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Clinical documents contain much valuable information that is significantly attractive to researchers. However, a large amount of protected health information (PHI) exists in clinical documents, and may reveal identities or other personal private information of the patients. To avoid exposing private information, PHI must be removed before researchers do research on these clinical documents. Hence, identifying PHI from clinical documents is essential.De-identification is the process of identifying and removing PHI from medical records. However, manually de-identifying medical records is time consuming and has significant costs. In 2006, de-identification was first introduced into the Informatics for Integrating Biology and the Bedside (i2b2) project [1]. Automatically removing PHI from discharge summaries was challenging. In this task, Wellner et al.’s method [2] obtained the highest score, using an existing toolkit that was based on conditional random fields (CRFs). Methods for de-identification generally fall into three categories: rule-based methods, machine-learning methods and a combination of the two. Meystre et al. [3] selected 18 automated de-identification systems for different types of clinical documents for detailed analysis. The authors concluded that the rule-based methods perform better with PHI that is rare in clinical documents, whereas machine-learning methods are good at identifying PHI that is not in the dictionaries. For example, “Johnson and Johnson” is a PHI term of ORGANIZATION and appears less frequently in clinical documents, but rule-based methods can identify it as ORGANIZATION rather than NAME; machine-learning methods can strongly associate the word “Johnson” in “Johnson was admitted to hospital yesterday” with PATIENT, although “Johnson” is not in the dictionary of PATIENT. Rule-based methods need experts to construct rules or patterns manually to identify PHI entities. For example, Neamatullah et al. [4] proposed a pattern-matching de-identification system for nursing progress notes, which were obviously less structured than discharge summaries were, using dictionary look-ups, regular expressions and heuristics. In nursing progress notes, technical terminologies, non-standard abbreviations, ungrammatical statements, misspellings, incorrect punctuation characters, and capitalization errors occur frequently. The evaluation showed that their method experienced a high recall rate. Compared with rule-based methods, machine-learning methods such as conditional random fields, support vector machines (SVM) are chosen by many more researchers for de-identification. Zuccon et al. [5] developed a tool to de-identify free-text health records based on conditional random fields. Linguistic features, lexical features, and features extracted by pattern matching were applied to train the classifier. Uzuner et al. [6] used support vector machines and local context to de-identify medical discharge summaries. They created an effective de-identifier and found that local context could improve the effect of de-identification. Boström and Dalianis [7] utilized an active learning method to train a random forest de-identifier on Swedish health records. Szarvas et al. [8] proposed an iterative learning method to de-identify discharge summaries using decision trees with local features and dictionaries. De-identification became a track in i2b2 shared tasks again in 2014. In the de-identification task, many of the teams employed methods using machine learning and rules [9].Compared with the de-identification task in 2006, medical records and PHI categories in the 2014 i2b2 shared tasks have changed significantly. First, the content in the medical records is not tokenized, and many irregular terms exist in which one token may contain two words. For example, the token “Since6/03/04” actually means “Since 6/03/04”. Furthermore, many abbreviations exist in medical records, which may decrease the precision of the tokenizer and part of speech (POS) tagger. Moreover, the number of PHI categories in i2b2 2014 de-identification is far greater than in 2006. Consequently, de-identification of medical records in i2b2 2014 has become a new challenge for researchers.In this paper, a new de-identifier of medical records, WI-deId, is proposed based on an implementation of conditional random fields. There has been a significant focus on preprocessing and feature generation from medical records. In the following sections, the details of the preprocessing procedure in WI-deId will be described, and features used in the classifier will be listed. Moreover, the experiment results and future directions of WI-deId will be discussed.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
