@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Exploring medical device design and use through layers of Distributed Cognition: How a glucometer is coupled with its context

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The design and use of a blood glucose meter is analyzed using Distributed Cognition.A DiCoT-CL framework is proposed to analyze layers of context around a device.The sociotechnical mechanics of the system and design ideas are described.Broader issues related to how a device is coupled to its context are highlighted.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Human–computer interaction,Distributed Cognition,Blood glucose meter,Glucometer,Socio-technical system,Ethnography,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Medical devices are becoming more interconnected and complex, and are increasingly supported by fragmented organizational systems, e.g. through different processes, committees, supporting staff and training regimes. Distributed Cognition has been proposed as a framework for understanding the design and use of medical devices. However, it is not clear that it has the analytic apparatus to support the investigation of such complexities. This paper proposes a framework that introduces concentric layers to DiCoT, a method that facilitates the application of Distributed Cognition theory. We use this to explore how an inpatient blood glucose meter is coupled with its context. The analysis is based on an observational study of clinicians using a newly introduced glucometer on an oncology ward over approximately 150h (11days and 4 nights). Using the framework we describe the basic mechanics of the system, incremental design considerations, and larger design considerations. The DiCoT concentric layers (DiCoT-CL) framework shows promise for analyzing the design and use of medical devices, and how they are coupled with their context.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Medical and biomedical informatics concerns the processing of information within software and technology (e.g. [1,2]), and within broader sociotechnical systems involving clinicians, patients, artifacts, etc. (e.g. [3,4]). Medical device designs, which stretch across this remit, are becoming more complex through increasing functionality and more complex controls. Furthermore, the systems through which they are procured, managed and used are also becoming more complex and fragmented e.g. through different committees, managers, trainers and users with different roles and responsibilities. There is a need for more studies that reflect on findings at broader sociotechnical and policy levels [5]. Misattributing medical device issues to the wrong part of the sociotechnical system can hinder corrective action: for example, on one ward staff believed that frequent device alarms were an issue for the manufacturer to address, when actually this was a device configuration choice under the control of hospital management [6]. Trends for technology in other domains suggest an outward movement through layers of problems. The problems considered about a system are initially hardware ones, but over time as the technology matures, software issues become relevant, then user interface ones, and then on to more collaborative, workplace and organizational issues. One way to think of this is that the technology ‘reaches out’ from its traditional interface [7].A critical challenge for research and development is to develop appropriate analytic tools to keep abreast of modern device design and use issues (e.g. see [5]). Distributed Cognition (DCog) has promised much as a framework for analysis [8]. However, some believe that the absence of an off-the-shelf methodology and appropriate analytical support has hindered it reaching its potential [9]. This paper introduces a multi-layer framework by augmenting DiCoT, which is a method that facilitates DCog analyzes. The framework, DiCoT-CL, has the user–device interaction at its core with concentric layers of system around this interaction. It provides analytic support so that different themes in the informatics environment around a device can be investigated at different levels. In particular, we use the approach to investigate the design and use of a modern inpatient glucometer, and how it is coupled with its context. The glucometer is an important and ubiquitous device in clinical contexts that has received little attention from researchers interested in sociotechnical systems.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Medical devices are becoming more interconnected, complex and supported by fragmented organizational systems. We need to develop analytic tools that can describe and capture these issues, with a particular focus on the informatics within and around medical devices. We have proposed a novel framework: the DiCoT concentric layers (DiCoT-CL) framework, which aims to provide such support. This framework advances analytical support for DCog studies that aim to evaluate the design and use of medical devices in practice. It achieves this by building on DiCoT, which is a method that constructs five interdependent models (i.e., information flow, artifact, physical, social and evolutionary) to describe and analyze systems. DiCoT-CL organizes the models into concentric layers of Distributed Cognition with the medical device as the central focus. For researchers interested in medical device assessment and development this encourages reflection on the device’s coupling to different layers of the system, reflection within and between levels, and reflection on the scope and coverage of the analysis.None.This work was supported by the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council [EP/G059063/1].