@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A methodology for extending domain coverage in SemRep

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Integrating new domain knowledge into the UMLS extends SemRep core coverage.An existing ontology-building method is adapted to accommodate the new knowledge.Text analysis uncovers non-UMLS domain knowledge for a medical informatics case study.New concepts, semantic types, and relations are defined for the new domain.The new knowledge and semantic representation allow SemRep to apply to new domains.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Natural language processing application,Domain-independent ontology development methodology,Semantic predications,UMLS knowledge sources,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We describe a domain-independent methodology to extend SemRep coverage beyond the biomedical domain. SemRep, a natural language processing application originally designed for biomedical texts, uses the knowledge sources provided by the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS©). Ontological and terminological extensions to the system are needed in order to support other areas of knowledge. We extended SemRep’s application by developing a semantic representation of a previously unsupported domain. This was achieved by adapting well-known ontology engineering phases and integrating them with the UMLS knowledge sources on which SemRep crucially depends. While the process to extend SemRep coverage has been successfully applied in earlier projects, this paper presents in detail the step-wise approach we followed and the mechanisms implemented. A case study in the field of medical informatics illustrates how the ontology engineering phases have been adapted for optimal integration with the UMLS. We provide qualitative and quantitative results, which indicate the validity and usefulness of our methodology.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
We present an approach to extend SemRep [1,2], a natural language processing (NLP) application, to domains not previously supported. Relying on the Unified Medical language System (UMLS©) [3] for domain knowledge, SemRep identifies and extracts semantic relations (called semantic predications) in biomedical text. Semantic predications represent assertions in text as triples that take UMLS Metathesaurus concepts as subject and object arguments and a Semantic Network relation to connect the arguments. When applied to a set of citations, they provide a semantic representation of their content which can be summarized and visualized as a network of concepts and relations, as in Semantic MEDLINE application [4,5]. Semantic MEDLINE has been exploited for hypothesis generation [6], inference of discovery patterns from known therapeutic relationships [7], and to support clinicians’ information needs [8], among others.SemRep’s dependence on the UMLS entails that it can only support predications in the biomedical domain. One way to extend SemRep coverage to other areas is by developing domain ontologies to adequately capture domain knowledge. Incorporating the new knowledge adhering to UMLS formalization parameters allows extending Semantic MEDLINE to other domains, as well.Ontologies often underpin a semantic representation of a domain and provide a structural framework for NLP applications. Aside from the philosophical discipline of formal ontologies and properties and the various formal theories in ontology development, a domain ontology has been defined as ‘a hierarchically structured set of concepts describing a specific domain of knowledge’ [9]. A top level structure for an ontology may not always be necessary to meet the expected goals [9] if it is intended to be used by an automatic system. The ontology need not represent an exhaustive categorization of a domain. The scope can be limited by defining only those elements and relationships needed to meet pre-set goals.Domain ontologies represent a given conceptualization of a domain, described through a set of entities or concepts and their interactions [10]. However, the consensus on the importance of building ontologies in developing knowledge-based systems does not extend to the content, format, or structure of the models, even when created for similar purposes or to represent the same domain [11]. For McCray [12], “all conceptualizations are biased, both because they depend on the purposes for which they have been created, and because they are closely tied to the world view of their designers.” Similarly in [13]: “ontology design is a creative process and no two ontologies designed by different people would be the same.” Hence, conceptualizations may not be universal but rather task-based. For others, domain ontologies can be too limiting, focusing on “abstract descriptions of knowledge organization” [14]. But incorporating context can render models less abstract, with better representation of reality [15]. Thus, conceptualization and contextualization can be complementary rather than mutually exclusive.We adopt the latter view that when constructing domain models it is important to incorporate context as a way to ground the ontology in actual data and provide a targeted representation of the domain. Our approach aims to develop such a representation, articulating core aspects of the ontological space of the domain, so the data can inform the model. In the resulting representation model, the key actors and concepts in the data are represented, along with the semantic relationships into which they enter. An understanding of this network of concepts and relations is needed to carve out the semantic space of the domain and outline the scope of the application. Structured knowledge can be incorporated by mapping the concepts and relationships to a higher-level terminology or ontology, such as the UMLS.By adapting well-known generic ontology engineering phases [16] for integration with the UMLS, we leverage existing UMLS knowledge while extending coverage within a newly defined semantic space. SemRep domain extensions have so far been deployed in pharmacogenomics [17] (now part of general SemRep), public health [18], and disaster information management [19]. The last two applications are available to the research community upon request. In this paper, we illustrate our approach with a new case study in medical informatics.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We extended SemRep coverage to medical informatics domain by applying and adapting the 4-step ontology engineering process proposed by Kuziemsky and Lau [16]. Our results provide further proof for the usefulness and extensibility of their approach, which they had applied to only one specific domain. Furthermore, our results demonstrate the suitability of UMLS knowledge source model (in particular, UMLS Metathesaurus and Semantic Network) as a general model to capture domain knowledge. They also validate SemRep as a general, knowledge-based natural language processing system that can be extended to new domains in a straightforward, methodical way. This also consolidates SemRep as a valuable tool for ontology-based NLP applications, such as those relating to knowledge management. For example, SemRep is currently being explored as a valuable addition to the suite of tools used in grant or research portfolio analysis of the type carried out at the National Cancer Institute at the National Institutes of Health [39].While we use automated tools to suggest terms that are potentially useful in new domains, much of the work in assessing their appropriateness, whether and how they are covered in UMLS remains a manual process. These tasks can be time-consuming and error-prone. Thus, future work in our research includes automating this process further and providing better validation. For example, synonymy discovery techniques, based on co-occurrence patterns [40] or dictionary definitions [41] could be exploited to automatically conflate terms into conceptual groups. Similarly, hypernymy relations (IS-A) can be discovered to some extent by exploiting syntactic patterns like ‘A, such as B’ [42] or ‘C tool’. However, while these techniques may lessen the burden on the domain experts, manual intervention will still be required as the techniques will provide less than perfect results. Based on our experience with the ontology engineering process and the errors encountered, we havealso started implementing tools to automatically check the validity of encoded domain knowledge with respect to UMLS and SemRep, including checks for unique identifiers for concepts, formatting of rules, and so on.