@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A medical diagnostic tool based on radial basis function classifiers and evolutionary simulated annealing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a method for developing neural network classifiers for medical diagnosis.We use radial basis function networks trained with non-symmetric fuzzy means.The classifiers are optimized using evolutionary simulated annealing (ESA).ESA helps to escape from local minima and train classifiers with increased accuracy.The method is evaluated successfully on nine medical diagnostic datasets.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Decision support systems,Evolutionary computation,Medical diagnosis,Neural networks,Radial basis function,Simulated annealing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveThe profusion of data accumulating in the form of medical records could be of great help for developing medical decision support systems. The objective of this paper is to present a methodology for designing data-driven medical diagnostic tools, based on neural network classifiers.MethodsThe proposed approach adopts the radial basis function (RBF) neural network architecture and the non-symmetric fuzzy means (NSFM) training algorithm, which presents certain advantages including better approximation capabilities and shorter computational times. The novelty in this work consists of adapting the NSFM algorithm to train RBF classifiers, and suitably tailoring the evolutionary simulated annealing (ESA) technique to optimize the produced RBF models. The integration of ESA is critical as it helps the optimization procedure to escape from local minima, which could arise from the application of the traditional simulated annealing algorithm, and thus discover improved solutions. The resulting method is evaluated in nine different medical benchmark datasets, where the common objective is to train a suitable classifier. The evaluation includes a comparison with two different schemes for training classifiers, including a standard RBF training technique and support vector machines (SVMs). Accuracy% and the Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC) are used for comparing the performance of the three classifiers.ResultsResults show that the use of ESA helps to greatly improve the performance of the NSFM algorithm and provide satisfactory classification accuracy. In almost all benchmark datasets, the best solution found by the ESA-NSFM algorithm outperforms the results produced by the SFM algorithm and SVMs, considering either the accuracy% or the MCC criterion. Furthermore, in the majority of datasets, the average solution of the ESA-NSFM population is statistically significantly higher in terms of accuracy% and MCC at the 95% confidence level, compared to the global optimum solution that its rivals could achieve. As far as computational times are concerned, the proposed approach was found to be faster compared to SVMs.ConclusionsThe results of this study suggest that the ESA-NSFM algorithm can form the basis of a generic method for knowledge extraction from data originating from different kinds of medical records. Testing the proposed approach on a number of benchmark datasets, indicates that it provides increased diagnostic accuracy in comparison with two different classifier training methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Medical diagnosis refers to the act of identifying a disease from its signs and symptoms, or, in other words, classifying input symptoms into some known disease category. As medical diagnosis often involves a degree of uncertainty, physicians could reap the benefits of appropriate decision support systems, able to help them assess medical situations. The profusion of data accumulating in the form of medical records could be of great help for designing such systems; however, unlocking the knowledge contained in historical data is associated with a number of difficulties. The relationship between a diagnosis and the associated symptoms or clinical findings is usually rather complex and nonlinear in nature and the mechanisms that govern the operation of the human body are quite often poorly understood; these facts impede the formulation of explicit laws that could be fitted to the available data, and thus, make the extraction of knowledge from medical records rather cumbersome.Though the aforementioned difficulties hinder the task, recent advances in machine learning and data mining methodologies are catalyzing the development of medical decision support systems. In this context, a variety of techniques have been used for building medical diagnostic tools [1], a significant portion of which involve a family of algorithms known as neural networks (NNs). NNs are a set of powerful mathematical tools [2] that simulate the way that the human brain deals with information and the procedure of learning. NNs have the ability to identify and learn highly complex and nonlinear relationships from input–output data only, without the use of first principle equations describing the system. This is accomplished by storing information in computational nodes called neurons. The development of an NN is based on a set of input–output examples, which the network learns during the training phase. In this stage, the network parameters associated with the neurons and/or the interconnection links are determined using an optimization procedure, which minimizes the errors between the true outputs and the network predictions over a set of training examples. A successfully trained NN model should be capable of producing accurate estimations given a new set of input data.A number of publications exploiting the use of NNs for building medical diagnostic tools have appeared during the last decades. A method for using variations in electrical impedance over frequency to distinguish basal cell carcinoma from benign skin lesions based on NN classifiers is introduced in [3]. The authors in [4] present a neural network-based biomarker association information extraction approach for cancer classification. A system called GEMS (gene expression model selector) has been developed for the automated development and evaluation of high quality cancer diagnostic models, including NN methodologies [5]. Several NN-based classifier approaches have been proposed for diagnosing heart diseases [6]. Training NN classifiers for medical decision making is studied in [7], focusing on the effects of imbalanced datasets on classification performance. The important issue of feature selection in building support vector machine (SVM) classifiers for biomedical diagnostic datasets has been studied in [8]. The use of NNs for medical data classification tasks is reviewed in [9]. Other similar machine learning approaches employed for building medical diagnostic tools include Bayesian methods [10–12], fuzzy logic [13], decision trees [14] and multivariable statistical techniques [15].Depending on the way the nodes of the network are interconnected and the calculations that each node performs, NNs are categorized to a variety of architectures. Radial basis function (RBF) networks [16] constitute a special network architecture that presents some remarkable advantages over other NN types including: (a) better approximation capabilities when performing interpolation, i.e. providing predictions in-between the training data points, (b) simpler network structures comprising a single hidden layer and (c) faster learning algorithms which are usually split into two stages [17,18]. Due to these advantages, RBF networks have been used extensively for modeling complex systems, with many successful applications in developing medical diagnostic tools [19–21]. Especially in this area, improving the accuracy of the network predictions is vital in achieving high performance diagnosis. Unfortunately, calculating optimal values for the parameters of an RBF network – as with other NN architectures – is a rather cumbersome task. When viewing the NN training procedure as an optimization problem, one realizes that the objective function usually presents some rather unwelcome properties including: (a) multimodality, possibly trapping the algorithm in a non-satisfactory local optimum, (b) non-differentiability, which impedes the use of derivative-based methods and (c) high levels of noise, typically present in the training data [17]. As these characteristics make the use of standard optimization methods inefficient, it is no surprise that interest is shifting to optimizing the RBF training procedure through the use of alternative approaches, like evolutionary-based computation techniques.Evolutionary computation [22] refers to a family of probabilistic optimization techniques that mimic processes from natural evolution, where the main concept is the survival of the fittest. Evolutionary algorithms (EAs) form a class of generic purpose search methods, which strike a remarkable balance between exploration and exploitation—two apparently conflicting objectives in any optimization technique. There are certain differences between EAs and conventional optimization methods: EAs manipulate coded versions of the problem parameters instead of the parameters themselves; they do not use any auxiliary information about the objective function, such as derivatives; they operate in parallel on a population of solutions instead of manipulating a single solution. Hence, EAs are considered to be efficient and robust optimization methods that are able to escape from local optima. These properties have made EAs very popular in various and diverse scientific fields, including applications of medical interest [23–26]. Not surprisingly, EAs have also been used for RBF network optimization. In [27], a new algorithm is introduced for developing dynamic RBF models based on genetic algorithms. Particle swarm optimization (PSO) is another methodology drawn from the arsenal of EA methods that has been exploited in this area; a novel algorithm for training RBF regression models based on PSO is presented in [17].The contribution of this paper lies in presenting a new methodology for building and optimizing RBF-based diagnostic tools with increased classification capabilities. The proposed approach uses the non-symmetric fuzzy means (NSFM) algorithm [28], which in this work is modified properly to train RBF classifiers. Furthermore, the evolutionary simulated annealing (ESA) [29] technique is suitably tailored and incorporated to the proposed scheme to optimize the fuzzy partition of the produced classifiers, with respect to the classifying accuracy. The resulting classification method is applied on medical diagnosis-related datasets.The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In the next section, we describe the applied techniques, including a brief introduction to the RBF architecture and the NSFM algorithm, full presentation of the proposed approach for training RBF classifiers, and a description of the methods used for evaluation and testing. Experimental results are presented in Section 3, followed by discussion in Section 4. The paper concludes by outlining the advantages of the proposed approach and setting directions for future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper introduces a new method for training classifiers based on RBF neural networks. At the heart of the proposed approach lies the NSFM training algorithm, which has been found to produce RBF networks of increased accuracy in shorter computational times. The NSFM algorithm operates on a given non-symmetric fuzzy partition of the input space, so as to calculate the number of RBF hidden nodes and their locations and give birth to a fully trained RBF classifier. The ESA technique is then suitably modified and wrapped around the NSFM algorithm to optimize the fuzzy partition. The evolutionary nature of ESA, helps the iterative search procedure to avoid getting stuck in local minima that could result from the traditional SA algorithm, thus producing classifiers with increased accuracy. To assess the performance of the ESA-NSFM algorithm, nine datasets of medical interest are utilized. Two different types of classifiers are used for comparison purposes, namely RBF neural network classifiers trained with the SFM algorithm and standard SVM classifiers with Gaussian kernel functions. The results show that the proposed approach outperforms its rivals in terms of more accurate diagnosis, in the majority of tested cases; furthermore it proves to be faster, compared to the SVM approach.Future research plans include exploiting the inherent potential of ESA for parallel implementation to design a distributed optimizer. This is expected to be of particular interest in the case of large databases of medical records. The authors also plan to release to the research community a distributable implementation of the ESA-NSFM algorithm.The two cardiotocography datasets contain a number of fetal cardiotocograms (CTGs), which were automatically processed with their respective diagnostic features. The aim of the “Cardiotocography dataset FHR” is to predict the fetal heart rate (FHR) morphologic pattern (1–10), whereas the purpose of the “Cardiotocography dataset NSP” is to predict the fetal state (Normal, Suspect, Pathologic). The available features for building the classifier are common for the two datasets.This dataset is formulated from continuous EEG measurement with the Emotiv EEG Neuroheadset. The objective is to determine the state of the eye, based on 14 different EEG features.The scope of the Pima Indian Diabetes dataset is to build a classifier for predicting whether a patient will develop diabetes, based on clinical findings. All patients in the database were females at least 21years old of Pima Indian heritage. The dataset contains 39 instances with missing values.The objective in this dataset is to discriminate between three possible states of the thyroid gland (euthyroidism, hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism). Input data to the classifier include 5 different hormones that are acquired after testing blood samples from the patients.Vertebral Column datasets are related to diagnosis of people with vertebral column disorders. The data have been organized in two different, but related classification tasks. The task in “Vertebral Column Dataset – 3 Classes” is to classify patients to one out of three categories: Normal (healthy people), Disk Hernia or Spondylolisthesis. The task in “Vertebral Column Dataset – 2 Classes” on the other hand is to discriminate healthy people (Normal category) from those who suffer from Disk Hernia or Spondylolisthesis (Abnormal category).These datasets [46,47] involve measurements taken from digitized images of breast mass. The objective in both datasets is to diagnose breast cancer in patients, classifying tumors as benign or malignant; each dataset is based on different input variables. The WOBC dataset contains 16 instances with missing values.