@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The use of fault reporting of medical equipment to identify latent design flaws

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Human factors methods were used to investigate No Fault Found (NFF) incidents.Medical equipment maintenance data was used to identify devices with high NFF rates.Interviews and heuristic analyses revealed usability issues cause NFF incidents.Usability testing validated the results.Our methodology can be used to identify devices with usability related design flaws.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
No Fault Found,No problem found,No trouble found,Clinical engineering,Human factors,Medical device design,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background and purposePoor device design that fails to adequately account for user needs, cognition, and behavior is often responsible for use errors resulting in adverse events. This poor device design is also often latent, and could be responsible for “No Fault Found” (NFF) reporting, in which medical devices sent for repair by clinical users are found to be operating as intended. Unresolved NFF reports may contribute to incident under reporting, clinical user frustration, and biomedical engineering technologist inefficacy. This study uses human factors engineering methods to investigate the relationship between NFF reporting frequency and device usability.Material and methodsAn analysis of medical equipment maintenance data was conducted to identify devices with a high NFF reporting frequency. Subsequently, semi-structured interviews and heuristic evaluations were performed in order to identify potential usability issues. Finally, usability testing was conducted in order to validate that latent usability related design faults result in a higher frequency of NFF reporting.ResultsThe analysis of medical equipment maintenance data identified six devices with a high NFF reporting frequency. Semi-structured interviews, heuristic evaluations and usability testing revealed that usability issues caused a significant portion of the NFF reports. Other factors suspected to contribute to increased NFF reporting include accessory issues, intermittent faults and environmental issues. Usability testing conducted on three of the devices revealed 23 latent usability related design faults.ConclusionsThese findings demonstrate that latent usability related design faults manifest themselves as an increase in NFF reporting and that devices containing usability related design faults can be identified through an analysis of medical equipment maintenance data.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Evidence suggests that adverse events associated with medical devices are more often the result of use error than device malfunction [1]. One study found that 82% of all preventable errors involving anaesthesia devices were due to use error [2], while a study of infusion pump errors found that use errors were the most frequent cause of patient harm [3]. In some cases medical devices have poorly designed and difficult to use human system interfaces [4]. As a result, there is an increasing interest in incorporating human factors engineering (HFE) principles in the design and evaluation of medical devices. However, the use of HFE principles within healthcare is still not widespread [5]. There remain instances in which usability related design flaws are identified by users as a device malfunction. When investigated, conclusions of “No Fault Found” or “cannot replicate problem” are often reached. These outcomes cannot be used to mitigate the situation and may contribute to user frustration and incident under-reporting. In this study, we sought to identify devices that contain latent usability related design flaws using medical equipment maintenance data and human factors techniques.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Medical device designs are becoming more complex, incorporating diverse functions and connecting with increasingly more products and environments. As discussed at the beginning of this article, latent usability related design faults are often implicated in adverse events. Medical equipment maintenance data can be useful in helping to identify educational opportunities, problems with specific devices or other trends that may be of interest. Although the proposed methodology is limited by the quality of an organization’s medical equipment maintenance data, it does provide a relatively efficient, easy to implement and useful process for identifying devices with a high potential of containing latent usability related design faults. Once identified, mitigation strategies can be employed, such as additional targeted user training or abstaining from procuring additional units of the identified devices. It is therefore recommended that the proposed methodology be applied by healthcare organizations both to reduce the occurrence of use errors, and to reduce the frequency of NFF reporting.