@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Classifying obstructive sleep apnea using smartphones

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a smartphone application that diagnose Obstructive Sleep Apnea.The design takes advantage of a smatrphone’s built-in sensors to screen OSA.We examine the system’s ability to screen OSA as compared to the golden standard.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Obstructive sleep apnea,Smartphones,Android,Physiological signals,Oximeter,Signal processing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is a serious sleep disorder which is characterized by frequent obstruction of the upper airway, often resulting in oxygen desaturation. The serious negative impact of OSA on human health makes monitoring and diagnosing it a necessity. Currently, polysomnography is considered the gold standard for diagnosing OSA, which requires an expensive attended overnight stay at a hospital with considerable wiring between the human body and the system. In this paper, we implement a reliable, comfortable, inexpensive, and easily available portable device that allows users to apply the OSA test at home without the need for attended overnight tests. The design takes advantage of a smatrphone’s built-in sensors, pervasiveness, computational capabilities, and user-friendly interface to screen OSA. We use three main sensors to extract physiological signals from patients which are (1) an oximeter to measure the oxygen level, (2) a microphone to record the respiratory effort, and (3) an accelerometer to detect the body’s movement. Finally, we examine our system’s ability to screen the disease as compared to the gold standard by testing it on 15 samples. The results showed that 100% of patients were correctly identified as having the disease, and 85.7% of patients were correctly identified as not having the disease. These preliminary results demonstrate the effectiveness of the developed system when compared to the gold standard and emphasize the important role of smartphones in healthcare.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is a common disorder affecting 2–4% of the adult population [1], and it is considered to be the most prevalent sleep disorder. There are three types of sleep apnea, namely: central, obstructive, and mixed sleep apnea. Central Sleep Apnea (CSA) occurs when the brain sporadically fails to trigger the breathing muscles in the chest, while obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) occurs when air is physically blocked from flowing into lungs during sleep intermittently. Mixed Sleep Apnea (MSA) is a combination of both central and obstructive sleep apnea [2]. Of the three, OSA is the most common while CSA and MSA are significantly rarer. In most cases, the patient is unaware of the breath stoppages because the body does not trigger a full awakening. As per the American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM), OSA is defined as a cessation in the airflow lasting for more than two breaths [2].The National Sleep Foundation (NSF) reported that for adults to function healthily they should obtain seven to eight sleeping hours every night [3]. Frequent obstructions of airflow during this period have a considerable influence on the performance of the human during the daytime. OSA causes excessive sleepiness, non-restorative sleep, high blood pressure, cardiovascular diseases, memory loss problems, erectile dysfunction, personality changes, and depression [4,5]. Besides daytime tiredness, OSA patients may experience job impairment and automobile accidents.Attended overnight Polysomnography (PSG) is considered the gold standard for OSA diagnosis. To get an overnight OSA test, the patient should stay in a specialized sleep laboratory for more than one night, with 22 wires attached to his/her body in order to record and analyze several neurologic and cardio respiratory signals. This brings great anxiety to the patients and they may not be able to sleep well during the night. Moreover, very few hospitals can accommodate the PSG test and it is rarely found in rural areas, which makes it unavailable for everyone and costly. Because of the aforementioned complications of using PSG, a need has arisen for portable devices with acceptable accuracy, high levels of usability, and depend on acquiring fewer biological signals [2,5–8].Smartphone technology has become abundant among millions of people. At the same time, the availability and popularity of mobile health (mhealth) represented by health applications (Apps) have also increased. Mobile health applications are now used to support the management of chronic diseases, such as: diabetes, heart disease, and hypertension. Additional examples of mobile health apps include helping people to avoid some bad habits that affect their health, such as: smoking cessation, body weight loss, and reducing alcohol consumption [9,10]. As the development of mHealth apps and the number of users of mHealth technologies increase, there is a need to understand the usability and learnability of these mobile devices and applications. For this reason, some studies focused on studying the usability and learnability of health apps on smartphones by applying theoretical models, such as: FITT (Fit between Individuals, Task, and Technology) [11] and Health-ITUEM (Health IT Usability Evaluation Model) [10]. Findings from these studies demonstrate the positive usability of smartphones in solving health with some differences in performance among devices.In this paper, we focus on implementing a portable device that is inexpensive, reliable, and accurate when compared with PSG. The developed design makes use of the pervasiveness of smartphones by designing an Android application that is able to extract the biomedical readings from the patient and analyze them to screen and classify OSA. This screening is considered a preliminary test used to identify people at high risk of having the disease who may need further confirmatory diagnostic tests at a hospital [9].In the developed system, we develop an algorithm that combines and analyzes the physiological readings to reliably infer if the patient suffers from OSA. This algorithm draws from conclusions made in published literature, experimental data and tests collected in this work, and finally the consultation of a physician expert who has been actively involved in this project. All readings are analyzed solely on the smartphone without the usage of any external resources. Finally, we examine our system’s ability to screen the disease as compared to the gold standard. We performed the tests on 15 subjects, and the results showed that 100% of patients were correctly identified as having the disease, and 85.7% of patients were correctly identified as not having the disease.The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 includes a literature review of related research. An overview of the pretest screening and its impact on the probability of having OSA is explained in Section 3. Methods for extracting the physiological signals will be outlined in Section 4. Section 5 explains the algorithms used to analyze the collected physiological signals. Section 6 presents the developed system architecture. Implementation of the application is explained in Section 7. Section 8 is a presentation and discussion of the results. Finally, Section 9 concludes this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
