@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A privacy preserving protocol for tracking participants in phase I clinical trials

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a privacy-preserving protocol to detect concurrent trial participants.We present a name representation scheme resilient to frequency attacks.The accuracy of the protocol is similar to standard non-secure methods.For a database size of 20,000, the private query time is under 40s on 32 cores.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Clinical trial,Phase 1 volunteer,Secure multi-party computation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveSome phase 1 clinical trials offer strong financial incentives for healthy individuals to participate in their studies. There is evidence that some individuals enroll in multiple trials concurrently. This creates safety risks and introduces data quality problems into the trials. Our objective was to construct a privacy preserving protocol to track phase 1 participants to detect concurrent enrollment.DesignA protocol using secure probabilistic querying against a database of trial participants that allows for screening during telephone interviews and on-site enrollment was developed. The match variables consisted of demographic information.MeasurementThe accuracy (sensitivity, precision, and negative predictive value) of the matching and its computational performance in seconds were measured under simulated environments. Accuracy was also compared to non-secure matching methods.ResultsThe protocol performance scales linearly with the database size. At the largest database size of 20,000 participants, a query takes under 20s on a 64 cores machine. Sensitivity, precision, and negative predictive value of the queries were consistently at or above 0.9, and were very similar to non-secure versions of the protocol.ConclusionThe protocol provides a reasonable solution to the concurrent enrollment problems in phase 1 clinical trials, and is able to ensure that personal information about participants is kept secure.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Although altruism is often considered the primary motive for patients to participate in clinical trials, many phase I clinical trials rely on healthy volunteers [1]. According to DeMets et al.[20], clinical trials involving new drugs are commonly classified into several phases (labeled 0 to 5), which can span many years. Phase 1 clinical trials usually involve testing a drug on 20–100 healthy volunteers to determine whether the drug is safe (at certain dosages) to further check for efficacy on a larger scale. In the case of healthy volunteers, the main reason for participation is monetary compensation [3,4,7,19,27,34,35,44,70]: individuals are attracted to the promise of large sums for seemingly little effort or skill needed on their part. Unlike patients, there are no potential benefits that healthy volunteers might gain from the drug or intervention that is being tested on them. Therefore, it is not surprising that the compensation provided by those running the trials is the main reason that healthy volunteers choose to participate. Some argue that providing monetary compensation to participants could result in coercion to the poor and those in need [22,26,27,49,51,67,71]. Others argue that it is only fair to compensate healthy research subjects because they gain no other benefit from their participation [25,49,50].From a research perspective, it appears that without monetary compensation, it would not be possible to recruit a sufficient number of healthy volunteers to fill the growing demand [3,4,7,19,34,35,44,70]. It has become more common for healthy volunteers participating in phase I clinical trials to earn at least part of a living that way [21,22,26,27,51,65]. There is an underground culture represented by publications like Guinea Pig Zero to assist those looking for trials to participate in [25] and websites that inform subjects of phase I trials available in their area [22].Volunteering for well-paying studies may not in and of itself be detrimental. However, of concern to researchers, trial managers, contract research organizations (CROs), and regulatory bodies is the possibility that some research subjects may enroll in clinical trials concurrently [22,27,34,35,70] or sequentially without regard to the appropriate “cleansing” or “washout” period between trials—a period of at least 30days, and up to many months depending on the trial/intervention [3,7,27,34,35,44,70].The practice of engaging in studies as an ‘overlapping trial participant’ can lead to nontrivial problems for phase I trials. These include introducing error and bias into the results of the trial, and an unnecessary early stop of the study due to elevated adverse events.The potential for error and bias in the results may be higher in trials that include overlapping trial participants. The act of participating in a clinical trial can affect a subject both physically and mentally [22,26,35,44,51,65,67]. There are drug effects, or physical effects due to the intervention, that can potentially endure after the trial has ended [35]. These practices can lead to greater risk to the participant as well as greater potential bias to the results of the studies. A correlation has been found between reported adverse events and repeat participation, finding that adverse events were more common in those with a longer history of trial participation [35]. A safe drug could be deemed unsafe, or worse, an unsafe drug could be deemed safe due to the interaction between drugs. This raises questions on whether participants’ experiences work to bias the results. Will lasting drug effects carry over to the next trial? Will any omissions or untruthfulness result in harm to the subject or inaccuracy in the results? [27,67].In clinical trials, stopping rules are typically defined in the study protocol to limit the amount of harm to participants [45]. If a percentage of serious adverse events is observed which exceeds the predefined limit, the trial is stopped early. Phase I trials typically involve the first introduction of a new drug to humans, and are testing for the maximum tolerable dosage [59]. These trials involve a small number of participants, and continuation of the trial is based on observed toxicity of the drug. To limit harm to participants, the acceptable level of toxicity is determined ahead of time. If participants do not show signs of toxicity, the drug dose is increased, if they do then the trial is stopped. Because of the small cohorts of participants in phase I trials, a very small number of individuals experiencing adverse events can have a significant impact on the overall outcomes of the study and may result in an unnecessary early stop. An early stop could lead to an under-dosage in future studies of the same compound, diluting its therapeutic effect.Participants trying to be enrolled in multiple overlapping trials have adopted various strategies to increase the chances of being accepted. For instance, through their participation in trials, experienced participants may learn what criteria researchers are looking for in a subject and how to behave within a trial to be considered a ‘good subject’. It has been suggested that once a person enrolls in a second study, they have the experience needed to appear as a good participant to ensure that they are retained in the trial and obtain the promised financial reward [4,22,26,51,65]. It has also been identified that some participants choose to withhold information or can be untruthful about the information that they provide to increase the chances of being screened in, for example, by taking measures to ensure that drugs will not be detected in the screening tests (by exercising or taking herbal remedies) [27,65]. Not all ‘overlapping trial participants’ withhold information or are untruthful, but current evidence shows that dishonesty among these individuals is not uncommon [4,8,22,26,27,35,44,51,65,79].According to ethical and legal guidelines regulating the conduct of research with human subjects, investigators are obliged to protect research participants from harm [38,54,58]. This holds true for all participants, even those who are not completely honest about their past or current participation in trials.As noted in the review in Appendix A, where tracking systems have been deployed, there is evidence that between 0.9% and almost 9% of volunteers are concurrently or have recently enrolled in a trial [8,35,58,79]. However, knowledge of the existence of a tracking system may have resulted in fewer overlapping participants attempting to enroll [8,58], meaning that these numbers should be seen as a floor.At the time of writing, the median enrollment for the 19,571 phase 1 clinical trials in clinicaltrials.gov was 33. If, say, 1% of participants in phase 1 trials are concurrently or have recently participated in other trials, it would mean that 1 in 3 trials are at risk of elevated adverse events unrelated to the compound under investigation, on average.Therefore, for practical and ethical reasons it is important to identify such overlapping trial volunteers and exclude them from participating.Organizations and sites that run phase 1 clinical trials have attempted to manage this problem by creating comprehensive registers of all participants in trials within a particular geographic area [8,79]. For example, one system used in Florida retains fingerprint (biometric) information about participants so that individuals can be checked against the database when they volunteer for a new trial [8]. In some cases, if a participant is found to be enrolled in overlapping trials they are excluded from those trials as well as any future trials within the institution or even the geographic region [79]. The creation of comprehensive tracking databases with personally identifying information about trial participants that are shared among multiple phase I sites creates privacy risks for the participants and regulatory risks for the sites. For example, if there is a data breach at the database the personal details of all those participating in trials would be exposed.In this paper we describe a secure protocol for tracking individual participants across multiple sites without creating an identity database holding information in the clear. The protocol allows sites to identify those individuals who participate in multiple trials concurrently but also provides strong privacy guarantees to the participants.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
