@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Foldover-free shape deformation for biomedicine

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
To propose a generalised algorithm for foldover-free deformation.The proposed iterative mechanism can guarantee the local invertibility of large deformations.The proposed iterative mechanism can be extended to other deformation scheme.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Shape deformation,Foldover,One-to-one mapping,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Shape deformation as a fundamental geometric operation underpins a wide range of applications, from geometric modelling, medical imaging to biomechanics. In medical imaging, for example, to quantify the difference between two corresponding images, 2D or 3D, one needs to find the deformation between both images. However, such deformations, particularly deforming complex volume datasets, are prone to the problem of foldover, i.e. during deformation, the required property of one-to-one mapping no longer holds for some points. Despite numerous research efforts, the construction of a mathematically robust foldover-free solution subject to positional constraints remains open. In this paper, we address this challenge by developing a radial basis function-based deformation method. In particular we formulate an effective iterative mechanism which ensures the foldover-free property is satisfied all the time. The experimental results suggest that the resulting deformations meet the internal positional constraints. In addition to radial basis functions, this iterative mechanism can also be incorporated into other deformation approaches, e.g. B-spline based FFDs, to develop different deformable approaches for various applications.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Shape deformation is an active topic of research in geometric modelling, biomechanics, and computational anatomy, which involves analysis and manipulation of 2D and 3D datasets. For instance, in computational anatomy, deformation techniques are usually deployed for accurate alignment of patient brain scans with a stereotactic atlas in order to quantify the morphology of anatomical structures. This is to understand the variability of brain anatomy by comparing and contrasting volumetric measurements between different patients, e.g. identifying the morphological elements that characterise the attributes of respective groups [2]. Moreover, high dimensional deformation techniques are useful not only in 3D volume data analysis, but also 4D flow MR Imaging. For example, 3D deformation fields can incorporate prior probability density functions from training sample sets into volume dataset segmentation and registration algorithms [22]. 4D-MRI further measures and visualises the temporal evolution of complex flow patterns in a 3D volume [5]. In biomechanics, deformation methods are used to mimic the static and dynamic behaviour of the objects inside the human body through the musculoskeletal model. This model is usually applied to the simulation of continuously deformable organs and tissues, such as muscles, ligaments and tendons [13]. The deformation of the tissue shape plays an important role in computing the muscles and joint forces using this model [15].However, all the above mentioned techniques do encounter the same difficulty when the amount of deformation is large, which means that unexpected foldovers are likely to appear in the resulting deformations. In computational anatomy, this implies that the mapping between the source and target datasets is not injective. This is a tricky issue for many applications where large deformation is inevitable, such as landmark matching via large deformation [3,11,30]. Despite numerous effects, anomalies, including irregular edges, spikes and jumps, still appear in image warping [7]. In biomechanics, foldover will violate the constraint of topology preservation. One obvious case is that an improper deformation may cause an intersection between muscles and bones when simulating the human limb movement. In geometric modelling, foldovers often lead to self-intersection of the deformed surface. In general, there are two kinds of self-intersections, global intersection (e.g. intersection of different regions of a surface) and local self-intersection (e.g. adjacent faces/pixels overlapping). This paper focuses on the latter. The objective of our research is to develop a mechanism to ensure that large deformation does not result in mesh anomalies, i.e. the resulting datasets are foldover-free.Our work here is primarily concerned with robust foldover-free deformations for high dimensional datasets. We first derive a general numerical condition, called the foldover-free condition, which guarantees no foldover occurs for an arbitrary dimensional dataset. Our main contribution is to formulate a generalised iterative deformation mechanism by incorporating this condition. We then employ radial basis functions (RBFs) to estimate the iterative step length. The second contribution of this paper is that the proposed iterative mechanism can guarantee the transformations locally invertible. Finally, the proposed iterative mechanism is further extended to other deformation schemes, e.g. B-spline based FFDs. This is the third contribution of this paper. Experiments will further validate the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed iterative algorithm in handling large deformations, some of which are topologically complex.The paper is organised as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the related work. Section 3 gives an overview of our foldover-free shape deformation method. In Section 4, we further describe the foldover-free iterative mechanism in detail. Applications and discussions are given in Section 5. The conclusions and future work are presented in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
