@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The detection of risk pathways, regulated by miRNAs, via the integration of sample-matched miRNA-mRNA profiles and pathway structure

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We identified disease risk pathways regulated by miRNAs.Change in gene expression and structural information were integrated simultaneously.Our method was effective and reliable in identifying disease risk pathways.The structure of a pathway plays a crucial role in the recognition of the pathway.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sample-matched miRNA-mRNA expression profiles,Gene expression regulation,Pathway structure,Risk pathway,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The use of genome-wide, sample-matched miRNA (miRNAs)-mRNA expression data provides a powerful tool for the investigation of miRNAs and genes involved in diseases. The identification of miRNA-regulated pathways has been crucial for analysis of the role of miRNAs. However, the classical identification method fails to consider the structural information of pathways and the regulation of miRNAs simultaneously.We proposed a method that simultaneously integrated the change in gene expression and structural information in order to identify pathways. Our method used fold changes in miRNAs and gene products, along with the quantification of the regulatory effect on target genes, to measure the change in gene expression. Topological characteristics were investigated to measure the influence of gene products on entire pathways. Through the analysis of multiple myeloma and prostate cancer expression data, our method was proven to be effective and reliable in identifying disease risk pathways that are regulated by miRNAs. Further analysis showed that the structure of a pathway plays a crucial role in the recognition of the pathway as a factor in disease risk.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenous RNAs, of approximately 22 nucleotides, which constitute an important class of master regulators involved in various cellular and disease processes [1–5]. MicroRNAs function mainly by silencing the expression of target genes at the mRNA level [6,7]. Approximately 1798 genes have been experimentally validated as targets of miRNAs. Target prediction algorithms (MTPAs), such as TargetScan, PicTar and others, have also been developed to predict target genes of miRNAs [8,9]. The study of pathways, which are known to be regulated by miRNAs, has become as an invaluable aid in understanding the function of miRNAs, their target genes and the molecular aberrations associated with diseases.Enrichment analysis can be used to identify disease related pathways, through the set of target genes. Statistical significance for pathway enrichment can be calculated by hypergrometric tests or the Fisher exact test, using all genes in the genome as the background [10,11]. Studies have shown that repression of gene expression is a general pattern of regulation by miRNA [12,13]. Sample-matched profiling of miRNA and mRNA has been an effective method used to detect this repression effect [14–16]. For example, Gutierrez et al. identified disease related miRNAs and genes. They integrated target prediction and anti-correlation using the Pearson correlation coefficient to identify the over-represented pathways [16–20]. The Pearson correlation coefficient represents the closeness of related miRNA-target pair. As multiple miRNAs can target the same gene, the regulation effect can be cumulative. However, the existing pathway identification methods have omitted the cumulative effect, and considered neither the alteration of target gene’s expression nor the cumulative regulatory effects simultaneously.The biochemical reactions within pathways control the specific cellular processes. In order to study the biological functions more efficiently, pathways are usually reconstructed into pathway networks (PN), represented by graph theory [21]. The structural information of a PN can depict the roles of gene products within the pathway. For example, a gene product with large betweenness centrality value (fraction of all shortest paths passing through the gene product) is of great importance in the pathway. Clearly, if a gene that is regulated by miRNAs has a large topological characteristics value, the regulatory effect of the miRNA on the pathway is also large. Although pathway topology has been adopted to identify pathways that are significantly related to a specific phenotype [22,23], the traditional methods have failed to consider the regulatory impact of miRNAs in the regulation of the pathway.To identify disease related pathways that were regulated by miRNAs, we developed a new pathway identification method, called MRPP (miRNA regulated risk pathways by sample-matched miRNA-mRNA profiles). This method incorporated sample-matched miRNA-mRNA expression profiles and pathway structure information. We considered both the alteration of gene expression and the topological significance of gene nodes in the pathways (Fig. 1). The study of the alteration of gene expression included the analysis of both genes and the miRNAs that target them. The regulatory intensity of the miRNAs was also considered. The topological significance of nodes in a pathway was represented by topological characteristics of these nodes, which represent the ability of target genes to transmit biological signals to the downstream nodes. We applied the method to sample-matched miRNA-mRNA profiles of multiple myeloma (MM) and prostate cancer (PC) and successfully identified their risk pathways.Multiple myeloma and PC sample-matched miRNA-mRNA expression profiles were obtained from GEO (Gene Expression Omnibus) [24]. The sample-matched profiles of MM (accession number: GSE16558) [16] consisted of 60 MM samples and five normal bone marrow samples. The sample-matched miRNA-mRNA profiles of PC (accession numbers: GSE8126 and GSE6956) consisted of 14 normal prostate tissues and 60 PC tissues. The 305 pathway files were taken from the KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) pathway database, as of June 2011.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
