@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A multi-label approach using binary relevance and decision trees applied to functional genomics

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose an adaptation for the Binary Relevance (BR) algorithm.It may decrease the number of classifiers to be analyzed by human experts.When all the labels are related, our approach finds a single classifier.When all the labels are uncorrelated our approach will be equal to BR.Performance comparable to other algorithms, with good F-measure results.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi-label classification,Decision tree,Functional genomics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Many classification problems, especially in the field of bioinformatics, are associated with more than one class, known as multi-label classification problems. In this study, we propose a new adaptation for the Binary Relevance algorithm taking into account possible relations among labels, focusing on the interpretability of the model, not only on its performance. Experiments were conducted to compare the performance of our approach against others commonly found in the literature and applied to functional genomic datasets. The experimental results show that our proposal has a performance comparable to that of other methods and that, at the same time, it provides an interpretable model from the multi-label problem.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Since the advance of hardware and software, the automated sequencing of DNA fragments has become possible. The amount of biological data available has been increasing, which also increases the need for computational tools for knowledge extraction. Machine learning techniques are widely used to predict gene functions so that the best predictions can then be tested in the lab to validate the results [1]. However, predicting gene functions is a complex process because a single gene may have multiple functions. Consequently, multi-label classification seems to be appropriated.There are several reasons to investigate and propose new multi-label classification techniques, especially in the bioinformatics or bio-related research fields. Gene Ontology2http://www.geneontology.org/.2is an example of a multi-label problem, where genes and proteins may have more than one function or feature. Another example is the MIPS Functional Catalogue [2], in which genes and proteins may belong to more than one functional class. Therefore, it is very important to carry out research on computational techniques to classify multi-label problems using proteins, genes and other biological and medical data: with such knowledge it is possible to develop new drugs, treat diseases, and help in diagnostics.Traditional algorithms are unable to handle a set of multi-label instances, since such algorithms were designed to predict a single label. A simple solution to this is to transform the original dataset into several sets of instances where each set contains all the attributes, but only one label to be predicted. This algorithm is known as Binary Relevance (BR). However, studies have shown that this approach is not a good solution [3,4], since each label is treated individually, generating one classifier for each label, and ignoring possible correlations among them. An algorithm that finds a classifier for more than one label can intuitively capture some correlations between them, and a simpler classifier may be found (one which uses a smaller number of rules, for example). Under these circumstances, it is important to research and develop techniques that use the Binary Relevance algorithm, extending it to capture possible relations among labels.This study presents a new adaptation of the Binary Relevance algorithm using decision trees to treat multi-label problems. Decision trees are symbolic learning models that can be analyzed as set of rules in order to improve the understanding, by human experts, about the knowledge extracted. For this reason, the algorithm proposed here was designed to capture relations between labels, a feature the original Binary Relevance algorithm does not take into account, and consequently upgrade its generalization ability. Furthermore, since the present study takes model interpretability into account (and not only performance), our approach reduces the number of induced trees for expert interpretation: in the best scenario, it builds only one model (tree) that classifies all labels.This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes related studies in the literature; Section 3 presents the basic concepts of multi-label classification; Section 4 presents our multi-label learning algorithm. Section 5 describes the experimental methodology to evaluate our approach; Results and discussion are presented in Section 6. Finally, Section 7 presents the final remarks and future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presents a study on multi-label classification problem. In this scenario there is more than one label to be predicted, i.e., an instance may be related to more than one label at the same time, making the classification task more difficult. In order to improve performance and comprehensibility of the extracted model, in this study we proposed an adaptation for the Binary Relevance algorithm in order to overcome the disadvantage of the BR algorithm: we considered possible relationships among labels. This may improve the generalization ability of the model, and may possibly decrease the number of classifiers to be analyzed by human experts. When all the labels are related, our approach finds a single classifier (decision tree) that is able to classify them. Only when all labels are unrelated is the output model of our approach equal to BR (one decision tree for each label).Experiments were conducted to compare the performance of our approach against others commonly found in the literature. The results lead us to conclude that our proposal has a performance comparable to that of other algorithms, as it obtained good results using the F-measure.Based on these results we can observe that the variation in the BR-DT Pru algorithm in comparison with the Clus Pru algorithm at all levels had better results, although it did not obtain good results compared to the other algorithms in the second and third levels. One explanation for this result may be the high number of labels and few instances (per label) in the second and third levels.Nowadays BR-DT only handles binary values. As future work, we intend to augment our proposal aiming to manipulate labels composed by more than two values. The current BR-DT algorithm only assigns a label to a class during classification and during the extension of the tree. After some iterations, this assignment should be rechecked to avoid error propagation. Another future work will be carried out in terms of improvement of execution time since BR-DT may be computationally expensive depending on the dataset.Software Availability: Tool and thesis are available for downloading at http://dcm.ffclrp.usp.br/?pagina=dcm-eventos-pt&cod=168.