@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Comparison of geographic methods to assess travel patterns of persons diagnosed with HIV in Philadelphia: How close is close enough?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We compared four methods of analyzing travel patterns.We utilized new analytic tools to measure transit ‘costs’.Significant differences were observed in both distance and cost measures.Travel costs varied significantly by geographic area.Transit network data add an important metric in urban areas.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
HIV,Geographic Information Systems (GISs),Network analysis,Travel patterns,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Travel distance to medical care has been assessed using a variety of geographic methods. Network analyses are less common, but may generate more accurate estimates of travel costs. We compared straight-line distances and driving distance, as well as average drive time and travel time on a public transit network for 1789 persons diagnosed with HIV between 2010 and 2012 to identify differences overall, and by distinct geographic areas of Philadelphia. Paired t-tests were used to assess differences across methods, and analysis of variance was used to assess between-group differences. Driving distances were significantly longer than straight-line distances (p<0.001) and transit times were significantly longer than driving times (p<0.001). Persons living in the northeast section of the city traveled greater distances, and at greater cost of time and effort, than persons in all other areas of the city (p<0.001). Persons living in the northwest section of the city traveled farther and longer than all other areas except the northeast (p<0.0001). Network analyses that include public transit will likely produce a more realistic estimate of the travel costs, and may improve models to predict medical care outcomes.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Analyzing spatial components in epidemiologic phenomena is becoming routine, in part, due to the availability of Geographic Information System (GIS) software, and the increasingly critical need to target limited resources where they can be most effective [1–4]. Spatial analyses have been used to identify and monitor emerging foci of disease [5], as well as to observe and track travel patterns within various jurisdictional boundaries [6–10]. Pattern analyses have been used to compare subgroups within a larger cohort [11–14], and have proven capable of delineating geographically precise points of targeted intervention [1,11,15,16,9,17]. Proximity analyses have been used to identify underserved communities, and identified utilization trends that do not always conform to resource planning assumptions [11,18–21].Travel distance to medical care, in particular, has been challenging to predict, and findings are often difficult to interpret [19,22–26]. Travel distance to medical care has been evaluated as a straight-line Euclidean value, typically from point A to point B, but also from one polygon centroid to another, using boundaries such as zip codes or census tracts [8,27,28]. Calculating and analyzing travel distances using network datasets are less common [19,25,22], and require resources and expertise not always available to local public health agencies. However, understanding how and where persons choose to access services is crucial for targeting limited resources where they will have the greatest impact. Distance to HIV medical care may also be a factor in several critical components of the HIV care continuum [29,30]; specifically linkage to care and retention in care.Quantifying access to healthcare at the local level is complicated by logistic, as well as operational issues, and standardization of methodology is often obfuscated by local variations and available resources. Studies of travel patterns have shown that access to services cannot be entirely separated from travel costs [31], and models describing activity-based travel, rather than more simplistic ‘from-to’, analyses have determined that travel costs are more likely a function of accumulation [32], with persons choosing to access medical care in locations relative to other services. The process of accumulation may involve accessing multiple services that are located in the same general area, or accessing services that are near a location other than primary residence, such as place of employment or friends and family. Network analyses that ignore public transit may underestimate the actual burden of travel to medical care. Philadelphia, an urban center of more than 100 distinct neighborhoods and approximately 1.5 million people [33], bordered by more affluent counties to the north and west, and a major river border to the east, is burdened with one of the highest rates of poverty among all major cities in the United States [34]. The city is served by a sprawling public transit system, which reported a ridership of over 337 million trips in fiscal year 2013 [35]. Due to the complexity of the medical care system in Philadelphia, the size of the city, and the socioeconomic status of the majority of persons living with HIV/AIDS, no analysis of travel patterns would be complete without inclusion of public transit. Although some studies have concluded that straight-line distances are a close enough approximation of actual distance [24,28], the question remains whether or not distance measures alone capture a meaningful metric for the time and effort associated with travel in a complex transportation system. The analyses presented here compare distances and total travel costs (i.e. time required to travel between two points) for a cohort of persons accessing the health care system, and demonstrate the utility of including transit network analyses to more accurately assess travel costs in an urban environment.Case data for analyses reported here were extracted from the City of Philadelphia’s Enhanced HIV/AIDS Reporting System (eHARS), a database containing information on all HIV cases reported to the Philadelphia Department of Public Health (PDPH) AIDS Activities Coordinating Office (AACO) Surveillance Unit. Philadelphia has mandatory name-based case reporting of all new HIV infections in the City. The eHARS database contains routine surveillance data collected through medical record abstraction including identifiers such as name, address, date of birth and address at diagnosis; as well as laboratory, pharmacy and health service utilization information. Death data from the Pennsylvania Bureau of Vital Statistics, Social Security Death Master Index, and the National Death Index are routinely matched to eHARS data to identify deceased persons and document cause of death when available. The eHARS data are routinely monitored to identify duplicate cases and undergo quality control and verification to ensure that abstracted data are correctly assigned to unique case records.All HIV cases diagnosed between January 1, 2010 and December 31, 2012 were initially considered for this analysis. Because this study relies on accurate geographic location data, cases were excluded if they had invalid or insufficient address data. We used the address at diagnosis to assign spatial location. Invalid or insufficient address data included post office boxes, missing street address, or address segments not found by the address locator. Persons with prison addresses at time of diagnosis, and any other cases that were diagnosed in prison or jail, were also excluded because the address does not reflect a residential location and would not serve as a starting point for a planned trip to access care or services. Facilities diagnosing or providing care for persons with HIV were assigned a spatial location based on street address. The list of facilities was derived from the sample of persons in the cohort, and includes counseling and testing sites, city-funded public health centers, outpatient physician’s offices, as well as HIV clinics and hospitals. There were 185 distinct facilities identified for this analysis. Correction facilities and other custodial settings were not included as they are not considered a location of care or diagnosis based on patient choice.Euclidean distances were calculated as the difference between point p (residence) and point q (HIV diagnosis facility) where:d(p,q)=(p1-q1)2+(p2-q2)2Distances were initially calculated in feet (the distance unit of the map used to assign spatial coordinates) and converted to miles for data analysis.The ability to model and analyze travel patterns along a public transit network requires access to data sources that combine geographic and systemic data in a usable format. The complexity of public transit data varies by jurisdiction, but it generally includes multiple routes along multiple modes of transport, with various points of interchange. The General Transit Feed Specification (GTFS), also commonly referred to as Google Transit Feed Specification, creates a standardized format for public transportation information, including schedules, stop locations, trip data and record linkage for all transit routes within a given system. Files generated to conform to the GTFS standard have required variable and formats which allow developers to create applications which can consume data from multiple sources. The Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority (SEPTA) releases GTFS data for use in non-commercial applications (http://www2.septa.org/developer/index.php). These data were incorporated into a geo-database for use with GIS software.The Network Analyst extension of ArcGIS 10.1 allows users to create and/or utilize network datasets to analyze travel patterns between two or more locations. Unlike straight-line distance measures that can be calculated from two or more spatial locations, network analyses include features of the natural and built environment that affect actual travel distance. We used street-level spatial data created and maintained by the City’s Department of Technology to construct a network dataset capable of analyzing basic travel patterns. The dataset uses information about street connections, one-way traffic and environmental features such as rivers and parks, to calculate the minimum travel distance between two or more locations. Based on data from supplemental surveillance projects which indicate that the majority of HIV patients in Philadelphia utilize public transportation, we also considered travel patterns associated with mass transit. Using tools developed by ESRI [36] and GTFS data supplied by SEPTA, we created a transit network geo-database that contains information for all transit lines (buses, trolleys, subway and elevated train) in the SEPTA network.In the Network Analyst extension of ArcGIS 10.1, a route analysis can be used to find the shortest path between two or more stops. The analysis settings depend on the phenomenon under investigation and the desired outcome. Network analyses can be used to find the closest facility (or the n closest facilities) to a given location, the shortest route between two points, or the shortest distance avoiding specific types of roads (e.g. highways or congested urban streets). The outcomes and restrictions are limited only by the data available to the analysis solver.The transit cost data presented here are a product of the transit evaluator developed for use with GTFS data and made available by ESRI. The total transit ‘cost’ includes the amount of time required to travel between locations using available public transit, including walking distances to and from transit stops. The transit cost evaluator attributes may include any number of parameters depending on the complexity desired, however the basic elements for this analysis include pedestrian travel to the transit stop, the time required to board the transit vehicle, travel time on the transit line, the time required to exit the vehicle, and any additional pedestrian time to reach the desired location. The route may include any number of transfers between transit routes, along with the associated wait time. Pedestrian travel was calculated using an average walking speed of 3mph. No boarding time or exiting time was included. Travel time on the transit line was calculated using the Transit Evaluator tool developed by ESRI, which calculates the shortest trip, in minutes, including wait time and travel time based on the start time, if specified. We used the start time of 8AM on a Monday morning for the calculations presented here. This time was chosen as a default to maximize the utility of the transit system and minimize wait times. The total transit cost was calculated as the sum of these elements.The travel distance and driving time data represent a network analysis using location and city street-level data, including accessibility, traffic patterns, and directional impedances to calculate the driving distance in miles. The distance value is calculated by the sum of the lengths of each network edge traveled between stops. No time penalty is assessed for entering or exiting the vehicle, and speed limits on individual streets are not included in the calculation. However, available data suggest an average driving speed of 20.1mph for Philadelphia [37]. This figure is based on data collected by Google Maps that was used to assess and compare average driving speeds in several different urban areas, and was used here to convert distances (in miles) to an estimated drive time (in minutes). Maps of the network datasets, along with a reference map of geographic areas of Philadelphia, are presented in Fig. 1.Analysis of variance was used to assess differences in average travel distance from address of residence to HIV medical care/diagnosis site. Euclidean distance and travel distances were compared by area of the city to assess significantly different overall travel costs. Mean differences were evaluated for statistical significance using the Tukey method. Pairwise differences between the individual travel distance measures were assessed using paired t-tests, both for overall differences and difference by geographic area. All statistical analyses were conducted using SAS 9.2.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
