@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An ensemble heterogeneous classification methodology for discovering health-related knowledge in social media messages

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Propose 5 heterogeneous features for identifying health messages in social media.Propose ensemble methods that allow base classifiers to make collective decisions.Validate the proposed methods based on empirical evaluations.Generalize the proposed methodology across multiple social media domains.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Social media,Machine learning,Classification,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectivesThe role of social media as a source of timely and massive information has become more apparent since the era of Web 2.0.Multiple studies illustrated the use of information in social media to discover biomedical and health-related knowledge.Most methods proposed in the literature employ traditional document classification techniques that represent a document as a bag of words.These techniques work well when documents are rich in text and conform to standard English; however, they are not optimal for social media data where sparsity and noise are norms.This paper aims to address the limitations posed by the traditional bag-of-word based methods and propose to use heterogeneous features in combination with ensemble machine learning techniques to discover health-related information, which could prove to be useful to multiple biomedical applications, especially those needing to discover health-related knowledge in large scale social media data.Furthermore, the proposed methodology could be generalized to discover different types of information in various kinds of textual data.MethodologySocial media data is characterized by an abundance of short social-oriented messages that do not conform to standard languages, both grammatically and syntactically.The problem of discovering health-related knowledge in social media data streams is then transformed into a text classification problem, where a text is identified as positive if it is health-related and negative otherwise.We first identify the limitations of the traditional methods which train machines with N-gram word features, then propose to overcome such limitations by utilizing the collaboration of machine learning based classifiers, each of which is trained to learn a semantically different aspect of the data.The parameter analysis for tuning each classifier is also reported.Data setsThree data sets are used in this research.The first data set comprises of approximately 5000 hand-labeled tweets, and is used for cross validation of the classification models in the small scale experiment, and for training the classifiers in the real-world large scale experiment.The second data set is a random sample of real-world Twitter data in the US.The third data set is a random sample of real-world Facebook Timeline posts.EvaluationsTwo sets of evaluations are conducted to investigate the proposed model’s ability to discover health-related information in the social media domain: small scale and large scale evaluations.The small scale evaluation employs 10-fold cross validation on the labeled data, and aims to tune parameters of the proposed models, and to compare with the stage-of-the-art method.The large scale evaluation tests the trained classification models on the native, real-world data sets, and is needed to verify the ability of the proposed model to handle the massive heterogeneity in real-world social media.FindingsThe small scale experiment reveals that the proposed method is able to mitigate the limitations in the well established techniques existing in the literature, resulting in performance improvement of 18.61% (F-measure).The large scale experiment further reveals that the baseline fails to perform well on larger data with higher degrees of heterogeneity, while the proposed method is able to yield reasonably good performance and outperform the baseline by 46.62% (F-Measure) on average.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Social media such as Twitter and Facebook are increasingly being used as tools for real-time knowledge discovery relating to social events, emerging threats, epidemics, and even product trends [1,2]. For example, real time analysis of Twitter users’ tweet content can be or is being used to detect earthquakes and provide warnings [3], to identify needs (e.g., medical emergencies, food and water shortages) during recovery from natural disasters such as the Haiti Earthquake [4], track emergence of specific syndromic characteristics of influenza-like illness [5], and collect epidemic-related tweets [6].The role of social media in biomedical domain has become significant in recent years [7–13]. Researchers and physicians have utilized social media data to (1) communicate and share information between patients and health care decision makers, (2) develop large scale, dynamic disease surveillance systems and (3) mining biomedical and health-related information.An immediate and direct use of social media in the biomedical domain is a means for patients and professionals to communicate and exchange information. Web 2.0 along with ubiquitous mobile computing devices allows individuals to dynamically and seamlessly interact with each other in real time, regardless of their locations. PatientsLikeMe1http://www.patientslikeme.com/.1is a social network for patients that improves lives and a real-time research platform that advances medicine. On PatientsLikeMe’s network, patients connect with others who have the same disease or condition, allowing them to track and share their own experiences. Eijk et al. illustrated the use of Online Health Communities (OHCs) for ParkinsonNet,2http://www.parkinsonnet.info/.2a social network for Parkinson disease patients whose participants (both patients and professionals) use various types of OHCs to deliver patient-centered care [14]. Merolli et al. explored different ways that chronic disease sufferers engage in social media in order to better tailor these online interventions to individually support patients in specific groups [9]. Additionally, Twitter, Facebook, and other social blogging services provide conduits for patients and medical practitioners to collaborate, exchange, and disseminate information through official broadcasting channels/webpages or discussion groups [12,10,13,11,15].Most popular social media providers such as Twitter and Facebook allow their posts to be geo-located. These properties provide researchers in the healthcare community the ability to monitor the medical related emergences. Culotta proposed a methodology to study the predictability of Twitter data on future influenza rates [16]. A correlation of 95% was observed between the tweets containing the flu keywords and the actual national health statistics. A similar study was conducted by Corley et al. who found a high correlation between the frequency of the tweets (weekly) containing influenza keywords and the CDC3http://www.cdc.gov/flu/.3influenza-like-illness surveillance data [17]. Bodnar et al. compared different regression-based models for disease detection using Twitter, and discovered that the SVM regression model gave the best correlation with the actual CDC disease report [18]. Heaivilin et al. introduced Twitter as a potential source for dental surveillance and research [19]. The findings suggest that people who experience dental pain usually turn to social network to seek comfort and advice from others who also suffer from dental pain. In all such applications, systems are needed to automatically, accurately, and efficiently identify and interpret health-related content in short text “micro” messages.Even though social media is high in noise due to the heterogeneity of the writing styles, formality, and creativity, such noise also bears undiscovered wisdom of the crowd, and hence should not be regarded as a threat, but an opportunity for discovering knowledge that can be useful in biomedical domains. Indeed literature illustrates rich research in mining biomedical and health related knowledge in social media. Paul and Dredze utilized a modified Latent Dirichlet Allocation [20] model to identify 15 ailments along with descriptions and symptoms in Twitter data [21,22]. Cameron et al. proposed a web platform PREDOSE (PREscription Drug abuse Online Surveillance and Epidemiology), which aims to facilitate research in prescription-related drug abuse practices using social media [23]. Greene et al. studied the quality of communication of the content in Facebook communities dedicated to diabetes. They classified each Facebook post into one of the 5 categories: Advertisements, Providing Information, Requesting Information, Support, and Irrelevant, and found that roughly two third of the information is about sharing diabetes management strategies [15]. Yang et al. proposed a method utilizing association mining and Proportional Reporting Ratios to discover the relationship between drugs and averse reactions from the user contributed content in social media [24].This paper presents a novel machine learning based methodology that combines multi-aspect learners to make collective decisions in order to discover health-related information in the heterogeneous pool of social media. Such a system could prove useful to multiple biomedical research and applications aiming to employ the power of large-scale, realtime social media. Social media posts/comments are usually represented as short textual expressions. We formulate the problem as a text classification problem, where the objective is to correctly classify health-related content, given a large, dynamic stream of data. A message is said to be health-related if at least one of these two following conditions is met:•The message indicates its author has health issues; e.g. Fever, back pain, headache…ugh!The message talks about someone else getting sick, or expresses health concern; e.g. I completely understand, more than anyone! Try a warm bath too. That always helped me w/ Pauly. & drinking water.The health-related content-identification problem is transformed into the health-related short text classification, where a system is given a short text message and asked to determine whether it is health-related or not. Studies [25–27] show that traditional text classification approaches which represent a document as a “bag of words” are not well suited for processing short texts, as they do not provide sufficient word co-occurrence or shared semantics for effective similarity measures. Specifically, traditional techniques such as N-gram feature extraction limit the ability to recognize high-discriminative terms that include health-related keywords and/or obtain meaning from the topical semantics of the entire text. We propose and test the efficacy of ensemble methods wherein multiple base classifiers that learn different aspects of the data are used together to make collective decisions in order to enhance performance of health-related message classification.In an effort to mitigate the limitations of existing health-related text mining methodologies, this work:1.Proposes to use 5 heterogeneous feature types which represent different aspects of semantics for identification of health-related messages in social media. Parameter sensitivity is studied to find the best parameter configuration and base classifier for each feature type.Explores the use of different ensemble methods that allow base classifiers trained with different feature types to make collective decisions.Validates the proposed classification algorithms using empirical evaluation. Additionally, we strengthen the reasons for choosing the proposed features by showing how each feature type impacts the classification.Evaluates the proposed classification algorithms on large scale, real world datasets, and shows that our proposed solutions do not only perform well on real-world data, but also generalize across multiple domains of social media with minimum assumption on the specific social media characteristics.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background of the related works. Section 3 explains the characteristics of the dataset we use in our experiments. Section 4 discusses our proposed methods, including feature extraction along with analysis on parameter sensitivity and ensemble techniques in detail. Section 5 describes the evaluation of our proposed methods against the baseline on both small labeled data and large scale datasets. Section 6 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We investigate using 5 heterogeneous feature sets representing different views of the data on machine learning ensemble methods for health-related short text classification problem. We analyse the parameter sensitivity of the feature extraction algorithms in order to obtain the best possible features from each feature type. We study the mutual effects of the feature sets by combining the base classifiers, each of which is trained with a different feature type, using standard ensemble methods. We are able to outperform the baseline by 18.61% in the small scale evaluation and 46.62% on average in the large scale evaluation, using the weighted probability averaging method. Our results are very promising and reaffirm our assumption that the limitation of the N-gram features on the social media domain can be reduced by combining classifiers that learn different characteristics of the data. Future works could seek to improve the classification algorithm [62,63] and to employ semi-supervised methods such as the co-training technique [64] to expand the training data with unlabeled data.