@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Technical desiderata for the integration of genomic data with clinical decision support

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Whole genome sequencing information will require clinical decision support (CDS).A desiderata is necessary to guide development of CDS for whole genome information.A panel of genome and CDS experts developed a desiderata with seven requirements.The proposed requirements were all found to be important by a community of experts.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Clinical decision support systems,Medical genetics,Genomics,Electronic health records,Health information technology,Personalized medicine,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The ease with which whole genome sequence (WGS) information can be obtained is rapidly approaching the point where it can become useful for routine clinical care. However, significant barriers will inhibit widespread adoption unless clinicians are able to effectively integrate this information into patient care and decision-making. Electronic health records (EHR) and clinical decision support (CDS) systems may play a critical role in this integration. A previously published technical desiderata focused primarily on the integration of genomic data into the EHR. This manuscript extends the previous desiderata by specifically addressing needs related to the integration of genomic information with CDS. The objective of this study is to develop and validate a guiding set of technical desiderata for supporting the clinical use of WGS through CDS. A panel of domain experts in genomics and CDS developed a proposed set of seven additional requirements. These desiderata were reviewed by 63 experts in genomics and CDS through an online survey and refined based on the experts’ comments. These additional desiderata provide important guiding principles for the technical development of CDS capabilities for the clinical use of WGS information.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Rapid genomic sequencing, including whole genome sequencing (WGS) and exome sequencing, is the future paradigm of clinical genetic testing [1]. With a patient’s entire genome readily available to a clinician at the point of care, WGS may offer many benefits to traditional single gene testing. Currently, the effective use of single gene testing is inhibited by several factors including the need for clinical indication prior to ordering, the time delay between test ordering and the return of results, and financial constraints for single gene tests [2]. WGS will likely overcome many such barriers in the future. For instance, with WGS information readily available, pathogenic variants in disease-causing genes can be made known to the clinician much earlier in the decision-making process to aid in differential diagnosis [3]. Likewise, important but clinically under-utilized use cases such as pharmacogenomics may now become more clinically and financially feasible than under the current genetic testing paradigm [4]. Indeed, the cost and value of WGS is now at a point at which health care providers are sequencing a patient’s genome for unique clinical scenarios [5,6]. As a result, it may be soon when WGS becomes a larger part of routine clinical care [1].While WGS offers many opportunities to enhance clinical care, were it to be made widely available for routine clinical care today, the effective use of WGS information would be hindered by significant barriers. These barriers include inadequate laboratory reporting methods, the complexity of genetic analysis, lack of physician proficiency in genetic analysis, and the insufficient number of genetics professionals in the workforce [7,8]. As clinicians are already burdened with significant time constraints, adding an additional layer of WGS information that they are required to review, integrate with other clinical parameters, and translate into appropriate clinical actions is unlikely to be successful without assistance [9]. This challenge is amplified by the rapidly evolving nature of our understanding of the genome and its clinical implications [10].Clinical decision support (CDS) integrated into the clinician’s workflow provides a practical solution to allow clinicians to provide effective clinical care using genomic information [11,12]. CDS entails providing clinicians, patients, and other healthcare stakeholders with pertinent knowledge and person-specific information, intelligently filtered or presented at appropriate times, to enhance health and healthcare [13]. Examples of point-of-care CDS include medication dosing support, order facilitators, alerts and reminders, relevant information display, expert systems, and workflow support [14]. CDS knowledge, which supports these types of CDS, is used to process clinical data to provide patient-specific advice, recommendations, or information. Table 1provides summary of CDS types and potential examples of WGS-enabled CDS.When developed and implemented properly, CDS has the ability to process large amounts of complex data, such as WGS data, and present actionable, evidence-based recommendations to clinicians at the point of care [15]. In doing so, CDS has been shown to be effective in reducing errors, improving clinician performance, and ultimately improving the quality of care in clinical settings [16]. Furthermore, CDS is able to translate research discoveries into clinical care much more efficiently than other traditional methods of knowledge translation [17]. Indeed, CDS may be essential to meeting the demands of WGS at the point of care [18].To provide guidance on how to integrate genomic information within the EHR, Masys et al. [19] developed a set of guiding principles for the technical integration of genomic information into the EHR. Their summarized desiderata is outlined in Table 2. While this paper provides a strong foundation for integration of genomic information within the EHR, in our experience developing CDS capabilities for WGS, we found that it did not fully address all the needs of WGS integration with CDS.To address this need, we assembled a core group of domain experts in genomics and CDS to define additional desirable functional characteristics for CDS capable of incorporating WGS at the point of care within an EHR. These additional requirements were then validated and assessed for importance among a larger group of domain experts in genomics and CDS. These additional desiderata, described in Table 3, are intended to augment the original Masys et al. desiderata and provide further guidance to system developers on important requirements to consider when developing health IT systems and CDS for WGS information. Of note, the requirements described in this desiderata represent current and potential needs according to our current understanding. Nevertheless, future research and development may require additional requirements to be added or compel current requirements to be removed from the desiderata. As such, this initial set of requirements should be viewed as an evolving set of requirements that informs and is informed by ongoing research and development in this field.A core group of domain experts in genomics and CDS was assembled to review needs for WGS CDS. This group of domain experts derived a set of additional desiderata by consensus. The members of the core group consisted of the authors of this manuscript and described in Appendix A. We sought to improve, refine, and validate our initial set of requirements by seeking additional input and qualitative feedback from a wider community of domain experts in genomics and CDS. To obtain this feedback, an anonymous, IRB-approved survey was distributed electronically to e-mail discussion lists of relevant expert groups [20]. Participants included members of the HL7 Clinical Genomics Workgroup, HL7 CDS Workgroup, AMIA Genomics Workgroup, AMIA CDS Workgroup, Open Source Electronic Health Record Agent (OSEHRA) Genomics Workgroup, the developers of ClinVar, University of Utah Program in Personalized Health Care, and our own professional contacts. The survey instrument was available from 8/13/2013 through 8/30/2013. Each requirement was listed and summarized on a separate page with a 5-point Likert scale assessing the participant’s opinion regarding the importance of each requirement (very important, important, neither important nor unimportant, unimportant, very unimportant, and unsure/no opinion/blank). The full survey is available in Appendix B. Survey responses were analyzed and visualized using spreadsheet software. Qualitative feedback was reviewed by the core panel, and feedback was incorporated into the desiderata where appropriate. Participant feedback, resulting modifications, and core group responses are available in Appendix C.The final desiderata is summarized in Table 3, listed in order of importance as assessed by the community of experts. All proposed requirements were judged to be important (with high significance) by the community of experts. The explanation and reasoning for each additional requirement is provided here.A relatively small number of Mendelian diseases, such as cystic fibrosis and sickle-cell anemia, are affected by variants within a single gene responsible for producing the characteristic phenotype. As a result, such cases are fairly straightforward to assess. With nearly every human condition affected one way or another by a genetic influence, most diseases, in particular common diseases, are caused or affected by multiple genetic influences and environmental factors. For example, there are potentially hundreds of genetic loci contributing to type 2 diabetes risk [21]. In order to provide an accurate risk assessment and decision support, all relevant genetic loci, relevant clinical factors (e.g. age, weight, health history, co-morbidities), and environmental influences (e.g. diet, physical activity, stress) need to be considered. Furthermore, it may not always be the case that all necessary data is in one central location. Therefore, CDS for the WGS must have the capacity to leverage and incorporate several pieces of information from multiple genomic and non-genomic data sources.Masys et al. describe the importance of separating molecular observations (e.g. DNA sequence) from variant classification (e.g. pathogenicity classifications) due to the need to update variant interpretation as genome knowledge changes and grows over time. To illustrate, one study found that over a seven year period, 14.5% of reported variant classifications had to be reclassified [22]. Likewise, it is also essential to separate CDS knowledge from both molecular observations and variant classification. CDS must have the ability to manage evolving and frequently changing gene variant interpretations efficiently without requiring changes to the underlying CDS knowledge each time a variant’s classification changes. Separation of CDS knowledge from variant interpretation allows CDS knowledge to be more efficiently handled and maintained.The reality of the health information environment in the US today is that multiple healthcare organizations use multiple EHR and health information management systems [23]. Often, these health information management solutions store and represent the same health information differently. This can be a challenge when trying to harness the information within different health IT systems in different organizations to provide CDS. Due to the need to distribute and share WGS enabled CDS knowledge across multiple organizations (see next requirement), the CDS architecture would ideally be EHR agnostic, where CDS knowledge can be developed once, and then run consistently anywhere. A number of initiatives aimed at supporting this type of architecture are underway, including the Health eDecisions initiative, OpenCDS, the SMART platform, and the CDS Consortium, to name a few.There are roughly 1200 known variants in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene, a gene associated with a rare form of colon cancer [24]. Likewise, there are nearly 2000 known variants in the cystic fibrosis gene CFTR [25]. Given the potentially high number of variants per gene, it may be inefficient to create CDS knowledge for every known variant in each disease-causing gene. Furthermore, as novel variants are discovered, it will be difficult to update CDS knowledge for every gene variant that is discovered. Therefore, to manage this complexity, variants with the same or similar clinical impact should be classified accordingly. CDS knowledge can then be simplified by developing logic or rules which leverages the variant interpretation rather than the specific variant. Nevertheless, in cases where a particular variant has a unique and clinically important impact or where machine learning CDS models could utilize individual variants or combinations of variants within a single gene, genetic information at the variant level should still be accessible to CDS knowledge. In summary, CDS knowledge can be greatly simplified by classifying variants into groups of common clinical impact, while still supporting inferencing at the individual variant level where necessary.Both the CDS and genomics fields have benefited from extensive research and development over the years. Indeed, both fields have well developed infrastructure and standards to support its uses. Therefore, it is important to leverage these standards and infrastructure. Examples include using HGVS and dbSNP to represent specific molecular observations; ACMG recommendations for variant classification; HL7 Clinical Genomics standards for the representation of genetic information; Arden Syntax, GELLO, GLIF3, GEM, or the HL7 CDS Knowledge Artifact Implementation Guide for CDS knowledge representation; the HL7 Decision Support Service standard and HL7 Infobutton standard for delivering CDS as a service; and open-source, standards-based resources such as OpenCDS. While many of these standards and resources may not be completely sufficient for meeting the needs of CDS for WGS, it still represents significant relevant effort. It will be important to leverage current and developing CDS and genomics infrastructure, standards, and knowledge.With the potential for genomic information to impact nearly every clinical decision and the clinical application of genomics rapidly evolving, the time and cost for a single entity or organization to manually create and update CDS knowledge will be challenging. Indeed, it is unlikely that a single health care organization will be able to author and manage all CDS knowledge for all WGS use cases. Furthermore, there should be an efficient and scalable mechanism to consistently modify CDS knowledge everywhere it is deployed. Ideally, a standardized CDS infrastructure would allow multiple health care organizations, public or private entities, or individuals to create, publish, and distribute CDS knowledge efficiently to multiple consuming health care organizations. Such an approach will allow a specialized entity (e.g. pharmacogenomics experts) to develop and manage CDS knowledge and subsequently distribute to ‘subscribing’ health care organizations. With an ecosystem of CDS knowledge developed independently by multiple content developers, it becomes more feasible for health care organizations to have affordable access to comprehensive, up-to-date, and accurate CDS knowledge for the entire genome.The separation of CDS knowledge from molecular observations and variant interpretations will require relevant genetic information being accessed and sent to a CDS engine (or equivalent) for processing. It will be inefficient and insecure to transmit an entire genome file for every CDS knowledge. The processing capacity required to transmit and sift through an entire genome for CDS knowledge will hinder the ability to provide CDS at the point of care in real-time. Furthermore, HIPAA requires that only the minimum protected health information needed to satisfy a particular purpose or carry out a function be used or transmitted [26]. Therefore, a CDS architecture must only transmit the relevant genes and any associated molecular observations, variant interpretations, and associated clinical information.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
