@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Bayesian evolutionary hypergraph learning for predicting cancer clinical outcomes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a new prognostic prediction model based on a Bayesian evolutionary learning.The evolutionary hypergraph classifiers identify higher-order prognostic biomarkers.The proposed Bayesian evolutionary learning effectively handles a complex search space.The performance of hypergraph classifiers outperforms other classification models.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Bayesian evolutionary learning,Clinical outcome prediction,Hypergraph classifier,Cancer genomic data,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Predicting the clinical outcomes of cancer patients is a challenging task in biomedicine. A personalized and refined therapy based on predicting prognostic outcomes of cancer patients has been actively sought in the past decade. Accurate prognostic prediction requires higher-order representations of complex dependencies among genetic factors. However, identifying the co-regulatory roles and functional effects of genetic interactions on cancer prognosis is hindered by the complexity of the interactions. Here we propose a prognostic prediction model based on evolutionary learning that identifies higher-order prognostic biomarkers of cancer clinical outcomes. The proposed model represents the interactions of prognostic genes as a combinatorial space. It adopts a flexible hypergraph structure composed of a large population of hyperedges that encode higher-order relationships among many genetic factors. The hyperedge population is optimized by an evolutionary learning method based on sequential Bayesian sampling. The proposed learning approach effectively balances performance and parsimony of the model using information-theoretic dependency and complexity-theoretic regularization priors. Using MAQC-II project data, we demonstrate that our model can handle high-dimensional data more effectively than state-of-the-art classification models. We also identify potential gene interactions characterizing prognosis and recurrence risk in cancer.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Prognostic prediction is an important task in clinical medicine. It is crucial to estimate the clinical outcomes of patients and the potential effects of treatments. A refined treatment based on likely clinical outcomes is especially necessary in oncology due to the variation of cancer progression in patients. By accurately estimating the clinical response to treatments, clinicians can personalize and hence provide an improved therapy for a patient.Gene expression profiling has been widely used to identify tumor heterogeneity, and it has led to the discovery of molecular signatures of potential prognostic and therapeutic interest [1,2]. As such, it is recognized as a powerful source for improving prognostic assessment and treatment selection in cancer medicine. Moreover, cancer prognosis is associated with combinatorial and modular regulation by multiple genetic factors. Thus, for more precise prediction of cancer clinical outcomes, the higher-order relationships among genetic factors must be induced from gene expression profiles. However, the complexity of gene interactions renders this task extremely challenging.Predictive methods, which classify patient outcomes on a genome-wide scale from high-throughput biological data, have flourished in recent decades. Many studies have adopted computational approaches, such as machine learning-based models [3–7] and statistical methods [8,9], to predict prognosis from cancer genomic data. However, few of the existing approaches address the higher-order interactions between genes involved in cancer prognosis.Predicting outcomes from higher-order gene relationships requires searching an exponential search space consisting of tens of thousands of genes. It is infeasible to exhaustively explore such a huge combinatorial feature space using a gradient method, and thus various feature selection methods are frequently used [10]. Typically, these approaches reduce the problem space by individually evaluating each gene under the assumption of the independence between features. However, such restrictions may not capture the important genes involved in higher-order relationships underlying pathological processes.Evolutionary computation is one of the most useful techniques for solving real-world complex problems. This approach is conceptually simple and widely applicable, and it outperforms classical optimization procedures. Moreover, it can be easily hybridized with various existing methods and data structures. Evolutionary methods include genetic algorithm (GA) [11,12], genetic programing (GP) [13], particle swarm optimization (PSO) [14], learning classifier system (LCS) [15,16], multi-objective optimization evolutionary algorithm (MOEA) [17], and estimation of distribution algorithm (EDA) [18]. These methods have been successfully applied to problems that are unsolvable by deterministic methods. Numerous biological problems can be formulated as optimization issues, for which evolutionary approaches are eminently suitable [19–23]. Also, especially in medicine, evolutionary computation has expanded rapidly in recent years, and is currently adopted in diagnosis and prognosis [24–26]. Despite various proposals and several successes, however, it remains difficult to evolve complex higher-order systems involving tens of thousands of features.Here we introduce a new population-based model that uses an evolutionary learning method to predict clinical outcomes of cancer patients (Fig. 1). The model handles complex genetic interactions by means of a flexible hypergraph structure comprising a large population of hyperedges, encoding the multi-variable combinations corresponding to all potential genes or markers. Each hyperedge is weighted by its discriminative ability to predict prognostic outcomes. Thus, each hyperedge potentially behaves as a prognostic module influencing the cancer clinical outcomes.The model learning involves the search of a high-dimensional space characterizing the higher-order relationships between factors. To learn the model from a dataset comprising several tens of thousands of genetic variables, we use an evolutionary method based on sequential Bayesian sampling scheme. The proposed Bayesian evolutionary algorithm is designed upon a standard evolutionary computation framework. The repeat of variation, evaluation, and selection is addressed as a sequential Bayesian sampling process, where the posterior distribution is recursively calculated from the prior distribution by estimating the likelihood from fitness measurements. Using this Bayesian formulation of evolutionary computation, the model can determine the problem-specific bias as a guideline for efficient search of a huge combinatorial feature space. This study adopts an information theoretic co-regulatory measure i.e., mutual information, and the model complexity for the prior distribution. The information theoretic measure enhances the efficiency of the evolutionary search, while the complexity retains a compact model size by controlling the parsimony.The proposed model is evaluated on MAQC-II breast cancer and multiple myeloma gene expression data [27]. The proposed model demonstrates high classification performance for predicting prognosis in patients, and can identify higher-order prognostic biomarkers of cancer clinical outcomes. Moreover, our model directly identifies potential modules of informative genes that characterize prognosis and recurrence risk in cancer.This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 details the proposed hypergraph-based model and the Bayesian evolutionary algorithm for learning the model. In Section 3, the experimental results are described and discussed. Discussion and conclusions are presented in Sections 4 and 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We proposed hypergraph classifiers based on evolutionary learning to predict cancer prognoses from complex genetic interactions, using two archived datasets. The learning method evolves a population-based representation of hypergraphs based on a sequential Bayesian sampling. The Bayesian evolutionary hypergraph model accommodates formal management of model complexity by defining priors on a huge combinatorial search space comprising tens of thousands of genes. Specifically, we controlled the evolutionary search process using two types of prior distributions. One is defined in terms of the mutual information between each genetic variable and the class label and it guides the compositional variation of the variables in a hyperedge. The other is related to the model size, modulating the degree of a hyperedge and the number of hyperedges in the model.Cancer prognosis is typically influenced by the combinatorial regulation of multiple genetic factors. By analyzing gene relationships at higher-order levels, we can better predict clinical outcomes in cancer patients. We have demonstrated that higher-order interactions discriminate prognosis more precisely than pair-wise analysis of single gene relationships. From this viewpoint, we predicted that potential prognostic gene modules could be identified from higher-order gene interactions.The performance of the proposed method was validated on MAQC-II data. The classification performance of the hypergraph classifiers was superior to those of other models including SVM, naïve Bayes classifier, decision tree, random forest, AdaBoost and LCS, especially in terms of MCC and AUC. Furthermore, the interpretable structures of hypergraph classifiers proved useful for analyzing complex biological phenomena. That is, the proposed model presents as an alternative method for solving a variety of biomedical problems. Such contributions will greatly assist toward developing a personalized and refined therapy.