@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Predicting treatment process steps from events

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Completely new approach for workflow-recognition from real-world patient data.Usage of Hidden Markov Models to create a stochastic model of the therapy process.Intelligent exception-handling techniques to improve HMM recognition rates.Application for the treatment process in oncological head and neck surgery.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hidden Markov Model,Workflow recognition,Tumor therapy,Digital patient model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
MotivationThe primary economy-driven documentation of patient-specific information in clinical information systems leads to drawbacks in the use of these systems in daily clinical routine. Missing meta-data regarding underlying clinical workflows within the stored information is crucial for intelligent support systems. Unfortunately, there is still a lack of primary clinical needs-driven electronic patient documentation. Hence, physicians and surgeons must search hundreds of documents to find necessary patient data rather than accessing relevant information directly from the current process step. In this work, a completely new approach has been developed to enrich the existing information in clinical information systems with additional meta-data, such as the actual treatment phase from which the information entity originates.MethodsStochastic models based on Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) are used to create a mathematical representation of the underlying clinical workflow. These models are created from real-world anonymized patient data and are tailored to therapy processes for patients with head and neck cancer. Additionally, two methodologies to extend the models to improve the workflow recognition rates are presented in this work.ResultsA leave-one-out cross validation study was performed and achieved promising recognition rates of up to 90% with a standard deviation of 6.4%.ConclusionsThe method presented in this paper demonstrates the feasibility of predicting clinical workflow steps from patient-specific information as the basis for clinical workflow support, as well as for the analysis and improvement of clinical pathways.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The use of a stochastic model provides a reliable classification of patient-specific information entities with the corresponding workflow step in the treatment process. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first approach designed to infer clinical workflows directly from HIS information entities. There is only one similar approach available in the scientific literature, which was developed by Huang et al., who used clinical event logs for mining clinical pathway patterns [13,12].Workflow recognition and the automatic classification of patient-specific information are important for the development of assistance functions for different clinical use cases. The knowledge of the patient’s current treatment step provides the basis for workflow assistance. With this knowledge, clinical information systems are able to provide physicians and surgeons with only the information necessary for a specific therapy phase such that less time is spent in searching the appropriate information entities. A second relevant use case in daily clinical routine is the acquisition of patient-specific documents. In existing information systems, physicians and surgeons browse through tens or hundreds of data sets and manually search appropriate documents. It is not possible to answer questions such as “Please give me all documents that have been created during radiation therapy”. When each information entity is tagged with its corresponding workflow step, access to information generated during a specific step in the treatment process can be significantly improved.Future work will focus on improving the presented approach and integrating it into daily clinical routines. First, the capabilities of the model must be extended. The current state of development does not support breaks in the process in the case of treatment abortion or death, which is very important for the use in daily clinical routines. Additionally, the time elapsed between two observations should be incorporated into the model to support the detection of potential process phase transitions. This information can then be used to refine the transition and observation matrices of the model. Second, the ability to train the model for daily use is a crucial prerequisite. This could be realized using a feedback-based approach, in which experts correct failures of automatically tagged information entities. Furthermore, the HMM will be integrated into oncoflow (see Section 3.1.1) to enrich the patient-specific information with workflow information and to implement the aforementioned clinical workflow assistance functionalities.