@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Annotating risk factors for heart disease in clinical narratives for diabetic patients

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
NLP task focused on identifying risk factors over time in clinical narratives.Corpus of 1304 longitudinal medical records for 296 patients.“Light” annotation task for domain expert annotators.Gold standard created through voting.Corpus used for track 2 of 2014 i2b2/UTHealth NLP Shared Task.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Natural language processing,Annotation,Medical records,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The 2014 i2b2/UTHealth natural language processing shared task featured a track focused on identifying risk factors for heart disease (specifically, Cardiac Artery Disease) in clinical narratives. For this track, we used a “light” annotation paradigm to annotate a set of 1304 longitudinal medical records describing 296 patients for risk factors and the times they were present. We designed the annotation task for this track with the goal of balancing annotation load and time with quality, so as to generate a gold standard corpus that can benefit a clinically-relevant task. We applied light annotation procedures and determined the gold standard using majority voting. On average, the agreement of annotators with the gold standard was above 0.95, indicating high reliability. The resulting document-level annotations generated for each record in each longitudinal EMR in this corpus provide information that can support studies of progression of heart disease risk factors in the included patients over time. These annotations were used in the Risk Factor track of the 2014 i2b2/UTHealth shared task. Participating systems achieved a mean micro-averaged F1 measure of 0.815 and a maximum F1 measure of 0.928 for identifying these risk factors in patient records.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
While much information about a patient’s medical history is stored in structured, easily searchable databases, still more information is contained within the narrative portions of the electronic medical records (EMRs). It is often necessary for clinicians to read through these narratives to gain a full perspective on a patient’s history of a disease and other relevant factors. Yet reading through years of patient records is time-consuming, particularly when only certain pieces of information related to a particular medical question are sought.Using natural language processing (NLP) to extract information about a specific clinical question was the focus for Track 2 of the 2014 i2b2/UTHealth (Informatics for Integrating Biology and the Bedside; University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston) NLP shared task. With the advice of practicing medical doctors and researchers, we developed an annotated corpus that answers the question “For each record in each patient’s EMR, which heart disease risk factors were present before, during, and after the record’s creation date?” We used this question as our starting point for enabling the use of EMRs in studying the clinical questions of “How do diabetic patients progress towards heart disease, specifically coronary artery disease? And how do diabetic patients with coronary artery disease differ from other diabetic patients who do not develop coronary artery disease?”The development of coronary artery disease (CAD or “heart disease” for short) is complex, and many factors are involved in determining whether a patient is at risk. The World Health Organization defines “risk factors” as “any attribute, characteristic or exposure of an individual that increases the likelihood of developing a disease or injury” [1]. Risk factors for heart disease include life-style and social factors such as smoking status and family medical history, as well as specific clinical conditions such as hypertension and hyperlipidemia. To understand the progression toward CAD in a patient, these risk factors are considered with their temporality and their time of onset.In order to develop NLP systems that can extract disease-relevant information from narrative EMRs to help clinicians assess patients’ potential progression toward CAD over time, we built and de-identified a new corpus of longitudinal patient records. We annotated these records for heart disease risk factors and medical information that indicates the presence of these risk factors using a “light” annotation paradigm [2]. This paradigm enabled us to annotate the corpus quickly and consistently.This paper describes the Track 2 (also called the “Risk Factors Track”) corpus of the 2014 i2b2/UTHealth NLP Shared Task. Section 2 discusses related work, Section 3 provides an overview of the corpus, and Section 4 gives more in-depth information about the heart disease risk factors that we annotated. Section 5 discusses the annotation guidelines, Section 6 describes trial annotations, and Section 7 reviews the annotation procedures and provides statistics on the resulting corpus. Sections 8 and 9 close the paper with our discussions and conclusions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The corpus for the 2014 i2b2/UTHealth NLP challenge is a new resource for researchers in clinical NLP. We annotated this corpus by applying light annotation procedures and determined the gold standard using majority voting. The document-level annotations provided for each record in a longitudinal EMR provide information that can support studies of progression of heart disease risk factors in a patient over time. The annotation of risk factors, associated indicators, and their temporal placements enables the use of NLP to answer important, clinically-relevant questions using the information in patients’ narrative EMRs. The output from systems trained on this data could potentially be used to create visualizations of patient timelines, predict patient outcomes based on larger trends, and show comorbidities between different risk factors and their indicators. This data set is distributed under data use agreements from i2b2.org/NLP.This statement affirms that Amber Stubbs and Özlem Uzuner, the authors of the paper “Annotating Risk Factors for Heart Disease in Clinical Narratives for Diabetic Patients” do not have any conflicts of interest relating to this paper or its results.