@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
PICO element detection in medical text without metadata: Are first sentences enough?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Two sets of naive Bayes classifiers were developed for PICO detection.We trained one set with first sentences and the other with all sentences.The first-sentence classifier performs slightly better for patient (P) elements.The all-sentence classifier performs better for intervention (I) elements.The performances are about the same for outcome (O) elements.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Text mining,Information retrieval,Natural language processing,Question answering,Information extraction,Evidence-based medicine,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Efficient identification of patient, intervention, comparison, and outcome (PICO) components in medical articles is helpful in evidence-based medicine. The purpose of this study is to clarify whether first sentences of these components are good enough to train naive Bayes classifiers for sentence-level PICO element detection. We extracted 19,854 structured abstracts of randomized controlled trials with any P/I/O label from PubMed for naive Bayes classifiers training. Performances of classifiers trained by first sentences of each section (CF) and those trained by all sentences (CA) were compared using all sentences by ten-fold cross-validation. The results measured by recall, precision, and F-measures show that there are no significant differences in performance betweenCFandCAfor detection of O-element (F-measure=0.731±0.009 vs. 0.738±0.010, p=0.123). However,CAperform better for I-elements, in terms of recall (0.752±0.012 vs. 0.620±0.007, p<0.001) and F-measures (0.728±0.006 vs. 0.662±0.007, p<0.001). For P-elements,CFhave higher precision (0.714±0.009 vs. 0.665±0.010, p<0.001), but lower recall (0.766±0.013 vs. 0.811±0.012, p<0.001).CFare not always better thanCAin sentence-level PICO element detection. Their performance varies in detecting different elements.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Evidence-based medicine or practice (EBM) involves answering clinical questions by analysis of related articles from literature databases such as PubMed [1,2]. Successful EBM application, reliant on abundant research-based evidence combined with clinical expertise [3] and systematic review, can efficiently help clinical decision making. However, raising a question is a must for a meaningful search, and the PICO model is a popular one for clinical problem construction. The model describes a clinical problem using the dimensions of patient/problem (P), intervention (I), comparison (C) and outcome (O).Although there are some critiques against PICO [4], most authors agreed that this systematic approach is beneficial for EBM [5]. Schardt et al. concluded that asking a good question lays the base for search success, and PICO helps enhance citation retrieval. This approach is more useful when applied to formulating treatment questions than to other types of clinical questions [6].In the era of information explosion, literature search and critical appraisal require an overwhelmingly heavy workload. This increases the need to utilize machine learning methods to assist with the systematic review process. In practice, some abstracts of these articles are well-structured, making it easier to locate the PICO components. However, a significant portion of the medical literature contains either unstructured or suboptimally structured abstracts. The difficulty in quickly locating the PICO components poses a barrier against EBM applications. Therefore, it would be a great help for EBM if we have effective information retrieval tools for PICO element detection. Much relevant work already exists, led by the seminal study of Demner-Fushman and Lin [7].In the past, articles manually annotated by human experts were used as the gold standard for classifier training and testing in research on medical category element detection. The downside of the knowledge-based approaches is tedious manual work resulting in small labeled data sets [8]; furthermore, there may be discrepancy among annotators or information searchers [6,9,10].In this paper, we propose an automated approach to recognize PICO elements in clinical studies with less human expert involvement. This can potentially support the systematic review process, and can be used as a first step in selecting potential targets from medical literature databases such as MEDLINE.Previous studies have sought to resolve the issues mentioned above and to develop better applicable algorithms and efficient classification methods [11]. Chung brought in rhetorical roles (i.e., Aim, Method, Results and Conclusion), using a sequential framework with Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) to label PICO at the sentence level [12]. Based on this, Boudin et al. trained classifiers with larger data sets [13], and then added term weighting based on location analysis [9]. Most of them retrieved information from a specific portion of data, but a few of them took in the remaining data to perform the classification task. Demner-Fushman and Lin, and Kim et al. [7,14] added an “other” category and collected non-targeted information into it. Kim et al. found that among various criteria, section headings can help detection task. As aforementioned, Boudin et al. compared different complex classifiers focusing on first sentences. They claimed that the majority of essential information is contained in the very first sentence of each section and tagging all sentences in a P/I/O section may not be more pragmatic. Nevertheless, there has previously been no mention of the applicability of first-sentence data sets.It is arguable that the second and latter sentences also contain important information and can contribute to classifiers performance. In this study, the aim is to determine whether a classifier trained only by the first sentences of explicitly labeled sections, without the labels themselves, is sufficient for PICO element detection at the sentence level in text.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
To facilitate systematic review, we propose a reproducible approach of training sentence preparation from PubMed abstracts, and used naive Bayes classifier to evaluate pure bag-of-word features for PICO element detection. Comparison of this study with other recent ones shows that exact pattern match and choosing words sorted by term frequency as features for naive Bayes classifiers is simple and efficient, and minimizes manual intervention.Our study shows that the very first sentence in a section does not always contain all the essential information for information retrieval. It is found thatCFis indeed more applicable in achieving better precision in P-detection, and is comparable toCAfor O-element detection since it can be efficiently generated. ButCAhas higher recall for P/I detection. Based on a combined precision and recall measure (i.e. F-measures),CFcan be used for P detection andCAcan be used for I detection.In addition to the specific results presented in this manuscript, a further contribution of this work is the generation of a large data set containing PICO labels was semi-automatically generated from PubMed in this study. We have made the data set publicly available, as the means to advance science in this research area.