@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Towards generating a patient’s timeline: Extracting temporal relationships from clinical notes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We proposed a hybrid system (graph-based and machine-learning) for temporal relation extraction.Our system yields an f-measure of 0.63, precision of 0.76 and recall of 0.54.We ranked third in f-measure and first in precision in the 2012 i2b2 NLP TLink extraction task.Sentence simplification and then parsing improves temporal relation extraction.Generalizing sentences yields interesting extraction patterns.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Temporal relation extraction,Clinical text mining,Automatic patient timeline,Natural Language Processing,Machine learning,Temporal graph,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Clinical records include both coded and free-text fields that interact to reflect complicated patient stories. The information often covers not only the present medical condition and events experienced by the patient, but also refers to relevant events in the past (such as signs, symptoms, tests or treatments). In order to automatically construct a timeline of these events, we first need to extract the temporal relations between pairs of events or time expressions presented in the clinical notes. We designed separate extraction components for different types of temporal relations, utilizing a novel hybrid system that combines machine learning with a graph-based inference mechanism to extract the temporal links. The temporal graph is a directed graph based on parse tree dependencies of the simplified sentences and frequent pattern clues. We generalized the sentences in order to discover patterns that, given the complexities of natural language, might not be directly discoverable in the original sentences. The proposed hybrid system performance reached an F-measure of 0.63, with precision at 0.76 and recall at 0.54 on the 2012 i2b2 Natural Language Processing corpus for the temporal relation (TLink) extraction task, achieving the highest precision and third highest f-measure among participating teams in the TLink track.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The narrative sections of clinical records contain information about clinically relevant events happened to patients. Most of the events, such as the patient’s illness progression, test results or the effect of a treatment are only meaningful in a specific timeline [1]. Questions such as “How effective was the treatment?” can only be answered and interpreted if the relative temporal relations between the events are considered. In general, temporal reasoning has applications in several tasks in the clinical domain such as information extraction [2,3], question answering [4,5], patient timeline visualization [6], clinical guideline development [7,8] and others. Automatic extraction of temporal information can facilitate processing of patient information in the narrative text, and this can contribute to the decision making process in fundamental patient care tasks such as prevention, diagnosis and forecasting the effects of the treatments [9,10]. Consider, for example, a situation where a patient with history of depression is brought to the emergency room. In order to make an informed decision about the gravity of the situation, the physician would need to go over previous visits and manually find and sort important events to determine suicidal intent. Alternatively, consider a child presented to the ER with trauma and possible fractures, reported as caused by a fall by the family member bringing her in. The attending physician has to quickly determine whether the injuries could be instead the result of abuse and flag the record for social services intervention, but key information can be hard to find on the spot. Automatic and reliable timeline generation in such cases and others like them can facilitate the decision-making process and potentially reduce medical errors. For a comprehensive review of the applications of automatic temporal reasoning in the clinical domain, we refer to Zhou et al.’s survey on the subject [9].There are diverse and complex linguistic mechanisms for representing the temporal information in natural language that make it very challenging for Natural Language Processing (NLP) systems to extract such information. For example, in many of the temporal event descriptions, the associated time is not explicitly mentioned. Automatic extraction of such implicit information requires domain knowledge plus the utilization of sophisticated NLP techniques. Sun et al. [1] provide a thorough discussion about the challenges of automatic temporal reasoning from clinical text. To promote advances in this area, the Sixth Informatics for Integrating Biology and the Bedside (i2b2) Natural Language Processing Challenge for Clinical Records focused on temporal reasoning in clinical narratives [11]. The challenge included three tracks: Event/Timex, TLink and End-to-End. Here we focus on the TLink track and briefly explain about the provided 2012 i2b2 annotated corpus. For more information about the corpus and other tracks in the challenge, please refer to Sun et al.’s paper [11].In the TLink track, participants were asked to develop systems to extract temporal relations (TLinks) of three types (before, after and overlap) between the given events and temporal expressions in the narrative portion of clinical records. The provided training data includes 310 de-identified discharge summaries in which the clinical events and temporal expressions are annotated. A total number of 190 notes were released for training and 120 notes were later released for testing. There are three different types of annotations in each note: events, temporal expressions (timex), and temporal relations (TLinks) between events and timex mentions. Events are clinically relevant situations such as treatments, problems, tests and other occurrences. Temporal expressions are mentions of date, time, duration and frequencies. The method that we present in this paper, a hybrid approach that features a combination of machine learning and graph-based inference, was developed for the TLink track. We propose an innovative way of utilizing parse dependencies for temporal information extraction by first simplifying a sentence and then generating a temporal graph based on the simplified version of the sentence. We introduce a method for generalizing sentences and extracting hidden frequent patterns, which was applied in the creation of temporal graphs. Moreover, novel classifier features are introduced to characterize the TLinks. The features significantly contributed to achieving high performance on the test data compared to other systems in the TLink track.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
