@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Text summarization in the biomedical domain: A systematic review of recent research

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
First systematic review of text summarization in the biomedical domain.The study found a predominance of methods producing extractive summaries.Multiple documents were used as the source for summarization.Natural language processing, and hybrid techniques were prominently used.Research is needed on the application of text summarization in real settings.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Text summarization,Intrinsic evaluation,Language processing,Machine learning,Biomedical domain,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveThe amount of information for clinicians and clinical researchers is growing exponentially. Text summarization reduces information as an attempt to enable users to find and understand relevant source texts more quickly and effortlessly. In recent years, substantial research has been conducted to develop and evaluate various summarization techniques in the biomedical domain. The goal of this study was to systematically review recent published research on summarization of textual documents in the biomedical domain.Materials and methodsMEDLINE (2000 to October 2013), IEEE Digital Library, and the ACM digital library were searched. Investigators independently screened and abstracted studies that examined text summarization techniques in the biomedical domain. Information is derived from selected articles on five dimensions: input, purpose, output, method and evaluation.ResultsOf 10,786 studies retrieved, 34 (0.3%) met the inclusion criteria. Natural language processing (17; 50%) and a hybrid technique comprising of statistical, Natural language processing and machine learning (15; 44%) were the most common summarization approaches. Most studies (28; 82%) conducted an intrinsic evaluation.DiscussionThis is the first systematic review of text summarization in the biomedical domain. The study identified research gaps and provides recommendations for guiding future research on biomedical text summarization.ConclusionRecent research has focused on a hybrid technique comprising statistical, language processing and machine learning techniques. Further research is needed on the application and evaluation of text summarization in real research or patient care settings.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The amount of information available for clinicians and clinical researchers is growing exponentially, both in the biomedical literature and patients’ health records [1,2]. To provide optimal patient care, clinicians need to efficiently and effectively retrieve, interpret, and integrate relevant information from multiple source [2]. Likewise, researchers need to navigate a vast amount of information from the biomedical literature for tasks such as generating new hypotheses and understanding the state-of-the-art in a given area. Electronic resources such as online literature databases and electronic health record (EHR) systems have been designed to help clinicians and researchers with their information management needs. However, the more resources grow, the harder it becomes for users to access information efficiently. Advances in information retrieval technology have shown some value in helping clinicians manage information overload [3]. Yet, information seekers often need to screen several documents and scan several pages of narrative content to find information that is relevant to their information needs [2].Automatic text summarization is a promising method for helping clinicians and researchers seeking information to efficiently obtain the “gist” in a given topic by producing a textual or graphical summary from one or multiple documents. A summary is “a reductive transformation of source text to summary text through content reduction selection and/or generalization on what is important in the source” [4]. The goal of text summarization is to present a subset of the source text, which expresses the most important points with minimal redundancy. The reduction of data accomplished by text summarization aims to allow users to identify and process relevant information more quickly and accurately. Thus, text summarization may become an important tool to assist clinicians and researchers with their information and knowledge management tasks.Important advances have been achieved recently in text summarization. As a result, several applications that leverage text summarization techniques have become available to the general public [5]. There has been a growing interest in researching text summarization techniques in the biomedical domain. An informal literature survey conducted by Afantenos et al. identified ten biomedical text summarization studies published between 1999 and 2003 [6]. Since then, there have been significant advances in the summarization tools and techniques employed in the biomedical domain. However, no systematic review on this topic has been conducted to date. A systematic review will promote improved understanding of the literature on this topic, identify gaps, and provide directions for future research. In the present study, we conducted a systematic review on text summarization methods applied to the biomedical literature and EHR systems. The systematic review is aimed at: (1) identifying the different techniques, areas of application, and evaluation methods over the last decade; (2) identifying research trends; (3) identifying research gaps; and (4) proposing recommendations to guide future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We systematically reviewed the literature on text summarization methods in the biomedical domain. Our study found a predominance of methods that produce extractive summaries; use multiple documents as the source for summarization; employ a combination of statistical, language processing, and machine learning techniques; utilize knowledge rich approaches that leverage a range of publicly available tools and knowledge resources; and that are evaluated through intrinsic techniques. We also found a growing interest in abstractive summaries and graph-based methods. To advance knowledge in this field, further research is needed in the cognitive aspects of text summarization, including visualization techniques, and evaluations of the impact of text summarization systems in work settings.