@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Generating a robust statistical causal structure over 13 cardiovascular disease risk factors using genomics data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A framework is introduced to integrate multi-omics and identify robust networks.A principle component (PC) approach is used to extract information across the genome.Genome-wide PCs facilitates identifying a causal network over phenotypes.The resulting network identifies candidate targets for intervention and prediction.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Causal network,Data integration,Cardiovascular disease risk factors,Partial correlation,Conditional independency,Granularity DAG,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Understanding causal relationships among large numbers of variables is a fundamental goal of biomedical sciences and can be facilitated by Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs) where directed edges between nodes represent the influence of components of the system on each other. In an observational setting, some of the directions are often unidentifiable because of Markov equivalency. Additional exogenous information, such as expert knowledge or genotype data can help establish directionality among the endogenous variables. In this study, we use the method of principle component analysis to extract information across the genome in order to generate a robust statistical causal network among phenotypes, the variables of primary interest. The method is applied to 590,020 SNP genotypes measured on 1596 individuals to generate the statistical causal network of 13 cardiovascular disease risk factor phenotypes. First, principal component analysis was used to capture information across the genome. The principal components were then used to identify a robust causal network structure, GDAG, among the phenotypes. Analyzing a robust causal network over risk factors reveals the flow of information in direct and alternative paths, as well as determining predictors and good targets for intervention. For example, the analysis identified BMI as influencing multiple other risk factor phenotypes and a good target for intervention to lower disease risk.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Interindividual variation in disease susceptibility is influenced by genetic variants, which can be organized into a defined biologic pathways or data-driven associative networks [1]. By identifying variables correlated with the primary endpoint of interest, we are able to classify individuals and predict future disease. Going beyond partial correlations and evaluating causal relationships among variables plays an essential first step in risk prediction, thereby promoting more efficacious treatment of current disease and prevention of future disease. By changing the level of a causal variable (e.g. LDL-cholesterol levels), we are able to change the risk of future disease (e.g. coronary heart disease), which may not be the case for mere associated variables (e.g. HDL-cholesterol levels) [4]. In the case of a randomized intervention, such as a clinical trial, identification of causation is conceptually straight forward. However, in observational studies, which represent the majority of most large-scale epidemiologic studies, causal inference is more complex. In most applications, especially “big data” applications, causal inference is embodied in Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs), where any inference is based on an estimated graph (i.e. nodes and edges). DAGs are illustrations of causal relationships among the variables. Mendelian randomization is an established approach to identify causal relationships [5–8] and it is natural in a biomedical setting to integrate genomics and phenotypic information to help establish directionality within a network of phenotypes. We apply this technique in large data sets from different granularities to achieve robust causal graphs (i.e. DAGs). In the present context, granularities are defined as hierarchical levels with different quiddity that the causal relationship between them is known, e.g. they are reflecting different levels of biologic organization and measurement (genomic and phenotypic). In the application shown here, we use data from a deeper granularity, the genome, to generate a robust statistical causal network among 13 risk factor phenotypes. Inclusion of genotypes in the analysis of phenotypes (e.g. plasma glucose levels) provides two advantages: first, genotypes are assumed to be measured without error, and second, there is a natural order between these granularities (genome variation → phenotype variation; G → P) and this knowledge helps identify robust directionality in the upper granularity.Using genome information is a promising approach to identify directionality that is less susceptible to confounding. Previous applications in data integration using gene expression data and genotypes have followed a similar logic [9–12]. For example, Mehrabian et al. [9] integrated genotypic and phenotypic data in a segregating mouse population to generate causal relationships. Aten et al. [11] introduced an algorithm to estimate directionality among nodes in a DAG by applying information from selected single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). In this study, we apply the concept of granularity in a comprehensive manner and extract information from a deeper granularity, here the genome, to achieve a robust causal network among variables of interest in the upper level of granularity, here cardiovascular risk factor phenotypes. To go beyond using a sample of SNPs, which are incomplete and may introduce instability in the study results [13], the method of principal components is used to extract information across the genome. Integration of genome information embedded in the deeper granularity and captured using principal component analysis with phenotype information in the upper granularity results in a robust causal network among the phenotypes, and we call this algorithm Granularity Directed Acyclic Graph (GDAG).We first briefly review the theory of graphical causal inference and introduce the granularity framework and the GDAG algorithm. The utility of this approach is introduced by application to a data set including 13 cardiovascular disease risk factors and 590,020 SNP genotypes measured on 1596 individuals and then the estimated structure is further interpreted. Use of information from the genome level of granularity allowed us to robustly generate the statistical causal network among the phenotypes. A discussion of the GDAG algorithm and the results is provided.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
