@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A kinetic model-based algorithm to classify NGS short reads by their allele origin

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We implemented a new algorithm to cluster NGS reads based on allele origin which relies on distance geometry approach.The algorithm is a new type of clustering methods.The algorithm allows to genotype genomic variants without any prior assumption.We tested the algorithm on 1000 genome project data.The algorithm can be used for other studies, such as to assemble genomic haplotype.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sequencing,Allele,Genotyping,Cluster,Reads,Variants,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Genotyping Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) data of a diploid genome aims to assign the zygosity of identified variants through comparison with a reference genome. Current methods typically employ probabilistic models that rely on the pileup of bases at each locus and on a priori knowledge.We present a new algorithm, called Kimimila (KInetic Modeling based on InforMation theory to Infer Labels of Alleles), which is able to assign reads to alleles by using a distance geometry approach and to infer the variant genotypes accurately, without any kind of assumption. The performance of the model has been assessed on simulated and real data of the 1000 Genomes Project and the results have been compared with several commonly used genotyping methods, i.e., GATK, Samtools, VarScan, FreeBayes and Atlas2. Despite our algorithm does not make use of a priori knowledge, the percentage of correctly genotyped variants is comparable to these algorithms. Furthermore, our method allows the user to split the reads pool depending on the inferred allele origin.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Since the first release of the human genome consensus sequence, the impact of next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies is getting every day stronger and it is rewriting the rules of genomic research.Current high-throughput DNA sequencing technologies can generate billions of short sequences (reads) whose length range from 50 to 400 bases.Once available, these reads are mapped onto their corresponding reference genome to extract useful genomic information as known and/or novel variants. However, while the human genome sequence assembly for a chromosome is an arbitrary mix of the two haploid chromosomes, the DNA fragment library is usually derived from a diploid genome. This requires determining the zygosity of each variant detected by the variant calling process: genotype calling is aimed at classifying these variants as heterozygous or homozygous.Several genotyping methods have been proposed both for human and non-human genomes [1–4]. Early methods rely on counting the number of times each allele of a single genomic locus (pileup) is observed. For example, VarScan [5] is based on an heuristic method that uses the number of aligned reads supporting each allele.The most recent methods are often based on a probabilistic framework. Tools such as GATK UnifiedGenotyper (UG) [2] or Samtools [3] compute a genotype likelihood p(D|G) for each genotype G, where D represents all the read data for an individual at a particular site.These genotype likelihoods incorporate errors that may have been introduced in base calling, alignment and assembly and are coupled with prior information, such as allele frequencies in a reference population (e.g. The 1000 Genome Project [6]) or databases of polymorphisms (e.g. dbSNP [7]). The genotype with the highest posterior probability is chosen and it is associated with a measure of uncertainty.Another recent method, Atlas2 [8] is based on a logistic regression model trained on validated whole-exome capture sequencing and uses features such as the ratio of the variant base to the reference sequence and the quality scores of the base calls in order to discriminate between true variants and sequencing, mapping, or alignment errors.These strategies rely on the single base pileup information derived from the aligned reads and are based on the assumption of variant locus and reads independence.Haplotype-based methods are based on a different genotyping strategy. They make use of short haplotypes directly inferred from sequencing reads mapped to the reference. FreeBayes [9] is an algorithm that uses haplotype informative reads (i.e. reads spanning two or more variants) in combination with a Bayesian statistical method [10] to improve genotyping accuracy.Due to the promise of third generation sequencing technologies to increase reads length up to thousands of sequenced bases [11], we can expect haplotype-based methods to increase their accuracy and importance as well.In this scenario, we have developed a new algorithm, called Kimimila (KInetic Modeling based on InforMation theory to Infer Labels of Alleles), that exploits a kinetic model approach relying on distance geometry. Kimimila, starting from a set of variant loci, infers the allele origin of each overlapping read by looking at reads similarity in terms of a non-euclidean distance and, as a consequence, can infer the zygosity of a variant through reads rather than through the single base pileup.Notably, our approach has been conceived to be fully data-driven. Therefore, it does not make use of a priori information and it does not rely on a statistical model. Furthermore, this algorithm provides a novel methodological contribution able to perform clustering with a non-euclidean metric.We run Kimimila on simulated data to evaluate the accuracy in classifying (or labeling) reads by the origin allele and on a sample of the 1000 Genomes Project in order to evaluate the genotyping and reads labeling accuracy as well, by using the relative genotype-chip data as validation set. We compared our algorithm with several genotyping algorithms, namely GATK UG, VarScan, Samtools, Atlas2 and FreeBayes, and we found that the percentage of correctly genotyped variants was comparable to the aforementioned tools. Furthermore, our method allowed the user to split the reads pool depending on the inferred allele origin. Such results can be further used for other interesting applications, such as haplotype reconstruction and to detect subclonal heterogeneity in tumor samples.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We presented a novel algorithm, Kimimila, able to classify reads that are mapped to a reference genome by their allele origin; as a consequence the algorithm can be used to assign the genotype of the genomic variant loci overlapped by the reads. The algorithm is based on an original clustering technique based on a distance geometry approach for reads comparison; it makes use of both the nucleotide frequency for a single variant locus across the overlapping reads and the sequenced base qualities assigned by the base caller. We integrated these two sources of information into a single model that, dealing with reads rather than only single base pileup, is able to combine more variant loci when present on the same read.We tested the algorithm on a simulated dataset in order to evaluate both the reads classification and variant genotyping. We showed that Kimimila is able to reach high performances despite high levels of noise. We compared Kimimila to several algorithms for variant genotyping: GATK UG, Samtools, Atlas2, FreeBayes and VarScan. We showed that these methods are comparable in terms of performances and that they suffer from the same limitations for shallow genome coverage.