@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Informing the design of clinical decision support services for evaluation of children with minor blunt head trauma in the emergency department: A sociotechnical analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Decision support integrated with emergency department workflow is a design challenge.Sociotechnical models can inform ED decision support design.The interdisciplinary assessment process is an example of an ED sociotechnical theme.Shared documentation spaces may allow for efficient, accurate data capture in the ED.Ease of re-using and updating data may enhance decision support use.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Clinical decision support,Prediction rules,Traumatic brain injury,Emergency department,Pediatrics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Integration of clinical decision support services (CDSS) into electronic health records (EHRs) may be integral to widespread dissemination and use of clinical prediction rules in the emergency department (ED). However, the best way to design such services to maximize their usefulness in such a complex setting is poorly understood. We conducted a multi-site cross-sectional qualitative study whose aim was to describe the sociotechnical environment in the ED to inform the design of a CDSS intervention to implement the Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network (PECARN) clinical prediction rules for children with minor blunt head trauma. Informed by a sociotechnical model consisting of eight dimensions, we conducted focus groups, individual interviews and workflow observations in 11 EDs, of which 5 were located in academic medical centers and 6 were in community hospitals. A total of 126 ED clinicians, information technology specialists, and administrators participated. We clustered data into 19 categories of sociotechnical factors through a process of thematic analysis and subsequently organized the categories into a sociotechnical matrix consisting of three high-level sociotechnical dimensions (workflow and communication, organizational factors, human factors) and three themes (interdisciplinary assessment processes, clinical practices related to prediction rules, EHR as a decision support tool). Design challenges that emerged from the analysis included the need to use structured data fields to support data capture and re-use while maintaining efficient care processes, supporting interdisciplinary communication, and facilitating family-clinician interaction for decision-making.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Translating scientific knowledge into clinical practice is a challenge in any healthcare setting. The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) reports that it can take as long as two decades for new knowledge to become common practice [1]. As a result, Americans reportedly receive only about one-half of recommended care [2]. Clinical decision support services (CDSSs) are one strategy that may address this issue by enabling clinicians to use electronically-entered patient data to allow rapid access to scientific evidence at the time of clinical decision-making. Although CDSSs have been reported to reduce errors and improve quality of care, they have also been poorly accepted and sometimes associated with negative unintended consequences [3]. Informatics-based strategies for the design and development of CDSSs may enhance clinical integration and thus improve quality of care and mitigate unintended consequences [4–6].The emergency department (ED) is a particularly challenging setting in which to implement CDSSs [7–9]. Although CDSSs may be an effective method to implement best available evidence, there is limited literature and considerable debate as to its potential effectiveness in improving outcomes in this setting [9–12]. With the goal of reducing unnecessary cranial computed tomography (CT) scans in children, the Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network (PECARN) recently derived and validated two robust, clinical prediction rules that identify both younger and older children at very low risk for clinically-important traumatic brain injuries (TBI) following minor blunt head trauma for whom CT scans may safely be obviated [13].The sociotechnical dimensions inherent in complex healthcare settings such as the ED influence the design features needed for a system that can successfully support evidence-based clinical decision-making [10]. These dimensions include institutional culture and goals, interdisciplinary workflow and communication, existing information systems and both local and external rules and regulations affecting clinical practice. Research examining the effectiveness of technology in various organizations has emphasized the importance of describing the details of these dimensions and their relationships prior to the introduction of new technologies. Failure to understand the interrelated nature of these dimensions can lead to solutions that support one while potentially harming another [3]. In healthcare settings, this is described as the unintended consequences of healthcare information technology (HIT) [14,15]. The complex sociotechnical facets of healthcare environments, while acknowledged to be inextricably connected, may be deconstructed in order to be examined and described prior to technology development. In any setting, these dimensions can be analyzed and their relationships described so that appropriate system features can be identified that address gaps while supporting existing positive structures. The objective of this study was to describe the sociotechnical environment in the ED setting to inform the design of a CDSS intervention to implement the PECARN TBI clinical prediction rules. In addition, we describe a modified sociotechnical model to reflect the unique requirements of the ED setting that could be used to inform the design of future CDSS interventions.We conducted a multi-site cross-sectional qualitative study (workflow observations, clinician focus groups, key stakeholder interviews), over a four-month period (November 2010–February 2011) prior to developing the CDSS intervention for implementation of the PECARN TBI prediction rules. Institutional Review Board approval was obtained at each site and informed consent was obtained from all study participants.All 11 sites participating in the study were part of either the PECARN or the Clinical Research in Emergency Services and Treatments (CREST) network [16,17]. Sites included three free-standing academic children’s hospitals, two academic tertiary care centers and six community hospitals located across the United States. All six community hospitals were part of the Kaiser Permanente Health System in Northern California. All sites were using the same vendor provided electronic health record (EHR) in the ED (EPIC®, Madison, WI) although software versions varied across sites. Nursing documentation, physician documentation and computerized provider order entry (CPOE) were in use at each study site for at least one year prior to the study period.Exploring the complex interactions between the social and technical nature of healthcare work is recognized to be an important step in understanding the potential impact of a new technology [18]. This is often referred to as a sociotechnical analysis [5,18,19]. Sociotechnical approaches to understanding work processes are based on the notion that the social context of work is critically linked to the technical component and as a result, the two continuously influence and alter one another [19]. Although, there is no single, comprehensive sociotechnical theory or approach, there are a number of theoretical and conceptual models based on sociotechnical thinking that can be used to inform the design of suitable structures to support work practices in a given setting [18,20–22]. From the available models, we selected a model proposed by Sittig and Singh [5]. This model was developed based on an in-depth analysis of information technology implementation in healthcare settings and, therefore, we felt it would serve as an appropriate guide for the current study [5]. This model consists of eight-dimensions known to be important to the development of useful and safe IT in healthcare settings [5]. These dimensions include (1) hardware and software infrastructure; (2) clinical content; (3) human–computer interface; (4) people; (5) workflow and communication; (6) organizational policies, procedures and culture; (7) external rules and regulations; and (8) system measurement and monitoring [5]. These eight dimensions form a synthesized model that allows for their practical description while recognizing their complex, interrelated nature [5]. As was done for this project, each dimension can be described as it occurs within a particular healthcare setting. The existing connections among the dimensions can then be reviewed, allowing for an examination of the sociotechnical structures in place that influence the usefulness of a new technology.We used the eight dimensions of the model to develop an open-ended guide for use in the focus groups and interviews. In addition, we used the model to guide observations of work processes with a focus on patterns of workflow and communication, as well as physical structures in each ED that would impact development and use of a CDSS intervention. The eight dimensions and their application to this project are described in the following paragraphs.Hardware and software infrastructure includes a description of both the existing hardware and software in use as well as the structures in place that support the maintenance of hardware and updates to existing software [5]. This infrastructure includes IT personnel available to develop new software and support its use as well as the capabilities of available software to address desired functions. We assessed these components from both the clinical and administrative perspectives, as these may differ and require reconciliation (e.g., clinician requests vs. financial burden). The clinical content and the interface design of any EHR system are recognized as critical components of its usefulness in a particular setting [23,24]. Outdated or inappropriate content has been blamed for overrides of suggestions from clinical alerting systems, while a difficult-to-use interface design can lead to errors [23–25]. We reviewed the proposed content (PECARN TBI prediction rules) of the new CDSS with targeted clinical users and organizational leadership to ensure appropriateness to the ED as well as consistency with organizational policies, procedures and culture. The focus was specifically on policies related to the use of IT systems for the implementation of prediction rules or clinical guidelines. We incorporated an examination of the roles and relationships of different clinician groups as well as clinical and administrative leaders who may be downstream users of CDSS data. An iterative approach toward user interface development was used in order to identify potential usability problems that could create errors so that these could be addressed prior to system deployment [26,27].Existing patterns of workflow and communication both within the ED as well as across the organization were described so that the CDSS could be appropriately integrated. We assessed how the new CDSS intervention might alter workflow in both positive and negative ways [3,27,28]. External rules and regulations were explored to understand how the CDSS intervention may assist or hinder the organization from meeting its regulatory and quality improvement goals.In order to ensure that a new CDSS intervention meets its intended goals, a plan for measurement and monitoring should be determined from the beginning of its development [5]. We examined this dimension to ensure that goals for the new CDSS were identified early, a plan for data collection was determined and incorporated into the service and appropriate data analysis occurred after system implementation. The ability to monitor and respond to problems helps to facilitate safe and appropriate CDSS use [3,4].We applied the method of contextual inquiry to observe clinicians’ (residents, attending physicians, nurse practitioners (NPs), triage nurses, staff nurses and physician assistants) workflow in the ED at each site prior to the focus group discussion for the purpose of describing the processes of patient assessment, documentation and decision-making. Contextual inquiry incorporates observations of actual work practices in the work environment with interviewing of those observed [28]. As the clinician was observed, the interviewer asked questions and clarified specific processes in which the clinician was engaged with a focus on areas of interest [28]. Observations were conducted by three members of the research team: one pediatric ED attending physician and two nurse informaticians with expertise in observational techniques. At least two observers were present at all 11 sites. We developed workflow diagrams from notes taken during observations and presented the diagrams at the focus group meetings to generate a discussion of workflow processes.Participants in the focus groups consisted of clinicians practicing in the ED and IT professionals at each site. We used purposive sampling to ensure inclusion of a representative sample of practicing ED clinicians at each site as well as site-specific IT specialists. At least one nurse with expertise in informatics and one ED physician facilitated each focus group. The groups were held in a conference room separate from the ED. We audiotaped all focus groups and conducted a debriefing session after each session in which the research team reviewed the discussion and identified key points and process modifications for the next group.We conducted interviews with nurse managers, ED medical directors, nursing IT specialists and organizational IT leadership such as chief medical information officers and chief information officers. There was no overlap between focus group and interview participants. We chose IT professionals based on their role in the organization and their knowledge of current informatics systems. Site principal investigators (PIs) and research coordinators identified appropriate ED management and IT leadership for participation in stakeholder interviews. Interviews were conducted by one pediatric ED attending physician and one nurse informatician with expertise in qualitative interview techniques. All but one stakeholder interview were audiotaped (one participant declined audiotaping but consented to written notes to ensure accurate documentation of the content discussed).Through triangulation of data sources from the workflow observations, focus groups, and interviews, we conducted a thematic analysis to summarize and describe the sociotechnical issues important to CDSS design. In the first phase of data analysis, an inductive process was used in which specific clinician quotes were divided into categories (Appendix 1). These categories were summarized into 3 themes. This was followed by a deductive process in which we mapped the categories to the eight sociotechnical dimensions. Next, we condensed the original eight dimensions from the sociotechnical model into three dimensions based on the category mappings. Following this, we created a sociotechnical matrix in which the identified categories were cross-mapped with the three themes we identified and the three sociotechnical dimensions (Fig. 1). We managed the data analysis using NVivo 9 (QSR, Cambridge Mass). Results are presented according to the three new sociotechnical dimensions and their related categories identified from our data.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
An in-depth understanding of existing workflow patterns, clinical tasks, culture and environment, available EHR tools and personnel enabled us to identify key features needed to create a CDSS intervention for implementation of specific prediction rules in the ED setting. CDSS interventions developed for use with an EHR must minimize clinical workflow disruption in the ED and balance the interests of clinicians, caregiver/patients, and organizations.This work was supported by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act-Office of the Secretary (ARRA OS): Grant #S02MC19289-01-00.PECARN is supported by the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), Maternal and Child Health Bureau (MCHB), Emergency Medical Services for Children (EMSC) Program through the following cooperative agreements: U03MC00001, U03MC00003, U03MC00006, U03MC00007, U03MC00008, U03MC22684, and U03MC22685.