@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Classifying temporal relations in clinical data: A hybrid, knowledge-rich approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Detecting and classifying TLINKs using: PropBank-style predicate-argument relations, and Discourse relations.A hybrid system architecture employing both rules and machine-learning.F-score of 69.3 on TLINK detection and classification.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Temporal relations,Semantic relations,Discourse relations,Hybrid approaches,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We address the TLINK track of the 2012 i2b2 challenge on temporal relations. Unlike other approaches to this task, we (1) employ sophisticated linguistic knowledge derived from semantic and discourse relations, rather than focus on morpho-syntactic knowledge; and (2) leverage a novel combination of rule-based and learning-based approaches, rather than rely solely on one or the other. Experiments show that our knowledge-rich, hybrid approach yields an F-score of 69.3, which is the best result reported to date on this dataset.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Temporal relation extraction and classification, one of the most important temporal information extraction (IE) tasks, involves extracting entities (i.e., events and time expressions) from a text document and determining their temporal relations with each other. The creation of the TimeBank corpus [16], as well as the organization of the TempEval-1 [21] and TempEval-2 [22] evaluation exercises, have facilitated the development and evaluation of temporal relation classification systems for the new domain.More recently, the 2012 i2b2 Challenge has focused on tasks related to extracting and classifying temporal relations from clinical data that comprised patient discharge reports [17]. Each report is composed of two sections, history of present illness and hospital course. The shared task was subdivided into 3 tracks: 1. EVENT/TIMEX3 extraction; 2. TLINK extraction; and 3. End-to-end system. Our goal in this paper is to advance the state of the art on the TLINK extraction track.The TLINK extraction track is composed of two tasks. Both tasks assume as input a document manually annotated with entities, which are either events or time expressions, as mentioned above. The first task, EVENT/TIMEX3-SCT TLINK Type Prediction, is a three-class classification task: given an event e and the creation time t of one of the two aforementioned sections of a report, determine whether e and t have a Before, After, or Overlap relation. The second task, EVENT–EVENT/EVENT–TIMEX3 TLINK Type Prediction, is a four-class classification task: given an event–event or event–time pair, determine whether the two elements of the pair have a Before, After, or Overlap relation, or whether no temporal relation exists between them. While these twotasks can in principle be tackled in any order, in our approach we will use the output of the first task when addressing the second task, effectively yielding a pipeline architecture.Our approach to TLINK extraction can be distinguished from other approaches, including those developed for the news domain and the clinical domain, in two respects. The first involves a large-scale expansion of the linguistic features made available to the classification system. Recall that existing approaches have typically relied on morpho-syntactic features, as well as a few semantic features extracted from WordNet synsets and VerbOcean’s [4] semantic relations. In contrast, we propose not only novel lexical and grammatical features, but also sophisticated features involving semantics and discourse. Most notably, we propose (1) semantic features encoding PropBank-style predicate-argument relations, and (2) discourse features encoding Penn Discourse TreeBank (PDTB) style [14] discourse relations.Second, while the vast majority of approaches to temporal relation classification adopted in the shared task are learning-based, we propose a system architecture in which we combine a learning-based approach and a rule-based approach. Our motivation behind adopting a hybrid approach stems from two hypotheses. First, a rule-based method could better handle the skewed class distributions that exist in the dataset for the EVENT–EVENT/EVENT–TIMEX3 TLINK Type Prediction task. Second, better decision rules could be formed by leveraging human insights to combine the available linguistic features than by using fully automatic machine learning methods. Note that while rule-based approaches have been explored for this task and shown to underperform learning-based approaches [11], to our knowledge they have not been used in combination with learning-based approaches. Moreover, while the rules employed in previous work are created based on intuition [e.g., 11,15], our rules are created in a data-driven manner via a manual inspection of the annotated temporal relations in the i2b2 corpus.Another unique feature of our approach concerns the way we apply machine learning to temporal relation classification. While in existing learning-based approaches to this task typically only one classifier is trained to determine the temporal relation between two entities, in our approach we train multiple classifiers, each of which is specialized in classifying a different type of entity pair.Experiments on the i2b2 Clinical Temporal Relations Challenge corpus demonstrate the effectiveness of our knowledge-rich, hybrid approach to temporal relation classification: we achieved an F-score of 69.3% on the test set, which is the best result reported to date on this dataset.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief overview of related work on temporal relation classification. Section 3 describes our methods, including a brief overview of the i2b2 corpus, our evaluation methodology and our approaches to the two tasks in the TLINK extraction track. We present experimental results in Section 4 and conclude in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We investigated a knowledge-rich, hybrid approach to the TLINK extraction track in the 2012 i2b2 challenge. Experiments on the i2b2 corpus demonstrated that our approach achieves an F-score of 69.3, which is the best result reported to date on this dataset. To stimulate research on this task, we will make our complete set of hand-crafted rules publicly available.Since our approach currently uses the predicate-argument relations and the discourse relations generated by semantic and discourse parsers that are not trained on clinical text, we believe that a promising way to improve our approach would be to replace these parsers with those trained on clinical text.