@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automatic construction of a large-scale and accurate drug-side-effect association knowledge base from biomedical literature

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Systematic studies of drug side effect associations can facilitate drug discovery.Current databases of drug-side effect associations are largely incomplete.We developed an automatic approach to extract drug-SE pairs from MEDLINE.We built a large-scale and accurate drug-SE association knowledge base.The drug-SE pairs correlate positively with drug targets, metabolism and indications.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Text mining,Drug side effect,Drug discovery,Drug repositioning,Drug toxicity prediction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Systems approaches to studying drug-side-effect (drug-SE) associations are emerging as an active research area for drug target discovery, drug repositioning, and drug toxicity prediction. However, currently available drug-SE association databases are far from being complete. Herein, in an effort to increase the data completeness of current drug-SE relationship resources, we present an automatic learning approach to accurately extract drug-SE pairs from the vast amount of published biomedical literature, a rich knowledge source of side effect information for commercial, experimental, and even failed drugs. For the text corpus, we used 119,085,682 MEDLINE sentences and their parse trees. We used known drug-SE associations derived from US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) drug labels as prior knowledge to find relevant sentences and parse trees. We extracted syntactic patterns associated with drug-SE pairs from the resulting set of parse trees. We developed pattern-ranking algorithms to prioritize drug-SE-specific patterns. We then selected a set of patterns with both high precisions and recalls in order to extract drug-SE pairs from the entire MEDLINE. In total, we extracted 38,871 drug-SE pairs from MEDLINE using the learned patterns, the majority of which have not been captured in FDA drug labels to date. On average, our knowledge-driven pattern-learning approach in extracting drug-SE pairs from MEDLINE has achieved a precision of 0.833, a recall of 0.407, and an F1 of 0.545. We compared our approach to a support vector machine (SVM)-based machine learning and a co-occurrence statistics-based approach. We show that the pattern-learning approach is largely complementary to the SVM- and co-occurrence-based approaches with significantly higher precision and F1 but lower recall. We demonstrated by correlation analysis that the extracted drug side effects correlate positively with both drug targets, metabolism, and indications.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
It has been increasingly recognized that similar side effects of seemingly unrelated drugs can be caused by their common off-targets and that drugs with similar side effects are likely to share molecular targets [4]. Therefore, systems approaches to studying the phenotypic relationships among drugs and integrating this drug phenotypic data with drug-related genetic, genomic, proteomic, and chemical data can facilitate rapid drug target discovery and drug repositioning.Computational approaches to predicting drug targets have often been based on chemical similarity measures and docking strategies [14,37,27,36]. Similarly, many computational strategies for drug repositioning have been explored [13]. The majority of these approaches leverage on known drug properties such as chemical similarity [14], molecular activity similarity [19], molecular docking [16], and gene expression profile similarity [12,23]. In a seminal paper, Campillos et al. [4] used phenotypic side-effect similarities among drugs to infer whether two drugs shared a target. The researchers showed that similar side effects of seemingly unrelated drugs can be caused by their common off-targets and that drugs with similar side effects are likely to share molecular targets. By systematically exploiting this correlation, the researchers were able to predict new targets for drugs and led to a patented reposition of a FDA-approved drug, Aprepitant. However, their analysis was limited to drug-SE relationships derived solely from the FDA drug labels for FDA-approved drugs. Later in this study, we will show that much of drug-SE association knowledge from biomedical literature have not been captured in FDA drug labels yet. For example, only 23.8% (30 out of 126) of reported side effects for drug irinotecan from MEDLINE are in FDA drug labels.Systems approaches to studying the phenotypic relationships among drugs can also lead to early prediction of unknown drug toxicity. Existing computational approaches to predicting drug toxicities are mainly based on known drug targets [8,26] or chemical structures [21,20]. The unifying assumption is that drugs with similar in vitro protein-binding profiles or chemical structures tend to exhibit similar side effects. Cami et al. have recently developed a novel phenotype-driven approach for predicting drug toxicities by integrating the network structure formed by known drug-SE relationships with information on specific drugs and side effects to predict likely unknown drug side effects [3]. Atias and Sharan reported a novel approach to predict drug side effects by taking into account of other drugs and their side effects [2]. Similar to Campillos’s study, these two studies used drug-SE associations solely derived from FDA drug labels.The availability of a comprehensive, accurate, and machine-understandable drug-side effect (SE) relationship knowledge base is critical for computation-based drug target and drug toxicity predictions. Current drug phenotype-driven systems approaches rely exclusively on drug-SE associations extracted from FDA drug labels. However, there exists a large amount of drug-SE relationship knowledge in other data sources such as FDA spontaneous post-marketing drug safety reporting systems (FAERS), patient electronic health records (EHRs), and the large body of published biomedical literature. While the FDA drug labels, FAERS, and EHRs mainly contain side effect information for FDA-approved drugs, the vast amount of published biomedical literature contains side effect information for drugs at all clinical stages, including investigational, approved, and failed drugs.Currently, more than 22million biomedical abstracts (or records) are available on MEDLINE, making it a rich information source of drug-SE associations. While many biomedical relationship extraction tasks have focused on extracting relationships between drugs, proteins, or genes [1,28,5,29], extracting drug-SE relationships from MEDLINE has been less explored. The key issue in extracting drug-SE pairs from MEDLINE is to differentiate drug-SE (‘CAUSE’) relationship from drug-disease (‘TREAT’) treatment relationship and from pure co-occurrences. Recently, Shetty et al. prototyped a process for applying information mining to discover major drug-SE associations from MEDLINE by developing a statistical document classifier to remove irrelevant articles [22]. Gurulingappa et al. trained and tested a supervised machine learning classifier to classify drug-condition pairs in a set of 2972 manually annotated case reports [10]. Both studies focused on a limited set of drugs, side effects or specific article types. It is unclear how these approaches can be scaled up to the whole MEDLINE in effectively building a comprehensive drug-SE relationship knowledge base. Recently, we developed an approach in boosting drug safety signal detection from FAERS using evidence from MEDLINE [31]. We also developed an automatic approach to extract anticancer drug-specific side effects from MEDLINE by developing specific filtering and ranking schemes [30]. However, those filtering and ranking methods were specifically targeted to extract anticancer drug-SE relationships and cannot be generalized for other types of drug-SE relationship extraction tasks. In one of our recent studies in building a disease phenotype knowledge base, we developed a pattern-based learning approach to extract disease-manifestation phenotypic relationships from biomedical literature [32]. In that study, we leveraged external knowledge of disease-manifestation from biomedical ontologies as prior knowledge to extract many disease-manifestation pairs from MEDLINE. In this study, we retarget the knowledge-driven pattern-learning approach to accurately extract a large number of drug-SE pairs from MEDLINE.Our study is based on the observation that researchers often use certain predominant patterns to describe drug-SE-specific associations. For example, in sentence “UGT1A1*28 genotype and irinotecan-inducedneutropenia: dose matters” (PMID: 17728214), a typical pattern “DRUG-induced SE” is used. In this study, we first automatically learned drug-SE-specific patterns using known drug-SE pairs derived from FDA drug labels. We then used these learned patterns to extract many additional drug-SE pairs from MEDLINE. Since our ultimate goal is to develop systems approaches to exploit drug phenotype relationships for drug target discovery, drug toxicity prediction, and drug repositioning, accuracy and scalability of the algorithm are critical. Pattern-based relationship extraction approaches have the advantage of being both highly accurate and efficient. Many pattern- or parsing-based biomedical named entity recognition and relationship extraction approaches have recently developed [7,9,15,33–35]. Our approach is different from these approaches in that we leveraged upon a large amount of prior knowledge in effectively finding patterns with both high precisions and recalls and that we applied the patterns to the whole MEDLINE in constructing a large-scale drug-SE relationship knowledge base.The entire experimental process consists of the following steps: (1) build a local MEDLINE search engine; (2) obtain known drug-SE pairs as prior knowledge; (3) extract drug-SE pairs from MEDLINE; (4) evaluate; and (5) analyze the correlation between drug side effects and drug target genes, drug metabolism genes and drug indications.We downloaded a total of 21,354,075 MEDLINE abstracts (119,085,682 sentences) published between 1965 and 2011 from the U.S. National Library of Medicine.1http://mbr.nlm.nih.gov/Download/index.shtml.1Each sentence was syntactically parsed with the Stanford Parser [17] using the Amazon Cloud computing service (a total of 3500 instance-hours with High-CPU Extra Large Instance used). We used the publicly available information retrieval library Lucene2http://lucene.apache.org.2to create a local MEDLINE search engine with indices created on both sentences and their corresponding parse trees.We downloaded a total of 100,049 known drug-SE pairs from SIDER (Side Effect Resource), a public, machine-readable side effect resource that was automatically constructed from FDA package inserts [18]. These pairs represented a total of 996 FDA-approved drugs and 4199 adverse event terms.An accurate and comprehensive SE lexicon is critical for the task of drug-SE relationship extraction. We built a clean disease (or SE) lexicon by combining and cleaning all disease terms in UMLS and in Human Disease Ontology.3http://bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologies/1009.3This clean lexicon has been used on our recent study of extracting disease-manifestation relationships from MEDLINE [32]. We also created a SE lexicon based on the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA),4http://www.meddramsso.com.4which has been used in one of our recent studies in building a cancer-drug-specific side effect knowledge base [31].The drug lexicon was downloaded from DrugBank [25], and it consisted of 6516 drugs, including both FDA-approved drugs and experimental drugs. The decision of using drug names from DrugBank instead of RxNORM or other sources was based on the fact that DrugBank contains many experimental drugs in addition to FDA-approved drugs.The knowledge-driven drug-SE relationship extraction system is depicted in Fig. 1and consists of: (1) Pattern Extraction, wherein syntactical patterns associated with known drug-SE pairs are extracted; (2) Pattern Ranking and Selection, wherein extracted patterns are ranked and drug-SE-specific patterns are selected from top ranked patterns; (3) Pair Extraction, wherein additional pairs associated with selected patterns are extracted from MEDLINE; and (4) Pair Ranking, wherein newly extracted drug-SE pairs are ranked. The ranking scores of each pair was based on the ranking scores of their associated patterns and its frequency in MEDLINE.In order to find drug-SE-specific syntactic patterns, we used known drug-SE pairs as search queries to the local search engine. Sentences and their corresponding parse trees containing any known drug-SE pairs were retrieved. The pattern “NP1 pattern NP2”, where the noun phrase pair NP1-NP2 is a known drug-SE pair, was extracted from the retrieved parse trees. The pattern is “DRUG pattern SE” if a drug entity precedes a SE entity or “SE pattern DRUG” if the opposite is true. For example, from the sentence “UGT1A1*28 genotype and irinotecan-inducedneutropenia: dose matters” (PMID: 17728214), we extracted the pattern “DRUG-induced SE” between irinotecan and neutropenia. From the sentence “Bradycardiainduced byirinotecan: a case report” (PMID: 09861240), the pattern “SE induced by DRUG” was extracted. The extra requirement that both the drug and SE terms must be noun phrases in the retrieved sentences is to avoid extracting partial or incorrect drug-SE pairs. For example, without the NP restriction, partial drug-SE pair “acetazolamide-necrosis” will be extracted from sentence “The high alkalinity of the injection vehicle of certain parenteral solutions of acetazolamideproducesnecrosis of the skin upon sc injection” (PMID: 18809) since the input SE lexicon does not include the more complete SE term ‘necrosis of the skin.’ By requiring that both drug and SE terms must be NP phrases, no pair will be extracted from this sentence. In this way, high precision is guaranteed.Not all patterns associated with known drug-SE pairs are necessarily specific in describing drug-SE semantic relationships. In order to find patterns that are associated with many known drug-SE pairs (high recall) and are also specific in describing drug-SE relationships (high precision), we first ranked extracted patterns by the number of their associated known drug-SE pairs. The ranking scheme ranked patterns highly that were associated with many known pairs (high recalls). However, not all patterns with high recalls were drug-SE-specific patterns. For example, non-specific patterns such as “DRUG and SE” can be associated with many known drug-SE pairs as well as non-drug-SE pairs. From the top-ranked patterns, we manually selected drug-SE-specific syntactic patterns such as “DRUG-induced SE” and “DRUG SE”. The pattern ranking and manual selection processes ensured the high recall (top-ranked) and high precision (manually-selected) of selected patterns. Because the pattern ranking algorithm effectively ranked highly many drug-SE-specific patterns with both high precisions and recalls, the manual selection process entailed minimal human time to scan top-ranked patterns (less than 15min).The selected drug-SE-specific syntactic patterns were used as search queries to the local MEDLINE search engine. Both sentences and parse trees that contained these patterns were retrieved. We extracted drug-SE pairs from the returned parse trees using the pattern format“NP1 pattern NP2,” wherein NP1 and NP2 were both noun phrases, and the pattern was one of the selected patterns. In addition, NP1 and NP2 were drug or SE terms from the input lexicons. Drug-SE pairs that appeared in MEDLINE but not in SIDER were determined additional drug-SE pairs that were discovered by the algorithm.We ranked the extracted drug-SE pairs based on their associated pattern scores and on their co-occurrence frequencies. A reliable drug-SE pair is assumed to be associated with reliable patterns many times. The ranking score of a pairRS(R)is defined as following:(1)RS(R)=∑i=0nlog(RS(Pi))*count(Pi,R)RS(Pi)is the score of its associated patterns (Pi) and is defined as the number of known drug-SE pairs from FDA drug labels that are associated with the pattern. The count(Pi,R) is the number of times that the pair is associated with the pattern in the entire MEDLINE corpus.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Computational approaches to systematically studying drug-SE phenotype associations have great potential in drug target discovery, drug repositioning, and drug toxicity prediction. However, the bottleneck in such systems approaches is the lack of an accurate, comprehensive, and machine-understandable knowledge base of drug-SE associations. In this study, we presented a large-scale relationship extraction approach to accurately extract a large number of drug-SE pairs from MEDLINE. Our approach significantly outperformed the state-of-art machine learning approach and achieved an average precision of 0.833, a recall of 0.407, and an F1 of 0.545. We have shown that the drug-SE pairs extracted from MELDINE correlate positively with drug target genes, drug metabolizing gens and drug indications. This unique drug-SE relationship dataset that we created from the MEDLINE text corpus, when combined with drug-SE associations from other sources and with other ‘omics’ data, can have profound implications in developing phenotype-driven network-based approaches to identifying new drug targets, repositioning existing drugs for new diseases, and predicting unexpected drug toxicities.RX is funded by CWRU/Cleveland Clinic CTSA Grant (UL1 RR024989) and the Training grant in Computational Genomic Epidemiology of Cancer (CoGEC). QW is funded by ThinTek LLC.