@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Gene–disease association with literature based enrichment

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Knowledge-based functional enrichment for gene prioritization of high throughput data.Automatic ontology generation from MEDLINE.Novel and fully automatic literature-based discovery.Literature ontologies perform better than expert-derived ones.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Gene–disease association,Literature based discovery,High-throughput data analysis,Gene set enrichment analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
MotivationGene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) annotates gene microarray data with functional information from the biomedical literature to improve gene–disease association prediction. We hypothesize that supplementing GSEA with comprehensive gene function catalogs built automatically using information extracted from the scientific literature will significantly enhance GSEA prediction quality.MethodsGold standard gene sets for breast cancer (BrCa) and colorectal cancer (CRC) were derived from the literature. Two gene function catalogs (CMeSH and CUMLS) were automatically generated. 1. By using Entrez Gene to associate all recorded human genes with PubMed article IDs. 2. Using the genes mentioned in each PubMed article and associating each with the article’s MeSH terms (in CMeSH) and extracted UMLS concepts (in CUMLS). Microarray data from the Gene Expression Omnibus for BrCa and CRC was then annotated using CMeSH and CUMLS and for comparison, also with several pre-existing catalogs (C2, C4 and C5 from the Molecular Signatures Database). Ranking was done using, a standard GSEA implementation (GSEA-p). Gene function predictions for enriched array data were evaluated against the gold standard by measuring area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC).ResultsComparison of ranking using the literature enrichment catalogs, the pre-existing catalogs as well as five randomly generated catalogs show the literature derived enrichment catalogs are more effective. The AUC for BrCa using the unenriched gene expression dataset was 0.43, increasing to 0.89 after gene set enrichment with CUMLS. The AUC for CRC using the unenriched gene expression dataset was 0.54, increasing to 0.9 after enrichment with CMeSH. C2 increased AUC (BrCa 0.76, CRC 0.71) but C4 and C5 performed poorly (between 0.35 and 0.5). The randomly generated catalogs also performed poorly, equivalent to random guessing.DiscussionGene set enrichment significantly improved prediction of gene–disease association. Selection of enrichment catalog had a substantial effect on prediction accuracy. The literature based catalogs performed better than the MSigDB catalogs, possibly because they are more recent. Catalogs generated automatically from the literature can be kept up to date.ConclusionPrediction of gene–disease association is a fundamental task in biomedical research. GSEA provides a promising method when using literature-based enrichment catalogs.AvailabilityThe literature based catalogs generated and used in this study are available from http://www2.chi.unsw.edu.au/literature-enrichment.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Association of genes with genetic diseases is complicated by the large number of genes involved, interactions between them and the quality of methods with which we measure gene activity. Several computational gene ranking methods (also called gene prioritization) use statistical or knowledge-based approaches to try to find those genes most likely to be associated with a given disease [1].Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) are a statistical gene prioritization method [2]. Millions of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are measured in healthy and control populations and are compared using odds-ratio to find SNPs that are much more common in the disease cohort compared to the population [3]. GWAS has been criticized for having an enormous number of statistical tests which create a high likelihood of false positives [4].Indeed an established conjecture in bioinformatics is that microarray data is too noisy to reliably predict gene–disease associations [4]. Normally, microarray data are ranked by signal strength in disease and control tissues. Studies that compare multiple studies of the same disease find very little correlation between results [5]. Possible explanations include individual variation and temporal gene activation cycles, and the protocol used in tissue preparation [6].One approach to adding in more signal to microarray data is to annotate these data sets with additional information about biological function. Functional annotation (e.g. using the Gene Ontology (GO) [7]) may provide insight into which pathways may be aberrantly activated or deactivated across the genes in an array. The scientific literature has also been proposed to support the manual process of microarray data annotation [8].Subramanian et al. [9] implemented a statistical method called Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) which uses a catalog of genes developed using biological knowledge accumulated in public databases, grouped by functional labels. The catalog enriches the microarray data, to help identify highly-activated or deactivated gene sets rather than individual genes. The performance of GSEA largely depends on the enrichment catalog used. Several catalogs are available from the molecular signatures database (MSigDB) [10]. These catalogs are derived using a combination of expert knowledge and automatic mining of manually collected databases such as the GO.GSEA has been shown to produce higher inter-study agreement than single gene comparisons, and to have produced promising results [9]. GSEA was developed to overcome the traditional strategies for gene expression analysis which may fail to detect biological processes that are distributed across a network of genes.The development of enrichment catalogs, however, requires domain expertise. Frequent updates are required to keep up with latest discoveries as they are published. Our hypothesis in this study is that using GSEA with enrichment catalogs automatically derived from the literature would be able to accurately predict novel gene–disease associations.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
