@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The linked medical data access control framework

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The LiMDAC framework enables controlling access to aggregated medical data.It capitalizes on the Linked Data paradigm to develop the underlying infrastructure.It consists of three models: metadata, user profile and access policy model.The LiMDAC architecture exploits and orchestrates the LiMDAC models.A proof-of-concept implementation evaluates the framework.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Medical data,Data-cubes,Linked data,RDF,Access policy,Privacy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The integration of medical data coming from multiple sources is important in clinical research. Amongst others, it enables the discovery of appropriate subjects in patient-oriented research and the identification of innovative results in epidemiological studies. At the same time, the integration of medical data faces significant ethical and legal challenges that impose access constraints. Some of these issues can be addressed by making available aggregated instead of raw record-level data. In many cases however, there is still a need for controlling access even to the resulting aggregated data, e.g., due to data provider’s policies. In this paper we present the Linked Medical Data Access Control (LiMDAC) framework that capitalizes on Linked Data technologies to enable controlling access to medical data across distributed sources with diverse access constraints. The LiMDAC framework consists of three Linked Data models, namely the LiMDAC metadata model, the LiMDAC user profile model, and the LiMDAC access policy model. It also includes an architecture that exploits these models. Based on the framework, a proof-of-concept platform is developed and its performance and functionality are evaluated by employing two usage scenarios.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Clinical research aims at finding new and better ways to understand, diagnose, prevent, or treat a specific pathological process, e.g., diseases or adverse events. It comprises three main categories: (i) the patient-oriented research that involves human subjects; (ii) the epidemiological and behavioral studies that examine the distribution of disease and the factors that affect health; and (iii) the outcomes and health services research that seeks to identify the most effective and efficient interventions, treatments, and services [1].Clinical research often requires the integration of medical data coming from multiple datasets that are usually stored across multiple sources such as hospitals, clinical sites, research institutes and pharmaceutical companies [2–5]. Medical data may contain sensitive patient data such as demographics, diagnoses, and medication, as well as radiology images, laboratory test results, doctors’ entries and comments [6,7].In patient-oriented research, the integration of multiple medical datasets enables the identification of a sufficient number of subjects [8]. For example, clinical trial phase III, which assesses the safety and the efficacy of a studied treatment or drug, requires large groups of people matching specific eligibility criteria that cannot be found through a single clinical site. In epidemiological studies, analysis of integrated datasets improves the statistical power of results. For instance, studies of clinical effectiveness or disease biology in rare diseases are only possible through multi-center analyses [9]. The integration of multiple datasets also enables better understanding of relationships between pathological processes and risk factors, or between genotype and phenotype [10,11]. For example, recent genome-wide association studies identified 13 novel loci associated with systolic and diastolic blood pressure as well as hypertension [12,13].At the same time however, clinical researchers face technical and interoperability [14], as well as ethical and legal [15], challenges in discovering and accessing scattered and heterogeneous medical data. Although the former challenges have been addressed by several standards [16,17], the latter still remain.In order to overcome these ethical and legal challenges, the approach of aggregating data has been proposed and widely employed. According to this approach, only the counts of subjects having specific characteristics are reported instead of raw record-level data, guaranteeing in this way non-identification and anonymization. Despite that, there is still need for controlling access even to aggregated data, e.g., due to data providers’ policies. A promising technology that facilitates data discovery and access at a Web scale is Linked Data. Linked Data refers to “data published on the Web in such a way that it is machine-readable, its meaning is explicitly defined, it is linked to other external datasets, and can in turn be linked to from external datasets”[18]. Currently, the most promising implementation of Linked Data involves publishing structured data in RDF using URIs in contrast to the full-fledged Semantic Web vision focusing on the ontological level or inferencing [19].The objective of this paper is to present the Linked Medical Data Access Control (LiMDAC) framework that capitalizes on Linked Data technologies to enable controlling access to medical data across distributed sources with diverse access constraints. The framework consists of (a) three Linked Data models, namely the LiMDAC metadata model for describing aggregated medical data, the LiMDAC user profile model for describing medical data consumers, and the LiMDAC access policy model, and (b) an architecture that exploits and orchestrates the three models to enable controlling access to medical data. From a technological perspective, the framework is validated using a proof-of-concept platform that is developed for that purpose.The remaining of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide background knowledge that is necessary for scoping and presenting our work. Section 3 presents the state-of-the-art regarding (a) existing solutions for controlling access to medical data and (b) the use of Linked Data technologies in medical data and for access control. Section 4 describes the proposed LiMDAC framework while Section 5 illustrates a proof-of-concept implementation of the LiMDAC framework. Finally, in Section 6 the results are discussed and in Section 7 conclusions are drawn.Ethical and legal challenges related to medical data mainly derive from (a) strict regulations that protect personal data and prevent patient re-identification by any means [20], (b) agreements that are specified in consent forms, e.g., patients approve sharing their data only in certain clinical studies [21], and (c) policies of stakeholders owing the data e.g., pharmaceutical companies do not contribute to a clinical research led by competitors, or physicians exclude data derived from studies in progress [22–24].In general, ethical and legal challenges impose access constraints that can be categorized as follows [25,26]:•Secrecy: Ensures the privacy of patients and the confidentiality of medical data preventing unauthorized disclosures of information.Integrity: Ensures the integrity of medical data and prevents unauthorized or improper modifications of data.Availability: Ensures the availability of medical data only to authorized persons and prevents the unauthorized or unintended withholding of data.In order to overcome secrecy and integrity constraints, the approach of aggregating data has been proposed. Aggregated data includes only counts of patients having specific characteristics instead of raw record-level information. Aggregated data is usually structured in the form of multi-dimensional data cubes [27,28]. In this way, non-identification and anonymization are ensured while the original data remain safe from any modifications. Despite that, there is still a need for controlling access to aggregated data, e.g., due to data provider’s policies, and thus availability constraints call for appropriate solutions [29].In order to elaborate on availability constraints, a patient-oriented research and an epidemiological study scenario are described below.In patient-oriented research, clinical researchers search for subjects that meet certain eligibility criteria related to a clinical study. Initially they identify possible data providers and ask them whether data of relevant subjects is included in their patients’ database. Data providers having such data and wishing to participate to the specific clinical study have to perform some intensive tasks. First, they check whether the identified subjects can be included according to the study’s eligibility criteria. Then, they match the eligible subjects with the patients’ consent forms to identify if they can be enrolled to the specific trial. Finally, they confirm that access to the patient data is permitted without violating any access constraints, e.g., when subjects have been recruited for a different trial. If the number of eligible patients is not sufficient, clinical researchers seek for additional subjects from other sources to meet the recruitment target.In epidemiological studies, clinical researchers perform statistical analyses of medical data in order to conduct secondary clinical research and thus, identify risk factors influencing the occurrence of a pathological process. In order to have accurate and statistically significant results, they need a large number of medical data. To this end, they identify possible data providers and ask for relevant data they can access without violating any access constraints. Data providers wishing to contribute to the specific clinical research have to perform some intensive tasks. First, they modify their data in order to ensure that their data will be transferred in an anonymized and non-identifiable form. To achieve this, they delete all references to the subject and create aggregated data. Data providers confirm that access to the data is permitted without violating any policies and provide the data e.g., data that is used for studies in progress.In addition to these scenarios, we interviewed stakeholders working in organizations that participate in the EU funded FP7 Linked2Safety project [30]. In particular, we interviewed five clinical researchers, one data manager and three clinical study managers coming from three healthcare organizations maintaining and using medical data for clinical research, namely the Institute of Neurology and Genetics in Cyprus, the Lausanne University Hospital, and ZEINCRO Hellas S.A., a private Contract Research Organisation in Greece. This exercise resulted in a list of user requirements that are related to availability constraints. This list is presented in Appendix A.These scenarios and requirements enable us to identify that two abstract roles related to medical data management are important in clinical research. The data provider creates and keeps medical data regarding patient-specific information in order to organize patients’ treatment, or conduct a clinical research. The data consumer discovers subjects meeting certain eligibility criteria for a patient-oriented research, or medical data to perform an epidemiological study.In addition, these scenarios and requirements enable us to come up with an abstract process that delineates clinical research and consists of the following steps:1.Data provider modifies and aggregates data in order to ensure anonymity and non-identification.Data consumer searches for data providers.Data consumer asks data provider for certain data.Data provider checks whether the requested data is available.Data provider checks whether data consumer is allowed to access the data according to some access constraint policies.Data consumer receives the data.Two different approaches to discover and access medical data from multiple data sources have been proposed: centralized and distributed [3]. The centralized approach enables access to medical data that has been transferred in centralized repositories. Alternatively, distributed medical data networks enable discovery of medical data in their original, disparate locations.Several frameworks consisting of processes, data models and software tools have been recently developed in order to enable medical data sharing and reuse [31]. For example, the Informatics for Integrating Biology and the Bedside (i2b2) [32,33] open source platform and software implementation allows clinical researchers to search across multiple i2b2 sites, find sets of interesting patients, and reuse medical data while preserving patient privacy and ensuring data integrity. While i2b2 created an analytic platform for a single clinical data repository, the Shared Pathology Information Network (SPIN) [34] has tackled the problem of cross-institution data sharing across a peer-to-peer network, in which each participating institution maintains autonomy and control of its own data. The Shared Health Research Information Network’s (SHRINE) [35,36] was built upon i2b2 and SPIN to enable investigators to search the electronic health records of patients across multiple independent sites. In the same context, the Cross-Institutional Clinical Translational Research (CICTR) [8] framework also extended i2b2 in order to enable federated queries across i2b2 sites. In particular, implementations of these two frameworks allow querying distributed hospitals and display aggregate counts of the number of matching patients. The Biomedical Informatics Research Network (BIRN) [37] aggregates imaging, clinical and behavioral data from multiple independent sites using a mediator that re-submits user queries to the relevant sites and aggregates results. The Service-Oriented Interoperability Framework (SIF) [38] targets heterogeneous data sources and employs Web Services standards (e.g., SOAP) to query JDBC databases. In this case users should be aware of all data models in order to form appropriate queries. The Federated Utah Research & Translational Health e-Repository (FURTHeR) [39] is also based on Service Oriented Architecture and employs Web Services standards in order to perform federated queries across distributed data sources. Finally, the integrating Data for Analysis, anonymization, and SHaring (iDASH) [40] framework covers many aspects of medical data reuse including annotation, compression, anonymization, information extraction from text, sharing in a privacy-preserving manner, and integration.Linked Data is an approach for accessing and connecting data using open Web standards. The Linked Data publishing process [41,42] usually begins with existing, structured data in various formats (CSV, relational data, XML, etc.), which are converted to RDF. The publication is based on a Linked Data model that can be created either by devising a new local schema (in RDF Schema, OWL, etc.), or by reusing existing, widespread vocabularies (such as FOAF [43], Dublin Core [44], and SKOS [45]). Thereafter, URIs are assigned to the items in the dataset on the instance level and interlinks are established with other datasets. There are typically two types of links that can be established, namely owl:sameAs used to link URI aliases and other, domain-specific RDF links such as foaf:knows and dc:author.The importance of publishing medical data as Linked Data becomes apparent in the case that we reuse widely used ontologies or linked datasets. For example, the International Classification of Diseases-11 ontology [46] classifies diseases and other health problems, including signs, symptoms, abnormal findings, etc. In addition, the Experimental Factor Ontology (EFO) [47] combines parts of several biological ontologies, such as anatomy, disease and chemical compounds, to annotate experimental variables. Furthermore, an increasing amount of life science datasets are becoming available as linked data. UniProt is a database of protein sequence [48], Reactome describes biological pathways [49], ChEMBL contains bioactive drug-like small molecules [50], ChemSpider includes chemical compounds [51], and WikiPathways describes pathways [52]. The reuse of such ontologies and linked datasets enables the disambiguation of concepts referring to the same entity, as well as the enrichment of medical data with data coming from disparate sources.The RDF Data Cube vocabulary (qb) is a Linked Data model that defines how to structure multi-dimensional data using RDF [53]. It is of vital importance in linked medical data because it can be used to publish the aggregated data that clinical researchers produce. According to the vocabulary, a data cube (qb:Dataset) consists of observations (qb:Observation) that are characterized by dimensions (qb:DimensionProperty), measures (qb:MeasureProperty) and possibly by additional attributes (qb:AttributeProperty). Specifically, the dimension defines the characteristics of the observed properties (e.g., gender, BMI, received medication and weight), the measure describes what has been measured (e.g., cases) and the attribute represents how the observations are expressed (e.g., units, status, etc.) The possible values for each dimension are taken from a code list. A code list is a controlled vocabulary such as a list of diseases, or possible age groups.At the same time, several research efforts have been made so far to control access in data published as Linked Data [54]. Initially, access policies were defined for the entire RDF file stored on a web server [55,56]. Thereafter, it was attempted to apply access policies on parts of the RDF graph [57–62]. In order to achieve this, the proposed access control frameworks define parts of the RDF graph on which access can be allowed (or denied). These parts are identified by specifying RDF patterns. Whereas the above approaches have primarily focused on RDF patterns, Costabello et al. [63] and Sacco et al. [64] propose access control ontologies over Linked Data. They both employ the SPARQL ASK to determine whether the requester is allowed, or not to access the requested resource. In general, the ASK query form can be used to test whether a query pattern has a solution and returns whether the solution exists. An important issue that may arise is the increase of the overhead produced by evaluating policies in every RDF triple [65].The proposed Linked Medical Data Access Control (LiMDAC) framework consists of the following:a.Three Linked Data models, namely the LiMDAC metadata model, the LiMDAC user profile model and the LiMDAC access policy model.An architecture that exploits and orchestrates the three models to enable controlling access to medical data.The framework aims at supporting the abstract process of data management in clinical research presented in Section 2. In particular, the steps of the process supported by the LiMDAC framework, along with a mapping to those steps presented in Section 2, are depicted in Table 1. In this table we assume that a platform has been implemented based on the LiMDAC architecture.The rest of this section is structured according to the main parts of the process and framework. In particular, Section 4.1 presents how aggregated medical data should be developed and published as Linked Data. This corresponds to the setup phase of Table 1 and is an essential prerequisite for the LiMDAC framework. We note that this is presented here only for clarity. The processes, technologies and tools for performing these tasks are outside the scope of this paper, as they are well documented in the relevant literature, e.g., [27,28]. Section 4.2 describes the LiMDAC metadata model, while Section 4.3 presents the LiMDAC user profile model. Section 4.4 elaborates on the LiMDAC access policy model and Section 4.5 describes an architecture that exploits these three models.In order to enhance clarity, we present a research study about childhood obesity [66]. According to the study, six paediatric academic health sites from different regions of the United States have participated in a clinical research related to children’s obesity. The dataset maintained by each site involves records about children between 2 and 17years old. For each child, the health sites store information about the age and the Body Mass Index (BMI). Moreover, the health sites have detected groups of conditions that most commonly co-occur with obesity including hypertension, hyperlipidaemia as well as other rare disorders such as acute leukaemia, multiple sclerosis, and chromosomal anomalies. In this paper, we use the background scenario of this study in order to present our results. We should, however, underline that we have used dummy and not real data from the study.Based on the obesity example, Table 2depicts part of a truncated dummy data cube provided by one of the sites.Fig. 1presents the RDF graph produced from the data shown in Table 2. The graph is modelled based on the RDF data cube vocabulary. In particular, it describes the data structure definition, along with two observations. The SKOS concept collection is used to indicate a set of disease concepts. Fig. 1 also presents the links that have been established between concepts and external vocabularies. It is apparent that “ex:disease” is linked to the concept “EFO:disease” from the EFO ontology that has the same meaning. The concept “EFO:body mass index” can be reused for the BMI dimension. Moreover, the measurement of frequencies and the age dimension can be expressed using the Statistical Data and Metadata eXchange standard (SDMX)1http://sdmx.org/.1which is used to publish statistical data on the web.We repeat here that medical data is transformed in this format during the setup phase shown in Table 1, is a prerequisite for employing the LiMDAC framework, and is not further elaborated in this paper.The LiDMAC metadata model facilitates the improved description of linked data cubes. Metadata enable data providers to express richer access constraints and data consumers to perform more expressive search queries.The RDF data cube vocabulary includes the qb:DataStructureDefinition concept which defines metadata related to cube structure. These metadata include the dimensions of the data cube, along with the values that are measured. However, additional metadata are needed to provide information about the clinical study (e.g., title, purpose, duration, location, subject, responsible personnel for conducting the clinical study, etc.) and the aggregation process that has been followed. These metadata were extracted from the requirements described in Section 2 and presented in Appendix A.Table 3presents the mapping between the requirements and the concepts extracted for describing medical data cubes. Based on these concepts, a conceptual model has been created, which is depicted in Fig. 2.Fig. 3shows the LiMDAC metadata model in the form of a linked data vocabulary. Since the model follows the linked-data principles, it reuses concepts from existing vocabularies instead of defining new ones. In particular, the following popular linked data vocabularies are exploited:•The DDI Discovery Vocabulary [67] that describes research and survey datasets on the Web.The DCMI Metadata Terms vocabulary [44] that is a specification of all metadata terms used to describe a resource.The FOAF vocabulary [43] that describes people and their relationships.The SKOS vocabulary [45] that is used to define classifications.In order to describe the proposed metadata model, we use the Study class (disco:Study) as an entry point. A Study represents the process by which a dataset was collected. It may contain a set of literal properties that provide information about the title (dcterms:title), the purpose (disco:purpose), and other high-level information. In addition, a Study includes object properties such as the sponsor of the Study (disco:fundedBy), and other affiliations such as the creator, the contributor and the publisher (dcterms:creator, dcterms:publisher, dcterms:contributor). They all are foaf:Agents, which can be either foaf:Persons or org:Organizations whose members are foaf:Persons. Moreover, we can use the subject, the temporal and the spatial properties (disco: subject, dcterms:temporal, dcterms:spatial) to describe the respective coverage of studies. For time periods, start (disco:startDate) and end dates (disco:endDate) can be also attached.The outcome of a Study is a raw record-level dataset (disco:LogicalDataSet) that may point to multiple variables (disco:Variable). The LogicalDataset contains a property disco:aggregation that indicates that a data cube (qb:Dataset) was derived by tabulating a LogicalDataset. Furthermore, the Study/LogicalDataset has a DataFile (disco:DataFile) that is the distributed file holding that data.In the example of childhood obesity, the Children’s Hospital of Colorado is the creator of the study that is titled “Multi-institutional study to access childhood obesity” and its purpose is to associate several health conditions with childhood obesity. Michael G. Kahn is the principal investigator of the study as well as responsible person for creating the data cubes transforming the produced medical data in an aggregated form and publishing them as linked data. The study was funded by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) and run from January 2007 to December 2008.Taking into account all this information, the Children’s Hospital of Colorado enriches the linked data cube derived from this study with the following LiMDAC metadata as shown in Fig. 4.The LiMDAC user profile model is used to describe data consumers. This model is exploited by data providers to define their access constraints and by data consumers to describe their user profiles. The LiMDAC user profile model should be in alignment with the requirements expressed by clinical research stakeholders (Appendix A). Table 4presents the mapping between users requirements and the identified concepts that are used in the model (Fig. 5).Fig. 6shows the proposed LiMDAC user profile model in terms of a linked data vocabulary. Again, the model capitalizes on popular linked data vocabularies by reusing existing concepts instead of defining new ones. In particular, it capitalizes on the following linked data vocabularies:•The FOAF vocabulary [43] that defines the agent.The Organization vocabulary [68] that is used to describe organizational structures.The PROV Ontology [69] that is used to model provenance information.Finally, the SKOS vocabulary [45] that is used to define classifications.We use the Organization vocabulary to define the Organization (org:Organization) that a data consumer works for (org:memberOf). The class org:Post represents the position that the data consumer holds in the Organization. The org:Site denotes the office or other premise at which the Organization is located. In addition, the Site uses the property org:siteAddress to indicate the address of the Site. The SKOS vocabulary is used to define the classification of the Organization within some classification scheme (org:classification). Furthermore, the PROV concept prov:Activity associates an agent (prov:Agent,) with an action/activity that he plans, or is responsible to conduct on the extracted data.In the example of childhood obesity, we could consider two clinical researchers, researcher A and researcher B.Researcher A works as a biologist. His current occupation is principal trial investigator in AHRQ while his latest research interests are related to the effects of the obesity in children’s life. Researcher A has decided to undertake a clinical research related to the effectiveness of a new treatment to children’ obesity for children presenting diabetes. To this end, he needs a sufficient number of subjects aged under 18 and diagnosed with diabetes (patient-related research).Researcher B works as an endocrinologist in the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia. His research interests are related to health habits. Recently, researcher B has started an epidemiological study about health habits and their effects on children’s health. In order to receive statistically significant results from the statistical analyses, he needs a sufficient amount of medical data derived from youth patients aged under 18 and containing information about BMI, regular exercise and/or vegetable consumption (epidemiological study).Taking into account all this information, the user profiles of the two data consumers are presented in Fig. 7.Access policies define the data to be protected and to whom access is granted or denied. Thus, each access policy consists of two parts. The first includes the metadata profile of the medical data that will be protected and the second the profile of data consumers that are allowed (or not) to have access to the data.In the LiMDAC framework we adopt a simplified access policy approach that enables us to assign access policies dynamically on linked data cubes sharing common characteristics. In particular, the LiMDAC access policy model specifies (a) an RDF pattern based on the LiMDAC metadata model to limit the application of policies only to data cubes annotated with those metadata and (b) a user pattern based on the LiMDAC user profile model to give the access permission only to users described with those attributes.Fig. 8depicts the LiMDAC access policy linked data model that consists of the following concepts:•The Dataset: It defines the dataset, where the access policy is applied. The dataset is usually a store containing all linked data cubes of a provider.The Data Cube Space: It describes the data cubes, in which the access policy applies. This is achieved through an RDF pattern based on the LiMDAC metadata model that should be satisfied by the metadata of a data cube. If the metadata contain this pattern then the access policy is applied to the data cube.The Access Space: It defines the data consumers for which the access policy applies. This is achieved through an RDF pattern based on the LiMDAC user profile model that specifies a user profile.The Access Control Privilege: It defines both types of permissions (i.e., grantAccess/denyAccess) and permitted operations (read/write/update). We define it as a subtype of the acl:Access.In the example of childhood obesity, each paediatric hospital serves as an individual data provider maintaining in a local repository a large number of linked data cubes coming from various clinical researches. Based on the proposed access policy model, each data provider creates access policies to make available the linked data cubes only to authorized data consumers and under specific conditions. Consider the case of the Children’s Hospital of Colorado. Using the proposed access policy model, it creates the following access policies:1.The data cubes derived from the childhood obesity study and sponsored by AHRQ can be accessed by any user working at AHRQ.The data cubes having in their structure the BMI dimension are authorized for access to data consumers working at the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia and being endocrinologists.Fig. 9presents the RDF representation of the second access policy.Fig. 10illustrates an architecture that exploits and orchestrates the three LiMDAC models to enable controlling access to medical data. Apart from the LiMDAC models, the architecture includes an Authorization Mechanism module and an Authorization Interface module.The Authorization Interface lies between data consumers and providers. It enables data consumers to (i) create user profiles based on the LiMDAC user profile model and (ii) search for distributed medical data. The data consumer defines the purpose of accessing medical data being either patient-oriented research or epidemiological study. The search criteria are based on the dimensions of the data cubes that are stored in the distributed RDF data stores. Next to each search criteria there is a field for selecting its value from a drop-down list of available codes.Moreover, the Authorization Interface translates data consumers’ queries into SPARQL queries and passes them onto the Authorization Mechanism. Initially the Authorization Mechanism retrieves the access policies from distributed data providers. Thereafter, the Authorization Mechanism checks whether the profile of the data consumer matches the user profile defined by each access policy. In case of success, the Authorization Mechanism creates and sends SPARQL queries to distributed data providers. The queries search for data that match both the data consumer’s query and the satisfied access policies. In case of success, the resulted datasets are returned to the data consumer via the Authorization Interface.The result of this process is either (i) (for patient-oriented research purposes) the number of patients meeting specific criteria, along with the name of the data provider publishing these data, or (ii) (for epidemiological studies purposes) the respective linked data cubes.Based on the framework a proof-of-concept platform is developed and its functionality and performance are evaluated based on two usage scenarios. The platform implements the Authorization Mechanism and the Authorization Interface and exploits the LiMDAC models. For its development we used the Jena Framework.2http://jena.apache.org.2Following on the childhood obesity example, we consider that there are four distributed data providers, each corresponding to a different hospital. Each data provider stores linked data cubes produced in the course of different clinical studies (including the childhood obesity example). Data providers also store metadata and access policies for the cubes based on the LiMDAC metadata and access policy models respectively. To emulate this setting, we have used four distributed RDF data stores (implemented using a Fuseki3http://jena.apache.org/documentation/serving_data/.3SPARQL server – part of the Jena Framework). A total of 120,000 linked data cubes are stored in each site. Each cube is structured based on 3 out of 10 dimensions that have been selected for each clinical study. We use around 40 dimensions in total with each receiving values from a pre-defined coded list. Moreover, there exist around 1.5 million triples expressing data cubes’ metadata that will be searched by access policies.In order to evaluate the platform we investigate two usage scenarios. In the example of childhood obesity, researcher A (as defined in Section 4.3) needs medical data for patient-oriented research (purpose) and selects the age dimension with value smaller than 18 and the diabetes dimension. On the other hand, researcher B needs medical data for epidemiological purposes and selects the BMI, regular_exercise, vegetable_consumption and age dimensions. In the value field of the age dimension he indicates smaller than 18 so that to investigate effects of health habits in young people.In the first scenario, the system returns the number of subjects meeting the specified criteria. Specifically, Researcher A is now provided access to data derived from the childhood obesity study, which his organization has funded.In the second scenario, the system returns data cubes meeting all specified criteria. We assume that this data comes from the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia and the Children’s Hospital of Colorado. Researcher B works at the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, thus he is provided access to data coming from his organization. Moreover, he is provided access to data coming from the Children’s Hospital of Colorado, since the Children’s Hospital of Colorado has defined a special access policy so as endocrinologists coming from the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia are permitted access to data cubes related to BMI.In order to evaluate the proof-of-concept platform, we performed functionality, as well as performance and scalability, testing based on two usage scenarios. In the functionality evaluation testing, we validated and verified that all requirements are implemented by the LiMDAC framework and the proof-of-concept platform.In order to evaluate the performance and scalability of the platform, we have conducted two sets of experiments measuring the response time. At each running, we have executed a complex (3 search criteria) and a simple (1 search criteria) user query. Table 5presents an example of these queries. The main difference between them is the number of dimensions requested. In our example, diabetes, BMI and hypertension dimensions are requested in the complex query while diabetes is requested in the simple one:At the first experimental setting (Table 6), each provider has 1000 access policies (we assume that 10% of the access policies are satisfied by the user profile). The measurement is repeated for 1200, 12,000 and 120,000 cubes per provider. The response time varies from 1s to 23s for the simple user query while for the complex query the response time are much sorter (vary from 0.1s to 0.6s). The more search criteria are used the less cubes are matched and thus, the quicker the response is. At the second experimental setting (Table 7), the number of cubes is constant, namely 120,000. Here, the variable parameter is the number of access policies per provider. We repeated the measurement for 10, 50, 100, 1000, 5000 and 10,000 access policies per provider (assuming that 10% of the access policies are satisfied). Again at each case a simple and a complex user query are executed. For the simple query the response times are between 0.1s and 23s for realistic scenarios until 1000 access policies, while the response time increases significantly as the access policies increase to simulate a web scale. For the complex query the response times are between 0.1s and 0.3s for realistic scenarios (i.e., until 1000 access policies) while the response time reaches 5s and 12s for imaginary scenarios that simulate a web scale (5000 and 10,000 access policies).Based on the performance evaluation results, we observe that the authorization mechanism is more sensitive to the number of available access policies than to the number of available cubes. At a real word scenario, it is expected to have a huge number of cubes but the number of policies is not expected to be so high. Based on that, we conclude that the proposed approach is expected to work efficiently for web scale data.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
