@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automatic signal extraction, prioritizing and filtering approaches in detecting post-marketing cardiovascular events associated with targeted cancer drugs from the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS)

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Targeted cancer drugs are often associated with unexpectedly high cardiotoxicity.The Mechanisms underlying these drug–cardiovascular (CV) relationships are unclear.Systems approaches in studying targeted cancer drug–CV relationships are important.There exists no knowledge base of targeted drug–CV relationships.We extract, rank, filter, and curate post-marketing drug–CV pairs from FAERS.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Targeted cancer therapy,Cardiotoxicity,Data mining,Post-market drug safety surveillance,Personalized medicine,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveTargeted drugs dramatically improve the treatment outcomes in cancer patients; however, these innovative drugs are often associated with unexpectedly high cardiovascular toxicity. Currently, cardiovascular safety represents both a challenging issue for drug developers, regulators, researchers, and clinicians and a concern for patients. While FDA drug labels have captured many of these events, spontaneous reporting systems are a main source for post-marketing drug safety surveillance in ‘real-world’ (outside of clinical trials) cancer patients. In this study, we present approaches to extracting, prioritizing, filtering, and confirming cardiovascular events associated with targeted cancer drugs from the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS).Data and methodsThe dataset includes records of 4,285,097 patients from FAERS. We first extracted drug–cardiovascular event (drug–CV) pairs from FAERS through named entity recognition and mapping processes. We then compared six ranking algorithms in prioritizing true positive signals among extracted pairs using known drug–CV pairs derived from FDA drug labels. We also developed three filtering algorithms to further improve precision. Finally, we manually validated extracted drug–CV pairs using 21 million published MEDLINE records.ResultsWe extracted a total of 11,173 drug–CV pairs from FAERS. We showed that ranking by frequency is significantly more effective than by the five standard signal detection methods (246% improvement in precision for top-ranked pairs). The filtering algorithm we developed further improved overall precision by 91.3%. By manual curation using literature evidence, we show that about 51.9% of the 617 drug–CV pairs that appeared in both FAERS and MEDLINE sentences are true positives. In addition, 80.6% of these positive pairs have not been captured by FDA drug labeling.ConclusionsThe unique drug–CV association dataset that we created based on FAERS could facilitate our understanding and prediction of cardiotoxic events associated with targeted cancer drugs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Treatment outcomes in cancer patients have dramatically improved since the introduction of targeted drugs. However, targeted drugs are often associated with unexpectedly high cardiovascular toxicity in cancer patients [1,2]. The mechanisms by which targeted drugs become cardiotoxic in cancer patients are not well-understood [3–5]. To ensure personalized cancer treatment, research efforts are needed to understand cardiovascular toxicities associated with targeted drugs. Toxic effects on the heart and vascular system caused by targeted cancer drugs can reveal insights into the biology of cardiovascular disease in humans [6]. Systematic and integrated approaches to studying cardiovascular events associated with targeted drugs have high potential for elucidating the complex pathways of drug-induced toxicities, identifying the on- and off-targets of undesirable cardiovascular events, and predicting unknown cardiotoxicities [7–9]. However, systematic study of targeted drug-induced cardiovascular events has been hampered by the lack of a comprehensive and machine-understandable knowledge base of drug-associated cardiotoxicity in cancer patients. This knowledge is often buried throughout multiple disparate and complementary information sources in various formats, including the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) (commercial drugs), the vast amount of published biomedical literature (commercial drugs, drugs under preclinical or clinical development, and even failed drugs), the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS) (commercial drugs), and patient electronic health records (EHRs) (commercial drugs). Our long-term research goal is to extract drug–side effect (drug–SE) relationships for cancer drugs from all these information sources and build a comprehensive cancer toxicity knowledge base. In this study, we focus on mining cardiovascular events associated with targeted cancer drugs (drug–CV) from the FDA post-marketing FAERS database, which holds data on more than 4.2 million patients, including 443,226 cancer patients. The unique dataset of drug–CV relationship we have created could facilitate our understanding of the underlying biological mechanisms of the toxic effects under consideration, the development of computational models predictive of adverse events related to targeted cancer therapies, the identification of cancer patients at risk for specific cardiovascular toxic events, and understanding the biology of cardiovascular disease in humans. Ultimately, our database can potentially capacitate the achievement of more effective, safer, and more personalized cancer care. As far as we know, this is the first study to systematically extract, rank, filter, and confirm cardiovascular events associated with targeted anticancer drugs using large amount of published biomedical literature.Targeted cancer drugs control cancer cell proliferation and spread by interfering with specific molecular targets involved in tumor growth and progression [13]. Targeted cancer therapies have significantly (positively) impacted the survival and quality of life of cancer patients [2]. Currently, approximately 500 novel targeted anti-cancer agents are under preclinical or clinical development or have been approved by the FDA for the treatment of specific types of cancers [13,14]. Targeted cancer drugs promise new ways to personalize cancer treatments based on the unique molecular targets expressed by tumor cells. However, a major challenge posed by these targeted agents lies in maintaining the balance between tumor control and drug-induced toxicity [2], especially cardiotoxicity, which represents one of the most significant complications of targeted drug use in cancer patients [15]. The mechanisms by which targeted agents manifest their cardiotoxicity remain unclear [3–5]. Unlike the side effects induced by non-specific cytotoxic chemotherapeutics, which are often similar, cardiotoxicity associated with targeted cancer drugs often differ among even drugs of the same class such as erlotinib and gefitinib [16]. Currently available approaches in predicting the cardiotoxicity of targeted drugs have had limited success [17], demonstrating the need for researchers to gain mechanistic insight into cardiotoxicity associated with targeted drug use in cancer patients.Side effects, including drug-induced cardiotoxicity, are observable phenotypes of drugs at the level of the whole body system and are mediated by a drug interacting with its targets through a cascade of downstream pathway perturbations [18]. Systems biology creates the capability to elucidate complex and highly interconnected pathways of toxicities and to develop computational models predictive of unknown toxicities [8–10]. It has been increasingly recognized that similar side effects of seemingly unrelated drugs can be caused by their common off-targets and that drugs with similar side effects are likely to share molecular targets [19]. Therefore, systems approaches to studying the phenotypic relationships among targeted cancer drugs and integration of this drug phenotypic data with genetic and other ‘omics’ data, such as protein–target interactions, chemical structure, and gene co-expression, will allow for a better understanding of drug toxicities. For phenotype-driven systems approaches to understanding targeted drug-induced cardiotoxicity in cancer patients, the availability of a comprehensive and machine-understandable drug–cardiovascular events (drug–CV) relationship knowledge base is critical. At present, no such data source exists and the published literature on automatically extracting drug–SE relationships for cancer drugs is scant.It was recently demonstrated that 39% of serious events associated with targeted cancer drugs are not reported in clinical trials and 49% are not described in FDA drug labels [20]. In addition, the accelerated approval of anticancer drugs initiated by the FDA in 1992 may cause the early release of unsafe drugs [21]. Therefore, to build a comprehensive knowledge base of drug–SE relationships for cancer drugs, it is important to extract knowledge from multiple sources, including FDA drug labels, the FDA post-market drug safety surveillance system FAERS, patient EHRs, and the large body of published biomedical literature. Recently, we developed a simple but effective method for extracting a large number of drug–SE pairs for cancer drugs from published biomedical literature abstracts [11]. In this study, we focus on mining targeted cancer drug-related cardiovascular events from FAERS, which includes data for more than 4.4 million patients.Spontaneous reporting systems are the main resources for post-marketing drug safety surveillance. Mining drug–SE relationships from FAERS is a highly active area. Data mining algorithms such as disproportionality analysis, correlation analysis, and multivariate regression have been developed to detect adverse drug signals from FAERS [22–26]. Current signal detection methods often suffer from a range of limitations including biased reporting and misattribution of causality in drug–SE combinations [27]. Therefore, it is important to develop robust signal detection methods to identify anticancer drug-related adverse events from FAERS. In this study, we developed a simple signal-ranking method that is more effective than standard signal detection approaches. We also developed three signal-filtering methods to further improve precisions. After these initial signal detection and strengthening steps, we confirmed extracted CV pairs by manually looking for evidence in the 21 million published MEDLINE records.The processing of detecting cardiovascular events associated with targeted cancer drugs is depicted in Fig. 1and consisted of the following steps: (1) Extracting drug–CV pairs from FAERS through named entity recognition and drug mapping processes; (2) ranking extracted drug–CV pairs by comparing six different ranking approaches; (3) filtering extracted drug–CV pairs by removing false positives (drug–disease treatment pairs and disease–manifestation pairs) and by extracting drug–CV pairs from patients taking single drug; and (4) manual curation of all extracted drug–CV pairs that appeared in MEDLINE sentences.The FDA FAERS data files for the time period from year 2004 through 2012 were downloaded [12]. A total of 4,285,097 records were extracted from the downloaded datasets. Among the downloaded files, files DRUGyyQq.TXT contain drug information associated with reported adverse event. Files REACyyQq.TXT contain all “Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities” (MedDRA) terms coded for an adverse event. Files DRUGyyQq.TXT and REACyyQq.TXT are the sources of drug–CV association extraction. Files INDIyyQq.TXT contain patients’ disease information, which was used in our study to stratify patients into cancer and non-cancer populations. Files DEMOyyQq.TXT contain patients’ demographic information, such as age and gender, which was used in our study to stratify patients into different demographic groups.A list of 45 targeted cancer drugs (including both generic names and trade names) that are FDA-approved or being studied in ongoing clinical trials was obtained from the National Cancer Institute (NCI) [13].We built a lexicon of CV terms based on MedDRA, which is a widely-used medical terminology to classify adverse event information associated with the use of biopharmaceuticals and other medical products [29]. The adverse events in FAERS are also coded with MedDRA terms. The lexicon was created by finding all leaf nodes with the ancestor “vascular disorders” or “cardiac disorders.” This lexicon consisted of a total of 1712 CV terms, including 1269 vascular disorders and 527 cardiac disorders.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, we present automatic approaches in mining cardiovascular events associated with targeted cancer drugs from FDA post-marketing FAERS database. We have built a database consisted of 11,173 post-marketing cardiovascular events associated with targeted cancer drugs. We have developed signal extraction, ranking, filtering, and confirming approaches to improve the precision of the dataset. The unique drug–CV relationship dataset we created could capacitate the development of computational models that would in turn facilitate our understanding and prediction of cardiotoxic effects associated with targeted drugs, and help us to achieve more effective, safer, and more personalized cancer care.http://nlp.case.edu/public/data/TargetedCancerDrug_Cardiotoxicity_AERS.This work by RX was supported by Case Western Reserve University/Cleveland Clinic CTSA Grant (UL1 RR024989), and the work by QW was supported by ThinTek LLC.