@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Portable automatic text classification for adverse drug reaction detection via multi-corpus training

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We introduce a portable model for Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR) detection from text.We present two annotated datasets built in-house for ADR detection from social media.We show that using NLP-based feature extraction improves ADR classification accuracy.We introduce multi-corpus training for ADR classification using compatible features.Our results verify that multi-corpus training can significantly improve accuracy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pharmacovigilance,Adverse drug reaction,Social media monitoring,Text classification,Natural language processing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveAutomatic detection of adverse drug reaction (ADR) mentions from text has recently received significant interest in pharmacovigilance research. Current research focuses on various sources of text-based information, including social media—where enormous amounts of user posted data is available, which have the potential for use in pharmacovigilance if collected and filtered accurately. The aims of this study are: (i) to explore natural language processing (NLP) approaches for generating useful features from text, and utilizing them in optimized machine learning algorithms for automatic classification of ADR assertive text segments; (ii) to present two data sets that we prepared for the task of ADR detection from user posted internet data; and (iii) to investigate if combining training data from distinct corpora can improve automatic classification accuracies.MethodsOne of our three data sets contains annotated sentences from clinical reports, and the two other data sets, built in-house, consist of annotated posts from social media. Our text classification approach relies on generating a large set of features, representing semantic properties (e.g., sentiment, polarity, and topic), from short text nuggets. Importantly, using our expanded feature sets, we combine training data from different corpora in attempts to boost classification accuracies.ResultsOur feature-rich classification approach performs significantly better than previously published approaches with ADR class F-scores of 0.812 (previously reported best: 0.770), 0.538 and 0.678 for the three data sets. Combining training data from multiple compatible corpora further improves the ADR F-scores for the in-house data sets to 0.597 (improvement of 5.9 units) and 0.704 (improvement of 2.6 units) respectively.ConclusionsOur research results indicate that using advanced NLP techniques for generating information rich features from text can significantly improve classification accuracies over existing benchmarks. Our experiments illustrate the benefits of incorporating various semantic features such as topics, concepts, sentiments, and polarities. Finally, we show that integration of information from compatible corpora can significantly improve classification performance. This form of multi-corpus training may be particularly useful in cases where data sets are heavily imbalanced (e.g., social media data), and may reduce the time and costs associated with the annotation of data in the future.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we focused on the problem of automatic text classification of sentences to detect ADR mentions. In particular, we attempted to investigate approaches by which NLP and machine learning techniques can be applied to improve the automatic classification of social media text containing medical information. Our particular focus was social media data, but we also included a publicly available data source from outside the social media domain for scientific comparison. We discussed the collection and preparation of two data sets that we have prepared in-house, one of which has been made publicly available. We utilized NLP techniques to extract useful features from the three data sets and showed that the careful selection of features can significantly improve automatic classification accuracies. The features chosen were indicative of various properties of the texts including their polarities, sentiments and topics. Our experimental results strongly suggest that the combining of features from well established text classification research areas, such as sentiment analysis, can improve classification accuracies. As such, there is a strong motivation for further exploration of similar well established research areas to identify features that may be applied to automatic ADR detection and monitoring. Furthermore, the topic model feature that we introduced is likely to benefit text classification tasks in general, and should be explored in future research.We explored the possibility of combining annotated data from different corpora in an attempt to improve classification accuracies. Our experiments showed that significant improvements in classification accuracies can be achieved by combining the DS and TW data sets, and slight improvements can be achieved over the DS and TW sets when combined with the ADE training data. This suggests that if data sets are compatible (i.e., they contain similar types of text), they can be combined for training. Although various properties of the DS and TW data sets are very different (e.g., post lengths, contents, n-gram models, and so on), the use of features, such as indication of sentiments, topics, ADRs, and polarities, maybe used to reflect compatible properties of the texts. This leads to improved performances when cross-corpus training is performed, and similar techniques can be used in the future for text classification problems attempting to utilize multiple data sets. The empirical validation of this hypothesis may have crucial implications, particularly when working with social media data, where the volume of data is colossal, and numerous sources of information exist. This may also significantly reduce annotation time and expenses.In the future, we would like to combine information from multiple corpora for the task of ADR relation extraction, which is the next step in our ADR monitoring pipeline. Considering that we achieved significantly better results than past research in the area, we expect that combining information from multiple sources for the later stages of our work will produce similar results. From an NLP and more general medical informatics perspective, we want to explore what NLP and feature extraction techniques from various text classification problems can be applied to text in the medical domain. It must be mentioned that the key to improving classification performance via combining corpora was the use of NLP on distinct data sets to extract features which represented similar information across the corpora. Thus, future research in this area may provide further break-through. Finally, there has been major progress in automatic text summarization research in the medical domain, such as the work presented in [55]. Considering the large volume of drug related information available in the various social networks, we will attempt to use summarization techniques to compress and identify critical information about drugs and utilize the summaries to assess drug safety.The authors declare that they have no competing interests.