@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Development and validation of a surgical training simulator with haptic feedback for learning bone-sawing skill

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We developed a visuo-haptic surgical training simulator for bone-sawing procedure.We validated the simulator’s face validity and construct validity.This simulator was able to produce the effect of learning bone-sawing skill.This simulator could provide a training alternative for novices.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Surgical training simulator,Bone sawing,Haptic,Skill learning,Simulator validation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveBone sawing or cutting is widely used for bone removal processes in bone surgery. It is an essential skill that surgeons should execute with a high level of experience and sensitive force perception. Surgical training simulators, with virtual and haptic feedback functions, can offer a safe, repeatable and cost-effective alternative to traditional surgeries. In this research, we developed a surgical training simulator with virtual and haptic force feedback for maxillofacial surgery, and we validated the effects on the learning of bone-sawing skills through empirical evaluation.MethodsOmega.6 from Force Dimension was employed as the haptic device, and Display300 from SenseGraphices was used as the 3D stereo display. The voxel-based model was constructed using computed tomography (CT) images, and the virtual tools were built through reverse engineering. The multi-point collision detection method was applied for haptic rendering to test the 3D relationship between the virtual tool and the bone voxels. Bone-sawing procedures in maxillofacial surgery were simulated with a virtual environment and real-time haptic feedback. A total of 25 participants (16 novices and 9 experienced surgeons) were included in 2 groups to perform the bone-sawing simulation for assessing the construct validity. Each of the participants completed the same bone-sawing procedure at the predefined maxillary region six times. For each trial, the sawing operative time, the maximal acceleration, and the percentage of the haptic force exceeding the threshold were recorded and analysed to evaluate the validity. After six trials, all of the participants scored the simulator in terms of safe force learning, stable hand control and overall performance to confirm the face validity. Moreover, 10 novices in 2 groups indentified the transfer validity on rapid prototype skull models by comparing the operative time and the maximal acceleration.ResultsThe analysed results of construct validity showed that the two groups significantly reduced their sawing operative times after six trials. Regarding maximal acceleration, the curve significantly descended and reached a plateau after the fifth repetition (novices) or third repetition (surgeons). Regarding safe haptic force, the novices obviously reduced the percentage of the haptic force exceeding the threshold, with statistical significance after four trials, but the surgeons did not show a significant difference. Moreover, the subjectively scored results demonstrated that the proposed simulator was more helpful for the novices than for the experienced surgeons, with scores of 8.31 and 7.22, respectively, for their overall performance. The experimental results on skill transference showed that the experimental group performed bone-sawing operation in lower maximal acceleration than control group with a significant difference (p<0.05). These findings suggested that the simulator training had positive effects on real sawing.ConclusionsThe evaluation results proved the construct validity, face validity and the transfer validity of the simulator. These results indicated that this simulator was able to produce the effect of learning bone-sawing skill, and it could provide a training alternative for novices.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Bone sawing or cutting is a complex hard tissue removal process applied in bone surgery (orthopaedic surgery or cranio-maxillofacial surgery) that involves many steps in which different essential skills are required. The surgeon must be very careful to apply appropriate forces and to operate the tools at appropriate speeds to avoid over-operation. Becoming a skilful surgeon with sensitive force perception requires rigorous training and iterative practice. Traditionally, surgical trainees have often watched and performed operations on models, animals or cadavers under the supervision of experienced surgeons, before performing the procedures themselves. This surgical education system has many drawbacks in terms of efficiency, cost, flexibility, and safety [1,2].Visuo-haptic interactive simulators, with both visual and haptic (tactile) feedback, have been rapidly developed in recent years to provide a realistic, cost-effective, safe and repeatable alternative to traditional surgical training methods, and these simulators have played an increasing role in surgical education and training [1,3]. Virtual reality systems have used computers to create virtual environments for simulating real-world scenarios, and haptic devices have been employed to assist in surgical training through virtual simulations of surgical procedures with haptic feedback. These visuo-haptic simulators can provide tactile, visual and audio sensations or information to create a realistic training scenario, in which novice surgeons can practice surgical operations, thus allowing them to make mistakes without serious consequences. As a result, the pre-trained novice can practice to master the basic skills and can undertake cognitive planning of surgical tasks [4].The aim of this research was to simulate bone-sawing operations and evaluate the validity of the learning of bone-sawing skill among trainees. For bone surgeries, bone-machining tasks are force skills, which require the trainee to operate the tools at an appropriate feed velocity with a stable hand and to remember the quantity of force applied to the tool. It is a challenging task to create realistic haptic interactions between a high spindle-speed saw, operating at more than 10,000rpm (revolutions per minute), and stiff bone. In this study, we constructed a virtual bone model for haptic rendering, based on the voxel model [5], and it had the advantage of taking into consideration the heterogeneous properties of materials. Further, the major variables (bone density, feed velocity and spindle speed) were considered in calculating the haptic forces of the bone-sawing operation. Moreover, we employed the multi-point collision detection method [6] to test the interaction between the tool and the virtual bone model, with the hope of achieving more real haptic forces. To evaluate the construct validity, face validity and transfer validity of the proposed simulator, three experiments were included in this study to analyse the effects of the learning bone-sawing skill.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the related previous work. Section 3 presents the development of the simulator with graphic rendering and haptic rendering. The simulator validity is tested in Section 4 with a multi-tiered testing strategy. Section 5 is the discussion and conclusion.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
