@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automated systems for the de-identification of longitudinal clinical narratives: Overview of 2014 i2b2/UTHealth shared task Track 1

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
First de-identification shared task on clinical narratives.10 teams participated, submitting 22 system output.Top-performing system achieved micro-averaged F1 measure of .936 using strictest evaluation metric.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Natural language processing,Machine learning,Shared task,Medical records,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The 2014 i2b2/UTHealth Natural Language Processing (NLP) shared task featured four tracks. The first of these was the de-identification track focused on identifying protected health information (PHI) in longitudinal clinical narratives. The longitudinal nature of clinical narratives calls particular attention to details of information that, while benign on their own in separate records, can lead to identification of patients in combination in longitudinal records. Accordingly, the 2014 de-identification track addressed a broader set of entities and PHI than covered by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act – the focus of the de-identification shared task that was organized in 2006. Ten teams tackled the 2014 de-identification task and submitted 22 system outputs for evaluation. Each team was evaluated on their best performing system output. Three of the 10 systems achieved F1 scores over .90, and seven of the top 10 scored over .75. The most successful systems combined conditional random fields and hand-written rules. Our findings indicate that automated systems can be very effective for this task, but that de-identification is not yet a solved problem.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The 2014 i2b21Informatics for Integrating Biology and the Bedside.1/UTHealth2University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston.2Natural Language Processing (NLP) shared task featured four tracks. The first of these was the de-identification track focused on identifying protected health information (PHI) in the clinical narratives. While identifying PHI for removal, it is important for de-identification to preserve the medically salient contents of the narratives so that this information can benefit downstream research and maintain the value of the record for the care of the patients.The 2014 shared task data were selected to show the progression (or lack thereof) of heart disease in diabetic patients over time, the focus of Track 2 of the i2b2/UTHealth shared task [1]. In order to reflect the progression over time, the records were longitudinal: the same patients were represented over multiple documents separated by weeks, months, or years. The inclusion of longitudinal records in a corpus presents a unique challenge for de-identification: Including more records from a patient’s medical record provides important medical data for clinical research, but it also potentially puts the patient at greater risk of being identified.America’s Health Insurance Portability Accountability Act (HIPAA; 45 CFR 164.514) defines 18 categories of PHI, which must be removed from a medical record before it can be considered safely de-identified. These categories include patient names, contact information, ID numbers, and so on. However, a recent study in Canada showed that over an 11-year period, records of people’s addresses alone could lead to their being identified [2]. Similarly, US citizens can be identified by their date of birth, ZIP code, and gender [3,4], yet the HIPAA PHI categories do not include gender, years, or full ZIP codes for sufficiently populated areas. In other words, while HIPAA provides a starting point for effective de-identification, it may not be sufficient for full de-identification.While full de-identification may not be a realistic and attainable goal, expanding HIPAA categories to include a wider set of information can make de-identification more secure. Accordingly, the 2014 i2b2/UTHealth shared task data were de-identified to a more strict standard than what HIPAA defines [5,6] using additional categories for PHI, such as professions, full dates, and information about medical workers and facilities. We refer to this expanded set of PHI categories as i2b2-PHI categories (see Section 3).We defined the Track 1 shared task consistently with the de-identification that we performed for data release. We released 60% of the de-identified data, with the gold standard i2b2-PHI annotations (but after the authentic PHI were replaced with realistic surrogates) as the training corpus. We gave the participants three months to build systems that automated the de-identification task. At this point, we released the remaining data, without annotations, as test data, and gave the participants three days to submit up to three system runs on the test data. We evaluated the system runs on two sets of PHI categories: the 18 categories defined by HIPAA (HIPAA-PHI) and the i2b2-PHI. We ranked the systems primarily based on their performance on the i2b2-PHI.This paper provides a brief overview of the de-identification task (Track 1) of the i2b2/UTHealth 2014 shared task, related work (Section 2), data (Section 3) and annotation (Section 4). Its focus is primarily on the evaluation metrics (Section 5), descriptions of participating systems (Section 6) and results of the shared task. To put this task into context, we compare these results to the results of the 2006 i2b2 de-identification task (Section 7) and close the paper with a discussion and conclusions (Sections 8 and 9).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
