@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Mining heart disease risk factors in clinical text with named entity recognition and distributional semantic models

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
NLP system to identify heart disease risk factors in diabetic patients over time.Employ named entity recognition, Bayesian statistics, and rule logic.Introduce distributional semantic model for characterizing contextual evidence.Distributional semantic model improves precision by 10.3% without use of lexicons.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Biomedical text mining,Clinical informatics,Translational research,Natural language processing,Named entity recognition,Distributional semantic models,Heart disease risk factors,Diabetes,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We present the design, and analyze the performance of a multi-stage natural language processing system employing named entity recognition, Bayesian statistics, and rule logic to identify and characterize heart disease risk factor events in diabetic patients over time. The system was originally developed for the 2014 i2b2 Challenges in Natural Language in Clinical Data. The system’s strengths included a high level of accuracy for identifying named entities associated with heart disease risk factor events. The system’s primary weakness was due to inaccuracies when characterizing the attributes of some events. For example, determining the relative time of an event with respect to the record date, whether an event is attributable to the patient’s history or the patient’s family history, and differentiating between current and prior smoking status. We believe these inaccuracies were due in large part to the lack of an effective approach for integrating context into our event detection model. To address these inaccuracies, we explore the addition of a distributional semantic model for characterizing contextual evidence of heart disease risk factor events. Using this semantic model, we raise our initial 2014 i2b2 Challenges in Natural Language of Clinical data F1 score of 0.838 to 0.890 and increased precision by 10.3% without use of any lexicons that might bias our results.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Diabetes Mellitus is a common disease with cardiovascular complications. Complications such as an ST elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) are associated with mortality, significant morbidity, and healthcare spending. The ability to identify patients likely to have a significant cardiovascular event within 1–3years provides an opportunity for successful intervention. A significant challenge to developing models for predicting cardiac risk involves the identification of temporally related events and measurements in the unstructured text in electronic health records. The 2014 i2b2 Challenges in Natural Language Processing in Clinical Data track for identifying risk factors for heart disease over time was created to facilitate development of natural language processing systems to address this challenge [1]. The details of the i2b2 Natural Language Challenge are documented in the annotation guidelines [2], and are summarized in the following Annotation section. Teams were provided with 521 de-identified medical record note text containing 64,035 risk factors. For evaluation, risk factor instances were rolled up to the document level for a total of 16,167 distinct record/document risk factors.Accurate identification of risk factors requires proper characterization of time, and whether a risk factor is attributable to the patient or a family member. For example, a mention of hypertension could be a past or current condition, and the condition could be attributable to either the patient or a patient’s family member. Capturing this information requires an effective approach for integrating contextual semantics within the event detection model. Distributional semantic models (DSM) can be used to quantify the semantic similarity between linguistic terms based on their distributional properties in large samples of text. The central assumption here is that the context surrounding a given word or phrase provides important information about its meaning [3–5]. DSMs provide a mechanism for representing terms, concepts, relations, or sentence meaning by using distributional statistics. The semantic properties of terms are captured in a multi-dimensional space by vectors that are constructed from large bodies of text by observing the distributional patterns of co-occurrence with their neighboring words. These vectors can then be used as measures of text similarity between words, phrases, concepts, relations, or snips of arbitrary text. Early work on use of distributional semantic modeling in EHRs (Electronic Health Records) has focused on providing vector-based representations of medical concepts, i.e., SNOMED [6], and for synonym recognition [7].Given a set of medical records, the annotation task was to create a set of text annotations that track the progression of heart disease in diabetic patients. Multiple records were annotated for each patient, which provides a general timeline to be created from the set. Annotation tags and attributes were used to indicate the presence and progression of disease (diabetes, heart disease), associated risk factors (hypertension, hyperlipidemia, smoking status, obesity status, and family history), disease-related medications, and the time they were present in the patient’s medical history. Each disease and risk factor associated with this task was assigned its own set of indicators that is used to identify whether or not the disease or risk factor is present for that patient, and when it is present. Annotations are summarized in Table 1.Every tag except for SMOKER and FAMILY_HIST has a time attribute that is used to show when the indicator for each medical problem is known to have existed. These reflect when the indicator occurred/was active in relation to the date the medical record was written, i.e., document creation time (DCT): before DCT, during DCT, after DCT, not mentioned.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We presented the design and analysis of a multi-stage natural language processing system employing named entity recognition, Bayesian statistics, and rule logic for identifying heart disease risk factor events in diabetic patients over time. The most significant shortcoming of the system was due to inaccuracies characterizing the attributes of these events. To address these inaccuracies, we introduced a novel distributional semantic model to capture event context. Using our distributional semantic model, we were able to improve our F1 score from 0.838 to 0.890, and increase precision by 10.3% on the 2014 i2b2 Challenges in Natural Language of Clinical dataset without use of any lexicons that might bias our results. We believe there is significant potential for integrating distributional semantics in the form of vector space models for improving named entity and event accuracies in healthcare natural language processing applications. Future plans include construction of a much larger EHR dataset from our clinical data warehouse to gather more robust distributional statistics and to perform a more thorough evaluation.The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.