@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Visualization and analytics tools for infectious disease epidemiology: A systematic review

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Visualization tools for infectious disease epidemiology are diverse.Complex geospatial, molecular, and social data require novel visualization tools.We reviewed visualization tools throughout development and adoption lifecycle.Visualization tools vary in usability and many suffer limited adoption.Challenges include data quality, access, and limits of human cognition and technology.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Visualization,Infectious disease,Public health,Disease surveillance,GIS,Social network analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundA myriad of new tools and algorithms have been developed to help public health professionals analyze and visualize the complex data used in infectious disease control. To better understand approaches to meet these users’ information needs, we conducted a systematic literature review focused on the landscape of infectious disease visualization tools for public health professionals, with a special emphasis on geographic information systems (GIS), molecular epidemiology, and social network analysis. The objectives of this review are to: (1) identify public health user needs and preferences for infectious disease information visualization tools; (2) identify existing infectious disease information visualization tools and characterize their architecture and features; (3) identify commonalities among approaches applied to different data types; and (4) describe tool usability evaluation efforts and barriers to the adoption of such tools.MethodsWe identified articles published in English from January 1, 1980 to June 30, 2013 from five bibliographic databases. Articles with a primary focus on infectious disease visualization tools, needs of public health users, or usability of information visualizations were included in the review.ResultsA total of 88 articles met our inclusion criteria. Users were found to have diverse needs, preferences and uses for infectious disease visualization tools, and the existing tools are correspondingly diverse. The architecture of the tools was inconsistently described, and few tools in the review discussed the incorporation of usability studies or plans for dissemination. Many studies identified concerns regarding data sharing, confidentiality and quality. Existing tools offer a range of features and functions that allow users to explore, analyze, and visualize their data, but the tools are often for siloed applications. Commonly cited barriers to widespread adoption included lack of organizational support, access issues, and misconceptions about tool use.Discussion and conclusionAs the volume and complexity of infectious disease data increases, public health professionals must synthesize highly disparate data to facilitate communication with the public and inform decisions regarding measures to protect the public’s health. Our review identified several themes: consideration of users’ needs, preferences, and computer literacy; integration of tools into routine workflow; complications associated with understanding and use of visualizations; and the role of user trust and organizational support in the adoption of these tools. Interoperability also emerged as a prominent theme, highlighting challenges associated with the increasingly collaborative and interdisciplinary nature of infectious disease control and prevention. Future work should address methods for representing uncertainty and missing data to avoid misleading users as well as strategies to minimize cognitive overload.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the last 20years, an increasing focus on the need for informatics and analytics in public health has resulted in a growing investment in information systems [1–7]. This investment has generated a myriad of new tools for different public health activities and jurisdictions, including tools and systems developed by federal, state and local governments, as well as research organizations [8–12]. Advances in electronic reporting and interoperability, computer technology, biotechnology (e.g. genetic sequencing), and other methods (e.g. social network analysis and geographic information systems) have put pressure on the informatics discipline and public health practitioners alike to translate these advances into common practice [1,7,13,14]. This pressure has been particularly acute for the surveillance and management of infectious diseases with pandemic or bioterrorism potential [7,15–17].To characterize the variety of tools and analytical approaches developed for infectious disease control, we conducted a systematic literature review of informatics tools for infectious diseases, with a focus on platforms for information visualization. In this review, we assessed the current landscape of these tools in terms of information needs and user preferences, features and system architectures of existing tools, as well as usability and adoption considerations. Due to the challenges of integrating, analyzing, and displaying public health data, particularly new types of data encountered in public health, this review places a special emphasis on efforts to visualize geographic information systems (GIS), molecular epidemiology, and social networks.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
