@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The need for harmonized structured documentation and chances of secondary use – Results of a systematic analysis with automated form comparison for prostate and breast cancer

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We analyzed and quantified data elements of prostate and breast cancer forms.Automated comparison of medical forms from different settings is feasible.This allowed a detection of similarities between documentation requirements.Top 30 common concepts were determined in the documentation of both cancer entities.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Semantic interoperability,Automated form comparison,Common data elements,Secondary use,Standardization,Clinical documentation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
IntroductionMedical documentation is a time-consuming task and there is a growing number of documentation requirements. In order to improve documentation, harmonization and standardization based on existing forms and medical concepts are needed. Systematic analysis of forms can contribute to standardization building upon new methods for automated comparison of forms. Objectives of this research are quantification and comparison of data elements for breast and prostate cancer to discover similarities, differences and reuse potential between documentation sets. In addition, common data elements for each entity should be identified by automated comparison of forms.Materials and methodsA collection of 57 forms regarding prostate and breast cancer from quality management, registries, clinical documentation of two university hospitals (Erlangen, Münster), research datasets, certification requirements and trial documentation were transformed into the Operational Data Model (ODM). These ODM-files were semantically enriched with concept codes and analyzed with the compareODM algorithm. Comparison results were aggregated and lists of common concepts were generated. Grid images, dendrograms and spider charts were used for illustration.ResultsOverall, 1008 data elements for prostate cancer and 1232 data elements for breast cancer were analyzed. Average routine documentation consists of 390 data elements per disease entity and site. Comparisons of forms identified up to 20 comparable data elements in cancer conference forms from both hospitals. Urology forms contain up to 53 comparable data elements with quality management and up to 21 with registry forms. Urology documentation of both hospitals contains up to 34 comparable items with international common data elements. Clinical documentation sets share up to 24 comparable data elements with trial documentation. Within clinical documentation administrative items are most common comparable items. Selected common medical concepts are contained in up to 16 forms.DiscussionThe amount of documentation for cancer patients is enormous. There is an urgent need for standardized structured single source documentation. Semantic annotation is time-consuming, but enables automated comparison between different form types, hospital sites and even languages. This approach can help to identify common data elements in medical documentation. Standardization of forms and building up forms on the basis of coding systems is desirable. Several comparable data elements within the analyzed forms demonstrate the harmonization potential, which would enable better data reuse.ConclusionIdentifying common data elements in medical forms from different settings with systematic and automated form comparison is feasible.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Medical documentation is a required, but time-consuming task and therefore in the focus of health informatics research. The official journal of the German Medical Association titled 2009 one article “Documentation in medicine – it is a madness” [1] and addressed the problem of documentation reality. There is high documentation workload and a huge variety of forms for different purposes with redundant data capture.The documentation process is very complex and sophisticated especially in oncology. Nevertheless, there is a lack of standardization which results in a huge variety of different forms in hospitals even for the same disease areas. This work is focused on the analysis of documentation items2Items and data elements are treated as synonyms.2of widespread cancer diseases. Prostate cancer is the most common cancer (other than skin cancer) among American men and breast cancer the second leading cause of cancer-related death in women [2,3]. Both cancer documentation sets consist of many forms from different sources and contain also redundant items. It was reported previously that e.g. for breast cancer up to 65% of data elements are gathered redundantly [4]. An optimization of this documentation process is desirable because documentation should burden the physician as few as possible [5].This becomes even more relevant as physicians spend more than 25% of their daily working time for documentation tasks and hereby almost as much time as for direct patient care [6,7]. These numbers only consider routine documentation within a hospital. In addition, parallel and redundant documentation for quality management, registries and clinical research increase the physicians’ workload.The documentation for these different purposes is in large part done within different systems and structures. “The existence of parallel independent documentation systems leads to a tremendous workload, and thus hinders acceptance among physicians” [8]. Patient care forms usually consist of many free-text elements, whereas research and registry-forms are highly structured.Studies show that there is a re-use potential for these purposes if the original information is documented in a structured way [9]. Prokosch reviewed the potential of reusing the electronic health record (EHR) [10] and Kush introduced documentation according to the single-source concept to reduce the physician’s workload [11]. Further projects in this context demonstrate the high potential of this research field [12].Without secondary use and structured documentation a lot of resources are needed to fulfill the documentation requirements for research and registries. This documentation is up until today usually performed by manual review of clinical free-text. This is an inefficient and error-prone process because the same information needs to be documented two or three times (e.g. writing of physician’s letter and extracting information from it to complete quality management forms). A similar aspect can be observed in the context of clinical studies, as Getz reported that the “protocol designs are becoming more demanding and burdensome on investigative site personnel”. Between 1999 and 2005 the workload for research increased by 10.5% per year [13].At the moment many studies are dealing with optimization of electronic medical records (EMR) or electronic health record (EHR) systems but there is still a lack of documentation standardization which leads to heterogeneity in data representation [14].Future work has to focus not only on the improvement of EHR systems but on the standardization of medical forms and their data items and to provide documentation standards that meet the different purposes by a single source documentation system. This need is emphasized by Ries et al., who analyzed oncological documentation in Germany and concluded that “none of the existing German cancer datasets (e.g. ADT or GEKID) meets clinical documentation reality” [8].Therefore, a systematic analysis is needed to identify common concepts and elements based upon documentation reality. To identify redundant documentation items it is necessary to compare and harmonize medical data items. Semantic enriched data items can enable automated comparison. Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine (SNOMED) [15] or Unified Medical Language Systems (UMLS) [16] are very important in this context [17].This work applies and extends compareODM, a recently published method to compare coded forms [18]. In contrast to the previous paper, this research goes beyond comparison of two forms and addresses a systematic analysis of the documentation landscape from two major disease entities at two university hospital sites including routine documentation, quality management, certification, research and cancer registration on the basis of real forms. Therefore, new methods to compare and visualize groups of forms were applied, for example spider charts. It was required to extend the compareODM method to conduct these analyses: the comparison of code lists (value lists) was integrated and the output of compareODM was enhanced for statistical analysis. With the compareODM Paper [18] the feasibility to compare two given ODM-forms was demonstrated. In the current research common data elements in tumor documentation for two chosen diseases were analyzed and identified.To our knowledge, an analysis of such amount of forms from clinical documentation is not available in the literature. Results of this paper are precise lists of data elements and can contribute to improved information systems.The scope of this work is an assessment of standardization opportunities based on a systematic and automated comparison of oncological forms in the context of prostate and breast cancer. It is well known that standardization can lead to better interoperability [19].The overall objective of this work is to analyze the current documentation landscape for two cancer entities, breast and prostate cancer. Specifically, we want to address the following research questions:1.Is it possible to quantify the amount of forms and data elements?Is there a chance of reusing elements for secondary use purposes?Which similarities exist between documentation for quality management, registries, research and clinical routine?What are the differences between clinical routine documentation in two German university hospitals?What are the top 30 common data elements for each disease entity?The documentation landscape of two common cancer entities (breast and prostate cancer) was analyzed to determine currently used data elements. For both diseases there exist structured forms.Medical forms for these cancers entities were collected from two university hospitals (Erlangen and Münster), e.g. forms for medical history, forms regarding surgery and different types of treatment (see Fig. 2). In addition, a web search for available forms and datasets has been performed from September until November 2012. National and international cancer registries, forms for quality management and certification as well as different research datasets (e.g. international common data elements, clinical trial documentation) were collected and analyzed.Fig. 1 describes the form collection process. 86 potential forms were identified and collected from different sources. Outdated and no longer used forms were excluded (13 forms). In a next step forms with only administrative items or only very specific items were excluded. Another three forms had to be excluded, because these consisted e.g. mainly of graphics. Finally, one form had to be excluded due to a missing permission. The full list of included forms is available in the Supplement (Supplement file 1).All collected forms were transformed into the CDISC Operational Data Model (ODM) [20], which is a standardized XML-format. For this transformation all data items from those forms were extracted manually and described by a data type (e.g. boolean, string), an item name and a concept code. These manually created element-lists were converted into the final ODM-files with the ODMconverter software (available on http://cran.r-project.org[21]). All data items of each form had to be coded with terminology codes to enable automated comparison. Automated comparison requires structured and coded forms and can be performed by a computer in contrast to elaborate manual comparison by humans. In the following “automated form comparison” refers to form comparison by the presented algorithm. Coding was performed by a medical expert (RK).Data items were coded with several existing coding systems, in particular UMLS and SNOMED CT. All forms were uploaded into the portal of medical data models (http://www.medical-data-models.org). The list of form URLs is available in the Supplement (Supplement file 1).NCI Metathesaurus [22] was used to identify suitable codes. The best-fitting medical concept was identified and the semantic type (procedure, finding, body part, etc.) was also taken into account.If an item could not be represented by a single precoordinated code, different codes were assigned using postcoordination to represent the concept (For example: “date of diagnosis tumor finding”→tumor finding (C1274082) and date of diagnosis (C2316983)). If the information and definition of a code were not sufficient within NCI Metathesaurus additional information about SNOMED Codes within CliniClue® Xplore [23] were used, for example: two different SNOMED Codes linked to one UMLS Code: zoledronic acid (C0257685) linked to: zoledronic acid PT 134600006 – type=pharmaceutical/biological product and to: zoledronic acid PT 395926009–type=substance).All ODM-forms were loaded into a database. Statistical analyses were performed with SPSS [24] to determine the number of forms and items.Documentation sources are characterized and classified according to the process in which they are used. Empty documentation forms were collected from sources of the following four categories in order to cover all relevant documentation elements. At this point only a short overview is presented. A detailed description and characterization of individual forms can be found within the Supplement (Supplement file 2) as well as a full list of material (Supplement file 1). Afterwards the forms are referenced with their file names. The file names are mentioned in italic letters without file extension (“.xml”).•Routine documentation forms from two university hospitals (Münster, Erlangen).•Breast cancer (14 forms).Prostate cancer (17 forms).Registries.•Epidemiologic Cancer Registry North-Rhine Westphalia (EpiNRW) [25].Dataset of the Society of Epidemiological Cancer Registries in Germany (GEKID) [26].Finish Cancer Registry (Finish_registry) [27].Certification & quality management documents: 20 forms.•ADT3Association of German Cancer Centers, ADT [28].3– Basic Cancer Documentation [29].ONDIS: oncologic aftercare, documentation and information system [30].Prostate cancer center certification by German Cancer Society (Onkozert_prostate).Quality assurance program for breast cancer centers in the State of North Rhine-Westphalia (Certification_breast).AQUA4AQUA-Institut GmbH (AQUA) [31].4: Statutory Mandatory Quality Management: questionnaire for breast surgery (AQUA_breast) [32].Research documentation.•Dataset: “Deutsches Prostatakarzinom Konsortium e.V.” (DPKK) [33], a cross-institutional research network on prostate cancer (DPKK_prostate).Dataset: Common data elements from CPCTR (Cooperative Prostate Cancer Tissue Resource) (CDE_prostate) [34].Trial documentation: ALTTO (Adjuvant Lapatinib And/Or Trastuzumab Treatment Optimization) (NCT00490139) [35].All forms were arranged in a timeline (Fig. 2) to provide an overview of the context in which the included forms are used. Documents were mapped to general workflow steps (medical history, diagnostic, therapy decision, therapy, aftercare). Documents that are not bound to a specific point in time were listed separately. The mapping to the workflow is also available with full details in the Supplement (Supplement file 1).The coded ODM-forms were compared using compareODM[18]. A basic version for comparison of two ODM-files is available on http://cran.r-project.org[36]. Within this analysis an extended version of compareODM was implemented that is able to work with a set of forms. We added the comparison of code lists (value lists) and prepared the output for statistical analyses.The extended R-source code is available in the Supplement (Supplement file 14). Within compareODM “two items are called identical if item name, concept code and value domain are the same. Two items are called matching if item names are different but concept codes and value domain are the same. Two items are called similar if their concept codes are the same but value domains are different.” [18]. Forms were compared to determine common data elements between different health care facilities and to examine the overlap with registry and quality management documents.Resulting lists of matching and similar items demonstrate the actual harmonization potential and show common concepts within actually used forms. Similar items indicate that an automated data exchange maybe possible, if the different value sets can be transformed accordingly [18].Within the scope of this work the focus is set on comparable items. These are defined as the aggregation of identical, matching and similar items. This aggregation was performed due to the complexity of prostate cancer and breast cancer form sets and especially for visualization and determination of common medical concepts needed. To determine coverage, the number of different concepts within the list of comparable items was divided by the lower number of items of involved forms.The numbers of comparable data elements between different forms and relations of forms are illustrated with different types of visualization. To extend the compareODM approach with dendrograms and grid images and to manage the complexity of form comparisons, spider charts for the illustration of the relations within groups of forms were added. With this illustration two groups of forms are compared: One group is plotted clockwise around and the other forms are each plotted with a curve of different color. Curves represent the number of comparable items regarding two corresponding forms. Spider charts were created with Microsoft Excel®.Form analysis was performed separately for each entity in the following steps:1.Comparison of routine documentation of both hospitals.Comparison of routine documentation of both hospitals with certification & quality management forms.Comparison of routine documentation with different registry forms.Comparison of routine documentation with research documentation.Focus was set to pairwise comparison of forms with high number of comparable items and high relevance from a medical point of view. Different documentation standards (CDE_prostate, registries and clinical trial documentation) were analyzed and set in relation to each other.Identification of common data elements for breast and prostate cancer was done by semantic enrichment (coding of data items) of collected forms, descriptive analyses (most frequent elements) as well as systematic and automated form comparisons.Automated form comparison was performed with an extended version of compareODM and results in matrices with all concepts that are identical, matching or similar within the comparisons. This output was analyzed with SPSS [24] and Microsoft Excel® to determine the top 30 common concepts for prostate and breast cancer. Results were presented in tabular format with absolute and relative frequencies as well as associated UMLS concepts.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
