@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-label classification of chronically ill patients with bag of words and supervised dimensionality reduction algorithms

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study discrete medical time series datasets with multi-label classification.We focus on chronically ill patients with multiple illnesses.We use Bag of Words quantization on medical time series.We compare multi-label classification and dimensionality reduction algorithms.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi-label classification,Complex patient,Diabetes type 2,Clinical data,Dimensionality reduction,Kernel methods,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveThis research is motivated by the issue of classifying illnesses of chronically ill patients for decision support in clinical settings. Our main objective is to propose multi-label classification of multivariate time series contained in medical records of chronically ill patients, by means of quantization methods, such as bag of words (BoW), and multi-label classification algorithms. Our second objective is to compare supervised dimensionality reduction techniques to state-of-the-art multi-label classification algorithms. The hypothesis is that kernel methods and locality preserving projections make such algorithms good candidates to study multi-label medical time series.MethodsWe combine BoW and supervised dimensionality reduction algorithms to perform multi-label classification on health records of chronically ill patients. The considered algorithms are compared with state-of-the-art multi-label classifiers in two real world datasets. Portavita dataset contains 525 diabetes type 2 (DT2) patients, with co-morbidities of DT2 such as hypertension, dyslipidemia, and microvascular or macrovascular issues. MIMIC II dataset contains 2635 patients affected by thyroid disease, diabetes mellitus, lipoid metabolism disease, fluid electrolyte disease, hypertensive disease, thrombosis, hypotension, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), liver disease and kidney disease. The algorithms are evaluated using multi-label evaluation metrics such as hamming loss, one error, coverage, ranking loss, and average precision.ResultsNon-linear dimensionality reduction approaches behave well on medical time series quantized using the BoW algorithm, with results comparable to state-of-the-art multi-label classification algorithms. Chaining the projected features has a positive impact on the performance of the algorithm with respect to pure binary relevance approaches.ConclusionsThe evaluation highlights the feasibility of representing medical health records using the BoW for multi-label classification tasks. The study also highlights that dimensionality reduction algorithms based on kernel methods, locality preserving projections or both are good candidates to deal with multi-label classification tasks in medical time series with many missing values and high label density.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The average lifespan has increased considerably due to the invention of better drugs and improvement of healthcare, but the rate of chronic illnesses per patient has also increased, becoming a burden for the economy of industrialized and emerging countries [1].The interaction between chronic illnesses and multiple drugs intake make the patient treatment complex to handle for caregivers. The possibility of taking informed decisions about complex patients is important to slow down the development of their illnesses.Unfortunately, doctors have to take decisions whose consequences will be evaluated only after years of treatment. Furthermore, given the growth in number of chronically ill patients, caregivers are often in charge of hundreds of patients [2]. In addition, patient electronic health records (EHR) often contain the evolution in time of the patient clinical data, which are high dimensional multivariate time series of physiological values.As reported in [3], physicians would use services that improve their understanding of an illness even if these involve more cognitive effort than in the standard practice. In particular, in the medical informatics and data mining community [4,5] it has already been discussed that classifying patients given their physiological values and laboratory tests may help caregivers’ decision making process.This paper is motivated by the problem of classifying patients affected by multiple illnesses to enhance the decision support of medical doctors. There are two challenges to overcome in order to define a system capable to correctly classify the multiple illnesses that may affect a chronically ill patient: (a) dealing with irregular multivariate time series; and (b) dealing with the interaction of multiple co-morbidities in a heterogeneous population of patients.The presence of high dimensional and multivariate data presents a big challenge to standard classification algorithms due to the curse of dimensionality [6]. Clinical time series are often irregular, a patient may present different number of records with respect to another patient and the periods of time in which the values are collected may not be aligned. The challenge is even more difficult if we consider the inherently multi-label properties of medical data, where a patient may present multiple co-morbidities at once.Concerning irregular time series, quantization algorithms, such as the Bag of Words (BoW) model, have proven successful in several medical tasks [7].As a matter of fact, BoW is often used in biomedical time series. In [7], Wang et al. present an application of the BoW model to EEG and ECG signals. Similarly to us, the authors of [7] are faced with the issue of time series of different length with possibly heterogeneous patients at hand.Jiu et al. present a supervised approach towards BoW codebook generation using neural networks in [8]. In particular, the approach uses Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLP) and the backpropagation algorithm to update the weights of the codewords according to their discrimination capabilities with respect to a set of classes.Similarly to [8], in [9] Ordonez et al. present a modification of the BoW model to classify medical time series. Such a model uses continuous multivariate time series to compute a symbolic representation of the signals that is then used as the codebook for the classification of the patients.Concerning multi-label classification algorithms, an extensive review can be found in [10]. Multi-label learning [11] implies training sets where each instance has a labelset and the task is to predict the labelset of unseen instances. As reported in [10], there exist works that combine supervised dimensionality reduction with multi-label learning [12–14]. Furthermore, most of these works focus on applying multi-label techniques on text analysis with static datasets [15].In general terms multi-label classification of complex patients in discrete medical time series is quite an unexplored issue. Firstly, we think that the main contribution of this paper is to propose the combination of BoW, to quantize irregular time series present in patient health records, and multi-label classification algorithms, to classify the chronic illnesses that a patient may present. These are two established techniques, but in medical settings their combination is quite novel.Secondly, we believe that this contribution is interesting to biomedical informatics as we evaluate linear and non-linear supervised dimensionality reduction approaches with respect to multi-label classification in medical time series, and we compare these approaches with state-of-the-art multi-label classification algorithms. In doing this, we aim at identifying the most effective supervised dimensionality reduction techniques with respect to medical time series. We aim to confirm the hypothesis that, given the nature of the data at hand, non-linear supervised dimensionality reduction algorithms have a behavior comparable to state of the art multi-label classifiers.Thirdly, our contribution is also of interest to biomedical research because we perform our evaluation against two real world medical datasets: the Portavita dataset, provided for this study by the Portavita company,1www.portavita.eu.1containing 525 diabetic patients presenting, sometimes simultaneously, hypertension, dyslipidemia or microvascular and macrovascular complications of diabetes type 2 (DT2) [16]; an extraction of 2635 patients from the public MIMIC II database [17], where we consider patients affected simultaneously by thyroid disease, diabetes mellitus, lipoid metabolism disease, fluid electrolyte disease, hypertensive disease, thrombosis, hypotension, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), liver disease and kidney disease.The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents a background on multi-label classification, kernel methods, and supervised dimensionality reduction algorithms; Section 3 presents the Portavita and MIMIC II datasets and their properties; Section 4 presents the training schema for the attempted multi-label classification algorithms; Section 5 presents an evaluation for the multi-label algorithms considered in this paper; finally, Section 6 concludes this paper and draws the lines for future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we studied the combination of the BoW model in medical time series with dimensionality reduction approaches for multi-label patient classification. When taking the Portavita dataset into consideration, the KLFDA algorithm with a nearest centroid classifier achieves the best results. In the MIMIC II dataset, dimensionality reduction algorithms are comparable to state-of-the-art multi-label classification algorithms, but suffer from the fact that the dataset is imbalanced.There are several possible extensions to this work. At the moment we are using a single kernel mapping, but extensions of KLFDA and KDA that work with multiple kernel learning have already been defined [40]. Multiple kernels could achieve a better mapping for our data and improve the precision of KLFDA and KDA.Another promising approach could be to develop a multi-label version of KLFDA and KDA, similarly to what is proposed in [41]. This would require modifying the definition of the scatter matrices in KLFDA and KDA to consider multiple labels, which is quite a challenging problem.In Section 3, we identified the issue of dealing with values sampled at different frequencies. Quantizing patient data with different sampling frequencies or considering descriptive statistics rather than a codebook, could be suitable approaches. Finally, we could apply a different substitution to LOCF and generate physiological values with a maximum likelihood model, provided that enough patients’ records are available.