@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Uncovering influence links in molecular knowledge networks to streamline personalized medicine

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
RIIG infers influence relations among biomarker proteins and biological pathways.RIIG uncovers patient-specific complex relationships among biological entities.RIIG facilitates finding effective drug targets in a personalized medicine setting.RIIG bridges curated biomedical knowledge and causal reasoning with clinical data.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
RDF inference,Morphoproteomics,Systems pathology,Theranostics,Personalized medicine,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectivesWe developed Resource Description Framework (RDF)-induced InfluGrams (RIIG) – an informatics formalism to uncover complex relationships among biomarker proteins and biological pathways using the biomedical knowledge bases. We demonstrate an application of RIIG in morphoproteomics, a theranostic technique aimed at comprehensive analysis of protein circuitries to design effective therapeutic strategies in personalized medicine setting.MethodsRIIG uses an RDF “mashup” knowledge base that integrates publicly available pathway and protein data with ontologies. To mine for RDF-induced Influence Links, RIIG introduces notions of RDF relevancy and RDF collider, which mimic conditional independence and “explaining away” mechanism in probabilistic systems. Using these notions and constraint-based structure learning algorithms, the formalism generates the morphoproteomic diagrams, which we call InfluGrams, for further analysis by experts.ResultsRIIG was able to recover up to 90% of predefined influence links in a simulated environment using synthetic data and outperformed a naïve Monte Carlo sampling of random links. In clinical cases of Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL) and Mesenchymal Chondrosarcoma, a significant level of concordance between the RIIG-generated and expert-built morphoproteomic diagrams was observed. In a clinical case of Squamous Cell Carcinoma, RIIG allowed selection of alternative therapeutic targets, the validity of which was supported by a systematic literature review. We have also illustrated an ability of RIIG to discover novel influence links in the general case of the ALL.ConclusionsApplications of the RIIG formalism demonstrated its potential to uncover patient-specific complex relationships among biological entities to find effective drug targets in a personalized medicine setting. We conclude that RIIG provides an effective means not only to streamline morphoproteomic studies, but also to bridge curated biomedical knowledge and causal reasoning with the clinical data in general.Recent advances in “omics” technologies and decades of omics-based research have resulted in generation of vast amounts of biomedical knowledge. This knowledge is expected to greatly improve patient care by addressing disease complexity and heterogeneity in the personalized medicine setting [1]. However, the complexity and fast growth of such knowledge make it intractable for the majority of medical practitioners, thus undermining its practical utility in medicine. Mental retention of large number of up-to-date facts, ability to quickly retrieve the most relevant to the case information and interpret inconsistencies of reported basic sciences discoveries are big stumbling blocks on the way of effective utilization of omics-derived knowledge at the bedside[2].This phenomenon can be illustrated by an example from medical fields of diagnostics and therapeutics, jointly known as theranostics[3]. Over the last several decades, pathologists have been using immunohistochemistry (IHC) [4] to identify expression of aberrantly expressed disease-associated genes [4–8]. These proteomic biomarkers have served as valuable diagnostic cues: from confirming the presence of certain cell types to staging and grading tumors and elucidating cancer phenotypes. Recently, it was proposed to exploit IHC protein expression patterns on histopathological slides to infer activation of molecular pathways and to guide individual therapies [9]. The technique, termed as morphoproteomics, provides a more systemic picture of involved biological mechanisms than traditional approaches. It can identify patient-specific drug target candidates, predict susceptibility to small-molecule inhibitors and explain resistance to conventional drug treatments. The potential of morphoproteomics to improve therapeutics in a personalized medicine setting has been demonstrated in a number of studies [9–27]. This method can now be viewed as an implementation of the new medical paradigm of theranostics, where approaches from diagnostics and therapeutics are merged to produce better clinical outcomes.There are, however, several obstacles in the way of widespread acceptance of morphoproteomics. First, the current set of antibody reagents routinely employed for IHC studies in the usual surgical pathology laboratory to identify the presence of proteins and other biomarkers in intra- and inter-cellular space is quite large. The classic reference textbook, “Rosai and Ackerman’s Surgical Pathology”, briefly describes the significance of over 250 antigens useful in general pathology and an additional 30 for hematopoietic diseases. They recommend that the standard surgical pathology laboratory be able to provide staining with approximately 90 antibody reagents in house [28]. Assuming only two states of protein expression regardless of its cellular location, the expert analysis of all possible combinations for even a half dozen of such proteins can be very challenging (2^6=64 combinations). Second, as discussed in [29], if one takes into account the cellular location of protein expression (e.g. nuclear expression of phosphorylated NF-kappa-B vs cytoplasmic) and consider more than just two states of its expression, even a small increase in the number of proteins in the study quickly would result in a combinatorial explosion of the data that is hard to overcome. Reliable identification of the relevant pathways in this scenario is challenging because each such protein expression pattern can manifest a different activation pattern of biological pathways. This all creates a significant barrier for pathologists to use morphoproteomics. A comprehensive theranostic study in many cases is infeasible due to limitations of individual practitioners’ knowledge of biological processes. An inter-expert collaboration, while being able to expand the knowledge space to a certain extent, is still not an effective way to overcome this challenge. It is difficult even for a group of pathologists to recreate a more or less holistic picture of activated pathways based on the clinical data.One of the ways to overcoming the above-discussed problems is to leverage biomedical knowledge stored in “omics” knowledge bases (KB), a variety of which has been generated and made publicly available. Data from the well-known sources of biological information including pathways data from Reactome [30], BioCarta [31], BioCyc [32], NCI PID [33], protein data from UniProt [34], HPRD [35] can be obtained in Resource Description Framework (RDF) format [36] directly from vendors’ website. In other cases, data are available in XML format but can be readily transformed into RDF using custom ontologies as it was done in [37]. There have been a number of works showing the benefits of Semantic Web technologies to translational science and personalized medicine [38–48] such as, for instance, logical language of RDF/N3 extension [49–51].Moreover, the development of comprehensive biomedical ontologies made it possible to combine RDF data into so-called integrated “mashup” knowledge bases. RDF-based query languages such as SPARQL [52] together with description logic and rule-based languages such as OWL [53] and SWRL [54] have been shown to utilize the RDF “mashup” KBs to uncover complex relations among different types of biological entities to generate novel hypotheses (for an example see [55]).However, it might be challenging to use the “mashup” KBs directly in personalized medicine setting and particularly in morphoproteomics. While it is relatively trivial to utilize SPARQL queries for retrieval of relevant biological facts, the results of such one-at-a-time queries may still lack sufficient explanatory power for clinical decision-making. There is a need for a methodology that will allow generation of a mechanistic picture of biological processes that explains clinical findings and fits all pieces of the puzzle together. To address these challenges, we have developed RDF-induced InfluGrams (RIIG), a novel informatics formalism that generates morphoproteomics diagrams by mining an RDF “mashup” knowledge base of curated biological knowledge constructed from publicly available online KBs (e.g. Reactome [56]). RIIG formalism treats active state of biomarker proteins as manifestation of related biological mechanisms and recreates a holistic view of their influence inter-relationships for theranostic purposes. The Methods section provides a description of the key elements of RIIG formalism and its implementation (more details of the RIIG formalism are available in Supplementary Materials (SM)).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
