@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Interoperability of clinical decision-support systems and electronic health records using archetypes: A case study in clinical trial eligibility

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Archetypes can be used to carry forward the idea of VHRs with clinical models, to achieve interoperability.They can be used as a homogeneous framework for modelling (arbitrarily complex and abstract) clinical concepts from CDSSs.As result, a set of interrelated archetype models (with knowledge-intensive mappings) are obtained.These archetype models can be reused to a large extent, in CDSSs or in other systems.CDSSs can benefit from using these archetype models for the interaction with the EHR, increasing their reuse chances.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Clinical decision support systems,Electronic health records,Systems integration,Clinical trials,Terminology,SNOMED CT,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Clinical decision-support systems (CDSSs) comprise systems as diverse as sophisticated platforms to store and manage clinical data, tools to alert clinicians of problematic situations, or decision-making tools to assist clinicians. Irrespective of the kind of decision-support task CDSSs should be smoothly integrated within the clinical information system, interacting with other components, in particular with the electronic health record (EHR). However, despite decades of developments, most CDSSs lack interoperability features.We deal with the interoperability problem of CDSSs and EHRs by exploiting the dual-model methodology. This methodology distinguishes a reference model and archetypes. A reference model is represented by a stable and small object-oriented model that describes the generic properties of health record information. For their part, archetypes are reusable and domain-specific definitions of clinical concepts in the form of structured and constrained combinations of the entities of the reference model. We rely on archetypes to make the CDSS compatible with EHRs from different institutions. Concretely, we use archetypes for modelling the clinical concepts that the CDSS requires, in conjunction with a series of knowledge-intensive mappings relating the archetypes to the data sources (EHR and/or other archetypes) they depend on.We introduce a comprehensive approach, including a set of tools as well as methodological guidelines, to deal with the interoperability of CDSSs and EHRs based on archetypes. Archetypes are used to build a conceptual layer of the kind of a virtual health record (VHR) over the EHR whose contents need to be integrated and used in the CDSS, associating them with structural and terminology-based semantics. Subsequently, the archetypes are mapped to the EHR by means of an expressive mapping language and specific-purpose tools. We also describe a case study where the tools and methodology have been employed in a CDSS to support patient recruitment in the framework of a clinical trial for colorectal cancer screening.The utilisation of archetypes not only has proved satisfactory to achieve interoperability between CDSSs and EHRs but also offers various advantages, in particular from a data model perspective. First, the VHR/data models we work with are of a high level of abstraction and can incorporate semantic descriptions. Second, archetypes can potentially deal with different EHR architectures, due to their deliberate independence of the reference model. Third, the archetype instances we obtain are valid instances of the underlying reference model, which would enable e.g. feeding back the EHR with data derived by abstraction mechanisms. Lastly, the medical and technical validity of archetype models would be assured, since in principle clinicians should be the main actors in their development.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A clinical decision-support system (CDSS) can be defined as “any computer program designed to help health professionals make clinical decision” [1]. This definition encompasses systems as diverse as sophisticated platforms to store and manage clinical data, tools to alert clinicians of problematic situations (e.g. drug-drug interactions), or decision-making tools to assist clinicians by providing patient-specific recommendations. In a broader sense, other systems which use clinical data to support decisions not directly related to patient care can also be considered to be CDSSs. Systems to support patient recruitment for clinical research trials are a representative example of such CDSSs.Irrespective of the kind of decision-support task, ideally CDSSs should be smoothly integrated into the computer tools that are routinely used by clinicians, and more importantly they should be able to operate without the manual entry of data already entered using some other system [1]. This implies some interaction with other components of the clinical information system, in particular with the electronic health record (EHR) to access all the clinical data required. However, after more than 3 decades of developments most of CDSSs have been either stand-alone systems or small components embedded within EHR or physician order entry systems [1,2].An important problem is the heterogeneity of clinical data sources, which may differ in the data models, schemas, naming conventions, and degree of detail used to represent similar data [3]. On the other hand, CDSSs very often require data at a level of abstraction higher than raw clinical data, a problem which has been referred to as the “impedance mismatch” between the CDSS and the EHR [4,5]. There have been several initiatives, involving standardisation bodies, to define generic EHR architectures for the communication of health data, such as CEN/ISO EN13606 [6], openEHR [7], HL7 CDA [8], or CDISC ODM [9]. However, their use is not widespread in current CDSSs.One of the main contributions of recent EHR architectures is the dual-model methodology[10] for the description of the structure and semantics of health data. The dual model methodology distinguishes a reference model and archetypes. A reference model is represented by a stable and small object-oriented model that describes the generic properties of health record information (such as folder, document, section, and audit). The generality of the reference model (RM) is complemented by the particularity of archetypes. An archetype is a detailed, reusable and domain-specific definition of a clinical concept (such as Apgar score, discharge report, and primary care EHR) in the form of a structured and constrained combination of the entities of the RM. The principal purpose of archetypes is to provide a powerful way of managing the description, creation, validation and querying of EHRs. From a data point of view, archetypes are a means for providing structural and terminology-based semantics to data instances that conform to some RM.We deal with the interoperability problem of CDSSs and EHRs by exploiting dual-model EHR architectures. In previous articles we propose a solution that exploits openEHR archetypes for the interoperability of CDSSs based on clinical guidelines [11,12]. In this article we take a further step and describe the implementation of a prototype that demonstrates the feasibility of our proposal. The prototype is based on a case study dealing with the determination of patient eligibility in a clinical trial (CT) for colorectal cancer screening. Typically, both clinical guideline recommendations and CT eligibility criteria are intended to be shared across different institutions, at national or even at international level, and thus the standardised access to the EHR becomes a pressing need in CDSSs for these purposes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this article we introduce a comprehensive approach, including a set of tools as well as methodological guidelines, to deal with the interoperability of CDSSs and EHRs based on archetypes. Archetypes are used to build a conceptual layer of the kind of a VHR over the EHR whose contents need to be integrated and used in the CDSS, associating them with structural and terminology-based semantics–what might be termed knowledge-rich clinical models based on archetypes. Subsequently, the archetypes are mapped to the EHR by means of an expressive mapping language and specific-purpose tools. In the article we also describe a case study where the tools and methodology have been employed in a CDSS to support patient recruitment in the framework of a CT for colorectal cancer screening.The utilisation of archetypes not only has proved satisfactory to achieve interoperability between CDSSs and EHRs but also offers benefits of varying nature. From a data model perspective, the utilisation of archetypes brings about several advantages over similar initiatives. First, the VHR/data models we work with are of a higher level of abstraction (clinical concept level instead of RM one) and can incorporate semantic descriptions (through terminology references). Second, archetypes can potentially deal with different EHR architectures (e.g. CEN/ISO EN13606, openEHR or HL7 CDA), due to their deliberate independence of the RM. Third, no matter what RM is used, the archetype instances we obtain are valid instances of the underlying RM, which would enable e.g. feeding back the EHR with data derived by abstraction mechanisms. Lastly, the medical and technical validity of archetype models would be assured, since in principle clinicians should be the main actors in their development.In the future we intend to work on different kinds of enhancements to our approach. On one hand we plan to integrate methodologies and tools to deal with an explicit domain (or concept) model, as well as with the interactions thereof with the archetype (or information) model, in line with the conceptual framework proposed by Rector [47]. On the other hand we envisage to deal with efficiency issues, to ensure that the response time when handling realistic clinical databases is affordable. Also related to the functionalities of our tools, we plan to address the bidirectional interaction of the CDSS with the clinical information system, e.g. the CDSS feedback to the EHR which has been mentioned above.