@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Comparing different knowledge sources for the automatic summarization of biomedical literature

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Automatic summarization may help biomedical researchers manage information overload.Biomedical summarization systems make use of domain knowledge from external sources.We show that the selection and representation of this knowledge has a significant impact on performance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Biomedical knowledge sources,Unified Medical Language System,Semantic graph,Automatic summarization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Objective:Automatic summarization of biomedical literature usually relies on domain knowledge from external sources to build rich semantic representations of the documents to be summarized. In this paper, we investigate the impact of the knowledge source used on the quality of the summaries that are generated.Materials and methods:We present a method for representing a set of documents relevant to a given biological entity or topic as a semantic graph of domain concepts and relations. Different graphs are created by using different combinations of ontologies and vocabularies within the UMLS (including GO, SNOMED-CT, HUGO and all available vocabularies in the UMLS) to retrieve domain concepts, and different types of relationships (co-occurrence and semantic relations from the UMLS Metathesaurus and Semantic Network) are used to link the concepts in the graph. The different graphs are next used as input to a summarization system that produces summaries composed of the most relevant sentences from the original documents.Results and conclusions:Our experiments demonstrate that the choice of the knowledge source used to model the text has a significant impact on the quality of the automatic summaries. In particular, we find that, when summarizing gene-related literature, using GO, SNOMED-CT and HUGO to extract domain concepts results in significantly better summaries than using all available vocabularies in the UMLS. This finding suggests that successful biomedical summarization requires the selection of the appropriate knowledge source, whose coverage, specificity and relations must be in accordance to the type of the documents to summarize.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The amount of biomedical literature that is available on the Internet has experienced an unprecedent revolution during the last decade. Up-to-date MEDLINE contains over 19million references to journal articles, and the US National Library of Medicine expects to index over one million articles annually within a few years [1]. In this context, researchers in biomedical-related disciplines find it extremely difficult to locate and read all the relevant literature that is published.Aware of this situation, the text summarization community is actively working toward the development of domain-specific methods that help manage this information overload. Given a set of articles related to a topic (e.g., gene, disease, treatment, etc.), the aim is to produce a brief summary that condenses the relevant information. These summaries are not expected to fully replace the original documents but to increase the likelihood of researchers to identify the information most pertinent to their studies.When applied to biomedical text, summarization methods usually rely on domain knowledge from external sources, such as GO [2], SNOMED-CT [3] or MeSH [4], to model the documents to be summarized. Previous works have demonstrated the benefit of such rich semantic representations compared to traditional approaches based on terms [5–7]. Texts are usually represented as sets of biomedical concepts linked by semantic relationships that are extracted from a given knowledge base. The selection of the knowledge source and the relations to be used, however, seems to be quite arbitrary or intuitive in spite of being a highly relevant decision in the summarization process.In this work, the aim is to analyze the impact of the knowledge sources that are used to represent the text on the quality of the automatic summaries. Our hypothesis is that successful biomedical summarization (as other data mining and information extraction tasks) requires the use of the appropriate knowledge source, whose coverage, specificity and properties must be in accordance to the nature of the documents to summarize. To this end, we propose a method for representing a set of documents relevant to a given biological entity as a semantic graph of biomedical concepts and relations. Different knowledge sources and relations are used to build various graphs that are next used as input to a summarization system. The automatic summaries produced by each graph are then evaluated and compared to assess the impact of the knowledge source on the quality of the summaries. We find that the selection of the knowledge sources and the relationships to be used to build the graph has a significant impact on the summarization performance (≈15% of improvement in ROUGE-2 metric).The article is organized as follows. The next section presents some related work in biomedical summarization along with the summarization system used in our experiments. We then describe the method for representing the documents as semantic graphs, as well as the evaluation methodology. We next report the results of the experiments and discuss these results. The final section provides concluding remarks.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this work, we have analyzed the influence of the knowledge sources and relations used to model biomedical text on the quality of the automatic summaries. To this aim, we have presented a graph-based summarization algorithm and evaluated its performance on different text representations that consider different combinations of biomedical knowledge sources and relations from the UMLS.Overall, the results presented in this paper suggest that the selection of the knowledge sources and the relationships to be used to model the text has a significant impact on the summarization results. In particular, we found that using GO, SNOMED-CT and HUGO to extract domain concepts allows for significantly better summaries than using all available vocabularies in the UMLS. Therefore, the knowledge base to be used should be an important parameter to take into account when developing summarization systems in the biomedical domain.Concerning future work, we will apply the main lessons learned from this work to our research in other bioNLP tasks. In the short term we plan to evaluate the effect of knowledge source selection in the automatic classification and indexing of MEDLINE citations [40]. We want to test, for instance, whether indexing of MeSH terms related to genes and proteins improves when the documents are represented using specialized resources, such as GO and HUGO, while indexing of more general terms (such as humans, mice, pregnancy, to name a few) are better captured by using more general resources for knowledge representation (e.g., SNOMED-CT or the NCI Thesaurus [41]).We will also apply the results of these experiments to improve our summarization system, by selecting the GO+SNOMED-CT+HUGO combination of knowledge sources for building the document graph, and testing the performance of the summarizer when the graph-based method is combined with other summarization techniques that have proved to be of great use for summarization of biomedical literature, such as sentence position [39], the similarity with the title [24] and the frequency of the concepts in the document [39].