@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Clinical information systems end user satisfaction: The expectations and needs congruencies effects

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A model for clinical users’ satisfaction with clinical information systems (CIS).Empirical test of model using survey in a public hospital (112 doctors, 203 nurses).Perceived CIS performance is found to be the most influential satisfaction factor.The expectations congruency is the next significants satisfaction factor among doctors.The second significant satisfaction factor for nurses is found to be the needs congruency.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Clinical information systems,End user satisfaction,Expectations congruency,Needs congruency,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Prior research on information systems (IS) shows that users’ attitudes and continuance intentions are associated with their satisfaction with information systems. As such, the increasing amount of investments in clinical information systems (CIS) signifies the importance of understanding CIS end users’ (i.e., clinicians) satisfaction. In this study, we develop a conceptual framework to identify the cognitive determinants of clinicians’ satisfaction formation. The disconfirmation paradigm serves as the core of the framework. The expectations and needs congruency models are the two models of this paradigm, and perceived performance is the basis of the comparisons in the models. The needs and expectations associated with the models are also specified. The survey methodology is adopted in this study to empirically validate the proposed research model. The survey is conducted at a public hospital and results in 112 and 203 valid responses (56% and 98% response rates) from doctors and nurses respectively. The partial least squares (PLS) method is used to analyze the data. The results of the study show that perceived CIS performance is the most influential factor on clinicians’ (i.e., doctors and nurses) satisfaction. Doctors’ expectations congruency is the next significant determinant of their satisfaction. Contrary to most previous findings, nurses’ expectations and expectations congruency do not show a significant effect on their satisfaction. However, the needs congruency is found to significantly affect nurses’ satisfaction.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Healthcare delivery systems are attributed with undesirable characteristics such as unsafe practices, treatment variability, and less than desirable quality of care [1]. Hence, there is great pressure to increase healthcare quality and patient safety while also reducing healthcare costs. Healthcare information technologies (HIT), especially clinical information systems (CIS), have been frequently suggested as efficient means of achieving healthcare quality, patient safety, reduced medical errors, and decreased costs [2–4]. However, the realization of all these benefits is contingent upon clinicians’ continuous use of these systems [5]. Prior research on information systems (IS) has found that users’ attitudes and continuance intentions are associated with their satisfaction with information systems [6,7]. Clinicians’ satisfaction has also been found to explain intended future use of CIS [8]. In addition, user satisfaction has been studied in relation to other important IS concepts such as user acceptance, user resistance and system usability [9–11].From another perspective, with the increasing amount of investments in CIS implementations, the importance of measuring the effectiveness of these investments has also been increasing. User satisfaction as a subjective or perceptual measure of IS success is probably the most widely employed IS effectiveness indicator in the IS success literature [12]. In their review of the literature on inpatient CIS evaluations, van der Meijden et al. [13] found that user satisfaction was evaluated in 46% of the studies. In fact, user satisfaction shows a system from its users’ point of view. When a “good” information system is viewed by its users as a “poor” system, it is in fact a “poor” system [14]. In other words, it is hard to deny the success of a system that is liked by its users [12].In “Behavioral Theory of the Firm”, Cyert and March [15] were the first to introduce the user satisfaction concept by proposing that the success of an information system at meeting the information needs of its users leads to either reinforcement or frustration [14,16]. Since this study, extensive research has been conducted in IS literature on user satisfaction (for comprehensive reviews, see [17] or [18]). This body of research (e.g., [6,12]) partly dealt with the role of user satisfaction in IS success [19]. Many other studies attempted to develop measurements for assessing user satisfaction [14,16,20–22] or provide typologies of information system characteristics that seem to affect user perception of the system [12,23,24]. They offered practitioners with helpful tools to improve their systems and chances of success [25]. Nevertheless, this body of research has been frequently criticized because of its overemphasis on IS technical soundness and specific system characteristics, and that it offers only a limited understanding of the psychological processes that convert a system’s performance into a user’s reaction to the system [26–28]. Furthermore, most of the research is based on empirical findings rather than a theoretical background [29].Moreover, while several IS studies investigated various aspects of IS usage within the specific context of healthcare such as clinicians’ resistance towards [3,30] or acceptance of healthcare information technologies [31], the clinicians’ satisfaction with clinical information systems is under-researched in the IS field. Nevertheless, the medical informatics literature on CIS satisfaction has examined how clinicians’ satisfaction is affected by different factors such as user characteristics [32–34], computer literacy [33,35], CIS quality, CIS usefulness, service quality [34], impact on work, and impact on patient care [32,33]. These studies provide a useful understanding of clinicians’ satisfaction with a variety of CIS functionalities and satisfaction differences among various user groups. However, like IS user satisfaction research, they usually lack a strong theoretical basis and focus mostly on the technical aspect of CIS. The necessity of further investigation of clinicians’ satisfaction is intensified with respect to the findings of previous healthcare information technology acceptance studies indicating that clinicians differ from other types of IS users due to their specialized training, autonomous practice and professional work arrangements [31,36,37].With regard to the importance of clinicians’ satisfaction in successful CIS implementations and the need for understanding the psychological processes of satisfaction formation, we aim to develop a conceptual framework to identify the cognitive determinants of clinicians’ satisfaction formation based on the disconfirmation paradigm. This paradigm is the major theory utilized in marketing literature to explore consumer satisfaction [28,38,39]. Hence, the research questions for this study are: (1) ”What are the cognitive determinants of clinicians’ satisfaction formation with CIS?” and (2) “What are the clinicians’ needs and expectations regarding CIS?”. Arguing that clinicians’ needs (desires) and expectations regarding CIS are two separate satisfaction comparison standards, we will examine their effects jointly in the disconfirmation paradigm. To identify the clinicians’ needs, we will employ McClelland’s learned needs theory [40]. The extant IS literature on user satisfaction will also be integrated into the research model of the study. As such, various IS attributes including system quality, information quality, and service quality from Delone and McLean’s [23] IS success model will be utilized as the aspects of the system which clinicians may have expectations about. The impact of perceived CIS performance at the functionality level on clinicians’ satisfaction will be examined as well. The variety of information systems and the conflicting human interests may call for different assessments of a system’s impact and effectiveness in order to capture the different stakeholders’ points of view [18,24]. Hence, the proposed model explaining/predicting clinicians’ satisfaction will be tested among two different clinical user groups (i.e., nurses and doctors) to observe any plausible differences in a practical manner.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. First, the theoretical background of the study is explained. Next, the research model and hypotheses are presented. This is followed by an explanation of the research methodology. Then, the data analysis and results are presented. The study concludes with a discussion of the findings and their implications for theory and practice.Healthcare information technologies (HIT) span various applications to serve different purposes in healthcare settings. Bhattacherjee et al. [41] developed a HIT classification based on the primary purposes of different HIT applications. Similar groupings have been extensively validated and utilized in prior relevant research. This categorization includes clinical HIT, administrative HIT, and strategic HIT. In the present study, CIS refers to the clinical cluster of this categorization representing applications designed to improve patient care, such as computerized physician order entry (CPOE) systems, electronic medical records (EMR), and pharmacy information systems.Briggs et al. [25] identified three categories of user satisfaction definitions in the IS literature including satisfaction as judgment, satisfaction as affect, and a mixed definition with both judgment and affect elements. An example of a definition framing satisfaction as a judgment or evaluation is “the extent to which users believe the information system available to them meets their information requirements” [14, p. 785]. Some examples of definitions framing satisfaction as an affective state include “the affective attitude towards a specific computer application by someone who interacts with the application directly” [21, p. 261], and “an affective state representing an emotional reaction to the entire Web site experience” [42, p. 298]. An example of a definition considering both affective and evaluative components for satisfaction is “the IS end-user’s overall affective and cognitive evaluation of the pleasurable level of consumption related fulfillment experienced with the IS” [29, p. 453].In this study, we adopt the second definition and conceptualize clinician satisfaction with CIS as an affective state representing an emotional reaction to a CIS that a clinician directly interacts with. The reason for this choice lies in the fact that a user with a positive evaluation of an IS might still not feel satisfied with it [25]. Furthermore, the evaluation component will be captured by the two determinants of satisfaction (i.e., needs and expectations congruencies) which will be discussed later in the paper.In order to identify the cognitive determinants of clinician satisfaction formation we draw on the disconfirmation paradigm. The disconfirmation paradigm is the dominant framework for explaining consumer satisfaction in marketing literature [28,38,39]. This paradigm considers satisfaction the result of an evaluative judgment between the perceived performance of a product and a pre-consumption comparison standard. Three different states can occur after this comparison process: (1) positive disconfirmation: when the perceived performance is above the comparison standard, (2) confirmation: when the perceived performance meets the comparison standard, or (3) negative disconfirmation: when the perceived performance is below the comparison standard. Satisfaction is more likely when positive disconfirmation or confirmation occurs, while dissatisfaction is expected when negative disconfirmation occurs [38,39].Different studies have examined the effects of various comparison standards such as predictive expectations [43,44], desires and needs [27,45], and experience-based norms [46,47]. However, the most common pre-experience comparison standard in the disconfirmation paradigm is expectations [38,46].Based on the expectations congruency model3In the rest of this study, when a specific comparison standard is used in the disconfirmation paradigm, we refer to it as the standard congruency (disconfirmation) model. This is a common practice in the relevant literature.3, satisfaction is the result of comparing the perceived performance of a product to the expectations about that product’s performance. When the perceived performance exceeds expectations satisfaction arises, while the perceived performance falling behind expectations result in dissatisfaction [27,39]. Marketing literature provides substantial empirical support for the influence of expectations congruency on consumer satisfaction [27]. Hence, one part of our research model examines the effect of clinicians’ expectations and expectations congruency on their satisfaction with CIS.Despite the wide inclusion of expectations in consumer satisfaction research, there is no consensus on the conceptual definition of this construct [27]. Spreng et al. [27] identified two different conceptualizations for expectations. The first view (i.e., predictive expectations) defines expectations as “primarily perceptions of the likelihood (or probability of occurrence) of some event” (p. 16). The second view (i.e., evaluative expectations) adds another component to this likelihood estimation that is “an evaluation about the goodness or badness of the event” (p. 16). This judgment component can be misleading and bias the effect of expectations on satisfaction. Similarly, in the IS literature, Szajna and Scamell’s [48] review of expectations definitions in social psychology and organizational behavior research recognized two components of expectations: (1) “a future time perspective” and (2) “a degree of uncertainty” (p. 494). Following the predictive conceptualization, we define expectations as an information system end user’s set of pretrial beliefs about the eventual performance and attributes of the information system. To identify these attributes we rely on the prior IS user satisfaction literature, specifically Delone and McLean’s [23] IS success model. This model provides three categories of IS attributes including information quality, system quality, and service quality. They will serve as the aspects of a system that clinicians may have expectations about.Although the expectations congruency model is widely employed in the consumer behavior research and in some IS end user satisfaction studies, the model has its shortcomings. First, it fails to explain dissatisfaction when low expectations are confirmed [27]. Second, the disconfirmation effect can only account for the aspects of the product for which consumers hold prior expectations, although consumers may also be dissatisfied with the unexpected aspects after consumption [28]. One suggested method for addressing these shortcomings is to use perceived actual performance as an additional antecedent of satisfaction [44], while another is to utilize a different comparison standard, i.e., one’s values (or needs, desires, wants) [45]. Therefore, another part of this study investigates the effects of both the needs congruency model and perceived CIS performance on clinicians’ satisfaction.There is also no overall accepted definition for the desires construct in the marketing literature. Spreng et al. [27] attributed this lack of consensus to the various possible levels of abstraction for conceptualizing desires. In a means-end framework, Spreng et al. [27] explain that desires ”can be defined abstractly in terms of the most basic and fundamental needs, life goals, or desired end-states or more concretely in terms of the means that a person believes will lead to the attainment of the desired end-states” (p. 16). In the context of end user satisfaction of information systems, it will be more useful to explore the influence of higher-level desires on end user satisfaction because there has already been extensive research on the various attributes of information systems that can affect end user satisfaction. Furthermore, prior IS studies [19] have shown that the conversion of higher-level desires into concrete product attributes (especially in the case of complex IS such as CIS) is not easy or straightforward for different IS stakeholders.To identify these higher-level needs (desires), we reviewed needs theories in the psychology literature. Major needs theories include Maslow’s needs-hierarchy theory [49,50], Alderfer’s ERG theory [51,52], Murray’s manifest needs theory [53], and McClelland’s learned needs theory [40]. McClelland’s learned needs theory is one of the most popularly accepted theories of motivation [40,54] and has been extensively employed in research in various job settings including healthcare environments [55,56]. This theory recognizes individual differences but also has specified content (specific needs categories). Hence, it offers considerable promise of explanatory power [57]. For this reason, we utilize it in our framework as the theoretical guide for identifying clinicians’ higher-level needs to explore their satisfaction with clinical information systems.Building on Murray’s manifest needs theory [53], McClelland [40] proposed the learned needs theory. According to this theory, individuals acquire certain needs through their life experiences in their culture. Four of these learned needs are the need for achievement, need for affiliation, need for power, and need for autonomy. Once these needs are acquired, they may be considered as personal predispositions that influence an individual’s perception of work situations and goal setting behavior [58]. These needs are considered important for understanding people at work [59]. Hence, in this study we will examine the role of CIS performance congruency with these needs on clinicians’ satisfaction with CIS.The need for achievement has been defined as “behavior towards competition with a standard of excellence” [58, p. 11]. It is “the drive to excel, to achieve in relation to a set of standards and to strive to succeed” [60, p. 349]. With the increasing emphasis on patient-centered care, healthcare institutions such as hospitals are striving to achieve the best possible patient outcome. CIS are health information technologies designed for the purpose of improving patient care [41]. Furthermore, previous belief elicitation research on physicians about using EMR and CPOE shows that they believe these CIS influence (positively or negatively) their performance, productivity and efficiency, and patient outcomes [61]. Due to the importance of achieving the best possible patient outcomes in the healthcare community, our research model investigates the congruency of the CIS with clinicians’ need for achievement in terms of patient outcomes. These patient outcomes include (1) patient satisfaction, (2) healthcare quality, and (3) medical error occurrence (patient safety).In the “Handbook of Social Psychology” [62], affiliation is defined as “the act of associating or interacting with one or more other people” (p. 465). The multidimensional model of affiliation [63] proposes four primary reasons (or social rewards) for people’s desire to affiliate: “(1) positive affect or stimulation associated with interpersonal closeness and communication, (2) attention or praise, (3) reduction of negative affect through social contact, and (4) social comparison” (p. 1008). The reason that is most relevant to the context of CIS use in healthcare is social comparison. Social comparison “involves the seeking of information about a self-relevant issue from others when objective criteria for evaluation are not readily available, particularly with respect to opinions, beliefs, and other socially relevant attributes” [63, p. 1009]. This information can be helpful for reducing ambiguity, uncertainty and confusion, and improving response to relevant situations [62,63]. Individuals are increasingly dependent on the exchange of information in the workplace to carry out their job-related tasks. For instance, communication takes 80% of a healthcare manager’s time [64]. Moreover, patient–clinician and clinician–clinician communication shapes an essential component of clinicians’ jobs. Prior studies have shown that CIS affects interactions and communication among these social actors in healthcare settings [8,65]. In the context of EMR and CPOE, better documentation is believed by physicians to improve the communication between colleagues and nurses [61]. Therefore, the social comparison dimension of the need for affiliation among clinicians and the CIS congruency in facilitating the fulfillment of this need will be investigated in this study.In his “Explorations in Personality” book, Murray [53] states that the five sets of needs, including the need for dominance, need for autonomy, need for aggression, need for deference, and need for abasement, can be taken together. The common concept among these needs is the element of control. The need for power and need for autonomy are of interest to this study. While the need for power is concerned with controlling other people, the need for autonomy is about controlling one’s way of working. The system investigated in our study did not impose any changes in the power distribution in the hospital for either nurses or doctors. Hence, the need for power is not included in the survey.In contrast, the system did change how doctors deal with ordering laboratory or radiology tests and consequent tasks. That is, it tampered with their autonomy. For nurses, the system increased the convenience of carrying out investigation orders, but no work control restrictions were inflicted. Hence, the need for autonomy is only included in the doctors’ questionnaire. Before proceeding to the next section, it is worth clarifying the distinction between expectations and desires.Expectations and needs (desires) are conceptually different. The simple distinction between them identified in the information systems and marketing research literature is that “expectations state what the individual thinks will happen, while desires represent what the individual would like to happen” [19, p. 300]. Spreng et al. [27] further elaborated that “expectations are beliefs about the likelihood that a product is associated with certain attributes, benefits, or outcomes, whereas desires are evaluations of the extent to which those attributes, benefits, or outcomes lead to the attainment of a person’s value. Expectations are future-oriented and relatively malleable, whereas desires are present-oriented and relatively stable” (p. 17). Our theoretical framework therefore recognizes expectations and needs (desires) as two distinct comparison standards in the disconfirmation paradigm.This section presents a research model based on the theoretical framework discussed in the previous chapter. Table 1defines each construct and Fig. 1depicts their relationships.Expectations have long been the dominant comparison standard in the disconfirmation paradigm in the marketing literature [46], and satisfaction has been considered to result from a low discrepancy between the pretrial expectations and the post hoc perceptions [39]. Similar to Spreng et al. [27], this study defines clinician expectations congruency as a clinician’s subjective assessment of the comparison between his or her expectations of a CIS and the CIS performance received. In turn, clinician expectations are conceptualized as a clinician’s set of pretrial beliefs about the eventual performance and attributes of a CIS. The positive association of expectations congruency and satisfaction has received considerable empirical support in the marketing literature [27]. Such an association has also been hypothesized in some IS satisfaction research [19,66]. We hypothesize a similar positive effect of clinicians’ expectations congruency on their satisfaction with CIS:H1Clinician expectations congruency is positively related to clinician satisfaction with CIS.The extant marketing literature also proposes a negative relationship between expectations and expectations congruency. This is because high expectations are more likely to be negatively disconfirmed and low expectations are more likely to be positively disconfirmed [27,39,67]. This association has been included in a number of IS studies in different contexts such as satisfaction with knowledge management systems [19], end user computing satisfaction [66], and measuring Web-customer satisfaction [42]. Similarly, we hypothesize that:H2Clinician expectations are negatively related to clinician expectations congruency.In addition to the indirect effect of expectations on satisfaction through expectations congruency, a direct positive impact of expectations on satisfaction has been postulated in prior marketing research [44]. The results of a number of IS studies have provided empirical support for the effect of IS users’ expectations on their overall satisfaction with the IS [68,69]. A longitudinal experiment by Szajna and Scamell [48] showed an association between the realism of IS users’ expectations and their satisfaction with the IS. A meta-analysis by Mahmood et al. [70] also found a strong correlation between the two constructs. On these grounds, the next hypothesis is:H3Clinician expectations are positively related to clinician satisfaction with CIS.Some marketing researchers have suggested the use of another frame of reference called needs (desires, values, or wants) in conjunction with expectations to address the shortcomings of the expectations congruency model [27,45]. In this study, clinician needs are defined at an abstract level rather than at an attribute level, and refer to three categories of needs (need for achievement, need for affiliation, and need for autonomy) from McClelland’s learned needs theory [40]. Clinician needs congruency also represents a clinician’s subjective assessment of the comparison between his or her needs and the CIS performance received. Several consumer satisfaction studies [27,28,45] have provided empirical support for the needs congruency model. Similarly, we argue that higher clinician needs congruency leads to higher satisfaction with CIS. Therefore, the next hypothesis is:H4Clinician needs congruency is positively related to clinician satisfaction with CIS.A similar association between expectations and expectations congruency has also been proposed for needs (desires or wants) and needs congruency [27,28,45]. That is, in the CIS satisfaction context, when clinicians hold high/low levels of needs (desires) towards a CIS, the actual performance of the CIS will be less/more likely to reach these levels, thereby resulting in negative/positive disconfirmation. Hence, the fifth hypothesis is:H5Clinician needs is negatively related to clinician needs congruency.Service quality literature, like consumer satisfaction research, recognizes consumer expectations as an essential concept and compares them with service experiences. In their study of the nature and determinants of customer expectations of service, Zeithaml et al. [71] suggest personal needs as one of the factors affecting expected service quality. Comparatively, in IS service quality literature, personal needs are also considered as determinants of expectations [72]. Therefore, we hypothesize:H6Clinician needs is positively related to clinician expectations.According to the expectations congruency and needs congruency models, perceived performance (which both expectations and needs are compared against) has a positive impact on both congruencies. This is because high performance is more likely to meet or exceed high expectations and needs [27]. In this study, perceived CIS performance is defined as beliefs regarding the performance of various functionalities of a CIS. The association between perceived performance and both congruencies has been found to be significant in both consumer satisfaction research [44,67] and IS satisfaction literature [26]. Based on these models and findings, the next hypotheses are:H7Perceived CIS performance is positively related to clinician expectations congruency.Perceived CIS performance is positively related to clinician needs congruency.Several marketing studies have found a strong positive relationship between perceived performance and satisfaction [44,67], thus indicating that the effect of perceived performance on satisfaction is not completely mediated by the disconfirmation effect. The comparative study by Tse and Wilton [44] also showed the relative better performance of a combined disconfirmation model with perceived performance over other disconfirmation models without perceived performance. Similar empirical support for the positive impact of perceived performance or functionality of different CIS on clinician satisfactions has been reported in various medical informatics studies [32,34]. Thus, we hypothesize that:H9Perceived CIS performance is positively related to clinician satisfaction with CIS.To verify alternative explanations of the final results, a number of control variables were identified from the relevant literature. Prior research suggests that age, gender [34], work experience [34], duration of the system use [73], computer background [33,35], and user training [33,35,70] may influence clinician satisfaction with CIS. The effects of these variables will be controlled in this study.This study uses a survey methodology to empirically validate the proposed research model. This methodology was selected because of its appropriateness for research questions asking about respondents’ beliefs or behaviors, generalizability power, and the inherent statistical nature of its information [74].In this study, the “clinician expectations” construct is considered a reflective second-order construct with three dimensions, namely information quality, system quality, and service quality expectations, as identified in Delone and McLean’s [23] IS success model. Each of these dimensions is measured using reflective items adopted from prior IS success studies such as [21,20]. The items were adjusted for the healthcare context. The doctors’ and nurses’ questionnaire items are provided in Appendix A. The respondents were asked to recall what they expected from the CIS before they started to use it. The expectations might have been based on information provided about the system during training sessions, what they heard from their colleagues, or prior experience with similar systems.The “clinician needs” construct is operationalized as a formative second-order construct. Of the different categories of needs suggested in McClelland’s learned needs theory [40], the “need for achievement” and “need for affiliation” are considered the two dimensions of the “clinician needs” construct for the nurse population in this study. The “need for autonomy” is the third dimension investigated for the doctor population. The “need for achievement”, “need for affiliation”, and “need for autonomy” are defined as first-order reflective dimensions. A discussion on the application of these needs categories to IS user satisfaction in the healthcare context is provided in the theoretical background section. As such, the items measuring the “need for achievement” in terms of patient outcome and the “need for affiliation” pertaining to the social comparison dimension of affiliation motivation are developed for the purpose of this study based on the relevant literature including [40,53,61] and [40,62,63], respectively. The items of the “needs for autonomy” construct are adopted with some wording modifications from [3,31].Expectations (needs) congruency can be measured with at least two approaches. The first one asks respondents to directly compare the perceived performance of a product with their expectations (needs). The second uses the calculated difference between the perceived performance scores and expectations (needs) scores as the measure of expectations (needs) congruency. Empirical research comparing the two approaches has shown that the former is superior [75]. In this study, we use the subjective direct measurement of expectations (needs) congruency.Similar to the “clinician needs” construct, “clinician needs congruency” is defined as a formative second-order construct with two first-order reflective constructs (for the nurses’ user groups) including “need for achievement congruency” and “need for affiliation congruency”. The “need for autonomy congruency” is the third dimension of this construct only for the doctors’ user group. In comparison, “clinician expectations congruency” is considered a reflective second-order construct with three first-order reflective constructs, namely “information quality expectations congruency”, “system quality expectations congruency”, and “service quality expectations congruency”.Perceived CIS performance can be measured at the attribute level or functionality level. We adopted the latter method as it is more common in the medical informatics literature. Furthermore, since the “clinician expectations” and “clinician expectations congruency” constructs are operationalized at the attribute level in this study, measuring perceived performance at the functionality level can provide insights into CIS performance from another point of view. This method can also detect any problems with the different CIS functionalities utilized in the clinicians’ daily practices. The questionnaire items ask about the performance of six different features of the CIS used most frequently by the nurses and doctors in our sample hospital.As we defined satisfaction as an affective state, a suitable measurement is the one used by [27,29,66]. These items ask respondents about their feelings regarding the use of CIS.To ensure conceptual validity, several clinicians at our sample hospital were consulted multiple times to test the survey questions. As a result, four items pertaining to information quality expectations (regarding information accuracy, preciseness, completeness, being provided on time), four items of system quality expectations (regarding the system effectively integrating data from different functional areas, maintaining high degree of data confidentiality, being easy to learn and user friendly), two items from service quality expectations (adequate technical competence, positive attitude towards users) and their corresponding items from the expectations congruency construct were omitted from the questionnaire. These items were dropped as the consulted clinicians (doctors and nurses) perceived that the rest of the items already captured the same content or were more important to their use of the CIS. Two rounds of labeled and unlabeled sorting were also conducted. In each round, three different IS postgraduate students were asked to go through the sorting process [76]. More than 89% of the items were correctly placed in the intended constructs with appropriate label. One item from the need for achievement construct (i.e., desire to receive detailed feedback on job performance) and its matching item from the need for achievement congruency construct were omitted as the sorting judges did not find them compatible with the rest of the items of these constructs. The results of the labeled sorting matched the intended construct well (100% hit rate). Upon further consideration, another item (i.e., desire to save time at work) from the need for achievement construct and its corresponding item from the need for achievement congruency construct were dropped from further analysis, as they seemed more related to clinician personal outcome than patient outcome.The CIS investigated in this study is an electronic medical record (EMR) system. This EMR has a computerized physician order entry (CPOE) to handle laboratory or radiology investigation orders. It also has documentation functions for doctors to complete patient discharge summary and printing of medical certificates or reports. The system also serves as a launch pad (via interfaces) to other related clinical systems like: radiology information system, and picture archival and communication system to view all X-Rays, CT, MRI scans and reports, outpatient medication order system, cluster patient record system which allows sharing of patient data across restructured hospitals in Singapore, ICU record system used for ICU patient documentation, and an operating theatre system used for surgical operation documentation.This system is used by doctors, nurses, and allied health staff to manage patients’ medical data, orders, and documentation. The survey targeted the first two user groups (i.e., doctors and nurses). Differences in the system for nurses versus doctors are more in terms of user rights. Both groups can see almost the same pages for example patient data, investigation orders, and documents. However, only a doctor can order investigations or write a document, while a nurse can only complete the order (order completion screens) and view certain documents. This study examined the system features related to laboratory and radiology investigation orders (involving both doctors and nurses) and the documentation functions (involving doctors).The survey was conducted at a public hospital in Singapore with more than 500 beds. 200 surveys were distributed to doctors from different clinical departments in the sample hospital by their clinical secretaries. 114 surveys were collected back by the clinical secretaries, 112 valid (i.e., complete) responses were included for data analysis, resulting in a 56% response rate. The nurse officers of the 19 wards in the sample hospital handed out 207 surveys to the nurses in their wards (10 surveys per small ward and 12 surveys for larger wards as suggested by the nursing director of the hospital). All of the distributed surveys were collected back by the nurse officers. Four incomplete responses were excluded and the 203 valid responses were used for data analysis, resulting in a 98% response rate. According to the sample size requirements suggested by [77] for PLS analysis, this study with nine incoming paths to its dependent variable (i.e., four paths from the independent variables and five paths from the control variables) required at least a sample size of 90. The number of distributed surveys therefore was selected with the consideration of having sufficient responses for data analysis and imposing less extra work for the clinical secretaries and nurse officers. An incentive of 10 Singapore dollars was given to each respondent. The survey was anonymous and approved by the institutional review board (IRB). Table 2shows the demographic information of the respondents.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
