@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Comparative analysis of a novel disease phenotype network based on clinical manifestations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Systematic studies of disease phenotype networks can discover new disease genes.Current disease phenotype networks are largely incomplete.We created a new Disease Manifestation Network (DMN) from biomedical ontologies.We compared DMN with genetic networks and a widely-used phenotype network.DMN reflects genetic associations among diseases and contains novel knowledge.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Ontology,Disease phenotype network,Network analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Systems approaches to analyzing disease phenotype networks in combination with protein functional interaction networks have great potential in illuminating disease pathophysiological mechanisms. While many genetic networks are readily available, disease phenotype networks remain largely incomplete. In this study, we built a large-scale Disease Manifestation Network (DMN) from 50,543 highly accurate disease-manifestation semantic relationships in the United Medical Language System (UMLS). Our new phenotype network contains 2305 nodes and 373,527 weighted edges to represent the disease phenotypic similarities. We first compared DMN with the networks representing genetic relationships among diseases, and demonstrated that the phenotype clustering in DMN reflects common disease genetics. Then we compared DMN with a widely-used disease phenotype network in previous gene discovery studies, called mimMiner, which was extracted from the textual descriptions in Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM). We demonstrated that DMN contains different knowledge from the existing phenotype data source. Finally, a case study on Marfan syndrome further proved that DMN contains useful information and can provide leads to discover unknown disease causes. Integrating DMN in systems approaches with mimMiner and other data offers the opportunities to predict novel disease genetics. We made DMN publicly available at nlp/case.edu/public/data/DMN.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Linking complex human diseases to their genetic basis remains a challenging task. For computational strategies to discover candidate disease genes, incorporating new data may lead to new discoveries. Traditional methods prioritized genes for a disease if the genes have similar functions with the known disease genes [2,38,44,39,32,17,48]. Recent studies incorporate disease phenotype similarities in addition to the genomic data to increase the ability of identifying new disease genes [19,23,43,46,47,16,35,37], assuming that similar phenotypes and overlapping genetic causes are correlated [5,29,15,2,9,10].However, the disease phenotype networks used in current gene prediction approaches remain largely incomplete. Most phenotype databases were constructed through mining textual phenotype descriptions [18,6]. For example, van Driel and the colleagues extracted disease-phenotype associations from OMIM through text mining, calculated the pairwise disease similarities, and stored them in the database called mimMiner [42], which is one of the most widely-used phenotype networks in recent disease gene discovery methods [23,43,33,36,16]. Combining different phenotype data has the potential to reduce the bias in each data source and improve the network-based prediction models [26,30]. Therefore, we explored new accurate and publicly accessible disease phenotype data in addition to the existing phenotype networks.In this study, we created Disease Manifestation Network (DMN), using the highly accurate and structured clinical manifestation data from Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) [24,4,25]. Clinical manifestation captures a major aspect of disease phenotype and can predict disease causes [5]. For example, the Stickler syndrome, Marshall syndrome and Otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia (OSMED) have highly similar manifestations and also involve mutations in interacting collagen genes COL2A1, COL11A2, and COL11A1, respectively [1]. The UMLS semantic network currently uses 50,543 disease-manifestation semantic relationships to explicitly link 2,305 diseases to their clinical manifestations. In this knowledge base, all disease and manifestation terms are formally represented by unified concepts and the semantic relationships between concepts were collected from multiple different ontologies.We hypothesized that DMN not only reflects known disease-gene relationships, but also contains different phenotypic knowledge compared with mimMiner. We tested the hypothesis through network comparative analysis between DMN, mimMiner [42], and the two variants of human disease network (HDN) [12], which connects diseases if they share genes. The correlation between DMN and HDNs indicated that DMN reflects existing knowledge on genetic relationships among diseases. The comparison between DMN and mimMiner demonstrated that the two phenotype networks are largely complementary in nodes, edges and community structures. The overall analysis suggests that combining DMN with previous phenotype data sources, such as mimMiner, may potentially improve the data-driven methods for biomedical applications, such as disease gene discovery and drug repositioning.Our study consists of the following steps (Fig. 1): (1) Constructed DMN using the disease-manifestation associations from UMLS; (2) compare phenotypic relationships in DMN and genetic relationships among diseases; (3) compared DMN with mimMiner [42]; and (4) conducted a case study on the phenotypic relationships of Marfan syndrome in DMN.We first extracted disease-manifestation relationships from the UMLS file MRREL.RRF (2013 version). The file contains 647 different kinds of semantic relationships between biomedical concepts. We collected the concepts pairs linked by the “has manifestation” relationship, and obtained 50,543 disease-manifestation pairs. The disease-manifestation relationships come from OMIM [14], Ultrasound Structured Attribute Reporting [3], and Minimal Standard Digestive Endoscopy Terminology [40]. OMIM is the major contributor among these data sources.The manifestation terms vary greatly in abundance. For example, common manifestations such as “seizures” are associated with many diseases, while rare manifestations such as “Amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia” are only associated with one disease. We used the information content (1) to weight each manifestation concept.(1)wc=-log(nc/N)Variablewcis the weight of the manifestation concept c,ncis the number of diseases associated with manifestation c, and N is the total number of diseases. Then we modeled the manifestation similarity between disease x and y by the cosine of their feature vectors in (2), in which the feature vectors consist of manifestationsxiandyifor disease x and y. The cosine similarity was used before [19,42] to quantify phenotype overlaps.(2)sx,y=∑ixiyi∑ixi2∑iyi2We constructed DMN as a weighted network with the manifestation similarities. The edges weights are in the range (0, 1].We conducted two experiments to evaluate whether the phenotypic relationships in DMN reflect genetic associations among diseases. The first experiment is to calculate the correlation between the disease similarities in DMN and two quantified measures of genetic associations. We first ranked the edges (disease pairs) in DMN by their weights (disease similarities) from large to small. For top N disease pairs, we counted the percentage of disease pairs that share associated genes in OMIM and the average number of genes shared by the N disease pairs. Then we calculated the Pearson’s correlations between N and the genetic measures.In the second experiment, we compared the network topologies between DMN and two genetic disease networks. A well-studied genetic disease network is HDN, in which diseases were connected if they share associated genes in OMIM and edges were weighted by the number of overlapping genes [12]. Here we inherited the network construction method of HDN, but used two different disease-gene association data: the updated data in OMIM (April, 2013) and GWAS catalog (August, 2013). We represented the disease terms in OMIM-based HDN and GWAS-based HDN with 2974 and 355 UMLS concept unique identifiers, respectively, to enable the comparison with DMN. The two genetic disease networks both contains rich information of disease genetics [20,22], but are largely different. The OMIM-based HDN mostly contains Mendelian diseases with strong genetic causes; the GWAS-based HDN mostly contains common complex diseases. The two networks only share 45 diseases.We compared the edges and community structures between DMN and the two HDNs. Network community structure reveals the biological network properties and offered insights into cell functions, protein interactions, and disease dynamics [8,31,34]. We applied a widely-used community detection algorithm [28] and calculated the two-way similarities between community groups:(3)SDMN→HDN=|X∩Y|/|X|(4)SHDN→DMN=|X∩Y|/|Y|∣X∣and∣Y∣are the number of disease pairs that appear in the same community in DMN and HDN, respectively.∣X∩Y∣is the count of disease pairs that were grouped into one community in both networks.We tested the significance of edge and community similarities between DMN and HDNs by creating a background distribution of similarities expected at random. We kept the number and size of communities in DMN, and randomly swapped the assignments of disease nodes into each community. Then we linked nodes inside a community with probabilityPin, and those across communities with probabilityPout. ThePinandPoutwere estimated from the edge density within and between communities in DMN, respectively. We repeated 100 times of randomizing DMN, and compared each random network to HDNs to create the background signals. Finally, we compared the observed similarities with the background signals using Wilcoxon signed-rank test.DMN and mimMiner both contain phenotypic knowledge based on clinical observations. Here, we compared DMN with mimMiner to demonstrate that the two phenotype networks contain different knowledge, so that combining them in applications, such as disease gene discovery and drug repositioning, may potentially lead to improved performance. We first mapped the 5080 diseases in mimMiner from OMIM identifiers to UMLS concept unique identifiers to allow the comparison. Since text mining introduced false positive disease-phenotype relationships, we needed to tradeoff between the data coverage and accuracy in mimMiner. Based on previous analysis [42], we chose to connect two disease nodes if their similarities are above 0.3. The network of mimMiner contains 4,391 disease nodes after these processes. We then compared the node, edges and community structures between DMN with mimMiner.Marfan syndrome is a common inherited disorder of the connective tissue, occurring once in every 10,000 to 20,000 individuals [45]. About 75% of patients with Marfan syndrome have mutations in the FBN1 gene, which encodes brillin-1, a protein that provides strength and flexibility to connective tissue. Despite this well-defined mutation, gene FBN1 cannot always predict the wide variety of phenotypes in patients, and other unknown genetic factors that account for the diversified phenotypes of Marfan syndrome may exist. Here, we conducted a case study on Marfan syndrome and its phenotype relationships in DMN. We compared the corresponding subnetworks in DMN, mimMiner and HDN to show that the DMN contains different phenotypic knowledge and has the potential in deepening the understanding of MS pathogenesis.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Systems approaches in studying disease phenotype networks have great potential in discovering unknown disease mechanisms. Currently, disease phenotype networks remain largely incomplete. Clinical manifestation is an important aspect of the phenotype data. In this study, we built a disease phenotype network, DMN, using the high quality disease-manifestation semantic relationship data from ontologies in the UMLS. Phenotype-genotype correlation analysis based on network comparison have demonstrated that the phenotype relationships in DMN reflects overlapping genetic mechanisms of diseases, but also contains new leads to discover genetic disease causes. Also, we have shown that DMN and a widely-used phenotype network are complementary. With the integration of phenotype data from other sources, our network could strengthen current candidate disease-gene selection methods.RX conceived the study. YC and RX designed the experiment. YC performed the experiment and wrote the manuscript. All authors have participated study discussion and manuscript preparation.