@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Enabling the use of hereditary information from pedigree tools in medical knowledge-based systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Risk assessment of developing an inherited illness using pedigree information.Methods, structured and statistic indices are defined for knowledge-based systems.Real information from a breast cancer database is used for experimentation.Implemented and integrated into eXiT∗CBR experimentation framework as a plugin.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Decision support,Structured data,Feature construction,Modeling,Medical applications,Knowledge-based system,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The use of family information is a key issue to deal with inheritance illnesses. This kind of information use to come in the form of pedigree files, which contain structured information as tree or graphs, which explains the family relationships. Knowledge-based systems should incorporate the information gathered by pedigree tools to assess medical decision making. In this paper, we propose a method to achieve such a goal, which consists on the definition of new indicators, and methods and rules to compute them from family trees. The method is illustrated with several case studies. We provide information about its implementation and integration on a case-based reasoning tool. The method has been experimentally tested with breast cancer diagnosis data. The results show the feasibility of our methodology.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Family history has been important for preventing several inheritance diseases, as it is one of the key variables in the Gail model [1] for breast cancer diagnosis. Family information is usually gathered thanks to pedigree software (as Cyrillic [2]), which allows to annotate relationships, healthy states, genetic markers, and much more data on patients and relatives, in a tree structured way. Thus, to improve medical care, a knowledge-based system (KBS) should incorporate the information about families collected thanks to this kind of tools.Data processing on pedigree software has been traditionally faced from a statistical point of view. However, statistics are not easy in this kind of structured scenarios, most popular statistics tools can conduct to inappropriate or absurd conclusions, and other methods for compositional data are required. On the other hand, expert physicians can evaluate at a glance, from the structure, density and another heuristic knowledge, the risk of a member of the family for suffering an inheritance illness. The skill of evaluating the information of the family is something that is acquired by experience, and difficult to transmit to other, novice physicians. Our research concerns the development of tools that capture the heuristic knowledge of expert physicians, finding out measures from the tree structure that conducts as close as possible to the predictions made by them. Providing a method to extract the relevant information from family trees enables the integration of pedigree tools with medical KBSs so other physicians can also use inheritance data in their decision making.The contribution of this paper is our methodology towards achieving such integration. It includes the definition of structured data-based indicators which are computed by analyzing the information contained in pedigree files. The methodology is presented first under the assumption of a simple, hierarchical family, and then is extended to cover more complex situations (second marriages, and so on). Our research is constrained to the data we have on breast cancer, an illness in which inheritance has been proved to be a key factor. Nevertheless, we believe that other inheritance illnesses can benefit from our results.This paper is organized as follows. First we provide information about the structured data on Section 2. Next, in Section 3, we describe our methodology to evaluate a set of indicators from pedigree files. In Section 5 case studies are provided, and in Section 6 the experimentation performed so far is shown and discussed. Then, in Section 7 we expose some related work and, finally, we end the paper in Section 8 with some conclusions and future work.Our starting point is the family information gathered in the very well-known standard that nowadays is one of the most used for pedigree information sharing: the GEDCOM format (GEnealogy Data COMmunication) [3]. This format consists of a header section, records, and a trailer section. Within these sections, records represent people, families, sources of information, and other miscellaneous records, including notes. In our case, the information we require is the family relationships and the people’s relevant medical data records such as if she is affected by a disease or has some results on a previously performed genetic test.As shown in Fig. 1, the representation of a GEDCOM file allows physicians to quickly understand the family structure and also the inherited factors on the members. Squares/circles represent males/females members of the family respectively; members in the same horizontal level belong to the same generation, horizontal lines between members in the same generation represents marriage relations, and vertical lines between members who belong to different generations represent parenthood and childhood relations. Regarding the individual information, a crossed line over the member means she is deceased; when the member is in black it means that she is affected by the illness, a plus next to the member means that the member has been genetically tested and has the disease causing mutation, a minus means the member does not have the mutation and nothing implies that he has not been tested correspondingly.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The need of dealing with pedigree analysis is a must when dealing with inherited illnesses. However, most of the approaches to interpret data on family histories are statistics based on the number of individuals in the family instead of their relationships. In this work we presents a new way of computing family risk based on indicators that takes into account the structure of the family, as physicians use to do.We provide a methodology based on three statistics-based indicators (global affectation, global mutation, and global penetration indicators), plus five structured data-based indicators (individual inheritance mutation, individual inheritance affectation, family inheritance affectation and mutation, and family integration indicators). To establish relationships among family members, a rule-based algorithm is provided for simple pedigrees (tree-like structures), while an interval based solution is provided for more complex situations (graphs due to second marriages, etc.).We have illustrated our methodology on several case studies. Moreover, our method has been implemented and integrated in a case-based reasoning tool that supports medical decision making. The experimentation has been carried out in a breast cancer diagnosis domain, showing that the inheritance information computed with our indicators can be more discriminative than statistics approaches.Having a way to compute indicators, the next step of our research is to discuss the results with physicians to enrich our methodology. This future work comprehends the combination of statistics and structured data based indicators (we have only tackled combinations among structured data based indicators). Our ultimate goal is to provide to the physicians with a powerful tool that supports their decision making taking into account the interrelationships among population values and individual information, that it is still an open problem.