@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Development and evaluation of a biomedical search engine using a predicate-based vector space model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Predicates, called triples, contain more structured information than keywords.We propose a new predicate-based search engine approach for biomedical texts.We develop a new vector space model and query-document similarity function.It achieves higher precision and relevance score than traditional keyword approach.Predicates can support more precise information search than keywords.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Search engine,Triple,Predicate,Information retrieval,Vector space model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Although biomedical information available in articles and patents is increasing exponentially, we continue to rely on the same information retrieval methods and use very few keywords to search millions of documents. We are developing a fundamentally different approach for finding much more precise and complete information with a single query using predicates instead of keywords for both query and document representation. Predicates are triples that are more complex datastructures than keywords and contain more structured information. To make optimal use of them, we developed a new predicate-based vector space model and query-document similarity function with adjusted tf-idf and boost function. Using a test bed of 107,367 PubMed abstracts, we evaluated the first essential function: retrieving information. Cancer researchers provided 20 realistic queries, for which the top 15 abstracts were retrieved using a predicate-based (new) and keyword-based (baseline) approach. Each abstract was evaluated, double-blind, by cancer researchers on a 0–5 point scale to calculate precision (0 versus higher) and relevance (0–5 score). Precision was significantly higher (p<.001) for the predicate-based (80%) than for the keyword-based (71%) approach. Relevance was almost doubled with the predicate-based approach—2.1 versus 1.6 without rank order adjustment (p<.001) and 1.34 versus 0.98 with rank order adjustment (p<.001) for predicate—versus keyword-based approach respectively. Predicates can support more precise searching than keywords, laying the foundation for rich and sophisticated information search.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The availability of online medical and biomedical information has increased dramatically in recent years [1]. For example, PubMed currently contains over 19 million articles covering biomedicine and health-related research, and adds approximately 0.7 million abstracts per year. Although search engines have been developed into highly efficient and effective tools, the availability of more advanced underlying data structures and associated user interfaces would make paradigm shifting improvements and alternate uses possible.Search engines and digital libraries are focused on, but also limited to, using strings of words. This is reflected in each user interface—users are limited to typing a list of words, and, at most, can indicate which words need to be combined or excluded by using quotes or “not.” This limitation is a consequence of the underlying phrase-based index which requires documents to be matched to words and phrases and it lends itself to a user interface which encourages suboptimal user search habits. For example, it has been shown that people continue to use very few keywords, only 2–3 on average [2–7], regardless of the topic of our search [7]. This existing keyword search technique results in imprecise queries as shown in Section 6.3.To remedy the short queries, query expansion techniques have been researched and are currently used by search engines. Varying degrees of success are achieved when adding different numbers of keywords [8–10], using the most frequent terms [11], or using terms from different parts of documents [12–14]. However, people do not like automated methods [15] and so interactive query expansion is preferred. This has led to the modern query expansion, popularized by many search engines, to select a query from a popup with queries already used by others [16,17].Unfortunately, today’s query expansion reduces the overall diversity of searches thereby also reducing the information available. Exacerbating the problem is that many search engines ignore portions of the queries. In most conventional keyword search engines, relationships between keywords are not captured or used to retrieve and rank the documents. Consequently, the search results show irrelevant results that contain the keywords but not the relationship between them. For example, using PubMed to find articles about “NBS1 interacts with endocytic proteins to affect the central nervous system,” the query “NBS1, endocytosis, central nervous system,” results in 329 documents of which only one of the top 20 documents were related to the query intent. In this example, the relation “interacts with” between “NBS1” and “endocytic protein,” and the relation “affect” between “NBS1” and “central nervous system” were not captured, and as a result most of the retrieved documents are about irrelevant matters (DNA damage, functional polymorphisms in the NBS1, etc.).Many improvements are possible, such as recognizing entities or visualizing results, and they are the topic of much research and development. Our work focuses on one such aspect—the inclusion of the relationship between the keywords in a search query. We define such a relationship as a predicate and store these as triples in the search engine index. The triples are a natural way of describing the vast majority of online data and resources [18]. Moreover, triples consisting of subject, verb or preposition (predicate), and object and form an elementary sentence that represents the basic information of the search [1,18].This study describes the development and evaluation of a predicate-based search engine that uses predicates in addition to keywords. Evaluated using a collection of more than 100,000 Medline abstracts the results showed that a basic implementation of this new, hybrid approach outperformed a basic implementation of the baseline approach (keyword-based search). In our study, the average precision of the predicate-based search was significantly improved by 9.17% compared to that of a keyword-based approach. The average relevance of the predicate-based search was significantly improved by 31.25% compared to that of a keyword-based approach. Our pilot study [19] showed for three examples that our approach to predicate-based search is an improvement. The contribution of this work is the further improvement of algorithms which are then evaluated with a new user study demonstrating the strength of predicate-based searching in biomedicine, a necessary first step in laying a foundation for future general search mechanisms. Although the approach can be applied to other types of text, scientific texts that describe relationships between variables are highly suited to our project.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
