@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
TEMPTING system: A hybrid method of rule and machine learning for temporal relation extraction in patient discharge summaries

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We developed rules and maximum entropy models for extracting temporal relation.We developed an algorithm to hybridize results of rules and maximum entropy models.We identified required knowledge and inference for temporal relations extraction.Clinical note sections within a discharge summary can help define temporal relations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Temporal relation extraction,Natural language processing,Text mining,Hybrid method,Maximum entropy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Patient discharge summaries provide detailed medical information about individuals who have been hospitalized. To make a precise and legitimate assessment of the abundant data, a proper time layout of the sequence of relevant events should be compiled and used to drive a patient-specific timeline, which could further assist medical personnel in making clinical decisions. The process of identifying the chronological order of entities is called temporal relation extraction. In this paper, we propose a hybrid method to identify appropriate temporal links between a pair of entities. The method combines two approaches: one is rule-based and the other is based on the maximum entropy model. We develop an integration algorithm to fuse the results of the two approaches. All rules and the integration algorithm are formally stated so that one can easily reproduce the system and results. To optimize the system’s configuration, we used the 2012 i2b2 challenge TLINK track dataset and applied threefold cross validation to the training set. Then, we evaluated its performance on the training and test datasets. The experiment results show that the proposed TEMPTING (TEMPoral relaTion extractING) system (ranked seventh) achieved an F-score of 0.563, which was at least 30% better than that of the baseline system, which randomly selects TLINK candidates from all pairs and assigns the TLINK types. The TEMPTING system using the hybrid method also outperformed the stage-based TEMPTING system. Its F-scores were 3.51% and 0.97% better than those of the stage-based system on the training set and test set, respectively.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Event and temporal information extraction from plain text is an essential task in natural language processing (NLP) research; and it has been used for many NLP applications, such as document summarization and question answering [4]. Document summarization must identify the key events in one or more stories to yield the best summary with the least extraneous information. Question answering must be able to answer queries about dates, the duration of events, and even relative times in the form of natural language or a set query type. The possible domains for temporal information extraction are numerous and varied, but it is especially useful for processing patient records in the medical domain. Such records contain valuable temporal data that is usually in the form of free text. Information about the sequence of events in patient records plays an essential role in clinical research because it can help solve diverse problems; for example, finding the correlations between treatments and outcomes or extracting information about adverse drug reactions. However, the knowledge that certain items are correlated may be worthless without knowing their temporal order. For example, if researchers are interested in the efficacy of the medicine vancomycin, realizing that the symptom of a disease changes after a patient takes vancomycin may be insufficient without learning that the change only occurs after three days of treatment. To improve the temporal extraction of patient information in the clinical domain, the Sixth Informatics for Integrating Biology and the Bedside (i2b2) NLP challenge [27] was held in 2012. The challenge involved automatically determining the temporal relations between events described in de-identified patient discharge summaries. Based on the TLINK, EVENT and TIMEX3 tags defined in TimeBank [17],1TimeBank is a hand-annotated corpus that conforms to the TimeML specification [18], which is an ISO standard for the annotation of events and temporal expressions, as well as anchoring and ordering the relations between them. In TimeBank, the TLINK tag represents the temporal relationship between events (the EVENT tag) or between an EVENT and a time expression (the TIMEX3 tag).1the challenge released a dataset annotated by Partners HealthCare and Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center [22], and proposed three tracks: (1) EVENT/TIMEX3 track: recognize event and time expressions; (2) TLINK track: based on the given EVENT and TIMEX3 tags, identify their temporal relations; (3) End-to-End track: perform the above two tasks on raw discharge summaries. In the framework of the TLINK track, the actions, situations and descriptions in a discharge summary that are related to the patient’s timeline are annotated with the EVENT tag. Phrases in the summary that provide time-relevant knowledge are annotated with the TIMEX3 tags. Temporal links or TLINKs indicate the relations between pairs of EVENTs and TIMEX3s; and the attribute “type” of a TLINK indicates how temporal objects are related to each other. A TLINK track system must establish a TLINK link between the involved entities. It must also state their attribute type explicitly; that is, indicate if they are: “before”, “after”, “includes”, “is included”, “holds”, “simultaneous”, “immediately after”, “immediately before”, “begins”, “ends”, and so on.Compared to general relation extraction tasks, identifying temporal relations in patient discharge summaries is more strenuous, and has motivated a great deal of NLP research in recent years [12,19,23]. Continuing with the vancomycin example above, the recognition of temporal phrases (e.g. after … three days) and event entities (e.g. vancomycin) are clearly prerequisites for understanding and interpreting the statement. However, the further temporal knowledge and inferences are more important and must be derived. First, the temporal aspects of the properties of entities must be properly assigned. Second, event descriptions involving entities and their time stamps must be extracted. Finally, the temporal order of the involved entities has to be inferred. In this paper, we focus on the TLINK track and propose a hybrid TEMPoral relaTion extractING (TEMPTING) system that combines rule-based and machine learning approaches to capture the above knowledge and inferences. Temporal relation extraction rules and the pseudocode for integrating the rule-based and machine learning results are formally described. To the best of our knowledge, many leading systems in i2b2 [6,24] do not consider some of the proposed rules or state them formally.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
