@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Creation of a new longitudinal corpus of clinical narratives

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
New corpus of 1304 de-identified medical records.Longitudinal records represent 296 patients.Three patient cohorts: with Coronary Artery Disease (CAD), no CAD, develop CAD.Overview of novel uses for this corpus.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Corpus,NLP,Medical records,Machine learning,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The 2014 i2b2/UTHealth Natural Language Processing (NLP) shared task featured a new longitudinal corpus of 1304 records representing 296 diabetic patients. The corpus contains three cohorts: patients who have a diagnosis of coronary artery disease (CAD) in their first record, and continue to have it in subsequent records; patients who do not have a diagnosis of CAD in the first record, but develop it by the last record; patients who do not have a diagnosis of CAD in any record. This paper details the process used to select records for this corpus and provides an overview of novel research uses for this corpus. This corpus is the only annotated corpus of longitudinal clinical narratives currently available for research to the general research community.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The 2014 i2b21Informatics for Integrating Biology and the Bedside.1/UTHealth2University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston.2Natural Language Processing (NLP) shared task featured four tracks: (1) de-identification of medical records, (2) identifying risk factors for coronary artery disease (CAD) in diabetic patients over time, (3) assessment of software usability, and (4) novel uses of the i2b2/UTHealth data set. Of these, tracks 1, 2, and 4 relied on a new corpus and annotations created for that year’s task.The goal of Track 2, the Risk Factor (“RF”) track was to look at CAD risk factors in patients over time. Accordingly, the corpus for this task included longitudinal data: multiple records for each patient, separated in time, that when put together would show changes in the patient’s health status. In order to provide comparison points for patients with different medical histories, we chose for this corpus to represent three different diabetic patient cohorts. The first cohort contains patients who have a diagnosis of CAD in their first record, and continue to have it in subsequent records. The second cohort contains patients who do not have a diagnosis of CAD in the first record, but get a diagnosis of CAD by the last record. The third cohort contains patients who do not have a diagnosis of CAD in the first record and do not get it over the course of their records.The 2014 i2b2/UTHealth NLP shared task tracks and annotations are all very different, but they all have the corpus in common. In this paper, we compare the 2014 corpus to other biomedical corpora and shared task data sets (Section 2), explain the source of the corpus and the process we used to select the records (Section 3), and examine the corpus in terms of data relating to represented groups (Section 4). This paper also discusses novel uses of this corpus outside of the tracks defined by the i2b2/UTHealth shared task organizers (Section 5), and closes with a discussion of our observations on the corpus-building process.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The 2014 corpus is a new and novel resource that, given the information it contains, can support longitudinal studies of diabetes and CAD. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first annotated longitudinal corpus that represents medically-defined patient cohorts and is available for research. This corpus provides sufficient information to support not only an NLP task for identifying CAD-related risk factors, but also a de-identification shared task.Evidence from the 2014 and earlier shared tasks indicate that the i2b2 corpora can also support some research unrelated to their original intent. As a result, we expect that the medical records gathered, de-identified, and distributed by i2b2 will remain useful to the community even in the absence of any new annotations generated by i2b2.This statement affirms that Vishesh Kumar, Amber Stubbs, Stanley Shaw, Özlem Uzuner, the authors of the paper “Creation of a new longitudinal corpus of clinical narratives” do not have any conflicts of interest relating to this paper or its results.