@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Annotating longitudinal clinical narratives for de-identification: The 2014 i2b2/UTHealth corpus

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
De-identification shared task for longitudinal clinical records.Protected Health Information in records replaced with realistic surrogates.First corpus of its kind available for distribution.Used for Track 1 of the 2014 i2b2/UTHealth NLP shared task.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Natural language processing,HIPAA,De-identification,Annotation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The 2014 i2b2/UTHealth natural language processing shared task featured a track focused on the de-identification of longitudinal medical records. For this track, we de-identified a set of 1304 longitudinal medical records describing 296 patients. This corpus was de-identified under a broad interpretation of the HIPAA guidelines using double-annotation followed by arbitration, rounds of sanity checking, and proof reading. The average token-based F1 measure for the annotators compared to the gold standard was 0.927. The resulting annotations were used both to de-identify the data and to set the gold standard for the de-identification track of the 2014 i2b2/UTHealth shared task. All annotated private health information were replaced with realistic surrogates automatically and then read over and corrected manually. The resulting corpus is the first of its kind made available for de-identification research. This corpus was first used for the 2014 i2b2/UTHealth shared task, during which the systems achieved a mean F-measure of 0.872 and a maximum F-measure of 0.964 using entity-based micro-averaged evaluations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Clinical narratives (i.e., free text records of patients’ health and medical history) provide information to researchers that cannot be found in structured medical records, such as family history, reasoning behind prescribed treatments, and details of the patient’s health. These clinical narratives are therefore an important resource for medical applications such as decision support [1,2] and cohort selection [3,4]. However, clinical narratives also contain information that identifies patients, such as their names, home addresses, and phone numbers. The Health Insurance Portability Accountability Act (HIPAA) requires that all information that identifies a patient be removed from these records before sharing the records outside of the clinical setting in which they were produced. The process of determining and removing patient-identifying information from medical records is called de-identification, also called anonymization. Often, removal of the patient-identifying information requires replacements with realistic placeholders, which we refer to as surrogates, also called pseudonyms. The replacement process is called surrogate generation.HIPAA refers to patient-identifying information as Protected Health Information (PHI), and defines 18 categories of PHI as they relate to “the [patients] or of relatives, employers, or household members of the [patients]” (45 CFR 164.514). These categories are shown in Table 1.The 2014 Informatics for Integrating Biology and the Bedside (i2b2) and the University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston (UTHealth) natural language processing (NLP) shared task featured a track focused on the de-identification of longitudinal medical records [5]. Longitudinal medical records represent multiple time points in the care of a patient, making references to past records as appropriate; their de-identification needs to pay attention to indirect identifiers that can collectively reveal the identities of the patients, even when none of those indirect identifiers would be sufficient to reveal the identity of the patient on their own. For example, the description of a patient’s injuries as “resulting from Superstorm Sandy” would not be covered under the HIPAA guidelines, but they indirectly provide both a location and a year for that medical record. This information, paired with other hints about the patient’s identity, such as profession and number of children, could lead to the patient’s identity.However, there are some rewards to mitigate the increased risks. Automated systems can take advantage of the repeated information: a name identified in one record as PHI can be searched for in other records in order to boost accuracy. Additionally, longitudinal records contain significantly more medical information about a patient, and they allow researchers to study a patient’s health over time. We selected the 2014 de-identification corpus in order to support research into the progression of Coronary Artery Disease (CAD) in diabetic patients, a different track for the 2014 i2b2/UTHealth shared task [6].In addition to paying attention to the longitudinal aspects of the corpus, the preparation of the corpus for the shared task was guided by the following goals:1.Given the intended widespread distribution of the corpus, we needed to apply a risk-averse interpretation of the HIPAA guidelines.Given the intended use of the corpus for automatic system development, we needed to maintain the semantics and integrity of the data so that systems developed on these data could be useful on authentic data.We needed to have sufficient representation of PHI categories, both in type and in quantity, so that machine learning based systems could learn automatically from available samples.We needed to have granular PHI categories to maximize the usability of the data for research on any subsets of the PHI, andWe needed to replace the authentic PHI with realistic surrogates to maintain readability.Given our goals, we developed annotation guidelines which we applied to the 2014 i2b2/UTHealth shared task corpus for manual de-identification of 1304 longitudinal clinical narratives, generating gold standard annotations that researchers can use for automatic de-identification system development. We replaced the authentic PHI with realistic surrogates using a combination of automated systems and hand curation.This paper describes the manual de-identification and the automatic surrogate generation processes applied to the 2014 de-identification shared task data, as well as the annotation guidelines generated for this shared task. Institutional review boards of MIT, Partners HealthCare, and SUNY Albany approved this study, and Partners HealthCare approved the de-identification methods described in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper describes the corpus for the 2014 i2b2/UTHealth NLP shared task in medical record de-identification. This is the first longitudinal set of patient records annotated for de-identification and available for de-identification research. It consists of 1304 records for 296 patients, and contains over 28,000PHI. The data were made available for de-identification shared task in May 2014 and will be available online to the rest of the research community in November 2015 at http://i2b2.org/NLP/DataSets with a Data Use Agreement.The authors declare that no conflict of interest.