@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An autonomous mobile system for the management of COPD

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The design of a novel mobile disease management system for COPD is described in detail.Patient data is interpreted by a Bayesian network model for COPD-exacerbation detection.The model is evaluated and shown to be able to reliably detect COPD exacerbations.A pilot study with COPD patients has shown that the system is useful and usable.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Chronic disease management,Bayesian networks,Decision support systems,eHealth,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
IntroductionManaging chronic disease through automated systems has the potential to both benefit the patient and reduce health-care costs. We have developed and evaluated a disease management system for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Its aim is to predict and detect exacerbations and, through this, help patients self-manage their disease to prevent hospitalisation.MaterialsThe carefully crafted intelligent system consists of a mobile device that is able to collect case-specific, subjective and objective, physiological data, and to alert the patient by a patient-specific interpretation of the data by means of probabilistic reasoning. Collected data are also sent to a central server for inspection by health-care professionals.MethodsWe evaluated the probabilistic model using cross-validation and ROC analyses on data from an earlier study and by an independent data set. Furthermore a pilot with actual COPD patients has been conducted to test technical feasibility and to obtain user feedback.ResultsModel evaluation results show that we can reliably detect exacerbations. Pilot study results suggest that an intervention based on this system could be successful.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Increasing demands on health-care and continuous pressure from health-care authorities and insurance companies to reduce costs while maintaining quality of care has created a situation in which automation of particular parts of the patient’s care process has attracted attention. Especially the provision of computer-aided assistance in the management of the patient’s diseases is an attractive option. In the context of chronic diseases, patients are continuously at risk of deterioration of health, requiring regular medical checkups and monitoring of their health status by the treating medical doctor. Providing computer-aided support to the patient can relieve work-load of health-care workers, while helping patients self-manage their disease. However, the provision of computer-aided support to patients poses questions with respect to whether or not patients are able to profit from the support, how the patient data needed for that purpose can be collected and interpreted, and which technical infrastructure is most effective.The idea to offer computer-aided support to patients at a distance from the treating hospital or practice is not new. Remote care facilitated by telecommunication technology has existed for some time already under different names such as: ‘telehealth’, ‘telemedicine’ and more recently ‘eHealth’ (electronic health) and ‘mHealth’ (mobile health). The exact scope and definition of all these terms varies, as exemplified by the review of Oh et al. [1] that identifies 51 definitions of the term ‘eHealth’. Although different definitions will place different emphases we can summarise the definitions as facilitating health care irrespective of location by means of technology. Practically speaking this means that information and communication technology assists in disease management, patient-doctor communication, patient education or any other application that promotes health.The research described in this paper aimed at developing methods for computer-aided assistance, including event detection, alerting, monitoring and treatment advice, as part of chronic disease management at a distance from the hospital. Patients with diseases such as diabetes mellitus, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), asthma and heart failure can benefit from assistance. We have applied it here to assist COPD patients, but the general framework is applicable to many other health-care situations. For COPD we collect data on respiratory symptoms, measure lung function and interpret these data by a probabilistic model to assess the risk of a clinically relevant worsening of symptoms due to an exacerbation.The main challenge addressed by the research was to develop a computer-aided disease management framework that allows finding a proper balance between self-management by the patient and support in various forms by health-care workers. This depends on the patient’s demands and wishes, the disease being managed and the requirements of health-care workers. One of the implications of the resulting requirements was that disease-related patient data had to be interpreted automatically as part of the patient’s self-management support. The system had to be capable of delivering autonomous assistance in disease management without being intrusive. Hence we decided for data monitoring and interpretation directly on a smartphone. Thus, the smartphone became the device of choice, enabling instant feedback to the patient. To cover the whole spectrum from complete self-management to distance support by health-care workers, collected patient data can also be relayed to health-care providers through a central server for both disease management configuration and inspection.Use of a smartphone makes it possible to forego the need for a personal computer (PC) with internet connectivity. This has the advantage that whereas most people are used to responding to phone alerts, sending reminders via email or a website may have little effect on the patient’s behaviour. This is also very much in the spirit of health care that is no longer tied to a particular location.If we compare this to usual care we see that patients have regular but fairly sporadic contact with their physician unless there is an acute reason for an unscheduled visit. Our system is capable of advising patients to take measures at an earlier stage than usual and enables easier communication between patients and health-care providers. Although parts of what the system provides has been used before in the context of eHealth or decision-support systems meant for health-care workers as user, the idea to place both healthcare users and workers on an equal footing by offering patients sophisticated, mobile decision support is new. The more common eHealth systems are mainly focussed on sending small sets of measurements from the patient to health-care providers, who still have to interpret these findings [2]. In the system described below, clinical knowledge is incorporated by means of a probabilistic graphical model in the smartphone, making it possible to provide relevant clinical advice automatically, to assist in patient self-management.The following questions are explored in the rest of the paper. It is investigated in what way patients can be empowered with disease management assistance to prevent exacerbations of COPD. Another relevant question is whether it is feasible to automatically interpret monitoring data by probabilistic models to detect clinically relevant events. This question is explored by means of statistical model validation methods. As a prerequisite we examine choices with respect to the important features of the disease management system in terms of hardware and software. Finally, the usability of the system was investigated with the help of COPD patients. Summarising, we report on a system for COPD exacerbation management, that has the novel feature of including automatic data interpretation by a probabilistic risk model, enabling autonomous operation to support patient self-management.In the next section, we start with some background on the clinical problem addressed in the research. Then the architecture of the disease management system is described in Section 3, focussing on its design and technical capabilities. Furthermore we report on a pilot study that investigates technical and clinical feasibility with a number of patients. The probabilistic model that is used for data interpretation is explained and evaluated in Section 5. Then in Section 6 we compare our system with telemonitoring requirements laid out by Peirce et al. [3] and with existing work on COPD telehealth, followed by a general discussion in Section 7.Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or COPD for short, is a chronic lung disease with high impact on patient well-being and with considerable health-care related costs [4]. Exacerbations – acute events of worsening of COPD-related health status – are important events in the progression of COPD, such that monitoring patients in a home setting to detect exacerbation onset may be warranted [5]. In this paper we focus on disease management and specifically on detecting and managing the occurrence of exacerbations of COPD at an early stage. We aim to decrease the impact of COPD on the patient’s quality of life, and prevent unscheduled doctor visits and hospitalisation due to exacerbations.Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is estimated to affect some 64 million people worldwide1World Health Organization http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs315/en/index.html. Accessed: January 2013.1and is one of the major chronic diseases in terms of both morbidity and mortality. COPD affects the respiratory system, decreasing lung capacity and obstructing airways, thus interfering with normal breathing. Patients often suffer from a combination of emphysema and chronic bronchitis, causing shortness of breath and therefore reducing their capability of performing day-to-day activities. The main cause of COPD is prolonged exposure to tobacco smoke; other causes include severe air pollution. COPD is currently not curable, but treatment does reduce the burden considerably. For further information on COPD see e.g. the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD).2www.goldcopd.com.2An important aspect of COPD which is particularly relevant in the present context is the progressive nature of the disease. Specifically exacerbations have a profound impact on the patient’s well-being and on health-care costs [4]. These exacerbations are mainly caused by airway infections resulting in symptom worsening [6]. Important to note is also that patients with frequent exacerbations usually have faster disease progression, which makes exacerbation prevention a particularly relevant goal. Additionally, a faster treatment response to exacerbations leads to better recovery [7]. We can distinguish different clinical approaches to defining exacerbations. Due to limited observability it is not feasible to give a practical definition in terms of pathophysiology, hence exacerbations are usually defined as an increase in symptoms; in terms of use of medication; or in terms of unscheduled health care use. We will return to this point in Section 5.The state of the respiratory system is observable via symptoms including dyspnea (breathlessness), productive cough, wheezing breath and decreased activity due to breathlessness. Besides these symptoms a number of physiological signs are relevant, in particular the forced expiratory volume in 1s (FEV1) and blood oxygen saturation. FEV1 measures airway obstruction by testing to what extend the patient can overcome obstructive and restrictive resistance during forced exhalation. A number of other indicators of deterioration exist, like blood oxygen pressure, inflammatory proteins and white blood-cell counts. However, measuring these factors requires hospital-grade equipment and incurs considerable inconvenience for the patient. Blood oxygen pressure can be observed by proxy with a pulse-oximeter that measures blood oxygen saturation.The long term nature of COPD and associated exacerbation risk require that any system, deployed in a home-care setting, takes into account not only efficacy, but also usability as important factors in the design. This section describes the current system design, the choices we made and some of the issues that arose during the development and implementation.In Fig. 1a graphical representation of the general idea behind our disease management setup is shown. The system consists of a smartphone as the main component taking care of communication and computation. Sensors are used to obtain objective information on the patient’s health status, transmitted wirelessly to the smartphone. Questionnaire data is collected from the patient on the smartphone. A web-based system allows scheduling tasks and collecting patient data centrally. The web-centre receives the data from the smartphone and provides data access for health-care workers. Patient data are interpreted in the smartphone by means of a disease-specific probabilistic model that incorporates clinical variables considered relevant by a clinical specialist.The system we used for COPD management is a specific instantiation of the general system just described. For COPD we were interested in measuring lung function and blood-oxygen levels to complement the recorded clinical symptoms. To do so we employed a sensor interface that took care of the Bluetooth communication and to which a micro-spirometer and pulse-oximeter were connected.Before going into more detail on the various components let us first describe the monitoring process. At regular intervals, adjustable in frequency and in time of the day, the patient gets an automatic reminder for data entry from the smartphone. The patient is presented with a simple touch-interface to answer a set of questions about COPD symptoms and is subsequently asked to perform a spirometry test and pulse-oximeter measurement. The results of the measurements are transmitted to the phone, and entered in a Bayesian network model to determine the probability of an exacerbation. In addition, the data is synchronised with the web-centre, which allows the responsible health-care workers to examine the patient data; depending on the situation this may be a nurse specialised in lung diseases, general practitioner or pulmonologist. If necessary, the patient can be advised to take action, based on the model’s prediction.Monitoring patients for relapse or a new occurrence of exacerbation provides valuable additional information compared to usual care, as exacerbations are often underreported, with patients only contacting their physician when the exacerbation is already quite severe. For the population of patients with regular exacerbations, this intervention provides a means for the patients themselves and for health-care professionals to stay better informed on the patient’s health status and to act accordingly.We now discuss a number of design issues that are relevant for automatic disease management. Although we focus on the requirements for our COPD system, these points also have more general value for similar systems.Chronic disease management is by its very nature a long term effort, which makes it particularly important to find a careful balance between costs and benefits. The intrusiveness of monitoring systems and costs, both monetary and in terms of patient time investment, require a precise definition of the target population. We argue that those that stand to gain the most from our COPD system are the patients with moderate to severe COPD and frequent exacerbations (more than 2 per year). These patients suffer greatly from the consequences of exacerbations, hence providing regular data to detect exacerbations in an early stage will in general be more acceptable. The most appropriate time to start the intervention would be directly after emergency treatment, because at that time the goal of preventing hospitalisation is clearly relevant for the patient. To increase the chance of success in general, psychological factors associated with intervention acceptance and technology acceptance in particular should be taken into account when introducing a disease management system.The system can operate autonomously in which case no data is transmitted. If data is communicated to health-care providers, all data transmission from the smartphone to the server is encrypted (HTTPS) to protect the privacy sensitive nature of the data. Also access-rights to the data in the web-centre are controlled and patients should give prior consent. Since these are general issues when working with patient data, we will not focus on them here, but they remain important.Ease of use is a critical requirement for any system that has to be used on a regular basis for a prolonged period of time. Since the interval between exacerbations is usually in the order of months, one should take care to reduce patient effort to a minimum, lest patients would stop entering data due to it being inconvenient. The patient population is relatively old on average – possibly not very experienced with the kind of technology offered – hence to facilitate understanding the system provides the ability to do practice runs. Nurses will have a supportive role in training patients. Specifically, at the start of the monitoring process, the nurse will enter the relevant information in the web-centre and instruct the patient on the use of the smartphone and sensors. A practice run serves to check whether the process has been understood and also provides baseline measurement values. In addition to the verbal instructions, the patient receives a written step-by-step instruction for reference. Our initial tests showed that a written instruction may be insufficient and therefore visual instructions, for example with screen captures of the phone, should be provided as well. As nurses are often just as pressed for time as physicians and also cannot be expected to be experts on the technicalities of the system, we provided a support phone-number for both patients and the nurses to assist in resolving any problems they might have. When introducing technology, especially to older patients, instruction by example appears to be preferable to only written instructions.Depending on the health status of the individual patient the rate of data acquisition can be varied, which can be automated based on the acquired data and the model. As long as a patient has low risk of an exacerbation, monitoring can take place on a weekly basis, keeping the time investment at a minimum. If a patient is at risk according to model predictions, the system check-in can be scheduled daily to ensure the possible exacerbation is detected and acted upon appropriately. A week between registrations may however be too long as an infection can develop in a matter of days, which means that unscheduled registrations are also an important part of the monitoring process. To facilitate self-management, it is important that the patient is in control of the registration schedule and can initiate registrations in addition to the predefined schedule. In this way patients can check their probability of exacerbation (appropriately visualised) when they feel they might be at risk. Eventually, this would hopefully lead to patients who no longer need our supporting technology, instead being able to decide by themselves when to contact their physician. The system, thus, has a dual role, providing information to the patient and health-care workers and helping the patient assess their COPD related health status, for better control over their disease.One of the critical points in the current system is the lung function measurement, which provides objective data to augment the subjective symptom data. Whereas oximetry is a simple manoeuvre clipping the sensor on your finger and waiting for a few seconds, spirometry is harder to perform well. In a home-care setting there is a risk of obtaining little useful data. Although patients that would use our system are diagnosed with COPD and therefore have to perform regular spirometry tests, it remains of paramount importance to properly instruct the patient at the start of the intervention. To adhere to the spirometry standards the FEV1 measurement is performed thrice and the best value is used. For the sake of usability we do not continue until three successful measurements have been made, as this would raise the bar unrealistically high. A reduction of the problem comes from the fact that we only take FEV1 into account which is easier and far less strenuous for the patient than measuring forced vital capacity (FVC), as is customary in lung function testing, and requires complete exhalation. In general, the reliability of all data that is gathered should be considered. Sensors can provide objective data only when they are sufficiently reliable.A further consideration is the kind of advice that the system should provide based on the model prediction of exacerbation risk. Typical advice would be to contact the physician, but a useful next step would be to advise, for example, to increase the dosage of bronchodilator drugs, corticosteroids or to start with antibiotics. The exact implementation of different kinds of advice should be decided in cooperation with clinicians, in accordance with clinical guidelines. We return to this point in Section 7.Currently our system runs on an HTC Desire smartphone as an application in the Android OS. In principle any Android phone with Bluetooth capability should suffice, which makes the platform fairly general. If available the fast 3.5G HSDPA connection was used, but due to the use of asynchronous communication and the relatively limited amounts of data being transmitted, data can also be transmitted to the central server when only a slower 2G GPRS connection can be realised. Recall that the self-management part of system also functions without any server connectivity at all.The phone communicates with the sensors via a Mobi, a Bluetooth-capable multichannel sensor-interface, from Twente Medical Systems International. In our case a Nonin pulse-oximeter and a custom micro-spirometer were connected to the Mobi. An important advantage of using the Mobi sensor interface is the availability of the communication-protocol specification, enabling us to integrate the sensor readings seamlessly into the Android application. Most of the other micro-spirometers on the market do not allow this, which makes them unsuitable for easy deployment in a home setting. The monitoring kit is shown in Fig. 2.The pulse-oximeter used in this study was a Nonin Medical 8000AA, which is an industry standard pulse-oximeter. SpO2 accuracy is 70–100%±2 digits.We used custom-made pneumotachograph micro-spirometer prototypes by Twente Medical Systems International. These spirometers were newly developed to interact with the Mobi sensor interface and have the advantage of providing raw data such that analysing the spirometer readings is possible without requiring external software. This enables tight integration with our application, which is difficult or impossible with most commercial spirometers on the market.Measuring raw spirometric data requires that we do some signal processing. The raw data signal is processed on the smartphone to obtain FEV1 values, i.e. forced expiratory volume in 1s. In Fig. 3a schematic spirometric flow-curve is shown. The shaded area is the FEV1, which is computed from the raw data by first determining the peak of the curve, then finding the lowest point in the half second prior to the peak and integrating the flow during one second from there.As the project in which the intervention was developed was called Aerial, the smartphone application inherited the same name. Android applications are written in Dalvik, a programming language that uses Java syntax, but is compiled to run on the Android OS without the Java Virtual Machine. The application provides the following functionality: a timed alarm to signal the registration, with on-screen buttons to delay the start of the registration; a touch-screen interface for the questionnaire, which consists of eight yes/no questions (see Table 1); on-screen instructions for performing the measurements and Bluetooth communication with the Mobi sensor-interface to receive the measured data; processing of the spirometry data to compute the forced expiratory volume in 1s (FEV1); computation of the probability of an exacerbation based on the observed data (see also the section on the Bayesian network and model implementation below); asynchronously transmission of the observed data to the server over a secured data connection. In Fig. 4screen captures are shown of the alarm screen and of the question about cough.The main component of our system is the probabilistic risk model. Based on the data that is gathered, the model can compute the probability of an exacerbation. The model we use is a Bayesian network [8,9]; Section 5 is devoted to the description of the development and evaluation of this model. The Bayesian network has been implemented using the lightweight reasoning engine EBayes3F.G. Cozman, http://www.cs.cmu.edu/javabayes/EBayes/index.html/. Accessed: January 2013.3. Since EBayes is written in Java the model inference could easily be integrated in the Android application. Due to the relatively small size of the Bayesian network and the processing power of modern smartphones, the inference does not have to be deferred to a server but can be performed on site. This has the advantage that even when mobile phone network coverage is suboptimal the application can still provide a probability estimate and accompanying advice. Recall that this capability is also in line with our aim of patient empowerment as mentioned in the introduction.The web-centre is the administration web-application that was built using the workflow management system iTasks [10]. The workflow system implements advanced features to generate and coordinate tasks and provides a generic (web)interface. Since the data management involved with patient monitoring is suitable to be represented as a workflow, iTasks provides a simple and effective way to construct the web-centre. In Fig. 5an impression of the web-centre is shown. Shielded by a secure login and different levels of access rights, the web-centre provides a workflow to enrol patients in the system as follows: first a user account is made with a registration number as identifier; the regular registration schedule is established in consultation with the patient; and a monitoring kit is assigned to the patient; then a practice registration can be performed (registrations are scheduled on the server; the smartphone regularly polls for new messages from the server but can also be forced to synchronise manually), of which the measurement results can be saved as baseline values; finally a start date and time for the registration schedule can be chosen. In addition, the web-centre has basic administration functionality to manage users and monitoring kit assignment as needed in research projects. Importantly, all the data received from the phone can be made available for inspection by the relevant health-care workers, thereby offering a means to stay apprised of the patient’s health staus that is not available in usual care.Normally, there is a long way to go between the development of a prototype system and its actual use within a health-care setting. The involvement of patients in the development of a system is of crucial importance to improve a system based on their feedback and to ensure that the system meets the requirements.We performed a system evaluation with a limited number of stable COPD patients recruited from the University Centre for Chronic Disease Dekkerswald in Groesbeek, the Netherlands, mainly to ensure that they were able to use the system effectively. We tested the monitoring equipment and data entry procedures with help of the patients and also studied the usability of the system from a patient’s point of view.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
