@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Creating hospital-specific customized clinical pathways by applying semantic reasoning to clinical data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We added local ontologies to the pathway model to represent hospital-specific terms.We constructed a semantic data model to store clinical data after semantic transformation.We proposed a generic framework for the hospital-specific customization of standard CPs.The customization method contributed to specify and detail the general knowledge in CPs.The customization method contributed to bridge the CP implementation gap.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Clinical pathway,Semantic transformation,Semantic reasoning,Clinical decision support,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveClinical pathways (CPs) are widely studied methods to standardize clinical intervention and improve medical quality. However, standard care plans defined in current CPs are too general to execute in a practical healthcare environment. The purpose of this study was to create hospital-specific personalized CPs by explicitly expressing and replenishing the general knowledge of CPs by applying semantic analysis and reasoning to historical clinical data.MethodsA semantic data model was constructed to semantically store clinical data. After querying semantic clinical data, treatment procedures were extracted. Four properties were self-defined for local ontology construction and semantic transformation, and three Jena rules were proposed to achieve error correction and pathway order recognition. Semantic reasoning was utilized to establish the relationship between data orders and pathway orders.ResultsA clinical pathway for deviated nasal septum was used as an example to illustrate how to combine standard care plans and practical treatment procedures. A group of 224 patients with 11,473 orders was transformed to a semantic data model, which was stored in RDF format. Long term order processing and error correction made the treatment procedures more consistent with clinical practice. The percentage of each pathway order with different probabilities was calculated to declare the commonality between the standard care plans and practical treatment procedures. Detailed treatment procedures with pathway orders, deduced pathway orders, and orders with probability greater than 80% were provided to efficiently customize the CPs.ConclusionsThis study contributes to the practical application of pathway specifications recommended by the Ministry of Health of China and provides a generic framework for the hospital-specific customization of standard care plans defined by CPs or clinical guidelines.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Clinical pathways (CPs), defined as structured multidisciplinary care plans [1], have been widely implemented as methods to standardize clinical intervention and potentially improve medical quality [2–5]. Extensive studies have evaluated the effectiveness of CPs for various diseases [6–10], though little information exists describing the use of CPs. Recent clinical practice in China has proven that the utility rate of CPs is unsatisfactory [11,12]. The European Pathway Association (EPA) performed an international survey on the practical implementation of CPs in 23 countries between 2004 and 2005 [11]. According to the statistical results reported by the EPA, in only three of the countries evaluated were approximately 21–40% of patients under pathway-based treatment, while in China and other participating countries, the number was less than 15%. Tao et al. [12] summarized the use of CPs based on 1051 literatures about CPs published in Chinese journals between 2003 and 2009. As reported, there were 162 hospitals in China that implemented electronic or paper CPs, accounting for only 0.82% of the total hospitals. And in 162 hospitals, 82.7% of the hospitals implemented CPs for less than 10 diseases.There are two main reasons limiting the practicability of CPs. First, the standard care plans pre-determined in CPs are not universally adaptable for different patients in different hospitals. In addition to patient characteristics, which have been a key consideration in creating personalized care plans via pathway customization, hospital characteristics are also important for generating personalized CPs. Merging the treatment experience of current hospitals into patient-specific CPs is beneficial in improving the practicability of CPs. Second, care plans defined in current CPs are too general to execute. Standard care plans in the clinical pathway (CP) specifications recommended by the Ministry of Health of China cannot be directly implemented in hospitals due to the general description of medical interventions. For example, anesthesia, which is usually essential before a surgical operation in a practical clinical environment, is frequently ignored in standardized CPs. Additionally, antiseptic, anticoagulant, and anti-infective agents are commonly defined in CPs without detailed names and dosages. Addressing complicated clinical details has become a challenge for implementing CPs.Taking into account the above two factors, this study proposes a data-driven, decision-making methodology to improve CP customization by applying semantic analysis and reasoning to historical clinical data. Through the analysis of historical clinical data in the hospital, we can generate disease-specific treatment procedures that are frequently used by physicians. These treatment procedures detail medical interventions of standard CPs and are helpful in creating hospital-specific customized implementation strategies.However, the quality of medical data may be indefinite due to data inconsistency, incompleteness, and ambiguities. Pretreatment is indispensable before completing data statistics and analysis. Semantic web technologies provide a novel approach to address the problem of data complexity [13–17]. This study analyzes and processes the historical clinical data by semantic transformation and reasoning. Common treatment procedures are extracted from clinical data via probability and statistics. After calculating the probabilities of standard CP procedures that appear in historical data, we discuss the process of CP replenishing and detailing, which are realized with the guidance of the historical treatment experience from historical data.In this paper, complete treatment procedures with pathway orders (standard interventions defined by CPs), deduced pathway orders (detailed interventions generated via semantic reasoning), and orders with high probability (supplementary interventions obtained from clinical data) are provided to efficiently customize CPs. Hospital-specific customized CPs are created by applying semantic reasoning to clinical data, which is beneficial for improving the practicability of standard CPs in hospitals.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The increasing amount of data digitally collected in healthcare systems provides great potential for extracting useful knowledge to improve medical services. The combination with clinical data recorded by EMR systems makes the standard care plans defined by CPs much more explicit and detailed. By explicitly expressing the general knowledge of CPs, more detailed and complete decision support is provided for clinical physicians to develop more efficient and intelligent clinical procedures. On the basis of CP knowledge and hospital-specific clinical data, the practicability of standard CPs in current hospitals will be effectively improved. This study contributes to the practical application of CP specifications recommended by the Ministry of Health of China and provides a generic framework for the hospital-specific customization of standard care plans defined by CPs or clinical guidelines.