@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Temporal relation discovery between events and temporal expressions identified in clinical narrative

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We have employed a hybrid approach (machine learning+manual rules).Simple rules are effective for between-sentence TLINK detection.Machine learning is used for within-sentence TLINK detection.Ablation study results are provided for the feature sets examined.Within-sentence conflict resolution shows limited but positive result.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Temporal relation,Clinical narrative,i2b2,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The automatic detection of temporal relations between events in electronic medical records has the potential to greatly augment the value of such records for understanding disease progression and patients’ responses to treatments. We present a three-step methodology for labeling temporal relations using machine learning and deterministic rules over an annotated corpus provided by the 2012 i2b2 Shared Challenge. We first create an expanded training network of relations by computing the transitive closure over the annotated data; we then apply hand-written rules and machine learning with a feature set that casts a wide net across potentially relevant lexical and syntactic information; finally, we employ a voting mechanism to resolve global contradictions between the local predictions made by the learned classifier. Results over the testing data illustrate the contributions of initial prediction and conflict resolution.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In order to study development of diseases and effectiveness of potential treatments, it is very important to understand the temporal relations among all the clinically relevant events such as patient’s symptoms (pre- and post-admission), medical test results, doctor’s diagnoses, administrated drugs and patient’s responses. Starting from a patient’s admission and continuing until after discharge, these events together with related temporal expressions, such as dates and times, are recorded in various clinical records. However, rather than employ a chronicle order and structured format, these records are usually written freely in natural language according to each doctor’s writing styles. Therefore, they need to be transformed into structured data in which the events within each patient’s history can be assigned to a “time line”. This time line captures the essential clinical experience of a patient during the visit. With enough such structured data, systematic analysis can be performed and information about disease progression and treatment effectiveness can be obtained. However, given the sheer number of clinical records available, it is hard to imagine any individual or group can manually process these records and turn them into structured data, even for a particular type of disease. Therefore, an automated system is desired. This automated system should be able to examine natural language text in clinical records, identify clinically relevant events and temporal expressions (together, we call them entities of interest), then discover the temporal relations between these entities and reconstruct the time line.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide background information and briefly describe the temporally annotated data provided by the organizers of the 2012 i2b2 Shared Challenge. In Section 3, our three-step method for temporal relation discovery is presented. Results are summarized in Section 4. We conclude in Section 5 with some discussion.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have presented an automated system for temporal relation discovery from clinical narratives consisting of three components: data expansion, rule-based candidate generation plus supervised machine learning, and conflict resolution. The temporal classification task has proved to be a difficult one because of the variety of ways that temporal information can be linguistically expressed (see previous section for the effect of contextual features). For example, in the sentence “She again tolerated [the procedure] well and [did well] postoperatively”, “the procedure” is classified as overlap with “did well” due to the conjunction “and”. But in fact, this is a before relationship hinted by the adverb “postoperatively”, where the part “-operative-” is referring to “the procedure”. In some other cases, decisions may rely on pragmatic domain knowledge not directly accessible through syntax. For example, in the sentence “She is admitted now for a neuro-interventional radiology procedure to decrease the likelihood of [epistaxis] on [Coumadin]”, “epistaxis” is classified as overlap with “Coumadin” because of the preposition “on” and possibly the entity type being PROBLEM and TREATMENT. However, if the model understood “epistaxis” is a problem caused by applying “Coumadin”, it should know this is actually an after relationship. Yet, the positive contribution of lexical features generated from a simple application of dependency parse trees suggests that syntactic structure can be further exploited to supplement lexical features relying on flat sequential relationships. A second problem, especially with respect to between-sentence relationships, is what to do when annotations fail to capture many temporal relationships. The transitive nature of temporal relations may in some cases make up for such missing data but in others it is more likely to propagate incorrect information through the network, making both learning and evaluation difficult. While we have concentrated our efforts on generic features and strategies, many opportunities exist for applying more domain-specific lexical and pragmatic knowledge to this task, such as the sequential relationships implicit between certain problems, treatments, and even a patient’s location and progress within the hospital setting. We look forward to tuning the feature set, further exploring conflict resolution strategies, and evaluating the system more thoroughly.This project was funded by NIH NLM 2U54LM008748: Informatics for Integrating Biology and the Bedside (i2b2) PI: Isaac Kohane and NIH NLM 1R13LM011411-01: Challenges in Natural Language Processing for Clinical Narratives PI: Ozlem Uzuner.