@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Using chief complaints for syndromic surveillance: A review of chief complaint based classifiers in North America

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a review of 15 chief complaint classification systems currently in use in North America.Classifiers can be divided into those that use statistical methods and those that use keyword based methods.All of the systems reviewed are capable of mapping to respiratory and gastrointestinal syndromes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Chief complaints,Syndromic surveillance,Natural language processing,Medical language processing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A major goal of Natural Language Processing in the public health informatics domain is the automatic extraction and encoding of data stored in free text patient records. This extracted data can then be utilized by computerized systems to perform syndromic surveillance. In particular, the chief complaint—a short string that describes a patient’s symptoms—has come to be a vital resource for syndromic surveillance in the North American context due to its near ubiquity. This paper reviews fifteen systems in North America—at the city, county, state and federal level—that use chief complaints for syndromic surveillance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A major goal of Natural Language Processing (NLP) in the medical domain is the automatic extraction and encoding of data stored in free text patient records. This extracted data can then be utilized by Information Technology systems to perform syndromic surveillance. In particular, the chief complaint—a short string that describes a patient’s symptoms before even a preliminary diagnosis has been made—has come to be a vital resource for syndromic surveillance in the North American context. Despite the acknowledged importance of chief complaints for syndromic surveillance, considerable variation exists in how they are used in practice by system builders, both in terms of algorithms chosen to map chief complaint strings to syndromes, and the syndrome definitions themselves.This paper reviews fifteen currently operational English language1Note that there are efforts to adapt English language chief complaint classification resources to other languages (for example, Lu et al. [1] for Chinese).1chief complaint based syndromic surveillance systems in North America. These systems were developed and deployed at the local, provincial or national level, by government agencies, universities, national public health bodies, military organizations, or local hospitals.The paper is divided into three sections. Firstly, we briefly outline the advantages (and disadvantages) of using chief complaints for syndromic surveillance. We then go onto describe each of the fifteen systems in turn. Finally we present a discussion section, including an outline of emerging syndrome definition standards for the field.Conventional public health disease surveillance relies on the routine manual or electronic filing (by clinicians and laboratories) of reportable and unusual diseases that alert public health officials to disease outbreak clusters of interest [2–4]. That is, conventional surveillance mechanisms depend on confirmatory laboratory testing after preliminary diagnosis by a physician. In many cases, the confirmation of an infectious disease or a bioterrorism agent takes days of testing and epidemiological analysis before an outbreak is identified. Traditional disease surveillance methods that rely on the passive and voluntary reporting of cases of specific diseases by practitioners and laboratories may not be timely enough to provide the information needed to detect and monitor a rapidly evolving outbreak [2,3,5,6].Timely outbreak detection requires the identification of suspicious patterns that occur early in the course of an illness [2,7,8]. Syndromic surveillance focuses on the early symptom (prodromal) period before clinical or laboratory confirmation of a particular disease [7,9,10] and may utilize both clinical and alternative data sources that reflect measurable alterations in personal behaviors that may precede a clinical diagnosis.2Note that the term syndromic surveillance can be used in a more restrictive sense to refer only to the analysis of medical reports (of various kinds), with alternative non-medical data sources specifically excluded [11,12]. In this paper, we use the term syndromic surveillance in its wider sense, to include over-the-counter medication sales and absenteeism data.2Syndromic surveillance systems often utilize data sources that already exist but have not been designed specifically for public health surveillance purposes. These sources could include patients’ chief complaints in medical facilities, prescriptions filled, retail drug and product sales, and school or work absenteeism [3,6,7,13].Many automated syndromic surveillance systems use triage chief complaints to classify patients into syndromic case definitions [8,14–19]. A chief complaint is a short phrase entered by a triage nurse or admission clerk describing the reason for a patient’s visit to a medical facility3Chief complaints are known as presenting complaints in some anglophone countries like the United Kingdom, Australia and the Republic of Ireland.3[20]. It has the advantages of being nearly ubiquitously available in the United States, routinely generated during normal hospital operations [21], and available electronically during or shortly after a patient’s visit, thus providing a basis for real-time surveillance [22] (for a random sample of chief complaints, see Table 1). The chief complaint is routinely collected during a patient’s encounter, because it represents a central piece of information that directs care. Various clinical, research, and administrative objectives all rely on the presence of an easily identifiable and unambiguous chief complaint. However, to be useful for syndromic surveillance, the free-text triage chief complaints must first be classified into syndromic categories or into some other type of coded representation that can be manipulated by a computer [14]. Hand-coding data into syndrome categories, whether performed onsite in the medical facility or offsite, requires considerable time and labor [22]. To make chief complaint data more realistically usable for ongoing surveillance, automated syndromic categorization applications have been developed. However, automated chief complaint categorization still suffers from the challenging nature of the data (that is, prevalence of abbreviations and misspellings, context-sensitive vocabulary, inter-hospital variation) and usability considerations (for example, providing a means for refining syndrome criteria) both of which must be overcome to classify chief complaints efficiently and effectively [22]. Furthermore, chief complaints vary in accuracy because they are recorded prior to physician involvement in care and can therefore lack the diagnostic precision of physician generated reports [23].While capturing surveillance data using chief complaints does not incur human effort, delay, or drastic reduction in information obtained by coding, the use of chief complaint data does have associated problems—identified by Shapiro [24]—caused by linguistic variation:1.A single symptom can be described in multiple ways by using synonyms and paraphrases.Medical concepts are often recorded using abbreviations and acronyms that are idiosyncratic to individual hospitals.The same concept can be indicated with different parts of speech.Words are frequently misspelled or mistyped in busy medical settings, causing the continual appearance of new, previously unseen errors.The use of free text in chief complaint based syndromic surveillance systems requires managing the substantial variation that results from the use of synonyms, abbreviations, acronyms, truncations, misspellings and typographic errors (examples of the surface variation found in chief complaints can be seen in Table 2). Failure to detect these linguistic variations could result in missed cases, and traditional methods for capturing this variation require ongoing labor intensive maintenance. One way of addressing this problem is to preprocess the string before it is handed over to the syndrome classifier (see Fig. 1, for a generic preprocessing module). Alternatively, supervised learning methods, if provided with enough labeled training data, are able to process chief complaints without the need for a preprocessing module. This issue is addressed further in Section 4.Beyond the NLP problem of mapping abbreviated or misspelled chief complaints to a syndrome is the issue of how syndromes themselves are specified and at what level of granularity. It is notable that many of the systems surveyed in the current paper use not just different syndromes (that is, some are concerned with only one syndrome, some with several) but also radically different syndrome definitions, thus making system comparison difficult.4However, recently there has been a move towards the creation of standard system definitions [25].4In this section we present a review of fifteen chief complaint classification systems developed in North America. First we outline some broad features of all systems, before going onto describe each system individually. Systems were identified through community knowledge,5A questionnaire was sent to the developers of “known” systems.5with additional classifiers identified using Pubmed searches6Pubmed search: chief complaint classifier, chief complaint system.6and Google searches. Once we identified the systems, we developed a questionnaire and distributed it to system developers to capture detailed characteristics of the chief complaint classifiers. For some systems we have comprehensive information (including evaluation) gleaned from published papers or websites. For other systems, we rely primarily on the results of our questionnaire. Note that all the tables in this section (with the exception of Table 7) show the results of the questionnaire completed by system builders. Of the fifteen systems, fourteen are based in the United States and one is based in Canada (Quesst). All systems covered, their names and originating organizations, are show in Table 3.Table 4delves deeper into the system characteristics, describing the processing method (whether keywords based, linguistic, or probabilistic–see Fig. 2), the implementation language, and whether the system is publicly available. Table 5shows the different syndrome categories used in each system. Table 6shows the different preprocessing characteristics used in each system (for example, is a preprocessor used at all? are abbreviations expanded?). Finally, Table 7shows a matrix of published evaluations between systems. Discussion of the results presented in each table are given in Section 4. The remainder of this section outlines the fifteen chief complaint classifiers reviewed.The BioPortal (now BioPortal 2.0) project7http://ai.arizona.edu/research/bioportal.7began in 2003 at the University of Arizona (in collaboration with the California Department of Health Services and the New York State Department of Health) [42]. Chief complaint classification is only one part of a more comprehensive system (which includes data visualization facilities and veterinary disease monitoring). Our focus will be on the system’s free text chief complaint classification module.Lu et al. [26] describe the latest version of BioPortal’s chief complaint classification system. The system is primarily rule based (as opposed to statistical) as the use of hand-crafted rules reduces the training bottleneck and also allows the system to be modified to cover new syndromic categories. In essence, “low-hanging” chief complaints match keywords, but further statistical processing is required for those chief complaints not matched in this simple first pass.Processing has three stages:1.Preprocessing8Lu et al. [26] refer to the preprocessing stage as “standardization”.8: Acronyms, abbreviations and truncations are expanded using three methods:•Synonym lists9Synonym extraction is performed using the EMT-P plugin [15].9The UMLS10Unified Medical Language System: http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/.10specialist lexicon toolEdit distance string matchingThese standardized chief complaints are then mapped to UMLS concepts.Symptom grouping: Symptoms for each syndrome are organized into Symptom Grouping Tables (SGTs). For example, “nausea”, “vomiting”, and “sickness” belong in the gastrointestinal SGT. Chief complaints that cannot be directly matched with items in a SGT via exact string matching may be semantically related to some SGT item. This semantic relationship is quantified using distance between the two concepts in the UMLS metathesaurus using the Weighted Semantic Similarity Score (WSSS) [26].Syndrome classification: Symptoms are mapped to syndromes of interest. For example, the chief complaint “SOB AND NAUS” is expanded (by the stage one preprocessing module) into shortness of breath and nausea. Stage two places shortness of breath and nausea into Respiratory and NVD syndromes. Stage three, maps the original chief complaint (“SOB AND NAUSEA”) to Respiratory and NVD syndromes.BioPortal was evaluated against the CoCo system [33] (see Section 3.7.1) and the Ears systems [37] (see Section 3.10). Test data consisted of one thousand distinct chief complaints, each assigned to a syndromic category by a jury consisting of two physicians and a nurse. The syndromic categories used were: botulism, constitutional, gastrointestinal, hemorrhagic, neurological, rash, lower respiratory, upper respiratory, fever and other (“other” is a catch all for the remaining chief complaints not placed into the previous categories). The UMLS-enhanced BioPortal system outperformed both CoCo and Ears using f-measure and sensitivity metrics. However, for low prevalence syndromes (for example, rash and botulism) conclusive results could not be shown.The Essence System (“Electronic Surveillance System for the Early Notification of Community Based Epidemics”) was developed at Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory (in collaboration with Maryland Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, District of Columbia Department of Health, the Virginia Department of Health, and the Defense Advanced Research Project Agency). Like BioPortal, Essence is a comprehensive biosurveillance monitoring and visualization tool, with a dedicated chief complaint classification module [27,43].11The system consists of resources for processing school absenteeism data and veterinary reports, in addition to the chief complaint classification module.11Essence uses a three stage processing pipeline:1.Preprocessing: The preprocessing module removes punctuation and digits and expands abbreviations. This abbreviation expansion is performed using dictionary lookup.Determine Lower Level Syndromes: Low level syndromes are identified using a variant of the cosine similarity method familiar from information retrieval (referred to as “weighted keyword matching” [27]). In this scheme, chief complaints are documents and low level syndrome definitions (which consist of collections of associated symptoms) are queries. To rectify misspellings, the system uses a variant of the Levenshtein edit distance algorithm.Constructing Higher Level Syndromes: The higher level syndromes used by the system (respiratory, death, gastrointestinal, sepsis, unspecified, other, rash, neurological) are constructed from the lower level syndromes (described in stage two) using boolean logic. This functionality allows for the rapid construction of new high level syndrome categories; Sniegoski [27] gives the example of the SARS outbreak of 2003/2004, where a new high level SARS syndrome was constructed from lower level syndromes in less than a day.System evaluation involved the analysis of chief complaint classification results from a single hospital over a 2week period, which suggested that both the specificity and sensitivity were greater than 0.90. Further, error analysis indicated that mistakes were largely attributable to the preprocessing module, in particular, problems with the expansion of unrecognized truncations and abbreviations. Later versions of the system are able to process triage notes using the Essence parser.The Quesst System (Queen’s University Emergency Syndromic Surveillance Team), based at Queen’s University, Canada has been in operation since 2004 [28]. The system classifies chief complaints from several Canadian hospitals. Initially, the Quesst project used the CoCo chief complaint classifier (see Section 3.7.1), a component of the Rods system [44]. However, the Quesst team identified two problems characteristic of the CoCo system that were suboptimal for their purposes:1.The system functions at the word level (that is, not phrases).CoCo uses the naive bayes algorithm which assumes statistical independence between features.In order to address these perceived disadvantage, the system designers built a maximum entropy model based classifier using the Stanford NLP toolkit.12http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/.12In the case of Quesst, character sequences that occur frequently in chief complaints were adopted as binary features.To evaluate the classifier, two methods were used. The first method involved developing a training/test data set of chief complaints (10,000/3000 respectively) which where then classified into one of eight syndromes. The performance of the maximum entropy classifier was then compared to CoCo using this new training/test set. The researchers found that the maximum entropy algorithm achieved better f-scores for the three most prevalent syndromes considered (Fever/ILI, 0.918/0.850; Respiratory 0.971/0.906; Gastrointestinal 0.974/0.891). However, meaningful comparisons could not be drawn for the low frequency syndromes.The second evaluation method was more qualitative, focusing on ecological validity in the application context. The original CoCo server was run in parallel to the new maximum entropy server, and their respective errors and strengths analyzed. The researchers found that the new algorithm functioned more effectively in the context of the system. The system developers attribute this increase in performance to the maximum entropy algorithm’s ability to utilize knowledge regarding the dependencies between different features.North Carolina Disease Event Tracking and Epidemiology Detection Tool (NC Detect13http://www.ncdetect.org.13) was developed at North Carolina Division of Public Health. The system monitors textual data from Emergency Departments, the Carolinas’ Poison Centre, and the Pre-Hospital Medical Information System. The system uses a stored keyword based methodology, combined with SQL, to map chief complaints to syndromes of interest. Syndromes covered include respiratory, gastrointestinal, neurological and fever.CCC EDS (Coded Chief Complaints for Emergency Department Systems) is a chief complaint classifier (and associated schema) developed at MacNeal Hospital, Berwyn, Illinois [30]. The researchers used several different sources—including the National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey,14http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/ahcd.htm.14the symptom section of the ICD-9 coding system and the relevant literature—to develop a list of 228 chief complaints. Each of these 228 chief complaints is associated with a type (injury, disease, treatment or exposure) and a system (cardiovascular, gastrointestinal or respiratory) in an attempt to facilitate the creation of reports focussed on specific user needs. In addition to type and symptom, each chief complaint is associated with the following metadata:•Definitional statementSynonyms (in total 2557. Each synonym maps to a single chief complaint)Coded according to Centers for Disease Control case definitions and ICD-9 & ICD-10 codesTo provide a specific example, the chief complaint “earache” includes the synonyms ear ache, earpain, otalgia, and pain in ear (note that synonyms can include misspellings). Additional synonyms were generated using corpus evidence. No preprocessing techniques were used and case insensitive string matching was employed to map from chief complaint strings to one of the 228 chief complaint categories (for example, the string “cough, fever and diarrhea” maps to the chief complaints Cough, Fever and Diarrhea).The system was evaluated using a corpus of 45,329 chief complaints of which 87.5% (39,650) were identified using 1116 synonyms (out of a total of 2557). The most frequently occurring chief complaint in the corpus was “abdominal pain”. Examples of unmapped chief complaints included “swallowed penny”, “dob bite” (sic) and “stomack pain” (sic). CCC-EDS has subsequently been refined using other emergency department and medical call center data sets. CCC-EDS version 5 has been expanded to 243 coded chief complaints using a Natural Language Processing engine with over 9000 synonyms.The Ngram Chief Complaint classifier (developed by AT&T Labs and the Emergency Medical Association of New Jersey Research Foundation) uses a machine learning approach to assign ICD-9 codes to chief complaints [31,32]. A corpus of Emergency Room reports (approximately 500,000 in total [32]), marked with both chief complaints and ICD-9 codes was used as training data, with the chief complaints represented as character based N-grams consisting of four characters (for example, “naus” and “diar”). Using this data, probabilities linking chief complaint strings to ICD-9 codes could be calculated for previously unseen chief complaints. Additionally, the character based representation allows for spelling errors and minor term variation. Once assigned an ICD-9 code, the chief complaint can be linked to a syndrome using a stored look-up table.The advantage of using a data driven method of assigning ICD-9 codes to chief complaints is that it can be ported easily to any language or environment (given that sufficient appropriate training data is available). Additionally, using intermediate ICD-9 codes facilitates data sharing and both national and international comparison.The Real Time Public Health Surveillance System (Rods15http://www.rods.pitt.edu.15) was developed primarily at the University of Pittsburgh from around the year 2000, operating chiefly in two US states (Pennsylvania and Utah) as well as in the monitoring of large scale public events (like the 2002 Winter Olympics) [2]. One of the distinctive features of Rods is that it is a realtime surveillance system. That is, data is not downloaded once a day and processed as a “batch”, but rather transmitted over a private network using HL7 protocols, hence increasing the timeliness of results.Chief complaint processing is just one feature of the Rods system (which includes data from over-the-counter health care sales, prescriptions, and school absenteeism). Two chief complaint classifiers have been used in Rods: CoCo and SyCo.CoCo (Complaint Coder) uses a naive bayesian classifier to sort chief complaints into one of eight syndromic categories (constitutional, respiratory, gastrointestinal, hemorrhagic, botulism, neurological, respiratory and other). The probability of each word belonging to a syndromic category is learned from a manually created data set. According to Olszewski [45] (a direct precursor of the CoCo system) chief complaints were converted to lower case and all punctuation removed. Additionally, Olszewski [45] compared chief complaints to ICD-9 codes for determining syndromic categories and found that chief complaints yielded better results (using a data set of 28,990 reports).CoCo can be used as an off-the-shelf product (that is, using the syndromic probabilities and syndromic categories developed by Rods). Alternatively, bespoke syndromic categories and training data can be developed for new sites or public health contexts. Note that CoCo has been used as a component within other surveillance systems (for example BioPortal).More recently, SyCo (Symptom Coder) has been developed as a probabilistic chief complaint classifier in Rods[34]. SyCo differs from CoCo in that instead of mapping chief complaints directly to syndromes using probabilistic techniques, chief complaints are first mapped to symptoms (using naive bayes) and symptoms are then mapped to syndromes (again using naive bayes). A syndrome is defined as a combination of symptoms and boolean operators (for example, nauseaORvomitingORabdominal pain might be the definition of gastrointestinal syndrome). Training data consisted of 16,718 chief complaints assigned to zero or more of seventeen syndrome categories. Like CoCo, SyCo is implemented in Java and is available as part of the Rods System.MPLUS (The Medical Probabilistic Language Understanding System) is a bayesian network based system developed initially at the University of Utah [35] for processing narrative clinical reports (in particular radiography reports and brain CT scans). Subsequently, the system was modified to process chief complaint data for syndromic surveillance [46]. The system classifies chief complaints using the Rods syndrome definitions (that is, constitutional, gastrointestinal, hemorrhagic, neurological, rash, respiratory botulism, and other).The basic system shell—before it has been modified to handle chief complaints and map to syndromes—consists of several modules:A: A lexicon derived from the UMLSB: A synonym module that maps synonyms, misspellings and textual variants to a canonical formC: A bayesian network for encoding words from textD: An edit distance based spell checkerE: A semantic analysis moduleF: A chart parser (and context free grammar) used to instantiate the bayesian networkConverting the system to the new domain involved:•Generating a bespoke synonym list (for example s.o.b → short of breath)Disabling the edit distance measure and adding misspellings to the synonym listThe system was trained using 4700 randomly selected chief complaints derived from a single hospital in Pittsburgh. The performance of the system was compared to a “gold standard” test set of 800 chief complaints annotated by a domain expert, showing that both specificity and sensitivity for all syndromes (with the exception of “other”) was above 0.95.The NYC-Keyword system was developed by the New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene from 2001, taking as input chief complaints from 39 hospitals in the New York City area [36]. SAS is used to scan chief complaints for character strings associated with syndromes of interest. Chief complaints can only belong to one syndromic category; in cases where chief complaints contain character strings that are associated with more than one syndromic category a hierarchy of syndrome classes (see Fig. 3) is used to identify the syndrome of most interest. For example, if we take the chief complaint “cold and fever”, cold maps to syndromic class common cold, and fever maps to class fever. As common cold is higher in the hierarchy than fever, the fever class is discarded. This approach was taken as the primary focus of the system is on two bioterrorism focussed syndromes (specifically respiratory and fever) in adults and adolescents. Chief complaints that can be associated with colds are not included in order to increase the specificity of the respiratory system.The system was tested over a 1year period (November 2001–November 2002) with 2.5 million patient visit records. For all ages, respiratory syndrome was the most frequently identified syndrome (0.8%). 73.5% of chief complaints were assigned to no syndromic category and 4.1% of chief complaints were blank.The Early Aberration Reporting System—Ears—was developed first at the CDC (in the wake of the attacks on New York and Washington in 2001) and subsequently at the National Center for Infectious Diseases [37,47].16http://www.bt.cdc.gov/surveillance/ears/.16The system is implemented in SAS, is publicly available and is designed to be easily set up. The system is widely used at the city, state and county levels and for monitoring large public events (for example, the 2004 Summer Olympics in Greece). Ears provides general purpose surveillance services, including monitoring calls to the emergency services, over the counter medication sales, and school absenteeism. Like the NYC-Keyword system (Section 3.9), data is processed in batch mode. Ears uses the Text String Search algorithm (more recently renamed as the Ears Search Process (ESP)), a keyword based system designed to map chief complaints to both symptom and syndrome classes.The Mayo Clinic Vocabulary Server (MCVS) is a general purpose clinical text processing tool that has been used for the analysis of radiology reports with the goal of identifying pneumonia [48], and for processing disability evaluation records [39]. MCVS uses a chief complaint preprocessor to normalize surface differences (that is, punctuation and case). Chief complaint strings are then normalized (using the Unified Medical Language System’s Norm program [49]) before being broken down into words and multi-word units. These words (or multi-word units) are then deterministically mapped to symptoms (and in turn to syndromes). A chief complaint can belong to multiple syndrome classes. The system is implemented in Java.BioSense17http://www.cdc.gov/biosense/.17was developed by the CDC and the Public Health Information Network (PHIN) as a central plank of the United States government’s bioterrorism and emergency preparedness strategy. In addition to chief complaint monitoring, the system processes ICD-9 codes gleaned from ER reports. As of 2007, the system receives input from over 370 hospitals and 1100 defense facilities all over the United States [40,50]. The system uses eleven syndromes—fever, gastrointestinal, hemorrhagic, localized cutaneous lesion, lymphadenitis, botulism, neurologic, rash, severe illness, specific infection and respiratory—with 78 sub-syndromes specified. Mapping is performed using keywords derived from the Ears system (see Section 3.10), which includes disease terms, abbreviations and common misspellings. Additional keywords are added based on clinical experience and attested instances. To perform classification, the system uses the CoCo classifier (see Section 3.7.1). The system is implemented in the C programming language.The Boston Public Health Commission’s Communicable Disease Division Chief Complaint Classification System (henceforth “Boston System”) [41] uses eight syndromic groups (including respiratory, gastrointestinal and neurological syndromes). The system matches stored keywords against chief complaints to output both symptoms and syndromes, and is implemented in a combination of Perl and SAS. Pendarvis et al. [41] describes the use of the system in a practical context, monitoring an outbreak of Mallory-Weiss Syndrome among children in the Boston area.The Emergency Medical Text Processor (Emt-P18http://nursing.unc.edu/emtp and http://ibridgenetwork.org/unc/emergency-medical-text-processor-version-2-3.18) was developed at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill from 2002 (using data from 2000 to 2001) [15,51]. The software is free for non-commercial use (and available for commercial use by agreement). Perl was used to implement the text processing modules and Java for the program control.The notion of text cleaning is central to Emt-P. Chief complaint strings are “cleaned” in three progressively more aggressive stages until the chief complaint is matched with a UMLS term. The three stages of processing are:1.Replace and correct replaces acronyms, abbreviations, truncations and other synonyms with standard terms (for example, dirreah → diarrhea), then compares these standardized terms to the UMLS. Chief complaints that are not matched are carried over to stage two.Punctuation and segmentation expands punctuation, and replaces acronyms and abbreviations with their full form using a look-up table (for example, chest/abdmn pain → chest and abdomen pain). Expanded terms are then checked against the UMLS, and those that are not matched are passed to the third and final “text cleaning” stage.Deletion is the most aggressive stage. where modifiers, qualities, numbers and temporal information is removed (for example, chest pain since 3pm → chest pain). If at this stage the chief complaint cannot be matched with a UMLS term, then the chief complaint remains uncategorized.Once chief complaints have been mapped to UMLS terms, they can be mapped to syndromes of interest using a look up table methodology. Note that as of 2007, Emt-P had not been integrated into the NCDetect system (see Section 3.4), also based at the University of North Carolina Chapel Hill [15]. Note that the tool is designed to be used as a pre-processor in conjunction with a chief complaint classification module.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
