@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A context-aware approach for progression tracking of medical concepts in electronic medical records

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A context-aware approach is proposed to track medical concept progression.The context-aware approach enriches context with more reliable temporal expressions.nttmuClinical.NET is released for processing unstructured electronic medical records.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Clinical natural language processing,Temporal information extraction,Electronic medical record,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Electronic medical records (EMRs) for diabetic patients contain information about heart disease risk factors such as high blood pressure, cholesterol levels, and smoking status. Discovering the described risk factors and tracking their progression over time may support medical personnel in making clinical decisions, as well as facilitate data modeling and biomedical research. Such highly patient-specific knowledge is essential to driving the advancement of evidence-based practice, and can also help improve personalized medicine and care. One general approach for tracking the progression of diseases and their risk factors described in EMRs is to first recognize all temporal expressions, and then assign each of them to the nearest target medical concept. However, this method may not always provide the correct associations. In light of this, this work introduces a context-aware approach to assign the time attributes of the recognized risk factors by reconstructing contexts that contain more reliable temporal expressions. The evaluation results on the i2b2 test set demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed approach, which achieved an F-score of 0.897. To boost the approach’s ability to process unstructured clinical text and to allow for the reproduction of the demonstrated results, a set of developed .NET libraries used to develop the system is available at https://sites.google.com/site/hongjiedai/projects/nttmuclinicalnet.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Heart disease is the leading cause of death in the United States, and coronary heart disease accounts for more than 60% of all incidents of heart disease. In addition, heart attack events can result in several complications such as heart failure, valvular heart diseases and arrhythmia. To prevent the incidence of new myocardial infarction, reduction of known proper risks related to coronary heart disease including smoking, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, obesity, and diabetes mellitus and tracking their progression over time are of utmost importance. To promote the identification of information relevant to heart disease risks and track their progression as documented in electronic medical records (EMRs), this work developed a system that recognizes mentions of medical concepts including the following items: disease names of diabetes and coronary artery disease (CAD); associated tests such as glycated hemoglobin (HbA1C) and test results; events and symptoms of CAD; and measurements related to diabetes, hyperlipidemia, hypertension, and obesity including blood glucose/pressure, cholesterol level, low-density lipoprotein (LDL) level, body mass index (BMI), and waist circumference.One general approach for progression tracking is to first recognize all temporal expressions, and then assign each to the nearest target concept. The distance between the concept and a temporal expression could be the number of tokens among them or depend on the syntactic parsing. However, associations resulting from such an approach may not always be correct, especially if the text processed by the natural language processing (NLP) system was incomplete or contains arbitrary line breaks. In light of this, this work proposes a context-aware approach which first reconstructs the context to enrich it with reliable temporal information. The algorithm then assigns the corresponding time attributes for all recognized concepts with respect to the creation time of the medical records (hereinafter referred to as the document creation time or DCT) based on the temporal information of the constructed context. The proposed algorithm and core library used to develop the system are available at https://sites.google.com/site/hongjiedai/projects/nttmuclinicalnet to allow for the enhancement of the proposed method and the reproduction of the demonstrated results.Fig. 1displays a flowchart of the developed NTTMUNSW system-a joint work of National Taitung University (NTTU), Taipei Medical University (TMU), the University of New South Wales (UNSW) and Taiwan’s Academia Sinica. For each EMR, a section recognizer constructed in our previous work [1] is first used to identify section headings. The text between two section headings is considered as the corresponding section content of the preceding section. For example, in Fig. 2, the content of the “Narrative History” section is “55 y/o woman who presents for f/u … Still with hot flashes, wakes her up at night. …”The content of each section is then processed by medical concept recognizers to identify disease mentions, along with their corresponding risk factors and medications. Subsequently, the time-attribute assigner component uses the proposed context-aware algorithm with two different context range parameters to determine the relative time attributes of the medical concepts. The setting of the range parameter determines the maximal expansion of the algorithm. In practice, the parameters were set according to the format of the given EMR. As shown in Fig. 1, if the record is a medical note, such as a discharge summary, the section-based strategy is used to indicate that the range parameter was set to “section”-the text in between two section headings. Otherwise, the record is considered to be a narrative description in a text like a consultation letter, and the paragraph-based method is used. The details of the proposed context-aware algorithm are described in the “Time-attribute Assigner” section. Other steps of the system workflow are elaborated in the following sub-sections.The mention concept herein refers to the descriptions in an EMR that indicate a diagnosis of the two target diseases–diabetes and CAD, as well as hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and obesity. In this work, two methods were used to develop the mention concept recognizer. The first is a dictionary-based method, and the second is based on machine learning.For the dictionary-based method, we collected a dictionary consisting of 220 terms for all five mention types by manually inspecting all texts tagged as a “mention” concept within the training dataset. In addition, all extracted relevant mentions from the dictionary used in our previous work [2] were merged. For the machine learning-based approach, the training dataset annotated with the occurrence of mention concepts was selected as the training set. The IOB2 tagging scheme was used to formulate the recognition problem as a sequential labeling task. This work then used the conditional random field (CRF) algorithm with the features proposed in our previous works [3,4] including part-of-speech tags, shallow parser tags, dictionary matching and bag of words to build the model.In addition to the mention concepts described in the previous section, a list of relevant numeric risk factors was defined for each mention type. For instance, blood pressure (BP) with a value over 140/90mm/hg is considered as a risk factor for hypertension. Table 1summarizes the medical concepts, their corresponding risk factors, and the standard values at which each factor is deemed to be risky. For each risk factor category, a list of keywords was collected from the training dataset by extracting terms annotated as the category. The list was then used as a dictionary by our system to tag the given medical record. For a candidate risk factor, if its adjacent numeric value (recognized by using regular expression patterns) satisfied the requirement listed in Table 1, the factor was then reserved for the assignment of the time attribute in the later stage. For non-numeric type risk factors, such as the surgery event of CAD, the corresponding keywords were collected from the training set, and the same dictionary-based approach was then used to recognize those factors.This work also recognizes all medications related to the targeted risk factors within an EMR. For instance, thiazide diuretics, often used to treat hypertension, are a target medication category. Similar to the mention concept recognizer, the same CRF algorithm and feature sets were used to build a model that can recognize target medications. All recognized medications were then matched with a medication name-category mapping file to determine the corresponding medication categories through a normalization step. The mapping file consists of medication terms collected from Wikipedia, including the generic names and classes of all drugs. In addition, as medications are usually presented by brand names in clinical texts, such as “Lozol” for thiazide diuretics, information from the Drugs.com website was therefore consulted for the brand names of all drugs, and the file was further expanded using the vocabularies of Drugbank [5]. Finally, the fourth author, who is a medical doctor, manually verified and finalized the mapping file. The final file contains 21 categories and a total of 474 names. Some recognized medication names cannot be directly mapped to their categories due to typographical errors, so a partial matching algorithm was employed to map the recognized mention with the compiled mapping file.The time-attribute assigner determines the time attributes for all recognized medical concepts. Before the execution of the time-attribute assigner, the following NLP steps are applied to the raw text of the given EMR. This work reserved the original line breaks of the raw text, which enables us to easily capture paragraphs in some record layouts. For each text block distinguished by the line breaks, the text was processed by the MedPost tagger [6] and our section classifier [7] to recognize sentences, tokens, and section headings. Note that due to the variety of record layouts, the sentences generated by the above NLP steps may be incomplete as shown in the right column of Fig. 3. The record date of the given EMR was also extracted for later usage. The information can be extracted by checking the content of the “Record date:” section of each record. Subsequently, all recognized medical concept instances along with their corresponding span information were collected as a list. Each instance in the list was then processed by the time-attribute assigner to determine its time attribute.The proposed context-aware time-attribute assigner was developed based on the notion that the algorithm for the assignment of a medical concept’s time attribute should both sense and react in a context-dependent manner. The present work defines the context as the narrative containing any information that can be used to characterize the time attribute of a medical concept. If the assigner senses that the current context is insufficient to determine the associated time attribute, the context-aware algorithm reacts by extending the current context to a certain extent and re-checks the context again until it resolves the time attribute or there is no further context to be expanded. More specifically, in this work, the (incomplete) sentence s which contains the target medical concept mc was first checked to determine whether or not it contains a clue that indicates the time attribute of mc. In this case, two types of context were involved, including the mention mc itself and s. The text of mc was considered as the superior context to s, since in some cases the mention itself contains the temporal information. For instance, our risk factor recognizer will recognize the entire statement “HBA1C 05/25/2092 7.30” as a High A1C risk factor (7.30>6.5), which indicates that the risk factor was observed on 05/25/2092.If the assignment failed and s is an incomplete sentence, s is extended to include surrounding tokens to form a complete sentence s′, which is then re-checked by the algorithm. Assuming that the extended context still does not provide any clues, the context is then further extended until either the time attribute is assigned or a predefined maximal extent (defined by the context range parameter) is achieved. Note that this work assumes that the temporal information associated with the target medical concept should be described before or within the current context. Therefore, when starting to expand the context of the complete sentence s′, the algorithm will only consider the content described preceding s′ to generate the current context c. The content following c will be included only when s′ is not the last sentence of a paragraph or the context range parameter was set to use the section-based strategy.In practice, this work applies two range parameters to implement the proposed context-aware approach for different formats of a given record. The format was determined by judging the numbers of section headings observed by the employed section recognizer and indicator phrases, such as “sincerely” and “with warm regards”. As depicted in Fig. 1, if the given record was a narrative written in a consultation letter, the range parameter was set to “paragraph”, indicating that the paragraph-based strategy was used to determine the time attribute. In this case, the maximal context of a medical concept considered by the context-aware algorithm includes the whole paragraph that contains the medical concept. Take the second to the last line of the right column in Fig. 3 as an example. This line contains the risk factor high BP, which is highlighted in bold. However, the incomplete sentence itself doesn’t provide any clue for time attribute assignment. Therefore, an algorithm was used to further include the three preceding lines to form the complete sentence c. The algorithm then re-checks the sentence and finds that c contains the temporal mention “last January”, which indicates that the event occurred before the DCT. Consider another case in which the above process cannot determine the target concept’s time attribute. The context will be extended to include the entire paragraph, which are all of the lines after the sentence “Dear Dr. Taylor:” as shown in Fig. 3.On the other hand, for a discharge summary with explicit section headings as shown in Fig. 2, the range parameter was set to “section” and the section-based strategy was used to determine the time attribute. In this case, the maximal context of a medical concept considered by the algorithm can include several paragraphs and even the complete section consisting of several paragraphs that contains the medical concept. Regardless of the format, if two or more temporal mentions are observed in a given context, the temporal mention that is nearest to the target concept will be assigned.The time-attribute assigner relies on several contextual clues to determine the time attribute. Along with the updated context c, a similar method was used to re-check the temporal information until either the time attribute of mc is updated or no new context is sensed by the context-aware algorithm. A temporal expression extraction system based on our previous work [8] was executed on a given text to extract temporal information. Table 2shows examples of extracted temporal expressions and their distributions in the training set. The system uses a pattern-based matching method to extract several types of temporal expressions described in a variety of ways, such as “in month|year”, “from year to year”, “this year”, and “6/12”, and normalizes them to their corresponding numeric values by using a mapping table. In addition, several post-processing rules were implemented to remove false positive cases, such as 150/70, which is not a temporal expression. Finally, non-numeric temporal expressions matched with keywords such as “today”, “last” and “recent” were assigned with their predefined time attributes. The numeric temporal expression is compared with the record date to determine the time attributes if the expression includes the year information. Otherwise, the context surrounding the expression is considered to determine the time attribute. For example, the time attribute for the expression “past 10years” is “Before DCT”.In addition, certain types of medical concepts, such as the “mention” indicator shown in Table 3, may not have explicit temporal expressions. Subsequently, the algorithm by default assigns the most common time attribute for such concept types based on the statistical results if there is no available temporal information. However, if the associated time attribute values have a (nearly) uniform distribution in the dataset used by this work, the algorithm will generate all of the three DCT as its output.As defined in the annotation guidelines [9] of the i2b2 track 2 dataset, the family history status possesses an attribute with only the value “present” or “not present”. This tag should only be marked as present if the patient has a first-degree relative (i.e., parents, siblings, or children) who was diagnosed with premature CAD (younger than 55 for male relatives, younger than 65 for female relatives). As a result, the classification of the family history status is divided into two steps. First, a dictionary consisting of 12 first-degree relatives was assembled to recognize keywords indicating first-degree relatives in the record. For instance, “father”, “mother”, “dad”, and “mom” were all included in the dictionary. This work also analyzes family history status from the semantic perspective by generating dictionaries of negation and CAD-related terms, and establishing two criteria to determine the attribute value: (1) The context contains a male/female first-degree relative word, along with specific age-related information (over 55years old for male and 65years old for female); (2) the context contains CAD-related terms and even numbers of negation terms. When both criteria are met, the indicator attribute is “present”. Otherwise, it is “not present”.For the detection of smoking status, a list of smoking-related keywords, such as “smoking” and “cigarette”, was compiled. The keyword list was then used by the Smoking Status Classifier as a dictionary to tag the given EMR. Afterwards, the text containing the listed terms was regarded as the context of the smoking status, and several weighted rules developed for different smoking statuses were applied to determine the patient’s smoking status, which follows the same rationale of our context-aware algorithm. If the context did not provide sufficient information to determine the smoking status, a similar context-aware approach was used to expand the context and re-apply the developed rules until either the status was determined or no further updated context was available.The 2014 i2b2 NLP shared task [9] released a dataset consisting of medical documents annotated with information related to the progression of heart disease in diabetic patients for the identification of risk factors of heart disease over time. Annotations of the dataset include the presence and progression of diseases (diabetes, CAD), and associated risk factors (hypertension, hyperlipidemia, smoking status, obesity status, and family history), and the time they were present in the patient’s medical history. We used the dataset in our work to evaluate the proposed medical concept progression tracking method. Following the same manner of the i2b2 risk factor track, the two training sets released by the track were used to develop rules. For the machine learning-based system, a tenfold cross validation on the same dataset was applied to select efficient features for mention concept and medication recognition.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
