@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fall prevention intervention technologies: A conceptual framework and survey of the state of the art

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
There is a lack of research effort focused on reducing extrinsic risk factors.Current systems do not support the delivery of environmental assessment interventions.Existing Post-fall prevention intervention systems do not enable patients and practitioners to interact and collaborate.Fall-injury prevention intervention systems are static and provide no form of user interaction.Cross-fall prevention intervention systems face similar challenges to other fall prevention systems.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Falls prevention,Technology-based interventions,Conceptual framework,Collaborative care,Healthcare,Self-care,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In recent years, an ever increasing range of technology-based applications have been developed with the goal of assisting in the delivery of more effective and efficient fall prevention interventions. Whilst there have been a number of studies that have surveyed technologies for a particular sub-domain of fall prevention, there is no existing research which surveys the full spectrum of falls prevention interventions and characterises the range of technologies that have augmented this landscape. This study presents a conceptual framework and survey of the state of the art of technology-based fall prevention systems which is derived from a systematic template analysis of studies presented in contemporary research literature. The framework proposes four broad categories of fall prevention intervention system: Pre-fall prevention; Post-fall prevention; Fall injury prevention; Cross-fall prevention. Other categories include, Application type, Technology deployment platform, Information sources, Deployment environment, User interface type, and Collaborative function. After presenting the conceptual framework, a detailed survey of the state of the art is presented as a function of the proposed framework. A number of research challenges emerge as a result of surveying the research literature, which include a need for: new systems that focus on overcoming extrinsic falls risk factors; systems that support the environmental risk assessment process; systems that enable patients and practitioners to develop more collaborative relationships and engage in shared decision making during falls risk assessment and prevention activities. In response to these challenges, recommendations and future research directions are proposed to overcome each respective challenge.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Falls prevention within the home environment has been a topic of research for over 30years [1] and is recognised as an important health issue within the United Kingdom (UK), Europe, North America and Australia [2]. The frequency of falls increases with age, often as a result of physical, functional, and cognitive impairments which are likely to emerge as a result of advanced ageing [3]. Consequently, it is estimated that 30% of older adults aged 65 and over fall at least once a year [4]. One in five falls result in bone fractures and the need for specialist medical attention [5]. Fall related fractures may cause disabilities and in some extreme cases premature death among older adults, which has a significant impact on demand for health and social care services resulting in a cost of £1.8billion per year to the National Health Service (NHS) in the UK [6].Falls prevention activities are carried out across a range of health disciplines including occupational therapy, physiotherapy, general practice, nursing, geriatric, gerontology health and social care [7–9]. There is evidence in the falls prevention research literature which suggests that in excess of 50% of potential falls relating to older adults are avoided as a result of ongoing falls prevention interventions [10]. There is a range of clinically established prevention interventions that target fall related risk factors [1]. A number of recent meta analyses, and systematic reviews considered a comprehensive range of falls prevention intervention studies for preventing falls in community-dwelling older people [11–15]. Fig. 1presents a diagrammatic summary of the key categories of intervention that are considered in these reviews and serves as a high-level overview of the key areas in which falls prevention research has been undertaken in recent years.In recent years, one popular approach to falls prevention has been to explore ways of targeting the restoration of muscle strength and balance for prevention of fall risks [16,17]. Exercise interventions are becoming an increasingly popular approach to falls prevention and there is an extensive body of evidence suggesting that these interventions can be effective in reducing falls and the risk of falling [18]. There are many issues, however, with regards to adherence and acceptance of the range of existing exercise interventions. Supervised one-to-one interventions with the patient and the practitioner are resource intensive in terms of cost and time, whilst supervised group exercise interventions require older adults to be able to travel to the location of exercise classes. Furthermore, there are many issues with regards to adherence and acceptance of existing unsupervised home-based exercise interventions, partly due to the lack of interactivity and personalisation that the paper-based exercise interventions typically use in these settings [19]. As such, 3D technology and games are increasingly being seen as a potential means of improving adherence by providing patients with more tailored and interactive exercise programs to engage with [20,21].Fall risk assessment is an approach used to assess a number of risk factors, specifically mobility issues and physiological factors that include muscle strength and balance, stability, posture and gait reaction time. There are many tests (e.g. Berg balance scale, Timed Up and Go, Turn 180° test) that have been developed to screen older people for fall risks in the community or in a clinical setting [22]. These tests are widely known with research evidence that supports their effective use in predicting fall risks to uncover issues that may lead to falls. Older adults who are exposed to fall risks such as gait and balance abnormalities, admitted into hospital for medical attention as a result of falling are at high risk of falling. Consequently, they are offered a multifactorial fall risk assessment that is administered by clinicians in a clinical setting, or within a specialist fall service. Such assessments are a part of multifactorial risk assessment or a singular assessment. It is crucial that older adults who are at high risk of falling are identified using the fall risk assessment tests so that targeted falls prevention interventions can be prescribed. Conducting such assessments has included high cost equipment in specialist fall services. However, 3D technology and games have shown promise as a low cost solution to augment traditional fall risk assessments and to account for low adherence rates of self-assessment of fall risks done at home [23].Education interventions are developed to increase knowledge about falls prevention and educate patients regarding their risk of falling and falls prevention strategies based on the available evidence-based literature. This type of intervention, as a single component, is often part of a multifactorial falls prevention programme, which leads to positive outcomes such as behavioural change, decreased fear of falling and increased mobility. Education interventions typically take the form of fact sheets with evidence-based materials. These inform their readers about the preventive measures to reduce falls, or checklist to help to identify fall hazards in the home and to take preventive measures such as change of behavioural patterns. In addition, patients are also offered information regarding where they can seek help and assistance in case of a fall to avoid long lie syndrome. As such, there is little research evidence of education interventions as a single component intervention that reduces the risk and rate of falls [11].Home assessments are carried out and assistive equipment is prescribed to reduce falls within the home environment. Typically, home assessments involve clinicians visiting the older adult’s home to assess the suitability of the home environment in relation to the mobility of the patient. Clinicians then propose adaptations, often via the installation of assistive equipment, in order to facilitate independent living and to mitigate any potential fall risks, which could arise during performing activities of daily living (ADLs). Accordingly, reviews in the falls literature have revealed that home assessments and adaptations as a single intervention do not, in general, significantly reduce the risk of falling. They do, however, have some positive effect for those who are at higher risk of falling [8,11]. Furthermore, identifying environmental risks and adapting the living environment accordingly may reduce fall risks among older adults significantly [24]. By definition, assistive equipment are systems or specialist devices prescribed by clinicians, that provide functional support to older adults to help with mobility, which would otherwise been proven difficult to do and maximises independent living and reduces falls. Assistive equipment includes grab rails, walking frames, hoists, raised toilet seats, stair rails, raised chairs and beds within the patient’s home [25–30]. Notwithstanding the benefits of the assistive equipment provision, there are issues which often persist with the use of equipment as it is not always adopted successfully. Consequently, research evidence indicates that more than 50% of home modifications and equipment are rejected [31–33]. As a result, there has been an increase in functional decline, leaving older adults vulnerable to the risk of falling. Equipment abandonment is often associated with a number of factors such as lack of knowledge about the equipment’s use, involving the users in the decision making process, their attitude towards the equipment, and a lack of fit of the equipment between service users and their environment [32,34–36].Technology-based interventions have been deployed in a wide range of falls prevention contexts and include diagnosing and treating fall risks [37–39], increasing adherence to interventions [40–42], detecting falls and alerting clinicians in case of falls [43–45]. Technology is also seen as having the potential to play a key role in enabling older adults to self-assess, which is in line with the personalisation agenda within the UK, giving older adults the opportunity to perform self-assessments for assistive equipment provision [46–50]. With an increasing pressure and demand on the NHS and with limited spending budgets, partly due to an unprecedented increase of life expectancy resulting in an ageing population [51], there is a need to find new ways of providing care to enable patients to provide effective self-care and further steps towards recognising patients as experts of their own care by giving them the chance to provide their own care [52]. Innovations in technology are seen as key to reducing costs and lessening the burden on the healthcare system, whilst also improving the quality and effectiveness of care provided [48], thus enabling patients to engage in the effectiveness of self-care to improve clinical outcomes. Encouraging the adoption of technology, however, has been a primary area of focus, particularly among the older population. There are contributing factors that include usability for the older adult cohort [53], exploring older users’ perceptions and beliefs [54], intuitive interactions [55], and multisensory feedback [56], which play a central role in motivating older adults to engage in clinical interventions. These should be catered for if technological interventions are to be adopted by older adults. Therefore, deploying usable and effective information and communication technologies (ICT) in areas of assisted healthcare, specifically falls prevention, within the home has the potential to enable older adults to maintain their independence and engage in unsupervised interventions, remotely monitored by clinicians. There is, however, an urgent need to explore the extent to which technology has been developed for the falls prevention domain and to identify the areas in which work is still required to respond positively to the broad range of challenges presented by this domain. Technology-based interventions have been identified as having valuable potential in the applied sub-domains highlighted in Fig. 1; exercise, fall risk, education and home assessment. However, relatively little research has surveyed the extent to which technology has actually been applied to each of the sub-domains and the provision of collaborative care, specifically the emerging patient–practitioner paradigm within the context of falls prevention. Furthermore, little research has covered the extent to which opportunities to support fall interventions have been explored respectively and the extent to which patients are being enabled to deliver effective self-care to improve clinical outcomes.A number of systematic reviews have been carried out in the falls prevention domain, some of these include: (1) general reviews [15,57], (2) exercise interventions [13,58], (3) fall risk assessment [59,60] and technology-based interventions [61]. Although a number of technology-based systematic reviews have been presented in the literature to date, such reviews tend to focus mainly on specific sub-domains of a much broader context of technology-based interventions. To the best of our knowledge, there is no existing research which surveys and categorises across the full falls prevention intervention landscape, the types of existing technology-based fall prevention systems, their key collaboration functions, the technologies they exploit, and the specific types of falls prevention interventions they support. Furthermore, there is little existing research which, as a result of taking this holistic view, identifies the areas of clinical practice, which appear to be well catered and identifies areas which require more attention.In light of the need to better understand the state of the art of the falls prevention technology landscape, this paper provides a comprehensive review and a conceptual falls prevention technology framework, which was developed as a result of carrying out a survey of the range of fall technology systems presented in the literature. Section 2 outlines the research methods used to conduct the literature survey. Section 3 presents the conceptual framework and its component parts are explained. Through presenting the conceptual model, Sections 7 survey the falls technology systems such as that of pre-fall, post-fall, fall injury and cross fall prevention systems found in the literature to date, respectively. Section 8 discusses challenges of existing falls technology systems and recommends future research directions based on the gaps that exist based on the survey of the state of the art in falls prevention technology research. Conclusions are drawn in Section 9.This section provides a detailed explanation of the methods employed for this study. The steps taken to develop the conceptual framework and carry out the survey of the state of the art are presented in Fig. 2and are described in more detail throughout this section.Initially, a number of survey papers were sourced to gain background knowledge of the research area. Part of the search strategy used for finding existing research was derived from reading previous survey papers such as [15,58,63–65]. This provided candidate search terms, keywords specific to the falls technology domain. The literature search strategy was a two-phase process. In Phase 1, electronic search and manual search was performed using electronic databases (IEEE Xplore, ACM, Pubmed, Web of Science, BioMed Central and ScienceDirect) to scan for papers that contain the search terms derived from the falls technology survey papers that had already been considered. For each paper, a manual scan of the title and abstract was conducted, and then the paper was included if it was considered relevant (the inclusion criteria is specified in the next section). In Phase 2, each paper’s reference list, found from the electronic search, was manually scanned in order to identify other potentially relevant studies. Thus, the snowballing technique[66] was used in phase two to pursue additional papers from citation counts and the list of references in each paper, essentially performing forward and backward searches. All searches conducted are based on a full screening of the studies, which were published between January 2010 and December 2014. The following search strings were used in the electronic databases:•Falls prevention technology AND older adults OR elderly.Falls systems AND patients OR older adults OR elderly.Falls management AND patients OR older adults.Falls prevention assistive technology AND patients OR older adults.Falls prevention approaches AND patients OR older adults.Search terms that were used in this review were purposely kept general to avoid potential bias in identifying a candidate dataset of studies which represents the state of the art. To enhance the search, Boolean operators were used so that synonyms of search terms were included when carrying out automated searches. Preliminary searches were conducted to identify search terms from existing reviews and to combine those search terms that derived from the reviews. Fig. 3presents the list of electronic databases used, the number of studies retrieved from the searches carried out using search terms with for each respective electronic database, the duplicate papers removed, and the total number of papers that were deemed relevant.The inclusion and exclusion criteria were used to identify appropriate studies, which proposed technology-based systems/applications that aimed to: aid in fall risk assessment and/or prevention activities, respond to falls, or aid in reducing the risk of falling with or without the support of clinicians. Incomplete studies and studies written in another language other than English were excluded. To ensure that the literature dataset reflected recent developments in the field whilst remaining manageable, all studies that appeared in the period 2010–2014 were included, any studies that were outside this time period were excluded from the sample. Studies that did not involve the use of technology for falls prevention activity were also excluded from the corpus. Each study reference list was scanned for additional studies that met the inclusion criteria.The conceptual framework was derived from surveying and analysing the literature dataset identified from deploying the literature search strategy presented in Fig. 2. A thematic analysis of the literature dataset was then performed in order to review and categorise the studies that were included in the literature sample. Thematic analysis is a qualitative analysis method for searching, analysing and representing the overarching themes and sub-themes that emerge from textual datasets [67]. Consequently, the themes and sub-themes and their observed interrelated structure which emerged as a consequence of carrying out a thematic analysis on the literature dataset were articulated via the incremental development of a conceptual framework that represents the state of the art of the falls prevention technology landscape. The following steps were taken to analyse the literature dataset and develop the conceptual framework. Initially, all falls prevention technology studies were added into a spreadsheet (used as a data management tool for primary studies that met the inclusion criteria), making up the dataset. After studies were added, the individual studies listed in the dataset were initially examined and overarching themes that emerged from the dataset were recorded in the literature spreadsheet, which served as a coding frame for carrying out the thematic analysis. Each theme was allocated to the appropriate code name and extracts of text from the studies that fit each concept were identified. The dataset was examined iteratively, to further develop themes and sub-themes. This was achieved via a process of splitting and joining together of themes and associated text that was related to themes and sub-themes. At this point, a list of themes and sub-themes were used to classify each study in the dataset within the coding frame. Several iterations of this reflective process were carried out until the themes and sub-themes reflected the representative literature dataset. Any inconsistencies were rectified, arriving at a consensus pool of themes and sub-themes that formed the conceptual framework in Fig. 4. The resulting conceptual framework represents the falls prevention technology landscape according to the literature dataset which was analysed. A detailed description of the conceptual framework and its component parts (themes and sub-themes) is now provided in the next section.The conceptual framework of the state of the art for falls prevention technology is presented in Fig. 4. The model is divided between falls prevention technology systems in practice (illustrated in the top part of the figure), which looks at the various falls prevention interventions in practice. The second part of the model considers technology deployment, which presents the range of falls technology systems proposed in the literature, the information sources they exploit, the types of user interface which they present and their respective collaborative functions.There are a wide range of falls prevention interventions and associated systems, which aim to overcome falls and the risk of falling. Pre-falls prevention intervention systems (Pre-FPIs) are technology applications that focus on supporting patients who have not yet experienced a fall, but may be considered to be at risk of falling (see Fig. 4, point #1). They take a pro-active approach via the development of applications, which support the delivery of targeted physical activities, exercises and education programmes that increase awareness of fall risks and help develop strategies to identify and overcome environmental fall hazards and the complications that may arise after having a fall. Cognitive training programmes are also deployed to encourage older adults to engage in activities that stimulate their cognition, hence slowing down the onset of age-related cognitive decline. Cognitive decline occurs as a natural part of the ageing process and can impact on functional ability and therefore lead to increased risk of falls [68–70]. Fall risk factors that Pre-FPIs aim to overcome, include intrinsic risk factors that relate to natural ageing changes that affect older adults’ physical ability, vision, balance, muscle strength and changes to their cognition. Lack of mobility could also result in loss of muscle strength and balance impairments, leading to functional decline and resulting in a fall [71]. Extrinsic risk factors include factors that are external to older adults’ physical health, functional ability and cognition. These include, for example, environmental hazards that are apparent within older adults’ home environment [72] such as poor lighting, wet floor surfaces, loose rugs, slippery handrails, and seating, toileting and bathing furniture, which is not optimally set up or fitted with suitable assistive equipment for an individual’s mobility needs or to carry out ADLs safely.Post-fall prevention intervention systems (Post-FPIs) are applications of technology which focus on individuals who have already experienced a fall and aim to help assess and deliver interventions to reduce the future risk of repeated falling episodes (see Fig. 4, point #2). The strategies employed by Pre-FPI and Post-FPI often share similarities, i.e. applications that support the delivery of exercise and education programmes with a view to overcoming shared intrinsic and extrinsic fall risk factors. However, the cohort and motivation for delivery of these interventions may be somewhat different in that Pre-FPI takes a pro-active approach and Post-FPI supports the delivery of more re-active interventions. Thus, much of Post-FPIs initially involve fulfilling a diagnostic assessment function, whereby the cause of the fall, which triggered the post fall intervention, is identified along with other intrinsic and extrinsic fall risks. There are a range of intervention types that are used to carry out functional assessment and cognitive assessment of post-fall patients to assess intrinsic risk factors. Functional assessment involves screening the patients’ physical movement for risk factors. As such, this includes older adults performing intentional physical activities in order for a range of assessment tests to be performed to gather fall risk behaviour data, which helps to determine the type of risk and the appropriate preventive measure to take. Cognitive assessment includes tests performed to assess cognitive abilities and reduce the progression of cognitive impairments, which typically lead to falls. Delivering this particular intervention provides opportunities for clinicians to determine which preventive interventions are most appropriate to be carried out thereafter and thus, address the intrinsic risk factors identified as a result of the assessment. Environmental assessment involves systems developed to assess extrinsic risks that impact on older adults’ ability to function independently within their living environment. This type of assessment aims to remove environmental hazards that obscure older adults’ ability to perform ADLs and recommend equipment to aid mobility and reduce fall risks in the home.Fall injury prevention intervention systems (FIPIs) focus attention on patients who are likely and expected to experience falls in the future (see Fig. 4, point #3). Primarily, the aim of many such systems is to detect falls when they occur and to prevent/minimise the injuries that may occur after the event of falling. FIPIs, therefore, often aim to detect falls in order to prevent fall related injuries rather than address the risks that lead to falls. There are three main intervention types used to tackle these risks. Activity monitoring monitors patient movements obtrusively or unobtrusively whilst they perform ADLs and attempts to identify abnormalities, otherwise not apparent. Fall detectors, attempt to distinguish fall events from everyday activity signatures, so as to detect fall events when they occur. Medical assistance involves the provision of support provided by clinicians after a fall.Cross fall prevention intervention systems (CFPIs) are technology applications which attempt to support and deliver a combination of pre-fall, post-fall and fall injury prevention interventions (see Fig. 4, point #4).CFPIs propose technology applications which attempt to deliver system functionality across two or more groups of intervention types i.e. Pre-FPI, Post-FPI and FIPI. An example of a CFPIs that includes Post-FPIs and FIPIs is that of Shi et al. [73] who develop a smart-phone application which assesses fall risks using traditional clinical tests and detects falls after they have occurred in order to prevent fall-related injuries. Another example which combines intervention types of Pre-FPIs and Post-FPIs is that of Silva et al. [37] who assess older adults for intrinsic risks and provide an exercise regime of dancing as a type of physical intervention to enhance the uptake and adherence to exercising more often in the older adult population, particularly those who are prone to falls, in an attempt to and reduce those intrinsic risks such as functional decline and a decline in muscle strength.The systems presented in the falls prevention domain host a range of application types and are deployed on a range of hardware platforms (see Fig. 4, point #5). Application type refers to the range of applications which are presented to support fall interventions. Interactive applications allow the user to interact with the application in some manner, whereas static offers no form of interaction between the user and the system. For example, most fall prevention injury applications are static as their main purpose is to collect data and alert when a fall has occurred. Games are interactive applications that make up another group of falls prevention systems which are typically played by patients with the goal of educating and increasing awareness of fall risks, or to engage the user in exercise and physical activity which is designed to improve mobility and hence reduce the risk of falling. Virtual reality (VR) applications present simulated 3D interactive environments that allow the user to navigate through these environments and receive feedback in real-time based on multimodal user input. Physical activity interventions are also often augmented by VR applications to engage users in physical activity and fall related physical exercise. With regards to the platforms that falls prevention technology systems are deployed upon; game consoles are self-contained platforms in which specific game applications are utilised by falls prevention systems so as to deliver falls prevention related games. For intervention types such as physical activities, the game consoles and sensor devices such as Nintendo Wii and Microsoft Kinect are often used [74–77]. Desktop computers are another common platform that systems are often deployed on. In recent years, smart-phones have shown promise as an ideal candidate for the deployment of falls prevention applications partly due to advanced processing capability, integrated sensors and communication facilities that such devices now host. A tablet is a mobile touchscreen platform, which includes inertia measurement units, sensors (accelerometer, gyroscope, GPS), camera and touchscreen display (requiring touch gestures to interact), replacing the traditional devices such as a keyboard and mouse.Information sources relate to the range of inputs that systems use to sense the users and the living environments they monitor in order to provide falls prevention system functions. Sensor location specifies where the sensors are located, either often as wearable sensors on the user or within the context of the environment in which the falls prevention system is being used. With regards to context, this may be for example in the form of sensors (camera-based and floor sensors) installed in the living environment which feed information back to the system about the user’s interactions with that environment. Sensor purpose considers the sensors used by falls prevention systems as belonging to one of three discrete groups: bespoke, repurposed and co-opted. Bespoke sensors are developed specifically for falls prevention systems, which often gather physiological data from users. For example, Uzor et al. [41] propose a small sensor which included a big switch to turn the power on and off, light emitting diode (LED) light to show power on and a velcro strap case to enable users to attach the sensor to their body to interact with the falls prevention exercise games. Repurposed sensors are sensors, which were originally developed for a different function, but have since been adapted for use within the falls prevention context. For example, Kayama et al. [76] utilise the Microsoft Kinect which was originally developed for gaming, however, due to the natural gesture-based interaction paradigm this technology supports, the Kinect is repurposed to provide the platform for an application that promotes the uptake of a gesture-sensitive falls prevention exercise game. Co-opted sensors are typically built into popular devices. For example, the accelerometer and gyroscope that is often built into self-contained smart-phones. These may be used to obtain movement data in order to perform falls prevention interventions, as with the study of Ferreira et al. [78], which exploit the smart-phone platform with the built-in sensors available (e.g. the gyroscope, accelerometer and magnetic sensors) to detect movement by attaching the smart-phone to the user’s body. Deployment environment reflects the range of living environments in which fall prevention technologies are typically designed to be deployed as specified in the surveyed literature sample. There are three key deployment environments which fall prevention systems are designed to be deployed within: the patient’s own home living environment; the hospital environment, typically for hospitalised patients; and within the nursing home environment which may also take the form of an assisted living/sheltered housing environment, whereby residential care is provided to older adults considered to be at risk of falling.Interface type refers to the form of user interface that each respective falls prevention system provides to its users. Multimodal interaction considers the mechanisms that enable users to interact with fall prevention systems, whether the user is the patient or the practitioner. A common interface type used in fall prevention systems is natural user interfaces, which provide patients with a naturalistic way of interacting with fall prevention systems. This typically requires users’ natural movements to be monitored and to serve as inputs, gathered via wearable or environmental sensors that are used to control fall prevention systems. This serves as an intuitive way of interacting with the system, particularly when considering that fall prevention systems typically strive to allow users to engage in an unrestricted manner and monitor the user’s natural movements within their respective living environments. Non-interactive interface is an invisible interface, which relies on intermediary sensor devices to source data from older users and to save that data to a centralised system, with no feedback provided or interaction with the end-users. The other common interface used by fall prevention systems is a touchscreen interface, which enables users to interact with fall prevention systems deployed on smart-phones by providing touch gestures to touch an object on the screen. This interface is an evolution of the peripheral devices such as a keyboard and mouse that were used to interact with objects on the screen. Although touchscreens are inherently used for fall prevention systems as they are deployed on smart-phones, they are not part of sourcing of physiological data from users, but rather a means to operate low level tasks.Users of the fall prevention systems consist of patients and practitioners interacting with the systems. Patients who use fall prevention systems tend to be older adults, i.e. people over the age of 65years who experience advanced age changes, age related health decline, and age related declines in physical and functional abilities. Practitioners are professionals (e.g. occupational therapists, physiotherapists, nurses, carers, social workers, general practitioners, accident and emergency staff) who deliver care to older adults in the hospital or community. Collaboration represents the means by which practitioners work in partnership with patients to deliver an intervention. Asynchronous collaboration relates to activities that are performed in real-time, however, the response to these activities do not occur in the time in which they occurred. For example, in case where an older adults’ movement data is gathered through the use of fall injury prevention interventions and if a fall event is detected an alert is sent to health care clinicians informing them of a fall. In this particular scenario, there is a time lag between the time of the fall event and the health response to a fall. On the other hand, synchronous refers to when users’ movement data is gathered in real-time and the response of the movement data is also given in real-time in the form of visual feedback or biofeedback depending on the fall prevention systems that the patient is engaging with. For example, Reed-Jones et al. [79] utilise the Wii to improve balance and mobility in older people. The Wii Fit game was used in conjunction with the Wii balance board, which served as an input device to source movement data from older users to provide real-time visual feedback during game play in order to engage users and to better achieve precise body control as part of the exercise training.In the following sections, the conceptual framework of falls prevention technology presented in this section is used to survey the systems that have been proposed in the literature. Section 4 reviews pre-falls prevention intervention systems; Section 5 reviews post-falls prevention intervention systems; Section 6 reviews falls injury prevention intervention systems; and Section 7 reviews cross-prevention intervention systems. Table 1provides a list of abbreviations and terms used throughout the review sections.Pre-fall prevention intervention systems (pre-FPIs) focus on supporting the prevention of falls by targeting risk factors, which if present, are known to be the cause of falls. Table 2provides a summary of Pre-FPIs considered in this literature survey and which make up the sole focus of this section.Pre-FPIs target fall risk factors that may be considered as a function of two distinct categories: intrinsic risk factors [18,19,40–42,75–97,99–109]; and extrinsic risk factors [74,98]. With regard to intrinsic risk factors, functional ability deficits are the sole focus of a number of studies [74,78,80,83,85,92,107]. In these examples, a range of technologies is used to proactively mitigate observed deficits in functional ability. The study, for example, by Visvanathan et al. [107] monitors the physical activity of patients who are hospitalised and considered to be at a high risk of falling as a result of functional decline. This is achieved via the use of wearable sensors and a sensor network that detects signs of potential risks as a result of physically impaired patients moving around the hospital room without aid. De Morais and Wickstrom [85] develop a serious game based on tai chi, to help improve the stability of those who exhibit balance impairments and impaired mobility. Initially, older adults are given a demonstration of pre-recorded tai chi activities at the start of the game and are then required to mimic those movements during gameplay.Functional ability deficits and balance impairments are the sole focus of many studies [18,19,40–42,75,78,79,81,82,84,86–90,92–95,99,101–106,108], which provide technology-based interventions to enable patients to retain their balance and improve functional abilities in order that physical activities can be performed safely within their normal living environments. For example, Uzor et al. [41] and Williams et al. [42] use 3D visualisation technologies and games to increase adherence rates and engagement with home-based exercises with the aim of improving muscle strength and balance. Another example of this is provided by Hardy et al. [90], who propose an exergame (i.e. exercise game) to reduce balance and gait impairments, thus encouraging older adults to exercise by providing a game that requires movements similar to that of activities found in evidence-based exercise programmes. Although many systems augment evidence-based exercises, some systems encourage users to engage in less structured exercise activities such as dancing. Lange et al. [93], for example, use an off-the-shelf game to help reduce impairments that impact on older adults’ balance by encouraging patients to engage in dancing activities.The systems presented in [76,77,91,96,97,100] focus on alleviating functional ability deficits and cognitive impairments (Fun+Cog), which are typically targeted via the use of game applications. As such, cognitive impairments are considered to impact on the patients’ functional ability. Some systems attempt to measure the extent to which cognition impacts upon functional ability. For example, Pisan et al. [77] integrate cognitively demanding tasks within a virtual environment, such as solving maths problems in a “simplified stroop test” whilst performing stepping exercises within an immersive virtual environment. The aim is to measure the patient reaction time whilst stepping, in order to uncover the severity of balance impairments whilst multitasking. Hilbe et al. [91] focus on patients in hospitals and nursing homes who are cognitively impaired. Patients are monitored to establish whether they leave their beds and, if so, the clinicians are informed so as to avoid falls in patients who are considered to be at high risk. Kayama et al. [76] and Mirelman et al. [96,97] address the reduction of the dual-task ability, cognition, and balance impairments by executive function and delivering dual-task training as it is believed that such activity improves cognitive function. Dual tasks include users engaging in problem solving tasks and performing tai chi exercises simultaneously within an immersive virtual reality environment. Finally, Schoene et al. [100] propose a game deployed on a game console that includes stepping and balance control tasks to improve reaction time in order to improve physical and cognitive abilities of community-dwelling older adults.The Pre-FPIs presented in [74,98] both focus on reducing extrinsic risk factors, in addition to intrinsic risk factors. For example, Bell et al. [74] use a desktop-computer-based game and user-worn sensors to reduce impaired mobility via engaging users in exercise tasks and a gaming narrative which educates the player on environmental fall risk factors such as clutter, placement of furniture, and the dangers of spills on different types of flooring. Otis and Menelas [98] present a smart-phone application which is the only system that focuses solely on reducing extrinsic risk factors. It considers the environmental conditions in which older adults function and notifies them of potential risks. The environment is scanned for slippery surfaces and steep slope by means of a smart shoe with built-in sensors.Intervention types used for preventing fall risks in [18,19,41,42,74–108] are typically administered either by practitioners or self-administered by patients. Physical activities are intervention types targeted by [18,19,40–42,75,78–95,98,99,101–108], to mitigate these intrinsic risk factors. Studies [18,19,40–42,74–90,92–97,99–108] all explore the value of VR and gaming technologies as a more interactive and engaging platform for patients to engage in exercise activity compared with more traditional approaches. For example, Chao et al. [75] investigate the barriers that lead to a lack of adherence to falls rehabilitation exercises and issues concerning older adults’ behaviour towards exercising. Their resulting system included the application of the self-efficacy theory to enhance exercise behaviour to engage older adults in physical activities to increase adherence rates of exercise programmes. The system made use of the Wii which provided both visual and audio feedback based on users performance during the game to encourage users to exercise whilst still using the original idea and purpose of the game to entertain users. Silveira et al. [101] explore the barriers to physical activities such as varying adherence rates to exercise programmes, behaviour towards physical activities and lack of social company whilst exercising. The proposed system is developed to specifically increase exercise adherence rates and behaviour by involving users in social groups to stimulate participation with training regimes and integrating the system into their daily routine. It also provides feedback on in-game performance and remote contact to supervise older adults during their exercise. The systems presented in [76,77,96,97,100] use a combination of both cognitive training and physical activities intervention types to reduce fall risks. For example, Pisan et al. [77] present a balance training game that uses Microsoft Kinect to enable older adults to interact with the proposed game. The game involves a series of stepping exercises where squares appear randomly on the screen and the user is required to step on the squares as quickly as possible while solving basic arithmetical problems. The results from this study revealed that performance during the stepping exercises decreases when participants engage with physical and cognitive tasks simultaneously, indicating that users could potentially be at high risk of falling when multitasking. Schoene et al. [100] use exergames to address the issue of lack of adherence to exercise programmes in light of improving older adults’ balance, stepping ability, cognition and other factors associated with falling. This exergame consists of a dancing gameplay, which provide instructions to perform dance moves using a step pad, with the aim of train balance, reaction and attention. Education and physical activities are intervention types in [74] which are used to reduce both intrinsic and extrinsic risk factors of falling. Bell et al. [74], for example, investigate the benefits of utilising the Nintendo Wii game console for preventing falls in assisted-living environments. Participants in this study engaged in exercise training with the use of the Wii combined with falls prevention education sessions. The fall prevention education sessions focus particularly on reducing clutter, arrangement of furniture in the living area, positioning of the rug, flooring and spills within the home environment, lighting, and staircase and bathroom safety, presented in the format of checklists.Pre-FPIs take the form of a range of application types and are deployed on a range of platforms. The application types presented in [83,91,94,95,98,104] are all static; they are essentially data collection tools which issue an alert to notify users of potential fall risks as a consequence of abnormal walking/behavioural patterns, which are collected from sensors. For example, Majumder et al. [94] propose a system which includes a feature extraction technique to conduct an analysis of walking patterns collected in real-time to determine whether there is a potential risk of the user falling. This system does not involve any notable form of interaction, as it simply analyses and sends alerts based on the data that is collected from patients. Otis and Menelas [98] develop a prototype of an instrumented shoe with embedded sensors actuators which are positioned in certain parts of the shoe to collect data, categorise the fall risk status of the environment, and then broadcast this in real-time to a smart-phone application. Horta et al. [92] propose a smart-phone-based system using built-in sensors to collect physiological data from older adults to inform them of any abnormal behaviour in their walking pattern. Chou et al. [83] detect the position of patients from that of lying-to-sit and alert the user with a warning that there is a high risk of falling while getting out of bed. Once the transitions of the patients have been detected, a notification is sent to clinicians in order to provide care and prevent bedside falls.All of the game applications presented in [40,42,74,76–78,80,81,85,88–90,93,100,101] make use of the Wii games console to detect user movements in real-time and enable users to interact with games and control in-game avatars. These studies explore the effects of such an interaction paradigm and evaluate its suitability to the fall and the prevention intervention domain. With regards to suitability, the Wii game console is a relatively low-cost solution and has the capability to simulate an array of physical activities; hence it has become a popular repurposed platform used in attempting to overcome the issue of uptake of and adherence to falls-related exercise interventions. Bainbridge et al. [81] examine the efficacy of a Wii Fit game for reducing balance impairments among community-dwelling older adults. Although the results in this study suggest that the Wii Fit game program can be an effective intervention for clinicians to prescribe to patients, it also reports that further research is needed to optimise its effectiveness and to better target the types of movement necessary to reduce fall risks. The most common sensor devices used with the Nintendo Wii are colloquially referred to as “Wii-motes”, which are handheld sensor devices with built-in infrared and accelerometer sensors and are similar in size to a TV remote control. The Wii balance board, with pressure sensors, is often used to monitor and assess patients balance. Williams et al. [42], Bell et al. [74] and Schoene et al. [100] use the Wii balance board with the Wii Fit game to assess its feasibility for improving the balance of older adults who had fallen previously, based on clinically established balance assessment tools such as the Berg Balance Score (BBS), Tinetti Test, Falls Efficacy Scale – International (FES-I), and Timed Up and Go Test (TUG). Pre-FPI systems presented in [19,86,96,97] are VR applications. The use of the Wii balance board device appears to reduce the fall-related risks based on the outcome measures of balance and functional ability, as reported in the studies. However other systems, specifically [18,41,75,79,82,84,87,99,102,103,105,108], are all interactive virtual reality and game applications which typically provide the user with a means of interacting with the application by the system responding to the user’s physical state, where aspects of the system are manipulated by their movement.A number of Pre-FPIs [19,78,83,92,94,98,101] are deployed on smart-phone platforms. As a result of advancements in smart-phones, they are an ideal technology for tackling an issue like fall prevention, as data can be obtained via built-in sensors. An example of the use of smart-phones is that of Ferreira et al. [78] who propose a smart-phone-based falls prevention system operating based on user movement which was then translated to movements performed for exercises in a serious game application. The main purpose of the study is to increase adherence of older adults exercising within their home. Majumder et al. [94] propose a fall prevention system for identifying abnormal gait patterns in real-time to predict an imminent fall and prevent it from occurring by notifying the user on the likelihood of a fall occurring. This system was deployed on a smart-phone and used the embedded sensors. Horta et al. [92] and Majumder et al. [94] propose a smart-phone-based solution to obtain movement data from older adults in real-time to inform users of abnormal walking pattern behaviour identified by the system, thus helping to avoid the occurrence of falls. This data is also shared with other stakeholders, such as clinicians or carers. The remaining system [101] is deployed on a tablet. Silveira et al. [101] develop a tablet-based exercise intervention system as it provides a touchscreen display rather than keyboard and mouse and is reported to be more intuitive in providing feedback based on in-application performance. The Pre-FPIs presented in [18,40,75,79,81,82,84,86–90,99,100,102,103,105,108,109] are repurposed game consoles. Bell et al. [74] and Lange et al. [93] investigate the utility of the Wii game console for preventing falls, particularly to educate older adults on exercise training and the environmental hazards that often contribute to falls. There are also Pre-FPIs [41,42,74,76,77,80,85,91,93,96,97,104,106,107] that are deployed on desktop computers. This is exemplified in the study conducted by Uzor et al. [41] who develop both a game and VR application for desktop computer platform using bespoke sensors to control the system.The Pre-FPIs presented in [18,19,40–42,74–108] all use information sources to enable the patient and/or practitioner to interact with the systems in some manner. There are, however, differences in the information sources and the way in which information is sourced from the user of the system. Sensor location comprises of two distinct categories, namely, are context and user. Context sensors are the main devices used in [18,40,42,75–77,79,81,82,84,87–91,93,96,97,99–106,108] to source information from patients unobtrusively, without the need for users to wear a device to interact with VR or game applications. Kayama et al. [76] utilise Microsoft Kinect as an input device, deployed in the environment, to enable older adults to interact with a game application. Taylor et al. [40] utilise the Nintendo balance board as an input device where the user stands on the board to interact with the game. Hardy et al. [90] and Griffin et al. [89] utilise Nintendo balance board to improve balance by controlling in-game avatar and to move virtual objects in order to achieve the game objective and to physically engage the patient as part of an intervention. Finally, Mirelman et al. [96] and Mirelman et al. [97] use pressure on the treadmill to capture physical movement of older adults performing physical activities. On the other hand, user-worn sensors in [19,41,74,78,80,85,92,94,95,98,107] require users to wear them in order to obtain the movement and translate that motion to control the system for clinical use. For example, Uzor et al. [41] built a bespoke sensor device that was used to enable patients to control the game and was considered less intrusive than other devices such as Microsoft Kinect and Wii Remote, and also ideal due to its size to attach it to specific parts of the body to capture the movement. Bailey and Buckley [80] utilise bespoke sensors to collect data from older adults performing ADLs as an attempt to understand the cause of falls.Sensor purpose refers to the type of sensing devices used to capture data from users and consists of bespoke, repurposed and co-opted sensors. Bespoke sensors [19,40–42,74,76,77,80,85,86,91,93,95–97,100] are custom-built sensors developed specifically for fall prevention and deployed within the living environment or worn by older adults. For example, Hilbe et al. [91] propose a “Bed-exit” alarm used to reduce bedside falls. The pressure sensors were designed and integrated on the side rails of the patient’s bed to track their attempt to get out of bed. The side rail is in a certain position so that if pressure is detected from the pressure sensor, with the value exceeding the threshold, an alarm is sent to clinicians (e.g. nurses) in order to prevent a fall from occurring. Williams et al. [42] use the Wii balance board as an input device with the Wii Fit game and balance assessment tools to improve the balance of older adults who are vulnerable to fall risks. Commercially available repurposed sensors are used to interact with falls prevention exercise games. For example, Pisan et al. [77] and Kayama et al. [76] utilise Microsoft Kinect with a game developed for older adults at risk of falling. The game measures changes to patients’ functional and cognitive abilities by carrying out physical and cognitive tasks simultaneously, as reduction in multi-tasking is known to be a predictive factor of a risk of falling. In particular, using Kinect is ideal as it is a cost-effective means of obtaining data from patients unobtrusively without the need to wear or to control handheld devices.Co-opted smart-phone sensors are now enabling applications such as fall prevention, detection and monitoring patients [110,111]. The pre-fall prevention systems presented in [19,78,83,92,94,95,98,101] made use of built-in sensors on smart-phones, which lend themselves well to tracking user movement in order to achieve outcomes of fall interventions. An example of a smart-phone application is that of Horta et al. [92] who use built-in sensors on smart-phones to capture physiological data from older adults in real-time. Otis and Menelas [98] propose a smartshoe to track the movement of patients and collect information from smart-phone sensors to the developed application. Smart-phones are considered an ideal tool for falls prevention due to their self-containing nature, size, portability and that they can also be used to communicate with other sensors making the applications more wide-reaching. Finally, Chou et al. [83] develop a system to detect the position of patients from lying to sit and alert the user with a warning that there is a high risk of falling while getting out of bed. Once the transitions of the patients have been detected, a notification is sent to alert clinicians in order to provide care and prevent a bedside fall.Natural user interfaces[18,40–42,74–77,79–82,84–90,93,96,97,99,100,102,103,105,106,108] enable users to interface with systems when performing physical activities during game-play and collect ambulatory/behavioural data from users unobtrusively. Mirelman et al. [96] augment treadmill exercise training with VR technology to improve functional ability and cognitive function, thereby reducing falls. Users perform exercises on the treadmill; those movements are then translated into inputs in a virtual environment which present users with obstacles, as well as other challenges, that they have to overcome. Feedback (visual and auditory) is presented to users based on errors that are made and tasks successfully completed. Systems presented in [19,78] use touchscreens and natural user interfaces, which are a specialised way of interacting with technology-based interventions to reduce fall risks. Although this type of interaction does not involve nor measure any physiological parameters, it enables touch input in order to operate some systems. It is a required action to interact with some systems. Ferreira et al. [78] propose a falls prevention game that use embedded sensors on smart-phone to enable users to interact with the serious game application via the use of the built-in touchscreen. Non-interactive interfaces[91,98,104,107] enable interventions to be administered without an interactive interface to engage users. For example, Sparrow et al. [104] propose an automated home-based exercise programme that provide voice response for real-time guidance whilst older adults performed their exercises. The programme is administered over the telephone with no interactive form of feedback or interface present to guide or engage users in a way that feedback is given of their performance during exercises. The remaining systems [83,94,95] use both non-interactive interface and touchscreens for Pre-FPI systems to perform fall prevention activities, such as gathering of data via built-in sensors and to use the platforms touchscreen to initiate the activities or to visualise analysis of the data that prevent fall risks. Chou et al. [83], for example, use sensors integrated into the patient’s bed to detect when an attempt is made to leave the bed without aid. This system does not require any form of interaction, as it is a monitoring tool for clinicians to prevent hospitalised patients from attempting to leave the bed. Once the alarm is triggered, the system on the smart-phone receives the alarm signal and clinicians are notified by a text message alert, which gives details of data received from the bed sensors, such as codes that indicate posture position.In terms of collaboration, the systems presented in [18,19,40–42,74–82,84–90,93,96,97,99–108] enable synchronous collaboration and engagement between patients and clinicians via a range of interface types. In the study by Marisa Ferrari et al. [95], clinicians supervise participants in an exercise training with the use of the Nintendo Wii in a nursing home. Users were provided with immediate feedback of their in-game performance to improve their functional ability and balance. Although it is not made clear if patients were involved in the decisions made in this intervention, the fact that both practitioners and patients are engaging in the intervention at the same time provides an opportunity for patients to be seen as more equal partners in their own care. Conversely, the remaining studies [83,91,92,94,95,98] are considered as asynchronous in that response from sourced movement data does not occur in real-time. The studies of Hilbe et al. [91], Majumder et al. [94] and Marisa Ferrari et al. [95] monitor older adults physical activities in an attempt to predict the likelihood of falling. Data such as abnormalities in walking patterns and critical patients leaving their bed are sourced from patients to prevent falls. As these systems monitor to improve health outcomes such as reduced fall risks, clinicians only intervene when the data collected suggests that the patient is at high risk of falling. No feedback is provided, as the purpose of these systems is simply to unobtrusively collect data that reflects ADLs, rather than perform activities to improve functional ability and balance to undertake ADLs.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
