@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Using electronic health records for clinical research: The case of the EHR4CR project

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
EHR4CR has designed a secure platform to optimise clinical trial protocols.The EHRCR platform facilitates patient identification and recruitment.The EHR4CR platform uses state of the art security and has robust information governance policies.The EHR4CR platform does not require the extraction or communication of any patient level data from hospitals.Proof-of-concept demonstrators have been built and evaluated.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Clinical research,Electronic health record,Data reuse,Clinical trials,Interoperability,Pharmaceutical industry,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectivesTo describe the IMI EHR4CR project which is designing and developing, and aims to demonstrate, a scalable, widely acceptable and efficient approach to interoperability between EHR systems and clinical research systems.MethodsThe IMI EHR4CR project is combining and extending several previously isolated state-of-the-art technical components through a new approach to develop a platform for reusing EHR data to support medical research. This will be achieved through multiple but unified initiatives across different major disease areas (e.g. cardiovascular, cancer) and clinical research use cases (protocol feasibility, patient identification and recruitment, clinical trial execution and serious adverse event reporting), with various local and national stakeholders across several countries and therefore under various legal frameworks.ResultsAn initial instance of the platform has been built, providing communication, security and terminology services to the eleven participating hospitals and ten pharmaceutical companies located in seven European countries. Proof-of-concept demonstrators have been built and evaluated for the protocol feasibility and patient recruitment scenarios. The specifications of the clinical trial execution and the adverse event reporting scenarios have been documented and reviewed.ConclusionsThrough a combination of a consortium that brings collectively many years of experience from previous relevant EU projects and of the global conduct of clinical trials, of an approach to ethics that engages many important stakeholders across Europe to ensure acceptability, of a robust iterative design methodology for the platform services that is anchored on requirements of an underlying Service Oriented Architecture that has been designed to be scalable and adaptable, EHR4CR could be well placed to deliver a sound, useful and well accepted pan-European solution for the reuse of hospital EHR data to support clinical research studies.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The rapid advancement and availability of health Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) offers remarkable enhancement opportunities for the clinical research sector [1]. Electronic health records (EHRs), interconnected through health care networks, have the potential to interact richly with research platforms [2]. The EHR in its ideal form for patient care is a longitudinal record of patient health information generated by multiple encounters in any care delivery setting. While the benefits of EHRs in direct patient care are widely recognised, deriving benefits from the reuse of EHR data through data warehousing for research purposes is still rare, underestimated or overlooked [3,4]. In a survey of US academic health centres only 8% of respondents reported integration of clinical research data with patient clinical data [5]. If an EHR is fully implemented, reuse of EHR data may be extremely helpful in supporting clinical research by reducing redundant data capture, providing better understanding of real patient populations, supporting hypothesis testing, checking clinical trial feasibility, screening populations, supporting patient recruitment and early detection of safety risks, assessing treatment effectiveness and outcomes, and conducting post-marketing monitoring and long-term surveillance [6]. As an example, linking EHRs with clinical trials has proven to increase the recruitment rate of patients [7–9].However, there are many obstacles to be overcome in using EHRs for clinical research. Fragmentation of patient records and proprietary health information technology systems that do not adhere to standards are a challenge. EHR vendors adopt few, if any, health information standards and very rarely accommodate controlled terminologies [10]. After evaluation of the numerous and varying initiatives across Europe, it is apparent that widespread incompatibility of the many data standards currently used by the clinical research and healthcare communities continues to hinder the efficient and rapid exchange of data between different electronic sources and compromises the quality of clinical trial results. Additional challenges that currently limit the use of, and value derived from, health ICT solutions in Europe include regional diversity in languages, healthcare practices and regulations, the emergence of multiple non-interoperable hospital EHR systems, and inadequate and inconsistent clinical documentation within EHRs. These limitations currently prevent the optimal use of EHR patient level data and information, and impede the advancement of medical research, the improvement of healthcare and the enhancement of patient safety [11].Processes and technologies that meet data privacy and regulatory requirements, and satisfy other organisational governance stipulations, are necessary prerequisites to gaining acceptance of the reuse of EHRs for research [12,13]. Privacy, legal implications and public relations ramifications were stated as concerns by over 80% in a survey [14]. Data quality (consistency, correctness, completeness) is another challenge for the reuse of EHR data [15–17]. As a consequence, EHRs appear to mainly be used currently for non-regulated investigator-sponsored clinical research and evaluating pilot or prototype applications [7,10,14,18].Moving beyond the current state-of-the-art implies setting up a framework to enable interoperability (encompassing technical, standards, functional, legal, and organisational aspects) for future electronic data collection and exchange between systems. This paper presents the current results of the IMI EHR4CR project which has designed, developed, and aims to demonstrate, a scalable, widely acceptable and efficient approach to interoperability between EHR systems and clinical research systems.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
