@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
WebBioBank: A new platform for integrating clinical forms and shared neurosignal analyses to support multi-centre studies in Parkinson’s Disease

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
WebBioBank is a new system for research data collection and biosignal analysis.It can be used in multicenter studies to integrate clinical and physiological data.It ensures homogeneous and anonymous data collection through sharable forms.It allows the creation of configurable analysis chains for data analysis.In a pilot multicenter DBS study it was useful to support integrated research.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Web-based platform,Database,Multi-centre clinical study,Operative unit,Parkinson’s Diseases,Signal processing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundThe web-based systems available for multi-centre clinical trials do not combine clinical data collection (Electronic Health Records, EHRs) with signal processing storage and analysis tools. However, in pathophysiological research, the correlation between clinical data and signals is crucial for uncovering the underlying neurophysiological mechanisms. A specific example is the investigation of the mechanisms of action for Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS) used for Parkinson’s Disease (PD); the neurosignals recorded from the DBS target structure and clinical data must be investigated.ObjectiveThe aim of this study is the development and testing of a new system dedicated to a multi-centre study of Parkinson’s Disease that integrates biosignal analysis tools and data collection in a shared and secure environment.MethodsWe designed a web-based platform (WebBioBank) for managing the clinical data and biosignals of PD patients treated with DBS in different clinical research centres. Homogeneous data collection was ensured in the different centres (Operative Units, OUs). The anonymity of the data was preserved using unique identifiers associated with patients (ID BAC). The patients’ personal details and their equivalent ID BACs were archived inside the corresponding OU and were not uploaded on the web-based platform; data sharing occurred using the ID BACs. The system allowed researchers to upload different signal processing functions (in a .dll extension) onto the web-based platform and to combine them to define dedicated algorithms.ResultsFour clinical research centres used WebBioBank for 1year. The clinical data from 58 patients treated using DBS were managed, and 186 biosignals were uploaded and classified into 4 categories based on the treatment (pharmacological and/or electrical). The user’s satisfaction mean score exceeded the satisfaction threshold.ConclusionsWebBioBank enabled anonymous data sharing for a clinical study conducted at multiple centres and demonstrated the capabilities of the signal processing chain configuration as well as its effectiveness and efficiency for integrating the neurophysiological results with clinical data in multi-centre studies, which will allow the future collection of homogeneous data in large cohorts of patients.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Over the last decade, web-based systems for data collection have demonstrated their efficacy at supporting and optimising the management of large-scale multi-centre clinical trials [1–10]. These systems defined and shared dedicated clinical forms reflecting the aims of the data collection during the clinical trial, which were to collecting multi-centric data. During and after the trial, data analysis is usually performed in single specialised centres, and only raw data databases remain available for further investigations. Moreover, especially in pathophysiological research, the correlation between clinical data and neurophysiological results is crucial to uncover underlying mechanisms.The investigation of the mechanism of action for using Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS) against movement disorders, especially Parkinson’s Disease (PD), is an example. In fact, while DBS is an established surgical treatment for PD that has recently been introduced to treat other neurological and neuropsychiatric diseases, its mechanisms of action remain unclear [11–17]. DBS treatment consists of delivering a high frequency electrical stimulus (100–180Hz, 60–120 us pulse width, 1–5V amplitude) through multi-electrode intracranial catheters to the deep brain structures targeted based on the pathology treated. The target for PD is the subthalamic nucleus (STN). Stereotactical neurosurgical procedures allow the precise placement of DBS electrodes in the target structure. Intraoperative monitoring procedures, including biopotential recordings with high impedance electrodes and functional stimulation, help to position the electrodes. In a second surgical procedure, the two electrodes are connected with an electrical pulse generator placed under the skin near the right shoulder.The study of the DBS mechanism of action was boosted by the observation that DBS electrodes, once placed at the target, enabled the pathophysiology of the target structure to be studied directly in vivo, particularly the STN and the other basal ganglia structures for PD [18,19]. Deep electroencephalographic signals, which are known as Local Field Potentials (LFPs) were recorded and analysed, providing new insights into the basal ganglia motor and non-motor functions in PD and other movement disorders as well as the mechanism of action for DBS [19]. However, until recently, the research on LFP recorded during DBS was carried out in individual research centres using heterogeneous experimental protocols, recording settings, and analysis algorithms. This fragmented situation produced results that although significant, must still be compared and examined together to obtain any relevant and shared advances. Investigating the mechanisms of action for DBS would therefore require a coordinated effort between all of the DBS centres. However because the study of LFP recorded in DBS patients is an informative tool used to reveal the pathophysiology of PD, multi-centre clinical trials should combine the data from clinical assessments with that from the neurophysiological recordings.Currently, different web-based systems are aimed at facilitating multi-centre data sharing for clinical trials or combining clinical data collection with data management and analytics workflow, integrating heterogeneous data and managing external semantic interoperability, particularly in the genomic/biological fields [1–10,20–24].For example, BTM-Research™ by Daedalus Software [20] allows the collection, storage, annotation, and tracking of biosamples across research centres, which allows the sharing of the collection and research workflows. This system is devoted to biological and genomic data, but it does not allow online signal processing using shared algorithms or analysis chains. REDCap [22] is a secure web system for data capture and export in research studies, but does not include the possibility to create personal analysis functions.The caBIG experience (now retired by the US National Institutes of Health, NIH, https://cabig.nci.nih.gov/) provided an open-source community for cancer data sharing and management, but it did not provide any tools to create clinical report forms (CRFs) for multicentre clinical trials [6]. Similarly, the “informatics for integrating biology and the bedside” project (i2b2) [7–9] was funded to integrate clinical and research data. To do so, the i2b2 “hive” provides a set of software modules called “cells” based on a common messaging protocol with interactions through web services and XML messages. The cells are developed by single researchers before integration into the hive, providing a scalable approach for the genomic research area. All of the software services are developed to contribute to the Clinical Research Chart (CRC). The CRC is fed by messages in form of an XML schema containing a header for the definition of basic communication information as well as a body with patient sets, including their phenotypic and genotypic data. However i2b2 does not support the creation of CRF for clinical trials. Other examples such as LORIS [5], OnWARD [10] are web-based tools for multicentre shared data management and scientific collaboration that are also ontology-based [10] but do not allow the management of signals and signal processing algorithms/chains. The SciPort system [25] is a web-based platform for scientific collaboration, integrating and sharing data from distributed institutions. It provides an XML based general approach to model complex scientific data by representing them as XML documents and allows each institution to manage documents independently on a Local SciPort Server.However, none of the available examples integrated the neurophysiological signals with the collection of clinical data in a framework that provided a web-based multicentre-shared environment while allowing for a standard-based interoperable electronic health record EHR and the direct creation of CRFs for supporting multicentre clinical trials.In this study, we describe the design, implementation and preliminary use of a new platform: WebBioBank. This platform has been developed specifically for combining the management and sharing of DBS patient EHR and biosignals (LFPs), including shared algorithms for DBS biosignal analysis, that were recorded during definable protocols as well as allowing for the possibility to create CRFs. The system may be accessed through a standard web browser, allowing users to perform various tasks for data management in an anonymous mode according to shared protocols. This system represents a new tool for the real time interaction between researchers and clinicians in different DBS centres. The clinicians will be able to add and manage information regarding a patient’s history, neurological signs and symptoms, therapy, neuropsychological test and scales, DBS surgery and follow-up. The researchers will provide shared advanced algorithms for LFP signal processing that can be combined in analysis chains, ensuring that the extraction of the LFP features is the same in all of the centres involved in the research study. The available analysis algorithms can be applied to the raw data to extract significant LFP features that can be correlated to the patient’s clinical state, as reported in the literature. Moreover, the system is open to any additional algorithm uploaded by researchers and can share it among centres. The system also ensures the anonymity of the clinical data/biosignal collection, protecting the privacy of the patients during large studies by other clinical centres. Since WebBioBank integrates the functionalities of traditional EHRs with those of research support systems, such as clinical research management systems (CRMS), it implements a “research” EHR (rEHR).In the first part of the paper, we describe the technical aspects of this new system (requirements, architecture, prototype, data type and processing, UML use case and activity diagrams). In the second part of the paper, we present the results from the first implementation of the prototype in a DBS multi-centre study, showing its capability in a research field in which these technical aspects are highly required. Finally, we highlight the limitations and innovative aspects of the new system from its first implementation while comparing it to an existing system.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
