@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Development of reusable logic for determination of statin exposure-time from electronic health records

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Identifying intended statin exposure from electronic health records is difficult.Intended statin exposure is an indicator of numerous clinical factors.We use electronic health records to model intended statin exposure.Best model created a proxy for exposure end based on other medical utilization.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Anticholesteremic agents,Algorithm,Electronic health records,Statins,HMG-CoA,Drug dosage calculations,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveWe aim to quantify HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor (statin) prescriber-intended exposure-time using a generalizable algorithm that interrogates data stored in the electronic health record (EHR).Materials and methodsThis study was conducted using the Marshfield Clinic (MC) Personalized Medicine Research Project (PMRP) a central Wisconsin-based population and biobank with, on average, 30years of electronic health data available in the independently-developed MC Cattails MD EHR. Individuals with evidence of statin exposure were identified from the electronic records, and manual chart abstraction of all mentions of prescribed statins was completed. We then performed electronic chart abstraction of prescriber-intended exposure time for statins, using previously identified logic to capture pill-splitting events, normalizing dosages to atorvastatin-equivalent dose. Four models using iterative training sets were tested to capture statin end-dates. Calculated cumulative provider-intended exposures were compared to manually abstracted gold-standard measures of ordered statin prescriptions, and aggregate model results (totals) for training and validation populations were compared. The most successful model was the one with the smallest discordance between modeled and manually abstracted Atorvastatin 10mg/year Equivalents (AEs).ResultsOf the approximately 20,000 patients enrolled in the PMRP, 6243 were identified with statin exposure during the study period (1997–2011), 59.8% of whom had been prescribed multiple statins over an average of approximately 11years. When the best-fit algorithm was implemented and validated by manual chart review for the statin-ordered population, it was found to capture 95.9% of the correlation between calculated and expected statin provider-intended exposure time for a random validation set, and the best-fit model was able to predict intended statin exposure to within a standard deviation of 2.6 AEs, with a standard error of +0.23 AEs.ConclusionWe demonstrate that normalized provider-intended statin exposure time can be estimated using a combination of structured clinical data sources, including a medications ordering system and a clinical appointment coordination system, supplemented with text data from clinical notes.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Increasingly, the electronic health records (EHRs) used for routine healthcare have become a resource for research purposes, particularly for comparative effectiveness research [1–4], genomic research [5–8], and longitudinal retrospective studies [9,10]. EHRs offer many research benefits including providing a snapshot of clinical care as it is performed in a non-research setting [11,12], the ability to quickly interrogate a large population for specific phenotypic characteristics[5,13,14], and the ability to derive and share phenotypes across multiple institutions using standardized algorithms [14–17].However, there are a number of challenges that need to be overcome for electronic health records to reach their full potential for research purposes. Ordered medication exposures are a very-frequently used element of EHR-based research, and present a unique set of challenges. The documentation of medication use within an electronic health record is not well standardized [18]. Documentation of prescription medications within a patient’s medical record may be stored in either structured or unstructured clinical fields and often there is necessary information in both types of fields [18,19]. Frequently, multiple sources of medication documentation must be interrogated and combined in order to obtain a complete and accurate description of a patient’s medication history. Medication classes that are prescribed for long periods of time are even more challenging because a number of features must be understood and combined to determine overall expected exposure.Accurate ascertainment of anticipated prescription period is essential to estimating total length of medication indication. Identifying initial order dates is straightforward from EHR clinical applications created for medications ordering, however, because completion of a medication regimen is not generally tied to a clinical or billing event, and generally occurs outside the medical setting, EHRs do not reliably capture dates when drug exposure ends. As a result, an algorithm must be defined to provide a logical and consistent method for determining these end-dates.Our aim is to develop a model for estimating prescriber-intended statin exposure time. Because prescriber intention is the goal, we chose to focus on orders or text mentions of statins over dispensing or pharmacy data.There are numerous cases where identifying intended dosage is a challenge. Some medications can be prescribed in numerous dosages, and may be prescribed at higher dosages to save patients’ money by pill-splitting. This leads to one dosage in physician notes, and another in prescription databases. Chronically prescribed medications may have dosage changes over time, presenting challenges when clinical dosing notes are carried forward in the record. If the class of medication has more than one drug, which may in turn have a range of dosages associated with it and the drugs have different relative efficacies, then these dosages must be standardized to a reference dose. Long-term exposure to a drug class can only be determined if all drugs within the class have a known effectiveness and equivalence to a reference dose.Further, because of the nature of EHR data, a true gold-standard for even provider intended statin exposure-time is not available via abstraction of retrospective documents or orders. As a result, the standard approach for identifying provider intended statin exposure time relies upon expert review of EHR documentation. Because exposure stop dates are often undocumented in the EHR, human review of contextual information surrounding clinical visits is essential to understanding the inferences that cannot be interpreted programmatically. The intent of this methodological study is to closely approximate this manual process to yield a close estimate of provider intended statin exposure. The issue of identifying actual statin exposure is not addressed here—measuring nonadherence or delayed adherence is outside the scope of this work.Statins encapsulate many of the challenges that are representative of the exposure-time problem; there are seven statins in the HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor class, as well as a set of combination medications that include a statin component [20]. These drugs can be prescribed in a variety of different dosages and commonly are prescribed in a manner that assumes pill splitting [45]. Additionally, multiple statin drugs in a range of dosages may be prescribed consecutively in a patient’s lifetime. Statins offer a challenging set of practical considerations for determining intended exposure time – in general once a statin is prescribed to a patient, that patient remains on a statin medication continuously [23–26]. Secondly, because statins are prescribed over a broad range of dosages (whose cost to the consumer does not correlate with dosage prescribed), pill-splitting is extremely common [21,22].Statins are one of the most commonly prescribed classes of medication in the United States, with more than 255 million statin prescriptions written during 2010 [27]. Increasingly, statins are prescribed for primary prevention of cardiovascular disease, resulting in very long-term patient exposure to these medications [28–30]. Current research suggests that there may be unexpected outcomes to this treatment including reduced cancer risks and increased type 2 diabetes risk [30–34]. Study of the downstream effects of statin exposure would benefit by some way to determine intended statin exposure-time.Here we develop a method for creating a statin exposure-time variable, Atorvastatin 10mg/year Equivalents (AEs), analogous to cigarette “pack-years” [35,36] in which statins are standardized across the class and exposure-time can be related to atorvastatin-year equivalents using clinically relevant prescribing guidelines. We developed logic to determine a proxy for statin end-dates which are not collected systematically. We harmonized a number of electronic databases using established search strategies to create a lifetime intended exposure estimate. We converted all statin prescriptions into equivalents using established equivalency tables [37]. Finally we validated our electronic algorithm versus the gold standard of electronic chart abstraction to determine our ability to capture statin usage effectively.The Marshfield Clinic Institutional Review Board (IRB) reviewed and approved this study as part of protocol CRO10209PM-C. Patients with statin exposure were identified in the Marshfield Clinic Personalized Medicine Research Project (PMRP), a population-based biobank of approximately 20,000 adults aged 18 or older, the vast majority of whom live within the Marshfield Epidemiologic Study Area (MESA), a 19 ZIP-code area surrounding the city of Marshfield, Wisconsin [38,39]. Individuals provided informed consent, a blood sample (for plasma, serum and DNA), and detailed lifestyle, diet, family history, and exposure data not available in the EHR as well as access to their EHR for medical research purposes [40,41]. The Marshfield Clinic system is estimated to capture 95% of outpatient encounters and 93% of inpatient encounters for this population and on average there are over 30years of EHR data on this population [40]. Marshfield Clinic is an integrated medical- and dental-delivery network, and has maintained electronic health records that are shared with neighboring hospitals. All told, these data capture networks provide access to an enormous range of clinical details for this defined population over the study period (1997–2011). Because all data are stored electronically, they are available for electronic querying and text mining. Additional details about the PMRP can be found at the project website: http://www3.marshfieldclinic.org/chg/pages/default.aspx?page=chg_pers_med_res_prj.Marshfield Clinic utilizes an internally-developed EHR system, Cattails MD(tm), which contains the vast majority of patient encounters, procedures, vitals, claims, laboratory measurements and clinical documents which are stored digitally both for patient care and research purposes.Two data sources were used to construct the current logic – the first is the Medications Manager application. Medications Manager is a module attached to Cattails MD used for ordering of dispensable medications in the Marshfield Clinic system. It stores information on drug class, order date, and dosage as well as a range of other clinical variables; however it is temporally limited to orders placed after 2005. Because Medications Manager is in place to facilitate prescription ordering, it stores the dates when medications are prescribed, and in most cases does not capture prescriptions stop dates.Prior to the implementation of Medications Manager, access to medications data is available through NLP interrogation of individual patient medical record documents (FreePharma) [42–44]. FreePharma does not directly represent medications ordering information, but rather patient-provider dialogue that may be indicative of exposure.An initial survey of the Medications Manager and FreePharma indications of statin exposure within the PMRP demonstrate that there is both a large population that are likely statin-exposed, and that substantial heterogeneities exist within this population. Within the PMRP, between 1997 and 2011, 6243 persons out of the total 20,500 patients enrolled in the PMRP (30.5%) had statin medication data stored in EHR data repositories (Table 1). Atorvastatin and simvastatin were the most common statins identified in both the Freepharma and Medications Manager tables, constituting 74.6% of all statin orders and text mentions (Table 1). The number of total dosages of statin medications by any individual patient received varied widely across the patient population; in most cases, the median number of drug–dose combinations for any given statin was generally one (the exception being atorvastatin, with a median value of two), interestingly, the maximum drug–dosage count ranged from 4 to 7 drug–dose combinations across the drug class. Patients with an indication of exposure to a single statin were likely to have been exposed to additional statins as well; of the 6243 patients with some statin exposure, 3735 (59.8%, Table 1) were also exposed to at least one other statin drug, as well as up to 14 statin drug–dosage combinations. Distribution of calculated lifetime intended statin exposure across the validated population indicated median exposure of 7.3 AEs, and mean of 11.3 AEs. Application of the appointment model with data imputation yielded a positive-predictive value of 100% and a negative predictive value (NPV) of 97.7% for Boolean (ever/never) statin exposure during the study period.Pill-splitting is frequently used by patients using statin medications, because price per pill does not scale linearly with dosage per pill. Pill-splitting involves mechanically dividing a single tablet in two or more portions, gaining additional days dosage at a nominal increase in cost. This practice greatly complicates the logic for electronically calculating intended exposure-time to this prolific class of medications, however logic to correct for this has been previously identified by Peissig et al. [45] using Marshfield Clinic data.There are some cases where dosage was unavailable in the Medications Manager application. Because this data source is intended for processing medications orders, we were confident that these represent legitimate indications of intended statin exposure; as a result, we chose to use the most frequent dosages identified in Medications Manager application for each drug in the statin class to impute a dosage where none exist in the record [46].Combining the Medications Manager and FreePharma data sources resulted in frequent instances of duplicated, overlapping, or inconsistent data–disagreement or conflicting information included instances of 2 or more statins being prescribed on the same day, or at differing dosages. When this occurred, logic was applied to select one or the other drug or dosage—in general patients tended to be prescribed higher dosages over time, and often during a visit, a lower dose of a statin would be stopped, and a higher dosage (or a more potent statin drug) would be ordered; as a result, in cases where 2 drugs or dosages were identified on the same day, the higher atorvastatin-equivalent dosage was selected as the dosage for calculating provider intended dosage. Records where 3 or more statins or statin-dosages were identified on a single day were discarded (<1% of total records).Normalization to a single statin medication is necessary for determining exposure time, because the drugs in the HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor class vary in potency and recommended dosage for patients. In order to relate dosages across the class, clinical prescribing guidelines for target LDL reduction were used to normalize across the class (Table 2) [37].Intended statin dosages were standardized using clinical prescribing relationships shown in Table 2 to a single “Atorvastatin equivalent” dosage that allows comparison between intended statin exposure-time across patient history in the medical record.A total of 218 individuals were selected for manual review of EHR data. Three of these patients withdrew from the PMRP during the course of this study, leaving 215 patients available for chart abstraction. A sample set of 18 patients was selected to use as a training set for data abstractors. A manual chart abstraction was performed for each of the 18 selected patients. Abstractors were blinded to the output of the electronic algorithms, and trained to collect patient identifier, statin drug name, statin dose, order date and stop date. Data were manually abstracted twice independently by two research coordinators, and discrepant records were reconciled. After training, remaining manual collection of 200 gold-standard patient exposure data were not performed in duplicate.Intended statin exposure prior to the start of the study period was not included in either the modeling phase or manual collection of gold-stand chart review.Four electronic algorithms were created to calculate long-term intended exposure to AEs (Fig. 1):Continuous model (Fig. 1A)—a continuous model was developed, assuming that statin exposure continues until a new statin drug or dosage is encountered in the record, or the patient is deceased. Only prescriptions with dosages were included in this model.180-day model (Fig. 1B)—a fixed 180-day window was used to estimate intended exposure-time based on preliminary review of the statin exposure data. A given prescription was assumed to last 180days, or until a new drug or dosage was identified within the time period. The window is also truncated in the case where a patient is deceased in the system. A variety of other time-windowed models were tested (data not shown), the 180-day window was the most accurate.Appointment window model (Fig. 1C)—a more flexible statin end-date assumption was created by allowing the prescription window to depend on clinical encounters where statins were likely to be prescribed (primary care, ob/gyn and cardiology visits). At each subsequent encounter, the previous drug and dosage is assumed to stop, unless a new order is present on that date. Intended statin exposure is expected to continue until a patient is deceased, or a 365-day period is reached without any clinical contact with the EHR. Any patient without clinical encounters during this sunset period is assumed to have received clinical care outside of the MC catchment area, and the time window is closed.Modified appointment window model (Fig. 1D)—the appointment window model was modified to ignore encounters lacking drug orders as end-dates, intended statin exposure was assumed to continue beyond these encounters at the previous drug–dosage combination. Further, encounters where no dosage was identified, but a statin was prescribed, dosages were imputed as described above.A second validation set of 100 patients were selected to compare the 4 models. Once atorvastatin equivalent dosage and start- and stop-dates were identified, the intended exposure-time for an individual period was calculated using Eq. (1); summing over all intended exposure-periods for a patient gives total intended exposure during the study period.(1)((End date-Start date)/365)∗(Atorv.Equiv.Dosage/10mg)=AE10mg was used as a baseline unit for exposure, and manually abstracted EHR records were used as the gold standard for evaluating the accuracy of the algorithm.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Using the modified appointment window approach for determination of prescription end dates that we developed here, it is now possible to simply and effectively calculate provider intended AEs in a large single provider population. In future studies this measure can be used to relate cumulative intended statin exposure to any number of related disease states. Further, it may be possible to apply similar logic to other drug classes, in order to establish cumulative intended exposure-time for research purposes.