@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-site study of surgical practice in neurosurgery based on surgical process models

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Surgical procedures performed at three different institutions are analyzed and compared.The comparison is based on the sequences of activities performed by the surgeons during surgery.This approach distinguished the surgical behaviors according to surgeon experience and location.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Surgical process models,Surgery,Surgical skills,Clustering,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Surgical Process Modelling (SPM) was introduced to improve understanding the different parameters that influence the performance of a Surgical Process (SP). Data acquired from SPM methodology is enormous and complex. Several analysis methods based on comparison or classification of Surgical Process Models (SPMs) have previously been proposed. Such methods compare a set of SPMs to highlight specific parameters explaining differences between populations of patients, surgeons or systems. In this study, procedures performed at three different international University hospitals were compared using SPM methodology based on a similarity metric focusing on the sequence of activities occurring during surgery. The proposed approach is based on Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) algorithm combined with a clustering algorithm. SPMs of 41 Anterior Cervical Discectomy (ACD) surgeries were acquired at three Neurosurgical departments; in France, Germany, and Canada. The proposed approach distinguished the different surgical behaviors according to the location where surgery was performed as well as between the categorized surgical experience of individual surgeons. We also propose the use of Multidimensional Scaling to induce a new space of representation of the sequences of activities. The approach was compared to a time-based approach (e.g. duration of surgeries) and has been shown to be more precise. We also discuss the integration of other criteria in order to better understand what influences the way the surgeries are performed. This first multi-site study represents an important step towards the creation of robust analysis tools for processing SPMs. It opens new perspectives for the assessment of surgical approaches, tools or systems as well as objective assessment and comparison of surgeon’s expertise.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The concept of decomposing a surgical process into a sequence of tasks was first presented by MacKenzie et al. [1] and Jannin et al. [2] who introduced the concept of Surgical Process Modelling (SPM). SPM allows description of a surgical intervention using a formal and structured language to model a Surgical Process (SP). Thus, SPMs represent SPs which are formalized as symbolic structured descriptions of surgical interventions using a pre-defined level of granularity and a dedicated terminology [3,4].The development of SPM involves three major processes: modelling, acquisition and analysis [4]. The modelling describes the work-domain of the study and its formalism, i.e. what is studied and what is modelled. The level of granularity is defined according to the level of abstraction for describing a surgical procedure. The acquisition describes the collection of data on which the models are built, this step being performed by human observations [2–4] or sensor systems [5]. The analysis process links acquired data to the studied modelled information. Analysis methods can be divided into three types: methods to create an individual model (iSPM), methods that aggregate/fuse information, and the methods that classify/compare data for extracting a specific parameter.The methods that help creating individual models are characterized by the levels of granularity of the acquired information and of the modelling. Top-down approaches are described as analyses that go from a global overview of the intervention with patient-specific information and a description of high-level tasks (such as phases or steps) to fine-coarse details (such as activities or motions). On the contrary, a bottom-up approach takes as input low-level information from sensor devices and tries to extract semantic high-level information. From the large number of papers published in this category, input data coming from videos [6–10] or tracking systems [11,12] have been of increased attention.The goal of aggregation/fusion methods is to create a global model (gSPM) of a specific procedure by merging a set of SPMs. One approach is to merge similar paths as well as to filter infrequent ones to create average SPMs [13]. This may provide a global overview of the surgical practice. Another approach is to create gSPMs that represent all possible transitions within SPMs. A step of synchronization may be necessary for both approaches in order to be able to merge all SPMs. For such purpose, probabilistic analysis have been used [7].Finally, the principle of comparison/classification methods is to use SPMs to highlight a specific parameter (i.e. meta-information) that explains differences between populations of patients, surgeons or systems. Two main applications have been considered: comparison of surgical tools/approaches/systems and objective evaluation of surgical skills. For both, different approaches have been employed. For quantitatively describing the similarities among multiple SPMs, similarity metrics were developed.Time was the first information chosen to evaluate surgical systems, tools, approaches or assess surgeons skills [14,15]. Many clinical studies adopted the principle of time-motion analysis in the early 90s using off-line observer-based videos recording (installed in the OR, surgeons’ head mounted, or in the operating field) [16]. Information regarding phases/steps/activities was then processed through simple statistical analysis such as average, number of occurrence or standard deviation [17–23]. The principle of time-motion analysis was later used by Riffaud et al. [24] but with on-line (i.e. live) SPM acquisition to compare expertise of surgeons. Different metrics were used: the operating time for the whole procedure and for each step, the number of activities performed with either the right or the left hand, the number of changes in microscope position, and the number of gestures performed by the surgeon (instruments used and anatomical structure treated). Furthermore, a set of similarity metrics has been recently proposed by Neumuth et al. [25] to compare different SPMs. In particular, the similarity of granularity, the content similarity, the temporal similarity, the transitional similarity and the transition frequency similarity were defined, each of them representing different aspects of SPMs. Classification focusing on the sequential aspect of SPMs was studied by Forestier et al. [26], where Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) along with K-Nearest Neighbour (KNN) algorithm were used for evaluating surgical skills over a population of surgeons. This method focuses on the different types of activities performed during surgery and their sequencing, by minimizing time differences. For example, if two sequences are composed of the same set of actions in the same order, they will be considered as identical even if they do not last the same amount of time. This approach turned out to be a complementary approach to the classical methods that only focus on differences in the time and the number of activities.In this study, the surgical practice at three different institutions is studied with SPM methodology based on a comparison/classification analysis method, using on-line observer-based recordings of surgical processes, modelled by SPMs. For this study, we followed the methodology described in [26]. Additionally, a matching process was introduced to make the link between terminologies. It allowed comparing SPMs acquired at different sites. 41 surgeries of anterior cervical discectomy (ACD) SPMs were acquired at the Neurosurgery departments of the Rennes University Hospital (France), the Leipzig University Hospital (Germany), and the Montreal Neurological Institute University Hospital (Canada). SPMs performed at different sites were classified using a similarity metric based on sequencing to 1) distinguish the different surgical behaviors according to the location where surgery was performed, and 2) establish a detailed classification of SPMs according to the level of surgical expertise of the surgeon performing the surgical procedure. Neurosurgery is among the riskiest and most important surgeries that is performed today. The complexities involved in the OR on the human brain mean that the initial training of a neurosurgeon requires extensive one-on-one instruction from a senior neurosurgeon. After that initial training, neurosurgeons still require several further years of experience to themselves reach a senior level. Consequently, comparing the way surgery is performed throughout a population of surgeons in several location increases the understanding of the complexity of the field of surgery. Thus, the main goal of this paper is to present how a proposed metric can be used to compare SPMs in order to create groups of similar surgical behaviors that can be explained by external parameters, in this paper the location and the expertise of the surgeons.We also propose the use of Multidimensional Scaling (MDS) to induce a new space of representation of the sequences of activities. Indeed, the similarity computed using DTW is complex and does not allow to easily display the surgeries for visual assessment. Using MDS allows us to plunge the surgeries on 2D Euclidean space, allowing to easily assess the similarity between them.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
