@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Towards actionable risk stratification: A bilinear approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Bilinear risk prediction model for EHR data.Low-dimensional embedding of patients in a learned risk space.Identification of meaningful clinical contexts.Significant improvement in accuracy over existing risk prediction model.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Risk stratification,Bilinear model,Logistic regression,Matrix factorization,Dimensionality reduction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Risk stratification is instrumental to modern clinical decision support systems. Comprehensive risk stratification should be able to provide the clinicians with not only the accurate assessment of a patient’s risk but also the clinical context to be acted upon. However, existing risk stratification techniques mainly focus on predicting the risk score for individual patients; at the cohort level, they offer little insight beyond a flat score-based segmentation. This essentially reduces a patient to a score and thus removes him/her from his/her clinical context. To address this limitation, in this paper we propose a bilinear model for risk stratification that simultaneously captures the three key aspects of risk stratification: (1) it predicts the risk of each individual patient; (2) it stratifies the patient cohort based on not only the risk score but also the clinical characteristics; and (3) it embeds all patients into clinical contexts with clear interpretation. We apply our model to a cohort of 4977 patients, 1127 among which were diagnosed with Congestive Heart Failure (CHF). We demonstrate that our model cannot only accurately predict the onset risk of CHF but also provide rich and actionable clinical insights into the patient cohort.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Risk stratification is indispensable to modern clinical decision support systems. By providing the clinicians (or other healthcare practitioners) an assessment of an individual’s risk against an adverse outcome, risk stratification plays a central role in personalized medicine, care plan management, and cost estimation [1]. While the application area of risk stratification is broad, generally speaking, a comprehensive risk stratification method has three fundamental goals:1.Risk Score Prediction: Given the clinical features, predict an individual’s risk against a certain adverse outcome, such as disease onset, hospitalization, and mortality.Patient Cohort Stratification: Segment a patient cohort into coherent groups based on the patients’ risk as well as clinical characteristics.Clinical Context Discovery: Identify the clinical contexts that underpin the patients’ risk assessment.The vast majority of existing risk stratification techniques are based on multivariate regression analysis [2–6], especially linear regression and logistic regression. Given a set of training patients and their clinical features, the regression model is fit to the training data such that the contribution of each individual clinical feature (also called risk factors) to the overall risk can be estimated (the regression coefficient). The trained model is then applied to a group of test patients to compute their overall risk scores. Based on the their risk scores, the patient cohort can be stratified into several tiers, e.g. high, medium, and low risk.Given sufficient amounts of training data [7], existing regression models can accurately predict the risk scores for individual patients (Goal 1 above). However, they offer limited insights when it comes to patient cohort stratification (Goal 2) and clinical context discovery (Goal 3). Imagine we have a cohort of patients who are at risk of Congestive Heart Failure (CHF). As illustrated in Fig. 1,1For interpretation of color in Fig. 1, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.1traditional regression model will be able to identify two high-risk individuals (red dots). Based on the fact that they have similar risk scores, these two patients will be stratified into the same group regardless of their clinical conditions. In fact, these two individuals may have high risks of CHF for very different reasons, e.g. one with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) and the other with Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD). These clinical contexts are crucial when the clinicians wish to act upon the risk stratification results, e.g. to devise personalized treatment plan, yet they are not adequately addressed by existing regression models.In this work we would like to address the limitation of existing risk stratification techniques by proposing a novel bilinear risk stratification model. Our model aims to perform a comprehensive risk analysis of a given patient cohort, from which clinicians and healthcare practitioners can derive more actionable insights. Our model is designed to achieve all the three above stated goals in a principled and integrated fashion. Specifically, our model learns an embedding of the patients into a low-dimensional risk space such that: (1) the distance from a patient to the origin becomes a measure of his/her risk (risk prediction); (2) patients with similar risk scores and clinical characteristics are close together in the space (cohort stratification); and (3) each dimension of the space provides an interpretation of the clinical context (context discovery). Therefore our model is able to give clinicians a full picture of not only the individual patients’ risk but also the distinct phenotypes associated with their risk; not only the contribution of individual clinical features but the clinical contexts they collectively define.We used a CHF patient cohort extracted from a real Electronic Health Record (EHR) database to test our model. The cohort consists of 1127 case patients who were confirmed with CHF and 3850 control patients. We extracted both diagnosis codes and medication as clinical features. We applied our model to risk stratify this cohort and predicted the risk of future CHF onset. We compared the results from our model to that of logistic regression and demonstrated that our model not only achieved better prediction accuracy but also provided rich and actionable clinical insights that were missing in traditional methods.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we propose a bilinear model for risk stratification. The advantage of our model is that it cannot only accurately predict the risk for individual patients but also capture the distinct clinical characteristics of different high-risk groups. Such advantage is achieved by approximating the feature-wise odds ratio matrix using a low-rank decomposition. We tested our model on a CHF cohort with 1127 case patients and 3850 control patients. We demonstrate that our model consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art risk prediction model in a variety of settings. More importantly our model is able to identify meaningful clinical contexts associated with the onset of CHF. These clinical insights are easy to interpret and instrumental to personalized care plan design.