@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
SYFSA: A framework for Systematic Yet Flexible Systems Analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Healthcare quality can suffer when systems are too rigid or too flexible.Systematic Yet Flexible systems support a mix of systematicity and flexibility.SYFSA is a design framework for selecting the right mix.SYFSA provides qualitative and quantitative methods for comparing designs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Flexibility,Information theory,Problem space analysis,Systematic Yet Flexible systems,Human factors engineering,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Although technological or organizational systems that enforce systematic procedures and best practices can lead to improvements in quality, these systems must also be designed to allow users to adapt to the inherent uncertainty, complexity, and variations in healthcare. We present a framework, called Systematic Yet Flexible Systems Analysis (SYFSA) that supports the design and analysis of Systematic Yet Flexible (SYF) systems (whether organizational or technical) by formally considering the tradeoffs between systematicity and flexibility. SYFSA is based on analyzing a task using three related problem spaces: the idealized space, the natural space, and the system space. The idealized space represents the best practice—how the task is to be accomplished under ideal conditions. The natural space captures the task actions and constraints on how the task is currently done. The system space specifies how the task is done in a redesigned system, including how it may deviate from the idealized space, and how the system supports or enforces task constraints. The goal of the framework is to support the design of systems that allow graceful degradation from the idealized space to the natural space. We demonstrate the application of SYFSA for the analysis of a simplified central line insertion task. We also describe several information-theoretic measures of flexibility that can be used to compare alternative designs, and to measure how efficiently a system supports a given task, the relative cognitive workload, and learnability.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Efforts to improve health care quality have led to an increased push to develop and adopt systems that enforce or encourage consistent processes based on best practices and evidence-based medicine. These efforts follow similar successful practices in other safety–critical industries, such as aviation and nuclear power. Within healthcare, these efforts include clinical guidelines, structured documentation, standardized terminologies, decision support systems, checklists, as well as policies.Although systems that enforce or encourage consistency can improve safety and efficiency, health care is filled with complexity, variations, and exceptions that are not easily captured by idealized processes. Systems that are too rigid to support such deviations can lead to decreases in quality, along with caregiver resistance and creative workarounds that decrease the positive effects of best practices (see, for example Koppel et al. [1]).Hollnagel’s ETTO (efficiency-thoroughness tradeoff) principle is an informal way to express the tradeoff between systematicity and flexibility [2]. Recognition of similar tradeoffs in other industries have led to the design ofSystematic Yet Flexible(SYF) systems [3], in which the system supports and sometimes enforces a systematic approach, while allowing flexibility. Thimbleby [4] has argued that user interfaces are easier to use when they are “permissive” (that is, giving the user flexibility, and hence lowering learning costs) but again this is an informal treatment. Norman [5] emphasizes the role of design constraints and forcing functions in user interfaces, but not how to design the appropriate blend.Although there are general design goals for SYF systems [3], there are no analytic frameworks that allow one to analyze the tradeoffs to determine the appropriate blend of systematicity and flexibility. Without analytic frameworks, organizations (or system developers) will inevitably make arbitrary, often sub-optimal, design choices. The usual response is to require iterative design, which is a period of repeated implementation and evaluation to guide improved re-implementation of the procedures; essentially a “trial and error” design process.In this paper, we present an analytic framework for designing SYF systems (whether organizational or technical) by formally considering the tradeoffs between systematicity and flexibility. In particular, we propose that the ideal SYF system is one that supports graceful degradation from idealized practices to those that better fit the situation at hand. The framework, which we call Systematic Yet Flexible Systems Analysis (SYFSA), is based on analyzing a task using three related problem spaces: theidealized space, thenatural space, and thesystem space. The idealized space represents the best and most efficient practice—how the task should best be accomplished, assuming that only actions that ultimately lead to a goal state are taken and all logical task constraints are met; in general, the least number of actions will be taken to achieve the goal. For example, the idealized space for choosing a medication includes a number of constraints, such as that the medication is therapeutically appropriate, has the correct dose and route, is safe, is available for purchase in the form and dose prescribed and within the required time frame, and is as economically efficient as possible. The natural space captures the task actions and constraints on those actions imposed by the physical world. For example, if the natural space is a paper-based, handwritten prescription we see that it enforces almost none of the idealized constraint—it is too flexible. However, this flexibility allows a physician to use non-standard formulations and dosing regimens to better personalize care and to easily prescribe new medications that may not yet be in more systematic IT-based ePrescribing systems. Lastly, the system space specifies how the task is done in a redesigned, or newly designed, system, including how it may deviate from the idealized space, and how the system supports or enforces constraints in the idealized space. A system space for ePrescribing explicitly considers the constraints of the idealized prescribing space, supports known constraints, while recognizing the need to cope with the inevitable exceptions and variations that are common in healthcare.SYFSA is a design and analysis framework, not a set of prescriptive guidelines or principles for producing SYF systems. Prescriptive guidelines give explicit design advice, but usually at a very high level of abstraction that leaves considerable details underspecified. For instance, one of Perer and Shneiderman’s guidelines for SYF systems that we discuss below is to allow the user to “See an overview of the sequential process of actions,” [3] but this guideline does not help the designer decide which of many possible sequences to highlight. In contrast, SYFSA’s primary value as a design and analysis framework is to allow stakeholders to explore trade-offs in systematicity and flexibility by making constraints (and lack of constraints) on actions and sequences of actions an explicit part of the design and evaluation process. Specifically, SYFSA forces designers (and others involved in the design or evaluation process) to think about the constraints or lack of constraints in each of the spaces and whether a specific system design supports those constraints. It is then up to the designer to use the results of the analysis to inform system design. Returning to Perer and Shneiderman’s example, SYFSA can help designers decide which sequence of actions to highlight.We also propose three quantitative, information-theoretic measures of task flexibility that allow designers to compare the flexibility of alternative system designs and how closely these designs match the idealized flexibility required to complete a task. These measures are motivated by an intuitive notion of flexibility, whereby a task that can be done by carrying out actions in any order has maximum flexibility, and a task that can only be done with a specific sequence of actions has the least flexibility.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
SYFSA is a systematic approach to analyzing and designing Systematic Yet Flexible (SYF) systems. By explicitly representing three spaces, the idealized space, the natural space, and the system space, designers and domain experts can examine the assumptions behind task analysis and system design, and the possible trade-offs between systematicity and flexibility. By making assumptions and constraints on actions explicit, the framework provides a means for designing novel systems that better support the constraints inherent in a task, but not in the natural environment. In addition, the quantitative information theoretic flexibility measures allow analysts to compare different spaces and system designs in terms of relative efficiency for supporting a task, cognitive workload, and learnability.