@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Utilizing social media data for pharmacovigilance: A review

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a review of pharmacovigilance techniques from social media (SM) data.Our review discusses twenty-two studies, comparing them across various axes.We present a possible pathway for automated pharmacovigilance research from SM.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Adverse drug reaction,Pharmacovigilance,Social media,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveAutomatic monitoring of Adverse Drug Reactions (ADRs), defined as adverse patient outcomes caused by medications, is a challenging research problem that is currently receiving significant attention from the medical informatics community. In recent years, user-posted data on social media, primarily due to its sheer volume, has become a useful resource for ADR monitoring. Research using social media data has progressed using various data sources and techniques, making it difficult to compare distinct systems and their performances. In this paper, we perform a methodical review to characterize the different approaches to ADR detection/extraction from social media, and their applicability to pharmacovigilance. In addition, we present a potential systematic pathway to ADR monitoring from social media.MethodsWe identified studies describing approaches for ADR detection from social media from the Medline, Embase, Scopus and Web of Science databases, and the Google Scholar search engine. Studies that met our inclusion criteria were those that attempted to extract ADR information posted by users on any publicly available social media platform. We categorized the studies according to different characteristics such as primary ADR detection approach, size of corpus, data source(s), availability, and evaluation criteria.ResultsTwenty-two studies met our inclusion criteria, with fifteen (68%) published within the last two years. However, publicly available annotated data is still scarce, and we found only six studies that made the annotations used publicly available, making system performance comparisons difficult. In terms of algorithms, supervised classification techniques to detect posts containing ADR mentions, and lexicon-based approaches for extraction of ADR mentions from texts have been the most popular.ConclusionOur review suggests that interest in the utilization of the vast amounts of available social media data for ADR monitoring is increasing. In terms of sources, both health-related and general social media data have been used for ADR detection—while health-related sources tend to contain higher proportions of relevant data, the volume of data from general social media websites is significantly higher. There is still very limited amount of annotated data publicly available , and, as indicated by the promising results obtained by recent supervised learning approaches, there is a strong need to make such data available to the research community.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Our survey covers research efforts for automatic pharmacovigilance techniques from social media data. The review includes carefully selected articles, published over the last four years, starting with the pioneering work of Leaman et al. [17]. The studies included in the survey show the growing attention that the utilization of social media data is receiving. Moreover, while early research tasks have been mostly exploratory, recent approaches have illustrated the need and interest for structured standardized approaches and annotated data. All but six studies in our sample used data that is publicly unavailable for system development and evaluation. As such, at this point, performing a direct comparison of existing detection/extraction approaches is impossible. At the same time, evaluations of systems have also progressed in various directions, without the development of any standard evaluation criteria. A transition in research methodologies is however clearly visible, as large annotated data sets are gradually becoming available.Most extraction approaches relied on using lexicons for identifying/extracting ADR mentions in text, while pattern-matching-based approaches have also been applied. Lexicon-based approaches face specific obstacles when applied to social media data, whereas pattern-based methods require large amounts of data for system development. Only recently, there has been a trend in supervised learning approaches that attempt to utilize annotated data, and it is likely that comprehensive supervised classification approaches will be used more frequently in the near future.Building on this review, we propose a possible framework for future ADR detection efforts from social media. Considering the recent developments of annotated data and large-scale annotation efforts, much of future research will invariably attempt to utilize supervised learning approaches. In the proposed framework, we only referred to data that is publicly available for performing ADR detection from social media. Fig. 2presents a high level illustration of the framework.The first step in working with social media data is the collection of the data. All the papers discussed in this review perform data collection from various sources. For health related social networks, such as Dailystrength, the collection of relevant data is generally easy since the data is categorized according to various criteria (e.g., drug name). For generic social networks, such as Twitter, the collection problem is harder. It is possible to collect posts by using drug names as search keywords, but drug names are often misspelt by users. To address this problem recent research [38,35] has utilized phonetic spelling filters to generate common misspellings for drug names [69]. These recent advances in NLP will aid future data collection processes.Following data collection, the challenge is to filter data. As explained earlier, data imbalance is an important problem in ADR mining from social media text, which has resulted in various research tasks on classification of ADR assertive text [49,48,38,39]. With the creation of recent publicly available corpora (e.g.,[50,38,35,58], learning algorithms can be trained and optimized to detect ADR assertive instances with high accuracies. Most classification research, however, have only used very basic linguistic features for classification (e.g., bag of words), and only very recent research has focused on exploring deep linguistic and semantic features and advanced machine learning techniques [41].Effective filtering/classification techniques are likely to aid the process of ADR mention extraction by removing the majority of irrelevant information. We have discussed various ADR extraction approaches in the paper, the most popular being lexicon-based ones. Lexicon-based approaches have benefited from recent expansions and merging of existing lexicons, and the incorporation of colloquial terms. Recent release of publicly available annotated data [65] will inevitably popularize supervised learning approaches for this task.The last step in the pipeline is to perform statistical analysis on extracted drug-ADR pairs to identify potentially harmful drugs. This step has hardly received any research attention to date, and we only identified two exploratory studies attempting to perform this task on social media data [40,39]. Progress in ADR extraction and classification research is likely to raise the research focus on the analysis of drug-ADR signals generated from social media data. Considering the rapid growth of social media data, this source of information is likely to have a massive impact on pharmacovigilance research.