@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Hemojuvelin–hepcidin axis modeled and analyzed using Petri nets

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Petri net based model of hemojuvelin–hepcidin axis has been proposed.Analysis of the model properties, especially its T-invariants, has been done.Finding dependencies among biological subprocesses corresponding to T-invariants.In non-hepatic cells m-HJV cleavage can be catalyzed simultaneously by two enzymes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Biological systems,Hemojouvelin synthesis,Modeling,Petri nets,T-invariants,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Systems biology approach to investigate biological phenomena seems to be very promising because it is capable to capture one of the fundamental properties of living organisms, i.e. their inherent complexity. It allows for analysis biological entities as complex systems of interacting objects. The first and necessary step of such an analysis is building a precise model of the studied biological system. This model is expressed in the language of some branch of mathematics, as for example, differential equations. During the last two decades the theory of Petri nets has appeared to be very well suited for building models of biological systems. The structure of these nets reflects the structure of interacting biological molecules and processes. Moreover, on one hand, Petri nets have intuitive graphical representation being very helpful in understanding the structure of the system and on the other hand, there is a lot of mathematical methods and software tools supporting an analysis of the properties of the nets. In this paper a Petri net based model of the hemojuvelin–hepcidin axis involved in the maintenance of the human body iron homeostasis is presented. The analysis based mainly on T-invariants of the model properties has been made and some biological conclusions have been drawn.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
It becomes more and more evident that living organisms are complex systems. It means that they are composed of many components that are interconnected by a dense network of interactions. These interactions are responsible for a great part of properties of such systems. In other words, the structure and functionality of living organisms follows not only directly from the properties of their building blocks but rather from the complex interactions among them.From this it follows that for a deep understanding the nature of living organisms it is not sufficient to study the properties of these blocks separately. It is necessary to analyze also the whole net of interactions. This means that they should be considered as complex systems and analyzed using methods developed for studying such systems [15,21,42].Methods of this type has been developed in the area of systems sciences where they have been usually used to analyze technical systems. Many of these methods can be applied in the area of biological sciences. But biological systems have their own specificity, so in many cases these methods should be adopted to the nature of them. However, in any case, the first and necessary step in the process of the analysis of a complex system is building a precise model of it. Such a model should be expressed in the language of some mathematical theory.It is worth to mention that developing a formal model of a biological system is usually much more challenging than building the model of a technical system. There are at least two reasons of this. First, the biological systems are the most complex ones analyzed by humans so far. Second, contrary to the case of technical systems, the biological ones have not been developed by humans. So, their structure has to be discovered.Traditionally, for describing biological phenomena in a formal way differential equations are used. They are a very powerful mathematical tool and models based on them are, in principle, very precise. However, in the context of biological systems it may be difficult to build a precise model based on differential equations. The reason is that they require exact values of some parameters. These values correspond to quantitative properties of the modeled biological system but they are usually difficult to determine. So, often the differential equations based model contains imprecise quantitative information what can considerably influence its properties and the conclusions drawn on the basis of it.So, for modeling complex biological systems recently models of another kinds are used. One of the mathematical theories applied for this purpose is the theory of Petri nets. The nets of this type have been proposed in 1962 by Carl A. Petri in the context of computer systems. For years this theory has been developed and applied in the area of technical systems, especially the computer and telecommunication ones. They are well suited for modeling concurrent stochastic processes.But most of biological processes are of this type. So, with the rapid development of computational biology during the last two decades Petri nets are being also used to model and analyze biological systems.One of the advantages of nets of this type is their intuitive graphical representation which is very helpful in understanding the structure of the net and the modeled system and in the simulation of them. On the other hand, there are well-known mathematical methods for the analysis of Petri net properties and many freely available software tools can support such an analysis and simulation [28,47].In this paper a formal model expressed in the language of Petri net theory of the hemojuvelin (HJV)–hepcidin axis involved in the maintenance of the human body iron homeostasis is provided. The smooth cooperation of this axis is a very important phenomenon because any disturbances observed, among others, on the basis of the naturally occurring human mutations show the measurable damages to the functioning of the human organism, either hepcidin deficiency, resulting in iron overload, or hepcidin excess with consequent iron deficiency and sequestration.Although it has been over 10years since the groundbreaking discovery of hepcidin and we learned a lot at this time, there are still new research topics in this issue [16]. Hepcidin is transcriptionally regulated and there is no evidence yet of other types of control. However, this regulation is very complex and still requires investigations [6].This paper presents a part of a broader research concerning iron metabolism (cf. [37,13,14]). Its novelty lies in modeling and analysis a different phenomenon, i.e. hemojuvelin–hepcidin – axis regulation, crucial for the maintenace of the human iron homeostasis, especially during inflammatory process. This is the next stage of our research on human body iron homeostasis. In addition to creating, from scratch, a formal model of this process based on Petri nets, a detailed analysis of the model has been made. Then, the results obtained in the form of T-invariants, have been grouped into MCT-sets and T-clusters. This allowed us to draw some biological conclusions.The organization of the paper is as follows. In the next Section some basics of the Petri net theory are provided which should be helpful for the reader in understanding the followed parts of the paper. In Section 3 the role of hemojuvelin in the process of hepcidin synthesis is described in an informal way. In Section 4 the Petri net based model is provided and described, while in Section 5 the results of the analysis of the model are shown and discussed. The paper ends with conclusions in Section six.A Petri net is a mathematical formalism based on a directed bipartite graph. Graphs of this type consist of vertices which can be divided into two disjoint sets in such a way that each arc of the graph has one of its ending vertices in one of these sets and the another ending vertex is an element of the second set. The vertices being elements of one of these sets are called places and the elements of the other set are transitions. In the biological context places correspond to some biological or chemical components while transitions correspond to some reactions (not necessarily in chemical sense) [33,27,8,23].This graph determines the structure of a Petri net. Graphs are static structures but one of the fundamental properties of Petri nets is their dynamics. It is connected with another important component of such nets, i.e. tokens. They flow through the net what corresponds to the flow of information, substances etc. through the modeled system. The distribution of tokens over the places, called marking, corresponds to the state of the modeled system.Every transition tj, j=1, 2, …, m has some input places pk, k=1, 2, …, rj. They are places for which arc (pi, tj) exists in the net. Similarly, there are also some output places pl, l=1, 2, …, sjof transition tj– they are places for which arc (tj, pk) exists. Every arc of the net is labeled by a positive integer called a weight.When the number of tokens residing in each input place piof transition tjis equal to or greater than the weight of arc (pi, tj), then the transition is enabled. Such a transition can be fired, what means that tokens from input places flow to output places via transition tj. The number of tokens removed from input place piis equal to the weight of arc (pi, tj). Similarly, the number of tokens put to output place pkis equal to the weight of arc (tj, pk). There are two exceptions to this rule. First, there are transitions without input places. Transitions of this type are continuously enabled. Second, there are also transitions without output places. They do not produce any tokens when fired. Transitions of both of these types can model interactions of the system with its environment.In a graphical representation places are shown as circles, transitions as rectangles, arcs as arrows and tokens as dots or numbers residing in places. The weights equal to one are not explicitly represented in the graphical representation of the net.The graphical representation of a Petri net is very intuitive but it is not well suited for the formal analysis of its properties. Hence, the basic representation of such nets is based on an incidence matrix A=(aij)n×m. The rows of this matrix correspond to places and the columns correspond to transitions of the net. Each entry aijis an integer number equal to the difference between the numbers of tokens present in place pibefore and after firing transition tj.In the case when a Petri net is a model of a biological system especially important is an analysis of its invariants. There are two types of them, i.e. P-invariants and T-invariants. A P-invariant is vectory∈Nnbeing a solution of the equationAT·y=0.A T-invariant is vectorx∈Nmsatisfying the equationA·x=0.With each T-invariant x there is associated its support, denoted by supp(x), being a set of transitions corresponding to non-zero entries in x, i.e. supp(x)={tj: xj>0, j=1, 2, …, m}. A T-invariant x is minimal if its support does not properly contain a support of any other T-invariant, i.e. if there is no T-invariant x′ such that supp(x′)⊂supp(x). A minimal P-invariant is defined analogously. Since any invariant can be obtained as a linear combination of some minimal invariants usually it is sufficient to consider only the minimal ones.A T-invariant corresponds to a set of transitions whose firing a number of times equal to an entry of the invariant reproduces a given marking of the net. There are many algorithms for the invariants computation and new approaches are still being published [29,4,36].A Petri net should be covered by T-invariants. It means that every transition should be an element of support of some invariant. In such a case every modeled elementary biological process contribute to a basic behavior of the net (cf. [38,14,23]). If in the net there are transitions which are not elements of a support of any T-invariant it may suggest that the model is not properly constructed. So, checking the T-invariant coverage is a kind of the verification of the model correctness.In case of many biological systems it is necessary to return to an initial state (what is possible if the net is covered by T-invariants). In particular it is necessary for the system whose model in presented in this paper. It is based on the regulation of hepcidin–hemojuvelin axis, which is crucial for maintaining the balance of iron metabolism in the human body, especially in the case of inflammation. The modeled process must return to the initial state since all deviations, particularly those that contribute to the increase in the concentration of iron in the body, would increase its availability for microorganisms which, like human, need iron to sustain all life processes. In terms of physiology the human body protects itself in this way before the massive infections.In Fig. 1there is shown an exemplary Petri net. The net contains: input transitions t0, t1, t2, output transition t8, T-invariants x1={t0, t8}, x2={t1, t3, t5, t6, t7, t8}, x3={t2, t4, t5, t6, t7, t8}, P-invariant y1={p3, p4, p5}. Transition t5 can be fired if and only if there is a token in both places p2 and p5. Thus, within a P-invariant at least one token must be provided, i.e. in places p3, p4 or p5. The net is covered by T-invariants.In order to draw some conclusions concerning the modeled biological system on the basis of the analysis of the net properties for T-invariant its biological meaning should be identified. In many cases it may be difficult in practice due to a huge number of them. In such cases grouping transitions and T-invariants into some sets appears to be helpful.Transitions can be grouped into the so-called MCT-sets (Maximal Common Transition sets) [38,37]. A set of this type consists of transitions which belong to exactly the same T-invariants. The MCT-sets partition the set of transitions into disjoint subsets whose biological meaning should be determined. T-invariants and the MCT sets are basis for conducting detailed analysis of the modeled biological processes [20].T-invariants can be grouped into the so-called T-clusters[37,17,34]. T-cluster is a set of similar T-invariants and could be interpreted as biological functional module. Similarity of T-invariants is computed based on clustrering techniques like UPGMA or Complete Linkage. Although formally there is no relationship between T-clusters and MCT-sets, T-cluster can be seen as a collection of MCT-sets and single transitions (Table 4).The analysis of the content of MCT-sets and T-clusters may lead to discoveries of some important dependencies among the subprocesses of the analyzed biological system which in turn may lead to some interesting properties of the system. In other words, in this way on the basis of the mathematical model some biological discoveries can be made.The balance of iron in the human organism must be carefully regulated to provide iron as needed, and to avoid toxicity associated with iron overload. The regulation of this process starts at the level of intestinal absorption and involves macrophage iron recycling and hepatocyte iron mobilization [11]. There is a lot of stimuli known to modulate the iron homeostatic mechanism, like erythroid iron needs, hypoxia, iron deficiency, iron overload and inflammatory processes. Much of this regulation is controlled by hepcidin [31], a protein encoded by hepcidin antimicrobial peptide (HAMP), which influences iron homeostasis mainly through its ability to bind ferroportin 1 (FPN1), the iron exporter responsible for iron egress from duodenal enterocytes, macrophages, and other iron exporting cells.Hepcidin is transcriptionally regulated and there is no evidence yet of other types of control [16]. Under physiological conditions its expression in the liver is regulated by many proteins that are expressed in accordance to iron demand, including the human hemochromatosis protein (HFE), transferrin receptor 2 (TfR2), HJV, bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) (BMP6 appears to be the key BMP in this regulation), matriptase-2 encoded by transmembrane protease serine 6 gene (TMPRSS6) and transferrin (Tf). As BMP6 is currently the only component of the HJV/BMP signaling pathway that has been demonstrated to be iron regulated, matriptase-2 may represent an additional element of this pathway whose expression is regulated in accordance with body iron stores [32]. On the other hand, HAMP expression can be also regulated, regardless of body iron levels, by erythroid factors, hypoxia, and inflammatory process [48].Studies in both humans and animal models indicate that HFE and TfR2 are relatively mild inducers of HAMP expression. In comparison, HJV, BMP6, matriptase-2, and neogenin are robust modifiers of its expression.At the cellular level, iron sensing involve HFE and TfR2, and is mediated also through the BMP/SMAD (proteins that are homologs of both the Drosophila protein mothers against decapentaplegic (MAD) and the C. elegans protein SMA) signaling pathway. BMPs represent a class of secreted ligands that can regulate cell proliferation and differentiation. Binding of BMP ligands to cell-surface BMP receptors (BMP-R) causes the phosphorylation of SMAD proteins that translocate to the nucleus to induce transcription of specific genes, including HAMP [6].One of the proteins influencing BMP signaling pathway is HJV, a membrane protein that is encoded by a gene hemochromatosis type 2 protein (HFE2) originally cloned by Papanikolaou et al. [30].The main sources of HJV are the liver and skeletal muscle, but it is also found within the heart [35]. HJV has two isoforms: an inactive secreted soluble form (s-HJV) and an active membrane-bound form (m-HJV) [25]. m-HJV can be cleaved to s-HJV (40 kD fragment) by the ubiquitously expressed furin.The furin-mediated HJV release is negatively regulated by iron-loaded Tf and possibly non-Tf iron [40]. m-HJV functions as a co-receptor for BMPs, increasing the efficiency of the interaction of BMP with its receptor, and increases hepatic hepcidin expression by enhancing BMP signaling, while s-HJV works the other way. s-HJV decreases BMP signaling by acting as a “decoy receptor” [22] for BMPs, competing with m-HJV [2], what prevents the formation of a cell surface BMP-HJV complex and blocks activation of BMP-R [9]. Therefore, any factors enhancing the synthesis of s-HJV lead to a suppression of hepcidin synthesis. Low iron levels and hypoxia are such factors. They increase the generation of s-HJV, by a stabilization of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) [39], which in turn up-regulates matriptases-2, a serine protease, which is encoded by the TMPRSS6 gene [26].Recent studies indicate that matriptase-2 binds and degrades HJV, leading to a decrease in cell surface HJV and decreases HAMP promoter responsiveness to BMP signaling in hepatocytes [40]. It is responsible for the cleavage of HJV at arginine 288, releasing a 36 kD s-HJV that is unable to bind BMPs, making matriptase-2 a suppressor of HAMP expression.The furin cleavage site of HJV is distinct from that of matriptase-2 [10].The activation mechanism of the SMADs has been well defined. Binding of BMP to cell surface HJV positions BMP to activate BMP-R. Upon BMP stimulation, type I and II receptors form heterodimers to recruit and phosphorylate receptor-regulated SMADs (R-SMADs) including SMAD1, SMAD5, and SMAD8 (SMAD1/5/8 signaling pathway).The phosphorylated R-SMADs subsequently dimerize with common SMADs (SMAD4) into R-SMADs–SMAD4 heterodimer and translocate into nuclei to activate transcription of HAMP gene, upon binding to proximal and distal sites on its promoter [44].The level of SMADs is regulated by the E3 ubiquitin-protein ligases, called SMAD ubiquitination regulatory factors 1 and 2 (SMURF1) and (SMURF2), respectively [49]. They accept ubiquitin from an E2 conjugating enzyme where they transfer ubiquitin to the R-SMADs which causes their ubiquitination followed by degradation in proteosome. SMURF1 binds to SMAD1 and SMAD5, while SMURF2 binds SMAD1, SMAD2, SMAD3, SMAD6 and SMAD7.BMP, HJV and SMAD1 response by HAMP is dependent on a distal BMP responsive element 2 (BMP-RE2). Furthermore, the BMP responsive element 1 (BMP-RE1) is located in the proximal region of HAMP. BMP-RE1 and BMP-RE2 mediate high baseline HAMP promoter activity [43].Another protein involved in regulation of HAMP expression is neogenin, which inhibits HJV secretion and was found to be necessary for BMP-induced SMAD1/5/8 signaling pathway [24].BMP signaling pathway is still subject to other regulation. It is negatively regulated by growth differentiation factor 15 (GDF15) and twisted gastrulation protein 1 (TWSG1) being members of the transforming growth factor-β family (TGF beta). They both modulate BMP signaling in response to ineffective erythropoiesis and are released under conditions of iron-restricted erythropoiesis [46].The TGF beta ligand binds to a type II receptor dimer, which recruits a type I receptor dimer forming a hetero-tetrameric complex with the ligand, i.e. TGF beta. TGF beta pathway is mediated by the SMAD anchor for receptor activation (SARA). SARA recruits an R-SMAD. The type I receptor of TGF beta (TGF beta-RI) phosphorylates the serine residue of the R-SMAD, what leads to a conformational change in the MH2 domain of the R-SMAD and its subsequent dissociation from the receptor complex and SARA [41]. The phosphorylated R-SMAD has a high affinity for a coSMAD, like SMAD4, and forms a complex.In the modulation of TGF beta ligands is involved a subclass of SMADs, i.e. inhibitor SMAD (I-SMAD). This class includes SMAD6 and SMAD7. They both compete with SMAD4 and consequently regulate the transcription of HAMP gene.While HJV is a BMP co-receptor that enhances BMP/SMAD signaling pathway [1], the mechanisms of how HFE and TfR2 contribute to the control of hepcidin activation remains elusive [7].Recent research indicates that HJV, TfR2, and HFE form a protein complex [7]. It was disclosed that HJV physically interacts with both HFE and/or TfR2 but not with TfR1. Transferrin-bound iron (Fe2Tf) competes with HFE for binding to TfR1. If serum Fe2Tf levels increase, HFE is displaced from TfR1 to allow its interaction with TfR2 and to activate HAMP transcription [5]. So, HFE bound to HJV does not simultaneously interact with TfR1. This suggests that the association of HFE with HJV or TfR1 is mutually exclusive [7].Summarizing, the BMP-R and its signaling molecules are at core of the regulatory mechanism and control the HAMP transcription through SMAD pathway. HJV increases BMP-R sensitivity to BMPs. Information about iron stores in the liver is transmitted through the increased production of BMP-R ligand, i.e. BMP6, and extracellular iron concentration is detected through the interaction of Tf with its receptors and with HFE. HFE and TfR2 increase the sensitivity of the BMP-R to BMP6, probably by interactions with HJV. Matriptase-2 is probably stabilized by low iron levels, it cleaves m-HJV and inactivates it [16].The Petri net model transforms biological and biochemical relationships and interactions into basic logical dependencies: implication, conjunction, negation and disjunction. Assembling of subnets constructed in such a way gives the final net. The Petri net based model of the process described in the previous Section has been built according to those rules. The resulted net contains 48 places and 65 transitions and is shown in Fig. 2. The names of places and transitions are listed in Table 1 and 2, respectively. The net has been drawn and simulated using Snoopy package [18] and has been analyzed using Charlie software [45]. For the statistical analysis programs written in R language have been used.Some places are identically named but are represented as different nodes. They are called logical nodes and represent the same states and are presented as independent places in order to improve a model readability.The presented model is a discrete Petri net with weights of all arcs equal to one (such a model is called ordinary Petri net). The model does not contain any information about speed of reaction and substrates or products quantity. However, much significant information about the described biological process can be discovered on the basis of a structural analysis. Below structural properties of the Petri net are discussed.If the model is ordinary, then the obvious observation that it is also homogeneous could be derived. It means that for each place all outcoming arcs have the same weight (no quantitative data is considered). Another property of the ordinary net is non-blocking multiplicity, i.e. the minimal weight of incoming arcs is grater or equal to the maximal weight of outgoing arcs.The net is connected but not in strong sense: there is undirected path between any two places but there may be no directed path between them (there are no independent processes within the model). There are no structural traps, i.e. there is no possible deadlock for the net and there is also no such marking for which no transition can fire. The model is not structurally conflict-free because it contains places with two or more outgoing arcs (for instance transitions t11 and t17 have the same preceding place p22).The model is pure because it does not contain any read arcs (loops which may represent occurrence of catalyst).There are no P-invariants and the model has 197 minimal T-invariants. The net is covered by these T-invariants what means that each transition belongs to a support of some T-invariant. Since the model does not contain read arcs, all minimal T-invariants are also feasible T-invariants (cf. [38,12]).The net model contains 14 non-trivial MCT-sets, i.e. those containing more than one transition. These sets and their biological meaning are presented in Table 3.The T-invariants of the net have been grouped into T-clusters. Within the same T-cluster all T-invariants are more similar to each other than to those inside other T-clusters. So, on the basis of such clusters some relationships between biological subprocesses corresponding to T-invariants can be deduced. In order to create meaningful T-clusters a proper clustering method should be used. It means that a clustering algorithm and a measure of similarity between clusters must be carefully chosen. The measure determines the values of similarity which are the base for the clustering algorithm to calculate the clusters.Various pairs of clustering algorithm and similarity measure often yields different clusters. In order to choose the proper measure and clustering method a computational experiment has been performed. The T-clusters have been computed using several clustering algorithms (UPGMA, McQuitty, Median, Single, Complete, Centroid and Ward) according to similarity values calculated on the basis of eight similarity measures (Binary, Canberra, Pearson’s Correlation, Euclidean, Manhattan, Maximum, Minkowski and Uncentered Pearson).To identify the best clustering the Mean Split Silhouette (MSS) [19] method has been used. This method evaluates how well each T-invariant fits to its cluster and gives an averaged fit for a given clustering. The MSS shows that for most cases (the number of clusters together with a similarity measure) the best T-clusters have been obtained for UPGMA method. It was also noticed that the method gives good and very similar results for three similarity measures, i.e. Pearson’s Correlation, Uncentered Pearson and Manhattan distance. So, for the analysis of the modeled process properties the clusters calculated using UPGMA and Pearson’s correlation have been chosen.To find the best number of clusters Calinski–Harabasz coefficient [3] has been calculated for the chosen method. This coefficient is calculated for each possible number of clusters (taken from some predefined range) and its highest value indicates the optimal number of clusters. In the case of the presented model this number is equal to 21. It corresponds to similarity threshold λ equal to 0.4 (this means that two T-invariants belong to the same cluster if and only if the distance between them is closer than λ). The clusters are listed and described in Tables 4 and A.6, their biological interpretations are provided in Table 5, while the resulting dendrogram describing relationships among the obtained clusters is shown in Fig. 3.In our work we pay a particular attention to the factors associated with HJV that affect the expression of HAMP, what in turn determines the concentration of hepcidin, a key protein of the human body iron homeostasis.We have found that cleavage of intracellular m-HJV to s-HJV is either furin-mediated or matriptase-2-mediated (both processes were found in various MCT-sets, i.e. m11 and m12). Matriptase-2-mediated cleavage of m-HJV is probably influenced by an increase expression of m-HJV. In all clusters, i.e. c10, c11 and c12 associated with matriptase-2-mediated cleavage, a single transition t28 (m-HJV expression) has been found, as opposed to processes related to furin-mediated cleavage, where t28 as a single transition has never appeared in clusters associated with furin-mediated cleavage, i.e. c6 and c8. The analysis of the network behavior indicates that these are two separate processes, but sometimes may interact with each other, as seen in the example of cluster c7, where in x99, x100, x113 and x114 invariants they co-exist side by side. It is interesting that only in the mentioned cluster, which refers to the processes taking place in cells other than hepatocytes (t12), these processes occur side by side. In the remaining twenty clusters such a situation was not observed. So, it can be ejected the assumption that only in the extrahepatic tissues cleavage by matriptase-2 and by furin may coexist together, what is possible, because the furin cleavage site of HJV is different from that of matriptase-2. It is illustrated in Fig. 4while Fig. 5shows the details of the analysis.An answer to this question can be found on the basis of the analysis of the content of cluster c10. It can be seen that both T-invariants belonging to this cluster contain such transitions associated with levels of iron, i.e. t15 and t26. An indirect answer to this question can be also obtained on the basis of the analysis of the content of MCT-set m8 and clusters c20 and c21. In each of them can be seen that the concentration of s-HJV increases in the case of a reduced level of iron. And when it comes to the formation of s-HJV particles? It is well known that it is held under the influence of matriptase-2 or furin. So, both these proteins must somehow be varied depending on the iron status of the body. So it can be concluded that the level of iron, particularly the low iron level, has probably an impact on the activity of matriptase-2 and furin. It is quite understandable, given the fact that matriptase-2 is responsible for the level of s-HJV, directly affecting the expression of HAMP, which in turn determines the availability of iron in the human body. On the other hand, it should be noted that high level of body iron do not shows such an impact on the enzymatic activity of these proteins, since in none of the analyzed clusters associated with furin or matriptase-2 mediated cleavage of m-HJV, transitions associated with elevated levels of human body iron can be found. Furthermore, the enzymatic activity of these proteins is also influenced directly by hypoxia process, or indirectly by the HIF-1 which is stabilized by hypoxia, what can be observed on the basis of the analysis of the contents of clusters c6, c8, c10, c11 and c12.We have revealed, that the release of s-HJV may be a tissue specific mechanism, which signals the local iron requirement of hypoxic skeletal muscles independently of the hypoxia in other organs, mainly in the liver. Namely, we have found, that although processes of furin activation induced by HIF-1 stabilization were located in a single cluster, i.e. c6, there were differences in the particular T-invariants compositions. Processes associated with the stabilization of HIF-1 by hypoxia in skeletal muscles (t29) were grouped into another T-invariants (see in clusters c6 and c17) than those influenced by hypoxia in other organs, i.e. t13.In the model we showed that state of hypoxia (p17) through transitions t13, t14 and t29, affects the stabilization of HIF-1 (p22). It in turn reduces the formation of a complex m-HJV–BMPs–BMPsR, what promotes an increase in s-HJV concentration and finally decreases the expression of HAMP. So it can be that any factors contributing to hypoxia have a significant impact on the concentration of hepcidin.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper the Petri net based model of the hemojuvelin–hepcidin axis regulation has been analyzed. The analysis was based mainly on T-invariants. Because of a big number of T-invariants transitions have been grouped into MCT-sets and T-invariants into T-clusters, whose biological meaning has been determined. An analysis of these mathematical objects allowed to detect some dependencies among the corresponding biological subprocesses.A particular finding of our study was to demonstrate that the conversion of m-HJV to s-HJV, crucial for the regulation of hemojuvelin–hepcidin axis, may occur at the same time under the influence of martiptase-2 and furin but only in extrahepatic tissues. The same process in the liver never sets at the same time. In addition, we have found that martiptase-2 and furin levels depend on the iron resources in the human body. Certainly, these results obtained in such a theoretical study are an indicator showing which parts of the analyzed process require an in-depth analysis, including laboratory verification. On the other hand, focusing on the results obtained in this study, the model of the regulation of HAMP expression with particular emphasis on the factors associated with hemojuvelin, created on the basis of current knowledge and hypotheses, is in itself a valuable part of the results. It shows that despite the fact that the parts of the model, especially these related to the matriptase-2 and HFE and TfR2, have been based primarily on some hypotheses, the results obtained on the basis of the analysis of this model allow to get valuable results, what may indicate that these hypotheses have been well-formed.The analyzed Petri net will be a subject of future research. In particular, some available quantitative data will be added to the model what should increase its predictive power. Increasing weight of arcs leads to a more precise model because it allows to include some quantitative relationships which appear in the biological system. However, to model these relationships some additional biological knowledge is necessary which may be not always available. It is worth to mention that differential equations also allow to build precise quantitative model. However, to build such a model exact values of some parameters describing a system are needed. In practice in case of biological systems such values are often not available. Hence building a model of a system based on Petri nets or some of their variants (e.g. hybrid Petri nets) is a reasonable alternative.Another direction of the possible research would be to design and conduct experiments in a wet laboratory. Despite that the biological findings described in this paper have been verified by biologist such experiments would additionally ensure their correctness. They also could suggest some further properties of the system which could be analyzed using systems based methods.So, the results presented in the paper are possible starting points for further both theoretical and laboratory investigations.