@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Cognitive informatics in biomedicine and healthcare

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Cognitive informatics (CI) research has its foundations in cognitive science.Transformations seen in CI in JBI reflect the changes seen broadly in the field of CI.Key topics include decision-making, usability, comprehension, workflow and errors.Recent developments toward use of applied cognition for usability and HCI studies.Future trends point toward consumer health tools and the use of mobile technology.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cognitive informatics,Cognition,Decision-making,Human Computer Interaction (HCI),Errors,Usability,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Cognitive Informatics (CI) is a burgeoning interdisciplinary domain comprising of the cognitive and information sciences that focuses on human information processing, mechanisms and processes within the context of computing and computer applications. Based on a review of articles published in the Journal of Biomedical Informatics (JBI) between January 2001 and March 2014, we identified 57 articles that focused on topics related to cognitive informatics. We found that while the acceptance of CI into the mainstream informatics research literature is relatively recent, its impact has been significant – from characterizing the limits of clinician problem-solving and reasoning behavior, to describing coordination and communication patterns of distributed clinical teams, to developing sustainable and cognitively-plausible interventions for supporting clinician activities. Additionally, we found that most research contributions fell under the topics of decision-making, usability and distributed team activities with a focus on studying behavioral and cognitive aspects of clinical personnel, as they performed their activities or interacted with health information systems. We summarize our findings within the context of the current areas of CI research, future research directions and current and future challenges for CI researchers.We are at a turbulent, yet exciting, phase in healthcare – turbulent, as the transformations in healthcare practice have been driven by paradigmatic shift toward the use of health information technology (HIT), both as a result of necessity and federal mandates; exciting, as such transformations have highlighted the central role of cognitive and behavioral sciences in developing usable systems that can provide high quality patient care. While there is a bright future, in terms of opportunities for researchers and practitioners who seek to engage in cognitive science research, it is also important to reflect on past research – to understand (a) the historical context and foundations of the development of cognitive research in biomedical informatics, (b) the theories, constructs and frameworks that drive the current research, and (c) the potential directions for future research. Within this focus, this special communication provides a broader context of the cognitive and behavioral research on HIT in biomedical informatics. In addition, we have also created a virtual issue of the Journal of Biomedical Informatics (JBI) that will provide a snapshot of the research that has been published in JBI pertaining to cognitive and social science research (see Refs. [1–57]).Cognitive science is an interdisciplinary field that draws from psychology, computer science, linguistics, philosophy and anthropology to understand human activities including reasoning, decision-making and problem solving. Principles from cognitive science have been applied for studying the usability of medical devices and interfaces [55]; developing training, educational interventions and guidelines [39]; streamlining and improving workflow and clinical processes [29]; and for understanding the process of clinical judgment, reasoning and decision-making [58]. In summary, cognitive science provides a viable mechanism to inform our understanding in technology-rich clinical environments, and represents an important component of biomedical informatics [59]. Additionally, cognitive research has been a key to shaping and structuring the use of HIT, adapting to the various needs of the clinical environment.Cognitive informatics (CI), by extension, is an interdisciplinary field comprising of cognitive and information sciences, specifically focusing on human information processing, mechanisms and processes within the context of computing and computer applications [60,61]. The focus of CI is on understanding work processes and activities within the context of human cognition and the design of interventional solutions (often engineering, computing and information technology solutions) that can improve human activities. Within the context of biomedical informatics, CI plays a key role – both in terms of understanding, describing and predicting the nature of clinical work activities of its participants (e.g., clinicians, patients, and lay public) and in terms of developing engineering and computing solutions that can improve clinical practice (e.g., a new decision-support system), patient engagement (e.g., a tool to remind patients of their medication schedule), and public health interventions (e.g., a mobile application to track the spread of an epidemic).Theoretical and methodological approaches from cognitive science have informed the design and evaluation of HIT, and also in understanding and improving the efficiency of healthcare providers. Original research in CI has drawn significantly from cognitive science topics related to comprehension, problem solving and decision-making. Cognitive research evolved from Newell and Simon’s [62] conceptualizations of individual “thought” and “mental processes”, and “human problem solving.” Original studies of problem solving introduced protocol-analytic approaches [63], human information processing theories that, consequently, laid the foundation for the discipline of human computer interaction (HCI). Methods such as verbal think-aloud have been extensively used in CI research, and have been influential in developing our understanding regarding medical problem solving and decision-making and reasoning. Similarly, Kintsch’s [64] research on text comprehension has been instrumental in shaping CI research related to reasoning and decision-making in healthcare.Recognition of the role of cognition in biomedical informatics has shown slow, but positive, growth. While the role of cognition in characterizing the nature of clinical decision-making, judgment and reasoning has been well acknowledged [65,66], the prevalence of cognitive science research in mainstream informatics literature did not occur until the late 1990s. One of the key contributions toward the integration of cognitive science and biomedicine came in 1989 with a book that assembled key papers in biomedicine from the fields of cognitive psychology, linguistics, computer science, anthropology and philosophy [67]. This book provided an early scientific foundation of cognition science for investigations in biomedical modeling.“Cognitive science” as a category for submission at the flagship American informatics conference, AMIA, did not occur until 1996. Internationally, such interest developed a few years later (with recognition at, for example, the European Artificial Intelligence in Medicine conference and the journal AI in Medicine). Though the Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association (JAMIA) published papers related to cognition (see e.g., [68,69]) as early as the late nineties, cognition was still considered as being on the periphery of informatics research. In our previous work [70], we conducted an informal evaluation of the cognitive studies across three leading informatics journals over two time periods (2001–2005 and 2006–2010): Journal of Biomedical Informatics, Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association and the International Journal of Medical Informatics. Based on a keyword search (using common terms such as cognition, cognitive decision support, usability testing and human factors), it was found that the second time period (2006–2010) had 70% more cognition related terms than the first. As the authors argued, while not conclusive, this points toward a growth of cognitive research in recent years [70].Additionally, the Institute of Medicine (IOM) reports of 1999 and 2011 [71,72], highlighting the role of human cognition, accelerated the growth of cognitive science research in informatics. Influential research papers (see e.g., [73]) on the cognitive underpinnings of physician behavior further illustrated the importance of this field. More recently, the federal mandates regarding health information technology (HIT) adoption and use has reinvigorated cognitive informatics research, leading to new avenues and research directions.As previously mentioned, our focus is on characterizing the growth, development and translation of research pertaining to cognition in biomedical and health informatics that was published in the Journal of Biomedical Informatics between January 2001 (when Computers and Biomedical Research (CBR) was reborn as JBI) and March 2014. This analysis emphasizes JBI because we performed the work for a JBI virtual issue consisting of articles previously published in the journal. Other informatics journals and conferences have published cognitive informatics papers in the same time period, but JBI has published an especially large portion of the cognitive papers since its debut in 2001, and those in JBI give a reasonable sense of general trends in the field. Since 2001, JBI has included research articles, methodological review articles, and general review articles that discussed human or team cognition, and its role in informatics. In the virtual issue that accompanies this article, we have collected a set of 57 papers. Additionally, given the breadth of topics that have been covered, we have categorized these papers along multiple cognitive dimensions. These dimensions will help in characterizing the nature of research on cognition in biomedical informatics, current research foci, changes occurring over the past decade, and directions for future research.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The role of cognitive and social sciences in the study of complex healthcare activities and processes has been well acknowledged [71,72,85]. An evaluation of the current literature in biomedical informatics, with a representative, large sample of 57 articles over the last decade from the Journal of Biomedical Informatics, has highlighted the importance and growing role of cognitive and learning sciences. While its acceptance into the mainstream informatics research literature is relatively recent, its impact has been significant – from characterizing the limits of clinician problem-solving and reasoning behavior, to describing coordination and communication patterns of distributed clinical teams, to developing sustainable and cognitively-plausible interventions for supporting clinician activities. The growth of the field within biomedical informatics, now often referred to as cognitive informatics, has not been without challenges (most of which we raised in the discussion section on “grand challenges”). However, with a broader acceptance and awareness of this field, we believe some or most of these challenges will be overcome. New topics of research such as wearable technology and the use of mobile devices have opened up new avenues and opportunities for research. Additionally, the role of simulations, both as a mechanism for understanding cognitive phenomena and as a training mechanism, is also a promising area of current research.The Journal of Biomedical Informatics has played a key role in promoting and sustaining research in cognitive informatics. This is represented not only by the volume of publications but also by the quality and breadth of cognition related topics that have been covered in this journal. Within the same time period, a cursory perusal of similar informatics journals finds that they have accepted and published far fewer articles in this topical area. While the reasons for this may vary, the key role played by the Journal of Biomedical Informatics is clear. This exploratory review, which started with a purpose of assembling the key cognitively-oriented articles published in this journal for a special virtual issue, turned into an opportunity to reflect on the growth of this field over the last decade.