@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Does the use of structured reporting improve usability? A comparative evaluation of the usability of two approaches for findings reporting in a large-scale telecardiology context

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Poor usability leads to a low adoption rate of telemedicine systems.Mode of input, free-text or structured report, influences usability.Usability and user satisfaction are higher for structured report interfaces in telecardiology.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Telemedicine,Telecardiology,System usability scale,Keystroke-level model,Heuristic usability evaluation,DICOM SR,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
One of the main reasons that leads to a low adoption rate of telemedicine systems is poor usability. An aspect that influences usability during the reporting of findings is the input mode, e.g., if a free-text (FT) or a structured report (SR) interface is employed. The objective of our study is to compare the usability of FT and ST telemedicine systems, specifically in terms of user satisfaction, efficiency and general usability. We comparatively evaluate the usability of these two input modes in a telecardiology system for issuing electrocardiography reports in the context of a statewide telemedicine system in Brazil with more than 350.000 performed tele-electrocardiography examinations. We adopted a multiple method research strategy, applying three different kinds of usability evaluations: user satisfaction was evaluated through interviews with seven medical professionals using the System Usability Scale (SUS) questionnaire and specific questions related to adequacy and user experience. Efficiency was evaluated by estimating execution time using the Keystroke-Level Model (KLM). General usability was assessed based on the conformity of the systems to a set of e-health specific usability heuristics. The results of this comparison provide a first indication that a structured report (SR) input mode for such a system is more satisfactory and efficient with a larger conformity to usability heuristics than free-text (FT) input. User satisfaction using the SUS questionnaire has been scored in average with 58.8 and 77.5 points for the FT and SR system, respectively, which means that the SR system was rated 18.65 points higher than the FT system. In terms of efficiency, the completion of a findings report using the SR mode is estimated to take 8.5s, 3.74 times faster than using the FT system (31.8s). The SR system also demonstrated less violations to usability heuristics (8 points) in comparison to 14 points observed in the FT system. These results provide a first indication that the usage of structured reporting as an input mode in telecardiology systems may enhance usability. This also seems to confirm the advantages of the usage of structured reporting, as already described in the literature for other areas such as teleradiology.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
telecardiology is one of the most traditional applications of telemedicine. It has been widely used for more than 15years and encompasses a wide range of application areas, being one of the fastest growing telemedicine fields [1]. A successful example of a telemedicine network offering telecardiology services is the STT/SC – Santa Catarina State Integrated Telemedicine and Telehealth System [2]. The STT/SC is an essentially asynchronous telemedicine system, also referred to as a store-and-forward (SF) system, which offers, among other modalities, telecardiology services through the provision of findings reports to EKG examinations. These are performed mostly at upstate primary healthcare facilities and sent to a central portal via a web interface. Telecardiology findings reports are provided by cardiologists accessing the portal using specially developed web and mobile applications. The findings are stored at the same portal, where the requesting physician and the patient can access the results. To date, more than 370,000 telecardiology examinations have been performed online, employing different versions of the system.The first version of the system, shown in Fig. 1, offered free text insertion (FT) for the provision of the findings reports.Various disadvantages, however, were observed with this kind of interaction and its usability, which could have negative implications on the clinic context [3]. This includes a higher probability of user errors that could not only affect the patient but also lead to setbacks in the degree of acceptance of the service. Therefore, a new version was developed, in which the use of structured reporting (SR) has been employed for the provision of findings reports, as shown in Fig. 2.The existence of a telemedicine operation on the scale of STT, raises questions about the adequacy of its model, based on a single and specifically developed software platform and its impact on both, patients and health professionals. There exists evidence that the most frequently cited reasons for the low adoption rate of Electronic Health Records (EHRs) – security, privacy and systems integration – are surpassed by the issues of productivity and usability [4,5]. Besides, many authors have commented that the usability situation of most EHR systems is not satisfactory [6–8]. Usability problems are considered a factor that can lead to the implementation of a healthcare IT system to fail [5]. On the other side, the majority of medical device incident reports can primarily be attributed to user error, implying that greater attention to human factors and usability during development of a medical devices and software could improve this situation [9]. Thus, the enhancement of the usability of EHR-related software seems to be critical for the continuous diffusion and success of this technology [10].In this context, an earlier investigation into user satisfaction with the STT’s service has already shown a very high degree of acceptance [11]. The adequacy of the software tools being offered, however, has not yet been systematically investigated. Therefore, the study described here represents a first step into this direction by analyzing usability. The quality usability is directly related to how users interact with software and with which levels of efficacy, efficiency and satisfaction a user is able to execute a particular task [12].In this regard, the adoption of a new structured reporting (SR) input mode, particularly in a specialized and well established field of telemedicine, such as, telecardiology, leads to the question on how SR compares to FT reporting with respect to usability as perceived by the healthcare professionals. Is it easier and more comfortable to provide a findings report using structured reporting? Is it faster? It is also important to question, if the modification from FT to SR has improved the quality of the telecardiology system from the users’ point of view.To effectively measure usability involves a combination of heuristics and observations of user interaction situations, along with expected patterns. The complexity of the clinical environment, however, is difficult to be reproduced in laboratory and ethics/privacy issues can prevent the execution of some kinds of usability evaluations [13]. The inclusion of usability specialists in healthcare IT development teams, on the other side, has not been common and end-users do not have the abilities or the training required to help in the usability design [14]. As a consequence, well-established and rigorous usability research strategies should be employed when performing usability research in the healthcare IT domain [15,16].This paper focuses on comparing the usability of FT and ST systems for reporting findings on electrocardiograms from the viewpoint of a cardiologist, based exemplarily on the STT/SC. We specifically analyze if user satisfaction, efficiency and general usability vary depending on the different input modes. The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 focuses on the study context providing background information on the STT/SC. Section 3 presents and discusses related work. In Section 4, we detail the adopted research methodology and in Section 5 we present the results of our study. A conclusion is given in Section 6.This work was performed in the context of a large-scale statewide public telemedicine system in the Brazilian state of Santa Catarina [17,2]. Located in southern Brazil, Santa Catarina, with a population in 2010 of 6,248,436, 295 municipalities and a population density of 65.29 inhabitants/km2, presents one of the densest and most evenly distributed populations in Brazil. Due to the centralization of medical staff and equipment in the coastal area and a few larger upstate cities, patients from upstate typically needed to travel long distances when seeking medical treatment. In May 2005, the state of Santa Catarina began operating the Santa Catarina State Integrated Telemedicine and Telehealth System (STT/SC, Sistema Integrado Catarinense de Telemedicina and Telessaúde), which operates for the Brazilian Unitary Public Healthcare System and uses an integrated software platform specifically developed for this purpose by the Federal University of Santa Catarina [17,2]. During its 9years of operation, the STT/SC has grown, now offering distance exam services in 291 municipalities and at 401 healthcare institutions, ranging from primary healthcare facilities up to tertiary hospitals, with approximately 75,000 consultations performed monthly and over three million examinations completed through the telemedicine system so far.The STT/SC offers, among other services, a service for asynchronous telecardiology diagnosis. Asynchronous telemedicine is an important modality of telemedicine, which allows the remote diagnosis by medical professionals in asynchronous sessions (store-and-forward), in which data is gathered remotely (such as in teleradiology) and sent to a remote specialist for later analysis and interpretation. Results are made available for the patient or the referring physician. Asynchronous telemedicine is established in several medical disciplines such as teleradiology, telecardiology, teledermatology, among others [18]. To date, the STT/SC performs about 16,000 telecardiology examinations/month. These examinations have their findings reports provided by a medical staff of up to 14 cardiologists.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We performed an original comparison with respect to usability of two different interaction modes, free text versus structured reporting, for the task of the description and publication of findings reports of electrocardiography examinations. The results of this work provide evidence that seems to confirm the benefits of the usage of structured reporting in telecardiology as observed already for other areas such as radiology [39]. The results we obtained indicate that also in the area of telecardiology the usage of structured reporting as an interaction mode enhances the system usability, mainly in terms of efficiency and satisfaction. Among the factors that contributed to this result are the fact that the SR system possesses clean screens, showing only information necessary to execute the task, and requires fewer steps by eliminating the need for typing the report.The results of this study, even if performed with a relatively small user group, clearly point out the benefits of the structured reporting mode. In this context, the use of structured reporting can strengthen the advantages of the usage of telecardiology systems through the reduction of the work load of healthcare professionals and promoting a better acceptance of this kind of system. This research work also provides a starting point for further studies of structured reporting systems aimed at other questions such as if findings report texts rendered from structured reports are easier to read or if they have a more significant content.