@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automatic detection of patients with invasive fungal disease from free-text computed tomography (CT) scans

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Invasive fungal diseases incur huge cost and health risks; surveillance is crucial.We apply text mining to detect fungal disease from CT scan reports.A variety of machine learning approaches are described and evaluated.Best performance achieves 95% recall at report-level, 100% at patient-level.An advantage of our approach is that manual annotation requirements are light.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Natural language processing,Data mining,Surveillance,Invasive fungal disease,Aspergillosis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundInvasive fungal diseases (IFDs) are associated with considerable health and economic costs. Surveillance of the more diagnostically challenging invasive fungal diseases, specifically of the sino-pulmonary system, is not feasible for many hospitals because case finding is a costly and labour intensive exercise. We developed text classifiers for detecting such IFDs from free-text radiology (CT) reports, using machine-learning techniques.MethodWe obtained free-text reports of CT scans performed over a specific hospitalisation period (2003–2011), for 264 IFD and 289 control patients from three tertiary hospitals. We analysed IFD evidence at patient, report, and sentence levels. Three infectious disease experts annotated the reports of 73 IFD-positive patients for language suggestive of IFD at sentence level, and graded the sentences as to whether they suggested or excluded the presence of IFD. Reliable agreement between annotators was obtained and this was used as training data for our classifiers. We tested a variety of Machine Learning (ML), rule based, and hybrid systems, with feature types including bags of words, bags of phrases, and bags of concepts, as well as report-level structured features. Evaluation was carried out over a robust framework with separate Development and Held-Out datasets.ResultsThe best systems (using Support Vector Machines) achieved very high recall at report- and patient-levels over unseen data: 95% and 100% respectively. Precision at report-level over held-out data was 71%; however, most of the associated false-positive reports (53%) belonged to patients who had a previous positive report appropriately flagged by the classifier, reducing negative impact in practice.ConclusionsOur machine learning application holds the potential for developing systematic IFD surveillance systems for hospital populations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Invasive fungal diseases (IFDs) are associated with considerable health [27,38] and economic costs [2,32]. Among the immunocompromised host population, patients with haematological malignancies and haematopoeitic stem cell transplant recipients (HSCTs) carry the greatest burden of IFDs [27,38]. The incidence of IFDs is highly variable, ranging from 8% to 48% in patients with acute myeloid leukaemia and HSCT patients [27,35]. IFDs of the sino-pulmonary system, of which invasive aspergillosis (IA) is most common, now comprise the majority of IFDs [38,27]—focus in this paper is exclusively on this class of diagnostically challenging IFDs, including invasive aspergillosis. The short-term mortality of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis remains unacceptably high at 34–43% in more recent reports among HSCT recipients and patients with a variety of haematological malignancies [37,35,42]. Given the high health and economic burden of IFDs, several authorities and professional societies advocate that surveillance of IFDs should be the standard of care [22,45,53].Surveillance is a necessary step towards defining the burden of IFDs, informing and evaluating choice of preventative strategies, tracking epidemiological data in response to changing therapeutic advances, host or environmental factors [39], and recognising sporadic but catastrophic healthcare related outbreaks [26]. At present, surveillance of IFDs is not routinely performed in most hospitals for a variety of reasons, including cost and the absence of an easily identifiable laboratory prompt (such as a positive blood culture) for mould diseases. Laboratory-based surveillance for IFDs is not suitable because isolation of infection-causing moulds occurs in less than 50% of cases [15] and/or patients may be too unwell to undergo invasive diagnostic procedures. Further, non-culture based tests are not widely available in hospitals, or may be associated with a delayed turn-around. Clinical review is challenging, requiring multiple data sources (radiology, clinical, laboratory) and multi-disciplinary teams, followed by the application of complicated definitions [13,27,36]. Thus, traditional methods of surveillance using either clinical review, laboratory-based methods, or less commonly administrative data are costly, labour intensive, error prone, and subject to incomplete case findings [9,27].The optimal screening method for IFD surveillance is undefined but the choice of screening method is critically important to minimise effort while maximising case capture. Computed tomography (CT) is appealing as a screening method for IFD surveillance. CT is a key diagnostic test for IFDs stipulated in internationally recognised guidelines [13], and lung involvement is present in the overwhelming majority (90–100%) of patients with IFDs [27,38,36]. CT is a non-invasive test uniformly performed when IFD is suspected and it is widely available in hospitals with results reported within hours rather than days. Although the radiologic features of IFDs are not specific for IFD [29], CT remains a valuable diagnostic adjunct [13].In this paper, we address the challenge of surveillance of sino-pulmonary IFDs using the technique of directly processing free-text radiology reports, specifically CT scans, as a means of screening patients for features supportive of IFD. Text Mining techniques over scans have been previously proposed to support detection and surveillance, including for infectious diseases and their symptoms (e.g., fever) [11,46,17,41,34,25,30], but not previously to the challenge of detecting IFDs. The approach has the potential to identify patients with suspected IFDs in real-time, delivering to hospitals a feasible, sustainable and cost-effective solution to the task of IFD surveillance with minimal interruption to routine clinical workflow.The described approach is a novel methodological contribution to the task of identifying cases of a specific condition from CT scan reports. Text classifiers were developed for CT scan reports at the sentence, individual report, and patient level. Classification at the report level enables the potential for real-time detection and monitoring of incidence of IFDs, while patient-level classification enables a surveillance and reporting mechanism for IFD. Sentence-level classification is shown to facilitate improved classification performance at the report- and patient-levels, and has the added benefit of indicating “supporting evidence” for a positively-classified report. The collection of scan reports used was drawn from three major Melbourne hospitals. A subset of these reports was manually annotated by infectious disease physicians with domain expertise in the area of IFDs. Manual annotation was performed at the sentence level, where the physicians arbitrated over several categories according to pre-specified annotation guidelines, of which presence or absence of language supportive of the presence of an IFD was most discriminatory. Note that we use a light annotation scheme, requiring much less annotation effort than is generally required for machine-learning approaches to biomedical text mining tasks (which may require annotation of phrases and relationships between entities). Moreover, we ensured that the machine-learning classifiers have no hand-coded intervention: i.e., they were constructed in a fully automated fashion. This makes the techniques more transferable to other problem tasks, and means even better performance could potentially be achieved on deployment in specific contexts, via hand-crafted tuning.Our ultimate aim is to develop an automated system that can be trained to detect a new condition by having an expert in that condition analyse and annotate data directly. In particular, other than data-annotation, the models require no human input during training.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper has explored the task of analysing the text in radiology reports, specifically of CT-scans, for evidence suggestive of an Invasive Fungal Disease (IFD). We developed and evaluated a suite of innovative techniques, combining sentence- and report-level ML-based classification combined with automated keyword extraction using log-likelihood measures. In particular, our techniques required a lightweight annotation, requiring annotation only at the sentence level. The resulting text classification systems—developed from reports derived from three major Melbourne hospitals—achieved high Recall (i.e., minimal missed incidence) at both report and patient levels. High Recall is an important attribute of a pervasive surveillance system intended to screen patients in order to identify those with potential fungal infection. Invasive fungal diseases are challenging to definitively diagnose, due to poorly sensitive tests compounded by patients often being too unwell to undergo invasive diagnostic procedures. Automatically mining the narrative of CT reports offers the possibility of eventually making real-time surveillance of these infections feasible for hospitals.The task of surveillance using CT reports requires accurate discrimination of patients with IFD from those without IFD, and in particular, minimal missed cases. The Recall achieved with the best-performing classifiers at report-level and especially at patient-level was very high, with all patients in our test data with an abnormal scan (as determined by the clinical experts) being successfully identified at some point during their clinical encounter.The report classification task underpinned the patient-level surveillance but is also a potentially useful task in its own right. Real-time prospective continuous surveillance via report processing could be used to: link to clinical decision support through the triggering of treatment protocols; alert hospitals to potential outbreak; strengthen antifungal stewardship in hospitals; assist clinicians in evaluating the effectiveness of preventative strategies such as antifungal drug prophylaxis or infection prevention practices; inform clinical trial design with contemporary incidence rates; and provide an opportunity for tracking disease trends in response to rapid advances in medical and transplant practices.Future work will concentrate on prospective evaluation of the classifier in clinical environments with broader engagement from end-users. We will also continue improving our classification techniques, including performing statistical analysis of actual distributions of positive examples as they arise in practice, and evaluate classifier performance under simulated hospital conditions.