@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Conceptualization and application of an approach for designing healthcare software interfaces

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We conceptualized a novel approach to design interfaces for healthcare software.The approach was applied to design an interface for outpatient clinic software.Usability evaluation found the designed interface simple, easy to use, and learn.This approach might be used to design interfaces for various healthcare software.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Interface design,Rhetorical situation,Move analysis,Stereotype,Healthcare,Outpatient clinic,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveThe aim of this study is to conceptualize a novel approach, which facilitates us to design prototype interfaces for healthcare software.MethodsConcepts and techniques from various disciplines were used to conceptualize an interface design approach named MORTARS (Map Original Rhetorical To Adapted Rhetorical Situation). The concepts and techniques included in this approach are (1) rhetorical situation – a concept of philosophy provided by Bitzer (1968); (2) move analysis – an applied linguistic technique provided by Swales (1990) and Bhatia (1993); (3) interface design guidelines – a cognitive and computer science concept provided by Johnson (2010); (4) usability evaluation instrument – an interface evaluation questionnaire provided by Lund (2001); (5) user modeling via stereotyping – a cognitive and computer science concept provided by Rich (1979). A prototype interface for outpatient clinic software was designed to introduce the underlying concepts of MORTARS. The prototype interface was evaluated by thirty-two medical informaticians.ResultsThe medical informaticians found the designed prototype interface to be useful (73.3%), easy to use (71.9%), easy to learn (93.1%), and satisfactory (53.2%).ConclusionsMORTARS approach was found to be effective in designing the prototype user interface for the outpatient clinic software. This approach might be further used to design interfaces for various software pertaining to healthcare and other domains.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A user interface is the space, where interaction between humans and computers occurs. The interface allows a user to manipulate a system (input) and shows the effects of the user’s manipulation (output) [1]. In the recent years, the interface design of healthcare software has been a hot topic of discussion in various national and international forums because it plays a vital role in the success, as well as the failure of healthcare Information and Communication Technology (ICT) systems. A study in Germany reported that a small improvement in interface design enhanced the quality of healthcare data being captured [2]. In another study at the Academic Medical Center of Amsterdam, Netherlands, the pre and post usability of the former and redesigned Electronic Health Record (EHR) system was evaluated. The redesigned EHR system was appreciated because of its user-friendly interfaces, enhanced functionality, and capability [3]. Similarly, the failure of several healthcare ICT systems has been attributed to non-friendly design of user interface. Several studies have shown that designing a user-friendly interface has been one of the biggest challenges faced by healthcare ICT systems [4]. A study in Finland has reported that the increasing use of computers stole the time and attention of doctors, nurses, and other healthcare professionals and distracted them from patients in delivering quality care [5]. In addition, several other studies have reported that doctors and nurses have faced numerous difficulties in their routine work due to non-friendly user interface [6–9].To rectify the interface design problems, the involvement of users has been always recommended during the software development [10,11]. However, users’ involvement of has been always given a low priority. Therefore, the strategy to involve users has remained unexplored until now [12]. After the advent of Graphical User Interface, their use has been suggested in healthcare ICT systems. However, due to the high complexity of the healthcare domain, even Graphical User Interface cannot bring much change in the usability of healthcare software [7,13]. Therefore, the healthcare domain has continuously faced the interface design related problems. Our literature searches uncovered some of the possible causes behind the poor usability of healthcare ICT products, as explained below [14–18].First, the evolution of ICT took place ‘inside-out’ manner. In the earlier days, computer systems were extremely expensive; therefore, the system efficiency usually had priority over the convenience [19–21]. At that time, finding cost-effective and efficient hardware solutions was the focus of research and development [22–26]. Over the time, the computer hardware turned out to be cheaper, effective, and efficient [27]. On the other hand, due to ever-growing software complexity, the failure of the software became a common phenomenon [28–31]. These intermittent software failures motivated its designers to involve users in the process of software development; however, users were always the last one to be involved [32,33]. The partial involvement of users works well in developing ICT products for domains such as banking, finance, insurance, and telecommunication because users of these domains are not diverse and have clearly defined system workflow. Nevertheless, about 68% ICT projects failed in these domains too, which caused the loss of nearly 63 billion USD [34,35]. Ironically, in spite of such failure prone situations, designers of healthcare ICT products continued to stick with the same traditional ‘inside-out’ approach with the minimal participation of users [36].Second, the healthcare is a complex adaptive system – dynamic, nonlinear, consists of a number of independent agents, diverse settings such as clinics, polyclinics, hospitals, and a wide variety of stakeholders such as doctors, nurses, patients. Therefore, healthcare systems face several limitations pertaining to their design and management [37–39]. Very often, interface designers are not aware of the underlying complexity of the health care organization. In addition, the time allocated to the interface designer is usually not sufficient to understand complex requirements of healthcare users, which prevents designers from developing user-friendly interfaces.Third, the ICT domain is still maturing to provide a systematic approach for the interface design. As shown in Fig. 1, interfaces are typically designed through two iterative steps: (1) prototype design, and (2) prototype testing. Some of the popular interface design approaches are structured, task-based, and scenario-based. In the structured approach, system functionality is developed first, followed by prototype interface design, then heuristic evaluation. The task-based approach first focuses on the user’s tasks, then cognitive walk-through evaluation that allows the interface designer to test the organized series of tasks. The scenario-based approach is a variant of task-oriented prototyping, which considers a realistic scenario – how the ICT system would be used in the real-world settings followed by think-aloud evaluation. In these approaches, the role of various factors, such as usability, user involvement, testing in real-world settings, cognitive aspects, time and cost of development, and complexity, increases from structured to scenario-based approach, as shown in Fig. 1.The bottom line of these approaches is to design human-centered interfaces by modeling human perception, cognitive process, and behavior. Due to a high diversity in the healthcare domain (diverse end-users, settings, and so on), the scenario-based approach has been highly recommended for designing interfaces for healthcare ICT systems. The scenario-based approach performs testing of prototype interfaces using the think-aloud method, wherein the cognitive aspects of clinicians are captured in their natural work settings using video recordings. Subsequently, the analyses of these video recordings reveal their perception, cognitive process, and behavior [11,40–45]. As the think-aloud method heavily relies on video recordings and their analysis, this method has been reported having several problems such as subjectivity of the experimenter, time-consuming, disturbances in the clinicians’ cognitive process, and high-cost [46].We argue that documents written by clinicians in healthcare settings (medical records) are a true representation of clinicians’ cognitive processes and behavior; therefore, we can make use of medical records instead of video-recordings. Several problems encountered in the think-aloud method could be resolved by resorting to concepts such as the rhetorical situation (a concept of philosophy), and the move analysis (a concept of applied linguistics) [47–50]. Therefore, we conceptualized a novel approach using concepts and techniques from various disciplines, which can systematically design a prototype interface, evaluate, and continually improve it. This approach was applied to design the interface for the outpatient clinic software. In this research paper, we have described the newly conceptualized interface design approach and its application.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
An interface design approach named MORTARS was conceptualized, which can design healthcare software interfaces. MORTARS approach was applied to design a prototype interface for the outpatient clinic software. The designed prototype interface was evaluated by medical informaticians. The evaluation has shown the prototype interface to be simple, easy to use and learn. This approach might be further used to design interfaces for various software pertaining to healthcare and other domains.