@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Text de-identification for privacy protection: A study of its impact on clinical text information content

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Text de-identification minimally reduces the informativeness of clinical notes.About 1.2–3% of clinical concepts in text are altered by de-identification.Only 0.81% of the annotated clinical concepts fully overlap with PHI.Only 1.78% of the annotated clinical concepts partly overlap with PHI.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Natural Language Processing,Medical informatics,Confidentiality, patient data privacy,De-identification, Anonymization, Electronic health records,United States department of veterans affairs,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
As more and more electronic clinical information is becoming easier to access for secondary uses such as clinical research, approaches that enable faster and more collaborative research while protecting patient privacy and confidentiality are becoming more important. Clinical text de-identification offers such advantages but is typically a tedious manual process. Automated Natural Language Processing (NLP) methods can alleviate this process, but their impact on subsequent uses of the automatically de-identified clinical narratives has only barely been investigated.In the context of a larger project to develop and investigate automated text de-identification for Veterans Health Administration (VHA) clinical notes, we studied the impact of automated text de-identification on clinical information in a stepwise manner. Our approach started with a high-level assessment of clinical notes informativeness and formatting, and ended with a detailed study of the overlap of select clinical information types and Protected Health Information (PHI). To investigate the informativeness (i.e., document type information, select clinical data types, and interpretation or conclusion) of VHA clinical notes, we used five different existing text de-identification systems. The informativeness was only minimally altered by these systems while formatting was only modified by one system. To examine the impact of de-identification on clinical information extraction, we compared counts of SNOMED-CT concepts found by an open source information extraction application in the original (i.e., not de-identified) version of a corpus of VHA clinical notes, and in the same corpus after de-identification. Only about 1.2–3% less SNOMED-CT concepts were found in de-identified versions of our corpus, and many of these concepts were PHI that was erroneously identified as clinical information. To study this impact in more details and assess how generalizable our findings were, we examined the overlap between select clinical information annotated in the 2010 i2b2 NLP challenge corpus and automatic PHI annotations from our best-of-breed VHA clinical text de-identification system (nicknamed ‘BoB’). Overall, only 0.81% of the clinical information exactly overlapped with PHI, and 1.78% partly overlapped.We conclude that automated text de-identification’s impact on clinical information is small, but not negligible, and that improved clinical acronyms and eponyms disambiguation could significantly reduce this impact.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As Electronic Health Records (EHR) are being deployed throughout the U.S. healthcare system, more and more electronic clinical information is becoming easier to access for secondary uses such as clinical research. This evolution offers tremendous potentials, but also equally growing concern for patient confidentiality and privacy breaches. Secondary uses of clinical information for research purposes require patient informed consent, a requirement often difficult to fulfill, especially with research involving larger patient populations. This patient informed consent requirement can be waived if the patient EHR content is de-identified, as defined in the HIPAA legislation [1]. Two approaches for de-identification are proposed: the “Safe Harbor” method, requiring removal of Protected Health Information (PHI), or the statistical method. Both methods typically involve significant human resources to manually examine EHR content and de-identify it. The former (i.e., “Safe Harbor” method) can also be applied automatically on clinical narrative text, using Natural Language Processing (NLP) methods, and therefore allowing for faster and cheaper de-identification of clinical text [2]. NLP methods have been shown to allow for high accuracy, [3–5] but they could also erroneously categorize clinical information as PHI, or introduce new misleading information when replacing the detected PHI with other information. These issues are also shared with manual de-identification approaches, and could imply reducing the information content of clinical notes, and the accuracy of subsequent automated processes such as information extraction.The Veterans Healthcare Administration Consortium for Healthcare Informatics Research (CHIR) is a multi-disciplinary group of collaborating investigators affiliated with VHA sites across the U.S. The objectives of the CHIR are to improve the health of veterans through foundational and applied informatics research, advancing the effective use of unstructured text and other types of clinical data in the EHR. Building methods and tools that can be used to automatically de-identify VHA clinical documents is of paramount importance in the development of this initiative. In the context of the CHIR, the de-identification project focused on investigating the current state of the art of automatic clinical text de-identification [2], on developing a best-of-breed de-identification application for VHA clinical documents [3], and on evaluating its impact on subsequent text analysis tasks and the risk for re-identification of this text.This paper presents our effort to study the impact approaches for preserving patient privacy, specifically automated clinical text de-identification, can have on clinical text informativeness, and on subsequent uses of clinical text such as information extraction.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
