@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Leveraging concept-based approaches to identify potential phyto-therapies

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Plant-based therapies (“phyto-therapies”) may be described in biomedical literature.This study aimed to identify and rank potential phyto-therapies in MEDLINE.Both a direct and an inferred approach were used to identify phyto-therapies.Results suggest promise for concept-based approaches to identify phyto-therapies.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Phyto-therapies,Concept-based text analytics,Translational bioinformatics,Drug discovery,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The potential of plant-based remedies has been documented in both traditional and contemporary biomedical literature. Such types of text sources may thus be sources from which one might identify potential plant-based therapies (“phyto-therapies”). Concept-based analytic approaches have been shown to uncover knowledge embedded within biomedical literature. However, to date there has been limited attention towards leveraging such techniques for the identification of potential phyto-therapies. This study presents concept-based analytic approaches for the retrieval and ranking of associations between plants and human diseases. Focusing on identification of phyto-therapies described in MEDLINE, both MeSH descriptors used for indexing and MetaMap inferred UMLS concepts are considered. Furthermore, the identification and ranking consider both direct (i.e., plant concepts directly correlated with disease concepts) and inferred (i.e., plant concepts associated with disease concepts based on shared signs and symptoms) relationships. Based on the two scoring methodologies used in this study, it was found that a Vector Space Model approach outperformed probabilistic reliability based inferences. An evaluation of the approach is provided based on therapeutic interventions catalogued in both ClinicalTrials.gov and NDF-RT. The promising findings from this feasibility study highlight the challenges and applicability of concept-based analytic strategies for distilling phyto-therapeutic knowledge from text based knowledge sources like MEDLINE.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Therapeutic associations between plants and human diseases (“phyto-therapies”) have been recognized and acknowledged throughout history. In contemporary medicine, phyto-therapies comprise nearly one-third of commercial drugs [1]. For example, nearly half of the currently used chemotherapeutic cancer drugs are derived from predominantly plant sources [2]. Nonetheless, the rate of drug discovery based on natural sources has been relatively static over the past decade [3]. Such a trend, in conjunction with the growing need of pharmaceuticals, suggests an opportunity to devise new approaches to identify new drugs from natural sources. Botanicals have provided cures for various human ailments over the ages, and may thus be a potentially valuable source for new drug candidates. To date, there has only been limited exploration of new plant-derived pharmacological agents that leverage contemporary resources or methodologies [4].Knowledge about the medicinal properties of plants and phytochemicals has been documented in traditional and modern peer-reviewed biomedical literature. To this end, biomedical literature resources may be a source for essential leads for the identification of pharmacological starting points [5]. The volume of biomedical knowledge continues to increase (e.g., MEDLINE is growing by 1.5 million citations a year) and thus will require the development of methods to extract information embedded within text resources to keep pace with the description of biomedical insights. Concept-based analytic techniques have been successfully applied in the biomedical domain for providing researchers with the ability to explore important associations between concepts from literature. Such approaches have been shown to support knowledge discovery and assist in validation of hypothesis driven biomedical studies [6]. In pursuit of uncovering valuable phyto-therapeutic leads, automated approaches may be of utility to sift through volumes of biomedical data to generate plausible testable hypotheses. When integrated with routine biological or ethnobotanical approaches, such hypothesis generation methods may identify associations that otherwise may not have been obvious from manual searches. However, limited attention has been given to the development of concept-based analytic approaches to support the identification of plant-based therapeutics. As with many concept-based analytic studies, identification of potential phyto-therapies faces the challenge of distilling enormous amounts of data to enable the discovery of potentially new knowledge.Co-word analysis was devised by French bibliometrics experts at the Centre de Sociologie de l’Innovation of the Ecole Nationale Superieure des Mines of Paris and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique in the late 1970s, and implemented in a system called “LEXIMAPPE” [7–9]. Since then, several systems have been developed that exploit keyword co-occurrence statistics to infer direct relations among biological entities. This method has been successfully employed in several fields [9,10]. Perhaps most relevant to the present study is the “ABC model” proposed by Swanson to discover hidden relations among entities [11,12]. The ABC model states that if there exist known associations between entities A and B, and between B and C, then it can be inferred that there may be a hidden association between entities A and C.In the context of high-throughput data extraction, concept-based systems have shown promise [13–15]. Controlled vocabularies or ontologies representing concepts are helpful in dealing with variations in terminology and expressions in literature [16,17]. Natural Language Processing (NLP) systems have been developed that can determine concept equivalence and similarity from text [18]. Use of controlled vocabularies or ontologies, in combination with NLP systems, to postulate new associations between biological entities from unstructured text has enabled flexible searches of biomedical text at varying levels of granularity [19,20].The Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) controlled vocabulary [21] along with concepts catalogued in the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) Metathesaurus [22] have been widely used in concept-based systems for literature-based knowledge discovery in biomedical domain from bibliographic databases (e.g., MEDLINE, which indexes over 20 million biomedical citations) [23–25]. There have been only a few studies to date that apply such concept-based approaches to identify potential phyto-therapies. One study used MeSH-based co-word cluster analysis to reveal some important topics relative to Chinese herbal drugs [23]. Another study demonstrated the use of MeSH descriptors and UMLS semantic types within the context of Swanson’s ABC model to identify potential therapeutic uses of Curcuma longa[26]. There remain significant opportunities to use concept-based analytic approaches to identify phyto-therapeutic knowledge embedded within biomedical literature.The goal of this study was to explore concept-based analytic approaches for phyto-therapeutic hypothesis discovery. Specifically, an approach was developed to identify potential phyto-therapeutics from MEDLINE-indexed biomedical literature by analyzing relationships between three types of entities: (1) ‘plant or plant related’; (2) ‘signs and symptoms’; and (3) ‘disease or syndrome.’ Direct associations were first identified between ‘plant or plant related’ and ‘disease or syndrome’ entities and ranked using co-occurrence scores. Next, inferred associations were also identified between plants and diseases by leveraging relationships that shared ‘signs and symptoms’ entities using Swanson’s ABC model, leveraging either a probabilistic reliability based inference or a Vector Space Model (VSM) for scoring best putative linkages. Results were evaluated relative to phyto-therapies associated with clinical trials (from ClinicalTrials.gov) or indexed in a reference drug terminology (NDF-RT). Such resources were chosen for the evaluation of the correlations in this study as these were considered to be the best available sources associated with contemporary medicine that catalogue in some way plant-based treatments that have been accepted, validated, or have received considerable attention towards validation. The promising results of this feasibility study suggest that concept-based analytic approaches may be used to identify potential phyto-therapies from within existing stores of biomedical knowledge as reflected in biomedical literature.The main goal of this study was to extract and rank associations between plants and human diseases from MEDLINE records using a concept-based approach. Two relationship datasets were developed and used for this study: (1) MeSH descriptors and (2) concepts predicted using the Metamap NLP system. These data sets are referred to as “MeSH based” and “MetaMap based,” respectively. Examples of the entities associated with each of the datasets are shown in Fig. 1.A Ruby script that leveraged the Entrez utilities via the BioRuby gem was used to generate a list of PubMed identifiers (PMID) associated with MeSH descriptors of interest. Three categories of MeSH descriptors were the subject of interest in this study:(1)Plant-related MeSH descriptors: The plant-related descriptors were defined as those that included either plant names or phytochemicals. For plant names, all descriptors included within the MeSH hierarchy “Plants [B01.650]” were considered. For phytochemicals (plant-associated chemicals), all descriptors from the MeSH hierarchy “Chemicals and Drugs [D]” were considered excluding “Inorganic Chemicals [D01]” and “Enzymes and Coenzymes [D08].” This initial list was then screened through a comprehensive list of phytochemicals listed in Dr. Duke’s Phytochemical and Ethnobotanical database [27]. Dr. Duke’s database contains information related to activity of phytochemicals and ethnobotanical uses of plants. This database has been used in published studies as a reference source for medicinal plant information [28–30]. The screening of MeSH descriptors against the phytochemical list was performed by approximate string matching as implemented by the “Amatch” Ruby gem. Finally, only those phytochemical descriptors with at least one activity listed in Dr. Duke’s Phytochemical and Ethnobotanical Database were kept.Signs and Symptoms MeSH descriptors: All MeSH descriptors included within the “Signs and Symptoms [C23.888]” hierarchy.Disease MeSH descriptors: All the MeSH descriptors included within MeSH “Disease [C]” hierarchy were included except those included within “Animal Disease [C22],” “Pathological Conditions, Signs and Symptoms [C23],” “Occupational Diseases [C24],” “Substance-Related Disorders [C25],” and “Wounds and Injuries [C26].”The MetaMapped MEDLINE Baseline Results were used from the 2011 MEDLINE/PubMed Baseline Repository (created on November 19, 2010), which consists of a MetaMap analysis of 19,569,568 Medline citations. A Ruby script was used to extract UMLS concepts associated with three UMLS semantic types: (1) Plant (Unique identifier T002, “plnt”): All the concepts included within this semantic type were considered without any screening. This semantic type includes concepts that are plant names along with the names of plant parts. For MetaMap based dataset, phytochemicals were not considered; (2) Sign or Symptom (Unique identifier T184, “sosy”): All concepts included within this semantic type were included. This semantic type includes observable manifestations of disease or conditions experienced by patient; or (3) Disease or Syndrome (Unique identifier T047, “dsyn”): All concepts included within this semantic type were included; This study only considered those concepts that were common to both the MeSH based and MetaMap based datasets. Two levels of scope were used for this study: (1) Title and Abstract and (2) Utterance (as determined by the MetaMap). The UMLS Concept Unique Identifiers (CUIs), their respective semantic types, PMID and utterance id were extracted and stored into a MySQL database.Two types of associations were explored in this study. Direct associations were defined as the co-occurrence of two concepts within the same scope (i.e., MeSH list, title and abstract level, or utterance level). By contrast, indirect associations were defined as hidden associations between two concepts via linking concepts (Fig. 2).Direct associations were determined by identifying co-occurring concepts from the aforementioned three categories. Within the scope of the present study, three types of associations were identified (1) ‘Plant or Plant related’ (plnt)⇔‘Sign or Symptom’ (sosy); (2) ‘Sign or Symptom’ (sosy)⇔‘Disease or Syndrome’ (dsyn); and (3) ‘Plant or Plant related’ (plnt)⇔‘Disease or Syndrome’ (dsyn). The direct associations were scored using the approaches described in Box 1 (Eqs. (1) and (2)). In Eq. (1), the connection between two co-occurring term is scored as the conditional probability of the occurrence of a concept given that of the second concept. The approach in Eq. (2) uses the term frequency–inverse document frequency (tf–idf) measure to evaluate how important an association of one concept is to another concept in a collection of concepts. After direct associations between concepts of semantic types plnt, sosy and dsyn were identified and scored, inferred association scores were calculated for links between plnt concepts and dsyn concepts linked via sosy concepts. Inferred associations were ranked using the two approaches as described in Box 1 (Eqs. (3) and (4)). The first approach (Eq. (3)) evaluates the probabilistic reliability of an inferred association calculated using direct association scores as calculated from Eq. (1). The second approach uses a Vector Space Model (VSM) that takes into consideration the degree of similarity between vectors using a cosine similarity metric (Eq. (4)). A final score was calculated for potential plant-disease relationships that incorporated both the direct and inferred links as follows:Box 1Two approaches were used to score the direct associations:(1)Probabilistic:(1)D(X,Y)=max{P(X|Y),P(Y|X)},where P(A|B) is the conditional probability of occurrence of concept A given that of concept B.TF–IDF:(2)D(X,Y)=tf(X,Y)∗logNn,where tf(X,Y) is the number of documents that include both concepts X and Y, N is the total number of documents and n is the number of documents that include concept X or concept Y.Inferred association scores:Probabilistic:(3)I(Q,Zj)=1-∏i=1m{1-D(Q,Yi)D(Yi,Zj)}where D(A,B) is the direct association score as calculated using Eq. (1).Cosine similarity:(4)I(Q,Zj)=∑i=1mwQ,YiwYiZj∑i=1mwQ,Yi2∑i=1mwYi,Zj2wherewA,Biis the weight as calculated using Eq. (2). Q is the query term and Zj, i=1 to m indicates the linking sign or symptoms concepts.(5)Finalscore=max{ndp(a,b),ndd(a,b)}+max{nip(a,b),nid(a,b)},where ndp(a,b), and ndd(a,b) are direct association scores between ‘a’ (plant related entity) and ‘b’ (disease related entity) normalized with respect to plant and disease terms respectively.(6)ndx(a,b)=D(X,Yi)max{D(X,Y1ton)}where x=p (plant related) or d (disease related), i=1–n and D(X,Y) as calculated using Eq. (1) or Eq. (2).Similarly, nip(a,b), and nid(a,b) are inferred association scores between ‘a’ and ‘b’ normalized with respect to plant and disease terms respectively.(7)nix(a,b)=I(Q,Zj)max{I(Q,Z1ton)}where x=p (plant related) or d (disease related), i=1–n and I(Q,Zj) as calculated using Eq. (3) or Eq. (4).To evaluate the relevance of the proposed links from the analyses, plant-related therapies and disease relations were extracted from ClinicalTrials.gov [31] and the National Drug File Reference Terminology [NDF-RT] [32]. ClinicalTrials.gov, hosted by the National Institutes of Health in collaboration with the Food and Drug Administration, is the largest registry of clinical trials conducted around the world. The Veterans Health Administration’s NDF-RT is a concept-oriented terminology that contains information about drugs and ingredients, including potential uses.In ClinicalTrials.gov, plant-related interventions can be found under the main category of “Dietary Supplements.” The interventions from this category and their equivalent MeSH descriptors as well as UMLS concepts were identified using the UMLS Terminology Services (UTS) API 2.0 via a Java program. Only those interventions present in both the MeSH based dataset and MetaMap based dataset were considered. Specific disease associations were then identified via a Ruby script using RESTful API calls to ClinicalTrials.gov. The associated terms were finally processed using MetaMap to identify preferred UMLS concepts (including MeSH descriptors).NDF-RT was acquired from a local installation of RxNorm, which was downloaded on July 2, 2012. Plant related interventions were identified as those under the class ‘HERBS/ALTERNATIVE THERAPIES’ (NUI N0000029634). For this class, relevant UMLS concepts (including MeSH descriptors) were identified from the ‘RXNCONSO’ and ‘RXNSAT’ tables. The therapeutic associations for each candidate interventions were then identified from the table ‘RXNREL’ by querying RxNorm for the relations ‘may_treat’, ‘may_prevent’, ‘may_be_treated_by’ or ‘may_be_prevented_by’.Precision and recall for identifying candidate plant-disease associations relative to the evaluation datasets were calculated as follows:Precision=Number of plant-disease associations validated by the evaluation datasetNumber of identified associationsRecall=Number of plant-disease associations validated by the evaluation datasetNumber of associations in evaluation dataset

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
