@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Social network analysis of biomedical research collaboration networks in a CTSA institution

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model research collaborations as a weighted undirected graph.Research collaboration network is small-world but not scale-free.The Clinical and Translational Science Award has positive impacts on collaborations.Combining various centrality measures offers a concise ranking of influential nodes.Link prediction model can identify potentially successful collaborations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Research collaboration network,Network analysis,Clinical and Translational Science Award (CTSA),Link prediction,Influential node,Small-world,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundThe popularity of social networks has triggered a number of research efforts on network analyses of research collaborations in the Clinical and Translational Science Award (CTSA) community. Those studies mainly focus on the general understanding of collaboration networks by measuring common network metrics. More fundamental questions about collaborations still remain unanswered such as recognizing “influential” nodes and identifying potential new collaborations that are most rewarding.MethodsWe analyzed biomedical research collaboration networks (RCNs) constructed from a dataset of research grants collected at a CTSA institution (i.e., University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences (UAMS)) in a comprehensive and systematic manner. First, our analysis covers the full spectrum of a RCN study: from network modeling to network characteristics measurement, from key nodes recognition to potential links (collaborations) suggestion. Second, our analysis employs non-conventional model and techniques including a weighted network model for representing collaboration strength, rank aggregation for detecting important nodes, and Random Walk with Restart (RWR) for suggesting new research collaborations.ResultsBy applying our models and techniques to RCNs at UAMS prior to and after the CTSA, we have gained valuable insights that not only reveal the temporal evolution of the network dynamics but also assess the effectiveness of the CTSA and its impact on a research institution. We find that collaboration networks at UAMS are not scale-free but small-world. Quantitative measures have been obtained to evident that the RCNs at UAMS are moving towards favoring multidisciplinary research. Moreover, our link prediction model creates the basis of collaboration recommendations with an impressive accuracy (AUC: 0.990, MAP@3: 1.48 and MAP@5: 1.522). Last but not least, an open-source visual analytical tool for RCNs is being developed and released through Github.ConclusionsThrough this study, we have developed a set of techniques and tools for analyzing research collaboration networks and conducted a comprehensive case study focusing on a CTSA institution. Our findings demonstrate the promising future of these techniques and tools in understanding the generative mechanisms of research collaborations and helping identify beneficial collaborations to members in the research community.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The Clinical and Translational Science Award (CTSA), funded by the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS, NIH) (formerly through the National Center for Research Resources (NCRR, NIH)), was launched in 2006 and has expanded to 60 academic institutions aiming to accelerate the process of translating biomedical research discoveries into clinical applications. One key function of the CTSA is to promote collaborative research efforts especially across different disciplines. For example, the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences (UAMS) – a CTSA institution since 2009 – created the Translational Research Institute (TRI) to support translational and collaborative activities such as helping basic and clinician scientists to develop and manage their studies, fostering collaborative partnerships among stakeholder communities, and providing infrastructures (e.g., clinical data warehouse) to affiliated researchers.It is crucial to quantitatively assess the effectiveness and quality of research collaborations in a CTSA institution. Social network analysis (SNA) methods have been deemed as an effective tool to assess intra-institution research collaborations in the CTSA community [1]. Previous studies on RCN [2–7], however, mainly focus on improving general understanding of collaboration networks by measuring common network metrics.1Network metrics, network characteristics, network measures, and network indices, are used interchangeably in this paper unless otherwise noted.1More fundamental questions about collaboration still remain unanswered such as recognizing “influential” nodes and identifying potential collaborations that are most rewarding. In this paper, we aim at finding answers to those questions by analyzing biomedical research collaboration networks at a CTSA institution (i.e., UAMS) in a comprehensive and systematic manner. To achieve this goal, we have developed new models and techniques for research collaboration network by leveraging readily available network analysis methods, results, and tools.The research collaboration networks we studied are distinctive in their data source and model. Those collaboration networks were constructed from collaborative research grants instead of conventional publication co-authorships [3–5] as we believe collaborative grants provide additional and earlier evidence of possible collaborations. Principle investigator and co-investigator(s) of a collaborative grant often work together in a number of aspects throughout the supported research project, from grant proposal writing to research conduct and findings dissemination. We studied the RCN before (RCN2006–2009) and after (RCN2010–2012) UAMS being awarded CTSA aiming to understand the temporal evolution of the RCN. Through comparing various network characteristics across different time frames, we were able to examine the effectiveness of CTSA and evaluate its impact on collaborative research activities at UAMS.In our network model, links between investigators are weighted to reflect the degree of collaboration. Previous studies on collaboration networks [3–8] model research collaborations as unweighted or binary networks where edges only indicate the existence of collaborations. However, collaborative research relationships may vary between investigators. It is intuitive that certain connections are “stronger” than others in an RCN, as we are often inclined to work with existing collaborators than finding new peers. Our network model reflects such a natural distinction through assigning the number of collaborative grants between two investigators as the edge weight.To understand network dynamics and generative mechanisms of research collaborations in a CTSA institution, more specifically, to answer questions such as: “Is the RCN at UAMS a small-world? Is the CTSA effective in fostering interdisciplinary collaborations? How to identify potential new collaborations that are more likely to succeed?,” we have developed new network analysis methods and obtained interesting and valuable findings from our unique dataset. The methods and findings are aimed to assist administration and leaderships in making such organizational policies and strategic plans that are inclined to cause positive and substantial impacts on research collaborations and their outcomes. For example, key nodes in a collaboration network can be identified on the basis of centrality measures, and promising new collaborations can be recommended by applying the link prediction techniques. Leveraging our network analysis and link prediction techniques, necessary resources can be provisioned to spawn new collaborations and attract new investigators.Our first finding of the collaboration networks at UAMS is that those networks are indeed small-world but not scale-free. Small-world and scale-free properties, manifesting in many real-world complex networks, have important implications in network robustness and efficiency. We quantitatively measured the “small-world-ness” [9] and revealed that the RCNs at UAMS indeed exhibit the small-world property. Moreover, the statistical measures [10] show that the degree distributions of bothRCN2006–2009andRCN2010–2012do not follow the power law. Therefore, the RCNs at UAMS are not scale-free.Our results also testified the effectiveness of the CTSA and its important role in promoting collaborative research within an institution. In addition to studying temporal evolution of network measures pertaining to RCNs, we also devised a quantitative“diversity” measure to model the trend of cross-disciplinary collaborations. The diversity measures how easy it is for an investigator from one discipline to reach another investigator in a different research field. The bigger the diversity value, the easier the cross-disciplinary collaboration will be. The diversity measure increases from 0.37 inRCN2006–2009to 0.56 inRCN2010–2012, indicating that the RCN at UAMS is moving towards favoring cross-disciplinary research after the CTSA.We leveraged centrality measures [2] and rank aggregation techniques [11,12] to derive a single consented ranking of important (or “influential”) nodes in a collaboration network. Moreover, Our collaboration recommendation technique employs the Random Walk with Restart (RWR) algorithm [13] to construct a recommendation model for suggesting new research collaborations. The benchmarks of the our recommendation method on the RCNs of UAMS show promising results (AUC:0.838∼0.974and MAP@3:≈0.977).Last but not least, we have developed an open source software package – the research collaboration network analysis (RCNA) tool kit (available at https://github.com/bianjiang/rcna under MIT license) – to help catalyze research in this area, especially to facilitate CTSA institutions to effectively evaluate the CTSA in promoting collaborative research activities. A unique and valuable component of the kit is a set of interactive visualization tools, which help us better explore and understand complex RCNs. A visualization of the UAMS’s RCNs can be accessed at http://bianjiang.github.com/rcna/.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We first describe the source data retrieved from an in-house developed research grant management system. We then introduce our weighted network model of research collaborations, the concept of network characteristics and measures pertaining to this study. After that, we describe our methods of using network centrality measures and rank aggregation to identify centrality “leaders”.2The centrality “leaders” are not necessarily the actual leaderships in an organization. It merely expresses the importance of these nodes in the network. For example, removing highly connected nodes – centrality “leaders” – will certainly reduce the overall efficiency of the network, and cause the network to be more prone to random failures.2Furthermore, we present a link prediction based model for suggesting new research collaborations. Finally, we present the experiment results and our interpretations which indicate that the CTSA award has a positive impact on the collaborative research environment at UAMS.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
