@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Improving hospital bed occupancy and resource utilization through queuing modeling and evolutionary computation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An evolutionary-based strategy for optimizing queuing models is proposed.Real geriatric data from St. George’s Hospital, London, were used for assessment.A “What-if analysis” to explore management opportunities was performed.Comparison with standard approaches showed the effectiveness of the model.The model is expected to easily adapt to different medical departments.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Queuing system,Compartmental model,Genetic algorithm,Bed allocation optimization,Resource utilization optimization,What-if analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Scarce healthcare resources require carefully made policies ensuring optimal bed allocation, quality healthcare service, and adequate financial support. This paper proposes a complex analysis of the resource allocation in a hospital department by integrating in the same framework a queuing system, a compartmental model, and an evolutionary-based optimization. The queuing system shapes the flow of patients through the hospital, the compartmental model offers a feasible structure of the hospital department in accordance to the queuing characteristics, and the evolutionary paradigm provides the means to optimize the bed-occupancy management and the resource utilization using a genetic algorithm approach. The paper also focuses on a “What-if analysis” providing a flexible tool to explore the effects on the outcomes of the queuing system and resource utilization through systematic changes in the input parameters. The methodology was illustrated using a simulation based on real data collected from a geriatric department of a hospital from London, UK. In addition, the paper explores the possibility of adapting the methodology to different medical departments (surgery, stroke, and mental illness). Moreover, the paper also focuses on the practical use of the model from the healthcare point of view, by presenting a simulated application.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A hospital department may face the situation when patients are turned away because all beds are occupied, and the corresponding healthcare service is thus postponed due to the insufficient number of available beds. An insufficient financial support or a poor resource management often causes this situation. On the other hand, an over-provision of hospital beds or an unrealistic health service time is a waste of the already limited resources. Accordingly, there is need for a complex involvement bringing together under the same umbrella advanced analytical methods and machine learning techniques to help make better decisions regarding the allocation and use of hospital beds in order to improve patient care and save money.A wide range of different techniques have been used and reported in the literature. [1] presents a model of the cost of treating stroke patients within a healthcare facility using a mixture of Coxian phase type model with multiple absorbing states. A non-homogeneous discrete time Markov chain incorporating time-dependent covariates is developed in [2] to model the patient flow in a cost or capacity constrained healthcare system. A multi-objective comprehensive learning particle swarm optimization with a representation scheme based on binary search for bed allocation problem in general hospital is presented in [3]. [4] developed a semi-closed migration network to capture patient flow into the clinic, and between the clinic and hospital.Although queuing models are widely used in industry to improve customer service, the number of applications in healthcare, however, is relatively small. This is probably due to the different nature of the two domains, the client-patient equivalence being however difficult to be generally accepted. Previous works [5,6] have introduced M/PH/c and M/PH/c/N queuing models in order to optimize the use of hospital resources both in a loss model and in an extended model providing an extra waiting room. A multi-objective decision aiding model based on queuing theory and goal programming is introduced in [7] for allocation of beds in a hospital. A queuing approach based on non-homogeneous arrival patterns, non-exponential service time distributions, and multiple patient types along with a spreadsheet implementation of the resulting queuing equations is used in [8] to increase the capacity of an Emergency Department. In [9] a decision support system based on the Erlang loss model is developed to evaluate the size of nursing units.Compartmental models have previously been shown to provide a suitable description of the patient flow through a hospital department, especially for geriatric medicine. Starting with a deterministic two-compartment mathematical model [10], further progress occurred when stochastic models along with mixed exponential distributions, continuous-time Markov model and Bayesian belief networks have been proposed [11–14].This paper proposes a flexible strategy to improve the hospital management regarding its two main aspects: (a) bed allocation policy, and (b) financial resource utilization. First, it uses results from queuing theory to model the patient flow, where a Poisson process describes the patients’ arrivals, hospital beds are servers, and the length of stay is modeled using a phase-type distribution. Second, in conjunction with the queuing system, a compartmental model describes the hospital department. Finally and most importantly, the previous approach has been enriched with the support of the evolutionary paradigm used to optimize both the bed allocation policy and the resource utilization. In addition, a “What-if” analysis has been performed to explore in depth the various possible options available for the hospital management. The main contributions of the paper are twofold: first, the evolutionary-based optimization of the hospital management, and, secondly, the “What-if” analysis allowing the evaluation of different available options.The theoretical model refers to a M/PH/c queuing system in which M denotes Poisson (Markov) arrivals, the service distribution is phase-type [15], the number of servers is c, and no queue is allowed. In such a loss model in which the customers that find all the servers busy are lost for the system, λ represents the Poisson arrival rate, and the phase-type service has the probability density function given by:(1)f(t)=∑i=1lαiρie-αit,with the corresponding meanτ=∑i=1lρi/αi, where l represents the number of phases/compartments, αis the mixing proportions, and the ρis the transition rates with∑i=1lρi=1.The parameters defining the above queuing model, λ, τ, and c are considered as variable entities being subject to an optimization process enabling the improvement of the bed occupancy and resource utilization.The average number of arrivals occurring during a time interval of length t is given byλ·t; thereby, the offered load of the system, i.e., the average number a of arrivals during an average length of stay τ isa=λ·τ. Since the probability of having j occupied servers is given by:(2)Pj=aj/j!∑k=0cak/k!,the probability that all the c servers are occupied is given by:(3)Pc=B(c,a)=ac/c!∑k=0cak/k!(Erlang’slossformula)In other words, B(c, a) represents the fraction of customers that is lost by the system [16,17]. Note that the above results apply when the system is in statistical equilibrium, i.e., after a sufficiently long period of time, Pjbeing referred as steady-state or statistical equilibrium probabilities.Basically, there are three fundamental quantities of interest for queuing models:•L – the average number of customers in system.W – the average time spent in system by an arbitrary customer.ρ – the server occupancy.Among useful relationships between the above characteristics, we mention:•The carried load L=a⋅[1−B(c,a)], representing the average number of customers in system, also known as Little’s formula.The average time spent in system by an arbitrary customer W=τ⋅[1−B(c,a)].The server occupancyρ=Lc(with ρ⩽1 for steady-state).One of the two main goals of this study is an evolutionary-based optimization of the bed occupancy management by estimating the model’s parameters c, λ and τ, in order to obtain:•An acceptable threshold for the delay probability B(c, a), seen as the suitable proportion of refused patients which the system is prepared to tolerate.The corresponding average time spent in system.The corresponding average number of customers in system.A main concern in proposing a model to solve real-world issues, especially in healthcare, is to provide the best service to customers with minimum costs by using the maximum utilization of existing resources. In queuing models, this could be “translated” by maintaining the lost requests (lost potential customers) at a minimum level with minimum costs. Following [5], a base-stock policy approach [18] is used to set up an associated cost model to balance the fraction of customers that is lost by the system against the service costs.As it was stated above, the model’s parameters c, λ and τ are supposed to be variable. This study focuses on finding their (near) optimal values providing a trade-off between serving costs and penalty costs corresponding to unsatisfied demands.In order to define the associated cost model, let us consider that the number c of servers comprises both the number of occupied beds and the number of idle beds, ready to be used in emergencies.In a similar fashion to the newsvendor model [18], the cost model envisages the two following parameters:•A holding cost of h units per day per empty (non used) server.A fixed penalty cost of π units per unsatisfied orders.With the aim of improving servers occupancy and resource utilization in the long-run department activity, the cost per day under the base-stock policy with server level c can be expressed as a function of the queuing system parameters c, λ, τ, and the cost model parameters h, π, by:(4)g(c,λ,τ,h,π)=π·λ·B(c,λ·τ)+h·{c-λ·τ·[1-B(c,λ·τ)]}Based on the cost function g(c, λ, τ, h, π), the issue of optimizing the inventory level, in other words, the resource utilization, is equivalent to a minimization problem, i.e., to find c, λ, τ, h, and π in order to minimize the cost (fitness) function g.A controversial method still in use in healthcare to measure the inpatients activity is based on the turnover per allocated bed per year, given by the ratio between the number of admissions per year and the number of allocated beds per year. Thus, the average turnover T is given byT=365·λ/cadmissions/patients per bed [19]. The cost function along with the average turnover represent the main economic parameters measuring the efficiency of the resources utilization.One of the ideas to bear on patient flow modeling is to consider compartmental models, which have been shown to provide an efficient proven description of patient dynamics at least for geriatric medicine [10]. Briefly, patients are admitted to the first compartment (e.g., acute care). Some are successfully treated and discharged, and, unfortunately, some die. A third group may need additional treatment, and thus, these patients are transferred to another section (e.g., rehabilitation); patients may be discharged from this compartment, or die there. This process may continue, depending on the specific case, three to six compartments being considered [12,20,21]. The situation describing the simplest but the most common case, a classical two-compartment model, is depicted in Fig. 1.The admission policy envisages the situation where admissions occur at random (i.e., Poisson arrivals), such an assumption being reasonable for a stable hospital system.Regarding the service time distribution, such compartmental models, either discrete-time deterministic or continuous-time stochastic, may be regarded as phase-type [15] with the number of components equaling the number of compartments. These distributions describe the time to absorption of a finite Markov chain in continuous time, when there is a single absorbing state and the stochastic process starts in a transient state.Computer-based patient modeling sounds well and represents a major concern in patient management. The optimization method chosen in this case involves the use of genetic algorithms (GAs) to estimate an acceptable threshold for the delay probability B(c, a), and to minimize the cost function g(c).GAs are natural computing algorithms consisting of the following components: populations of chromosomes, selection according to fitness, crossover to produce new offspring, and random mutation of new offspring. The algorithm consists of the following steps [22,23]: (Step 0) – the data are encoded in a vector form and the recombination and mutation rates are picked; (Step 1) – the population, consisting of a certain number n of chromosomes, is chosen; (Step 2) – the fitness function is computed for each chromosome; (Step 3) – the iteration takes place through the following steps (selection, crossover and mutation) until n chromosomes have been generated; (Step 4) – replacing the current population by the new one, and (Step 5) – using the termination criterion to stop the evolutionary process.We present below the corresponding evolutionary algorithm.GA algorithm1.A population consisting of a certain number n of chromosomes is randomly chosen from an appropriate interval.Using the tournament selection operator, n chromosomes are chosen for reproduction; one chromosome can appear several times in the newly formed population.Using the recombination probability, m parents are chosen for reproduction.The newly formed offspring replace the m parents.The new population is formed by the (n–m) chromosomes that were not chosen for reproduction plus the newly formed m offspring.Using the mutation probability pm, the normally distributed mutation operator is applied on the whole population. If the fitness of the mutant is better than the original chromosome’s fitness, then the mutant replaces the original in the population.The cycle is repeated until the termination criterion is reached.1.A problem related to the convergence speed of a GA is the appropriate choice of the population size n. Using a heuristic evaluation, with population sizes ranging from 50 to 150 chromosomes, the best performance has been obtained for n=100 chromosomes.Another problem that arises in the use of GAs is the appropriate choice of the parameters defining the variations operators. We considered the parameter tuning, using the whole (total) arithmetic recombination with the crossover rate pc=0.35 and parameter α=0.3, and the non-uniform (normally distributed) mutation with mutation rate pm=0.4.Using a heuristic evaluation, with the number of generations ranging from 50 to 150, the manual inspection of the values of the fitness functions (either B or g), combined with different thresholds indicated that 100 is the (near) optimal value.Since the distribution of data is not always normal (Poisson arrivals, phase-type service), the appropriate intervals (search space) for the corresponding chromosomes were estimated as <mean±1.96×SD>, seen as substitutes of the 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) for the mean of each parameter.The management of hospital beds is an important nowadays task, and various models have been proposed, mostly based on operations research techniques (e.g., stochastic processes, queuing theory, etc.) [1,2,5–7,12,13,21]. This approach involve the construction of the corresponding mathematical model, which is time and resources consuming, due to the computational and statistical nature of most of these techniques. An attractive and effective alternative to this classical approach is represented by the use of GAs. Some of the reasons to use GAs are: (a) they can solve any optimization problem described with chromosome encoding, (b) the method is very easy to understand and implement without deep mathematical knowledge, (c) the number of parameters can be very large, and (d) there are no major constraints for the fitness function. Due to their efficacy, computation speed and wide range of applicability, we have chosen to use GAs as optimization technique for hospital bed occupancy and resource utilization.The first task of this research is to optimize the bed-occupancy management by estimating the sufficient number of beds in order to maintain at a tolerable level the number of rejected requests.When using the GA approach, a chromosome is represented by a vector (c, λ, τ), with the genes c, λ and τ belonging to specified domains (95% CI) matching real-world medical data. The corresponding fitness measure is given by the delay probability B(c, a). Since, in this context, the main task is maintaining the rejection probability level as low as possible, the objective (fitness) function B(c, a) has to be minimized, depending on different thresholds.The second aim of the study is to estimate the optimal model parameters enabling the best healthcare service to patients with maximum resources utilization, in other words, to find the optimal balance between holding costs and penalty costs.Technically, a chromosome is represented this time by the vector (c, λ, τ, h, π), the fitness function being now represented by the corresponding cost function g.In the end, health professionals can use the model to answer several questions regarding the management of hospital departments (arrival policy, average length of stay, optimum bed occupancy, costs, etc.) enabling them to anticipate hospital bed allocation and expected healthcare costs.“What-if analysis” has been finally performed with the purpose of exploring the effects on the outcomes of the queuing system and resource utilization through systematic changes in the input parameters. Given an input change (parameters c, λ, τ, h, and π), this sensitivity analysis detects how the two main models’ performance measures: (a) the delay probability B, and (b) the cost function g are affected by this change, and how could they be tuned to respond to the management optimization issue.The methodology presented above is illustrated using bed-occupancy data collected at the Department of Geriatric Medicine – St. George’s Hospital, London (1969–1984) [19], and January 2000 [24]. The healthcare assistance consisted of acute, rehabilitative and long-stay medical service.During these years, different admission policies and inpatient management were considered. Admission experienced annual changes, with periodic increases and decreases due to both management policies and seasonal events (Christmas, Easter, influenza epidemic, etc.).Three different styles were adopted for the inpatient management: (a) one-compartment model (combined acute, rehabilitative and long-stay) in 22% of cases, (b) two-compartment model (combined acute and rehabilitative wards, with separate long-stay) in 38% of cases, and (c) three-compartment model (separate acute, rehabilitative and long-stay wards) in 25% of cases. As it can be seen, the two-compartment case, depicted in Fig. 1, is the most prevalent.As inventory policy, the department allocated, on average, 186 beds per year. Whatever the case, a mean arrival rate equaling λ=5.9 patients per day and a mean length of stay equaling τ=24.9days were found to be well described by the data [5].Regarding the associated cost model, since the data came from the National Health Service (NHS), the profit was assumed zero. Taking into account the general practice in those times, the cost parameters were estimated as follows [5]:•The total cost per patient per day is £168 (£50 are incurred with respect to the bed, and £118 with respect to the treatment).The holding cost is h=£50 per day.The penalty cost π is computed as follows. Considering that the total cost of turning away a patient may equal the cost per day multiplied by the expected length of stay, and the penalty cost represents 25% of the total cost of turning away a patient, we can estimate the penalty cost π=168×24.9×0.25=£1046.It is worth noting that this assumption is only indicative, estimating the lowest approximation for cost based on the assumption that penalty may be broadly regarded as lost revenue incurred when a patient is turned away due to no empty beds available.Unlike the usual patients, geriatric patients have to face different healthcare experiences regarding hospitals, rehabilitation facilities, nursing homes, long-term care, assisted living, etc., resulting in different flow patterns (admission, length of stay), compartmental type, and costs. In this regard, when adapting the model from geriatrics to other medical departments, although the underlying paradigm can be kept, the practitioners have to anticipate a more dynamic patient flow, with different values of the corresponding parameters, and the cost function components [19].Theoretically, changing policies might lead to a reduction in length of stay (or indeed arrival rate). When hospital administrators seek to improve the patient management, whatever the department specialty, they find the difficulty to implement the change. This is true especially when recommended changes directly affect the patient quality of healthcare (e.g., length of stay). On the other hand, the arrival rate is influenced by external factors, and cannot be directly controlled by healthcare professionals. Accordingly, in addition to the difficulty of such an approach regarding possible changing policies, the lack of confidence in the success of proposed changes puts a serious obstacle on continuous improvement efforts.According to the American Hospital Association (AHA) Annual Survey of Hospitals [25], the corresponding parameters referring to surgery were estimated as λ=16.14 patients per day, τ=5.5days, and c=150 beds -community hospitals (one-compartment system).The data originates from the UK’s Hospital Episode Statistics (HES) database and concerns stroke patients [26,27]. The corresponding parameters were estimated as λ=286.2 patients per day, τ=14.29days, and c=5587 beds -three-compartment system.The data originate from the Center for Mental Health Policy and Services Research (CMHPSR), Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania (Medicaid) [28]. The corresponding parameters were estimated as λ=1.907 patients per day, τ=1151days, and c=562 beds -three-compartment system.The inpatient hospital costs represent the largest component of healthcare expenditures in most developed countries nowadays. The inpatient costs are far from being uniformly and undoubtedly assessed. According to [29,30], the average hospital adjusted expenses per inpatient day was $1730 throughout USA, and £225 in UK. Consequently, the actual inpatient costs are estimated by each hospital. While the cost function g may be used as it is, the parameters h and π may be adjusted by each user following the same paradigm as in the geriatric model.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
