@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Cross-domain targeted ontology subsets for annotation: The case of SNOMED CORE and RxNorm

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a computationally-efficient approach to ontology subset extraction.We use the SNOMED CORE subset as source; NDF-RT, RxNorm, and the UMLS Metathesaurus.We extract a targeted subset of drugs, RxNorm/CORE, 4% the size of RxNorm.Recall was better when annotating scientific abstracts than clinical texts.Ontology repositories with mappings look promising to extract subsets for annotation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Ontologies,SNOMED CT,RxNorm,NDF-RT,UMLS,Annotation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The benefits of using ontology subsets versus full ontologies are well-documented for many applications. In this study, we propose an efficient subset extraction approach for a domain using a biomedical ontology repository with mappings, a cross-ontology, and a source subset from a related domain. As a case study, we extracted a subset of drugs from RxNorm using the UMLS Metathesaurus, the NDF-RT cross-ontology, and the CORE problem list subset of SNOMED CT. The extracted subset, which we termed RxNorm/CORE, was 4% the size of the full RxNorm (0.4% when considering ingredients only). For evaluation, we used CORE and RxNorm/CORE as thesauri for the annotation of clinical documents and compared their performance to that of their respective full ontologies (i.e., SNOMED CT and RxNorm). The wide range in recall of both CORE (29–69%) and RxNorm/CORE (21–35%) suggests that more quantitative research is needed to assess the benefits of using ontology subsets as thesauri in annotation applications. Our approach to subset extraction, however, opens a door to help create other types of clinically useful domain specific subsets and acts as an alternative in scenarios where well-established subset extraction techniques might suffer from difficulties or cannot be applied.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Biomedical ontologies are key to medical informatics, but their size and complexity still represent a challenge in many applications [1]. The Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine-Clinical Terms (SNOMED CT) [2], for example, comprises over a million terms (text strings) structured as a taxonomy of 400,000 concepts and an ontological layer that conforms to theEL++description logic standard [3]. Finding a portion of interest that can be used as a virtual substitute for a whole ontology for a specific application or domain is a highly desired objective, because it reduces complexity, improves maintenance, encourages reuse and customization, and improves performance in applications [4]. These portions of interest are referred to as subsets, modules, or segments.An application where ontology subsets can play a major role is in the annotation of clinical documents. A key part of the annotation process consists of syntactically identifying ontology concepts in the free text of the document by using efficient string matching techniques and a reference thesaurus [5]. This strategy is followed, for example, by the National Center for Biomedical Ontology (NCBO) Annotator [6]. The content and size of the thesaurus play a key role in the annotation process, influencing which and how fast ontology concepts will be identified in free text.The characteristics of the thesaurus are even more relevant in the case of annotators that use ontology matching and word-sense disambiguation techniques [7,8], such as MetaMap [9]. MetaMap can produce more accurate results than efficient string matching, but it is computationally much more expensive: Aronson and Lang showed that MetaMap can take up to a minute to process an average MEDLINE citation. Furthermore, they showed that some complex phrases can require hours of computation when using the 5 million terms from the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) Metathesaurus [10] as a reference thesaurus, because hundreds of thousands of potential mappings are generated [9].Several approaches for extracting compact subsets from ontologies that might be used as a thesaurus for annotation have been proposed. Research on ontology modularization, interested in modules that preserve the logical entailments that can be derived from the original ontology, has found efficient strategies of extraction by traversing an ontology from a set of input key concepts, or signature [4]. Ontology modularization techniques include graph-traversal [11–14] and logic-based techniques [15,16], whose extraction strategies depend on the ontology’s topology and its definitional axioms, respectively. The requirement of preserving the original ontology entailments, key to ontology modularization, however, adds a large number of terms to the module that are unlikely to be found in clinical documents, necessarily affecting precision and performance [17].Therefore, term-frequency analysis of large corpora or datasets is often preferred to produce small and precise subsets for annotation [18–20]. One of the most relevant examples of such a subset is the CORE problem list subset of SNOMED CT (CORE) [20], which is only 1.50% the size of SNOMED CT but covers over 90% of the diagnoses and problem lists found in existing reference datasets. Public authoritative medical corpora are very scarce (with the notable exception of the Multiparameter Intelligent Monitoring in Intensive Care II clinical database [21]), and using a generalist corpus (e.g., MEDLINE) might not provide good enough results because of potential mismatch between content and vocabulary used in scientific abstracts and clinical jargon [17]. To extract the CORE subset, seven large-scale health care institutions collaborated to analyze their datasets. It is expected that extracting a subset with similar characteristics as CORE for a different domain would require a comparable effort, which is unfeasible in many cases.Furthermore, in some scenarios only terms from one or more specific domains might need to be identified in a medical document. Pharmacovigilance using clinical notes [22] and extraction of drug-disease treatment pairs from biomedical literature [23] are two representative examples. In these cases, using a thesaurus the size of the UMLS Metathesaurus or SNOMED CT imposes unnecesary overhead when annotating because only drugs and diseases are relevant in the free text. Domain-specific ontologies might be preferred or even required when annotating. In the United States, for example, SNOMED CT is the designated standard terminology for diagnoses and problem lists, but RxNorm is the standardized nomenclature for clinical drugs for use in federal government systems [24].The already available CORE problem list subset of SNOMED CT represents a useful resource to annotate diseases, providing high recall while being exceptionally compact in comparison to SNOMED CT [20]. To the knowledge of the authors, no comparable subset of RxNorm is available to annotate drugs.Burton et al. [25], however, showed that the National Drug File-Reference Terminology (NDF-RT) [26], a drug information source produced by the U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs, was extremely valuable for making inferences between medications and indications, because NDF-RT has comprehensive information on recommended treatments [27].NDF-RT, SNOMED CT, and RxNorm are all included in the UMLS Metathesaurus [10], a biomedical ontology repository with mappings developed by the U.S. National Library of Medicine. Ontology mappings are links between concepts from different ontologies that are considered semantically equivalent and are the main field of study of ontology alignment or ontology matching [7]. The UMLS Metathesaurus not only contains NDF-RT, SNOMED CT, and RxNorm, but also mappings between them.In this study, we explore the possibility of using mappings and cross-ontologies available in ontology repositories as an efficient way to extract compact subsets for annotation, given the fact that extremely compact high quality subsets such as CORE are already available. In particular, the aims of the present work are as follows.1.To propose an approach that extracts a target subset TS from a target domain ontology TO, using an existing, related source subset SS from a related source domain ontology SO. The approach uses a standard ontology repository, a cross-ontology linking SO and TO, and mappings, and requires no preexisting corpus or signature selection.To study and compare the relative size and performance of the subsets SS and TS when used to annotate terms in clinical documents, as opposed to using their full domain ontologies SO and TO.As a use case for evaluation, we extract a subset from RxNorm (TO) in the domain of drugs for treatment, which we term RxNorm/CORE (TS), using the existing CORE subset (SS) of SNOMED CT (SO) in the domain of diseases. We use the NDF-RT ontology as a link between SO and TO, and the UMLS Metathesaurus as an ontology repository that provides the ontologies and mappings between them. Finally, we study and compare the performance of RxNorm/CORE and CORE for identifying terms mentioned in medical research literature and discharge summaries.Fig. 1shows an overview of our approach to obtain the RNorm/CORE subset, using the CORE problem list subset of SNOMED CT as source. The following subsections describe the approach in depth.The Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) Metathesaurus [10] is a knowledge base that comprises over 160 biomedical ontologies (source vocabularies in UMLS terminology), including SNOMED CT, NDF-RT, and RxNorm. The UMLS Metathesaurus is part of the Unified Medical Language System, developed by the U.S. National Library of Medicine to facilitate interoperability between computer systems [28].Terms that represent the same concept (e.g., ‘heart attack’, ‘myocardial infarction’, ‘cardiac infarction’, or ‘infarction of heart’) are assigned the same Concept Unique Identifier (CUI) in the UMLS Metathesaurus, regardless of which biomedical ontology they belong to. CUIs provide consistency for concepts and terms across ontologies, facilitating interoperability. The UMLS 2010AB release1UMLS Metathesaurus 2010AB Release, http://www.nlm.nih.gov/pubs/techbull/nd10/nd10_umls.html.1was installed in a local MySQL database using MetamorphoSys, the UMLS installation and customization program. The UMLS Metathesaurus, comprising 158 source vocabularies in its 2010AB release, was accessed through standard SQL queries.As an authoritative source subset for diseases, we selected the CORE problem list subset of SNOMED CT. The CORE subset is a subset containing 5814 concepts for documentation and encoding of clinical information at a summary level. The concepts included in the CORE subset represent the most frequently used terms in a series of datasets submitted by seven large-scale health care institutions that cover most medical specialties. The CORE subset provides a recall above 90% for diagnoses and problem lists with only 1.50% of the size of the full SNOMED CT [20]. Table 1shows the five concepts in the CORE subset that were most frequently found in the submitted datasets.Although the CORE subset is not part of the UMLS Metathesaurus, it is available online under the UMLS license. To maintain consistency, we used the 201102 version derived from UMLS Metathesaurus version 2010AB, which was the version of UMLS used throughout the study.We selected the NDF-RT ontology to serve as the linking component. NDF-RT contains approximately 147,000 terms that represent 44,000 concepts, and it links our target and source domains (i.e., drugs and diseases). We were only interested in drugs used for treatment and we therefore used the relationship labeled as ‘may treat’. The ‘may treat’ relationship indicates that “medication X is appropriate for the treatment of disease Y, its associated symptoms, or closely associated diseases” [26]. The remaining three relationships in NDF-RT that link both domains (‘may prevent’, ‘may diagnose’ and ‘induces’) were not used in this study.Our target ontology was RxNorm, which is the standardized nomenclature for clinical drugs for use in U.S. federal government systems and which contains 437,000 terms that represent 194,000 concepts. The semantic approach used throughout the study follows the UMLS schema whereby two terms from the same or different ontologies were considered semantically equivalent if they shared the same CUI in the UMLS Metathesaurus.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, we have shown that cross-ontologies and biomedical ontology repositories with mappings are valuable tools to extract an ontology subset efficiently when another subset from a related domain is already available. In our case study, we used ontology subsets to serve as a reference thesaurus for annotating diseases and drugs in clinical documents. The CORE subset of SNOMED CT not only proved to be a useful resource to annotate diseases, but it also served as an authoritative source subset for extracting a related subset of drugs of RxNorm using our approach.Our approach to subset extraction opens a door to help create other types of clinically useful domain-specific subsets, for example, in the domain of anatomy by using CORE as the source subset and the ‘finding site’ relationship that links diseases and anatomical sites in SNOMED CT. In this case, target ontologies of interest could be the SNOMED CT anatomy branch or the Foundational Model of Anatomy (FMA) [31], although mappings between SNOMED CT and FMA are not yet available in the UMLS Metathesaurus.Our approach also acts as an alternative in scenarios where well-established subset extraction techniques might suffer from difficulties. This is the case for term frequency analysis when a local corpus related to the domain is not available or is not representative enough, and for ontology modularization techniques when they are not capable of working with multiple ontologies or there is uncertainty regarding which concepts to use as an input signature.The analysis of our results revealed several limitations in the subset extraction process and opened new research questions to be explored in future work, as follows:1.Improving the mapping technique beyond mere CUI matching by using the hierarchies of the ontologies to infer concepts that are now not taken into account, to minimize the impact of different granularity or term usage between ontologies.Using other drug-indications linking components, such as the ones identified by Névéol and Lu [30].Exploring our strategy in open biomedical ontology repositories such as BioPortal [32]. Open biomedical ontology repositories constitute a new opportunity to reuse domain-specific subsets submitted by users.Quantitatively analyzing the performance gain (e.g., speed and memory usage) when using ontology subsets instead of full ontologies as thesauri in annotation applications.Finally, this study adds to the existing studies suggesting that there is no universal way to extract subsets from ontologies and that the task of subset extraction should be strongly guided by each particular domain and application [14]. Furthermore, not only is the adequate technique essential to optimize the efficacy of the subsets, but also the data used for input and validation. More corpora of discharge summaries available to the health informatics community, which are still scarce, would also be especially welcome to generalize the results of this study to other domains and applications.