@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Development and evaluation of RapTAT: A machine learning system for concept mapping of phrases from medical narratives

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Annotation can identify critical information within clinical notes.A key annotation step is mapping phrases to concepts of interest.We assess the impact of including token order as a feature on mapping performance.Including token order improves precision and recall over a bag-of-words classifier.The algorithm is scalable and should support near-real-time, automated annotation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
NLP,SNOMED-CT,RapTAT,UMLS,SVM,MCVS,CSV,TP,FP,FN,IQV,Opt,Perf,Natural language processing,Bayesian prediction,Machine learning,Systematized nomenclature of medicine,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Rapid, automated determination of the mapping of free text phrases to pre-defined concepts could assist in the annotation of clinical notes and increase the speed of natural language processing systems. The aim of this study was to design and evaluate a token-order-specific naïve Bayes-based machine learning system (RapTAT) to predict associations between phrases and concepts. Performance was assessed using a reference standard generated from 2860 VA discharge summaries containing 567,520 phrases that had been mapped to 12,056 distinct Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine – Clinical Terms (SNOMED CT) concepts by the MCVS natural language processing system. It was also assessed on the manually annotated, 2010 i2b2 challenge data. Performance was established with regard to precision, recall, and F-measure for each of the concepts within the VA documents using bootstrapping. Within that corpus, concepts identified by MCVS were broadly distributed throughout SNOMED CT, and the token-order-specific language model achieved better performance based on precision, recall, and F-measure (0.95±0.15, 0.96±0.16, and 0.95±0.16, respectively; mean±SD) than the bag-of-words based, naïve Bayes model (0.64±0.45, 0.61±0.46, and 0.60±0.45, respectively) that has previously been used for concept mapping. Precision, recall, and F-measure on the i2b2 test set were 92.9%, 85.9%, and 89.2% respectively, using the token-order-specific model. RapTAT required just 7.2ms to map all phrases within a single discharge summary, and mapping rate did not decrease as the number of processed documents increased. The high performance attained by the tool in terms of both accuracy and speed was encouraging, and the mapping rate should be sufficient to support near-real-time, interactive annotation of medical narratives. These results demonstrate the feasibility of rapidly and accurately mapping phrases to a wide range of medical concepts based on a token-order-specific naïve Bayes model and machine learning.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Clinical free text contains a wealth of information that can improve general medical knowledge and patient specific care. For example, it can provide evidence regarding the sources or epidemiologic course of a disease outbreak or delineate patient variables that predict an altered response to a medical intervention [1]. However, the unstructured nature of free text can impede the identification of useful information. Methods to convert unstructured free text into structured data can help the extraction of evidence from medical narratives. Manual annotation, in which a user scans a document and identifies key phrases of text conceptually related to a particular subject of interest, is one way to accomplish this. However, producing high quality annotations may require the extensive labor of multiple, experienced reviewers with sufficient understanding of the domain [2,3]. Furthermore, there can be both intra- and inter-annotator variation in the textual phrases identified during annotation and the concepts associated with those phrases. Even though manual annotations are commonly used as the reference standard when evaluating automated systems, the quality of annotations may vary among reviewers and from one corpus to the next [4].Natural language processing (NLP) can reduce the burden of manual annotation and may generate more consistent and comprehensive indices of the text [5,6]. However, adapting an existing NLP system to a new task often requires developing novel NLP applications or iterative modification of the existing algorithms to match the document types under review and the environment [7–10]. In addition, even automated systems can require substantial time to classify multiple, complex concepts in large document sets. Such temporal demands could hinder concept identifications if required to be executed in near-real time for prospective clinical applications.The objective of the present study was to evaluate whether machine learning using a token-order-specific, naïve Bayes classifier could serve as a basis for one aspect of the annotation process, namely mapping of phrases within the free text to coded concepts. Basing the system on efficient, probability-based data structures and algorithms might provide performance advantages over rule-based NLP systems and support near-real-time analysis [11]. In addition, because machine learning provides a methodical procedure for system optimization, such an approach might obviate the need for failure analyses and recoding of software when applying an NLP system to a new task. An optimized system such as this would have a number of potential uses. For one, it could reduce the annotation burden associated with manual indexing of free-text documents by learning and then automatically mapping phrases of text tagged by a reviewer to concepts of interest. By setting the system to map textual phrases to a recognized set of terminologies such as those contained within the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS), clinical providers could rapidly obtain relevant information by simply selecting phrases of interest within a clinical note.We set out to build an NLP application that could adaptively learn and optimally replicate reference standard performance and demonstrate the accuracy and operational efficiency of the system. We hypothesized that machine learning based on a token-order-specific, naïve Bayes classifier could be used to create a system capable of accurately and efficiently mapping phrases within free text to medical concepts. Herein, we describe the initial development and evaluation of such a system, the Rapid Text Annotation Tool (RapTAT).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
