@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
All-IP wireless sensor networks for real-time patient monitoring

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The all-IP WSN architecture based on gateway trees is proposed.The proposed routing algorithm is achieved in the link layer without route discovery.A mobile node does not need to be configured with a care-of address.A physician can monitor the vital signs of a patient at any time and at any places.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
All-IP wireless sensor network,Patient,Monitoring,Real time,Link layer,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper proposes the all-IP WSNs (wireless sensor networks) for real-time patient monitoring. In this paper, the all-IP WSN architecture based on gateway trees is proposed and the hierarchical address structure is presented. Based on this architecture, the all-IP WSN can perform routing without route discovery. Moreover, a mobile node is always identified by a home address and it does not need to be configured with a care-of address during the mobility process, so the communication disruption caused by the address change is avoided. Through the proposed scheme, a physician can monitor the vital signs of a patient at any time and at any places, and according to the IPv6 address he can also obtain the location information of the patient in order to perform effective and timely treatment. Finally, the proposed scheme is evaluated based on the simulation, and the simulation data indicate that the proposed scheme might effectively reduce the communication delay and control cost, and lower the packet loss rate.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the next 20years, the elderly population in the world is rapidly growing and may be reach nearly 20% of the overall population [1,2]. People as they age tend to have increasing health care needs as well as chronic conditions. Consequently, it becomes of paramount importance to deliver quality healthcare with low costs to a growing elderly population. Monitoring chromic conditions might be the most important application of WSN. The main benefit of traditional WSN applications is to achieve remote monitoring. This benefit can be used in many fields, and one typical example is human (animal) biofeedback [3,4]. With remote monitoring, the treatment of emergency conditions for patients can become easy and the people with different levels of physical disabilities can be enabled to have a more independent life. Contrary to building more hospitals, WSN technologies may provide the healthcare with a much lower cost to achieve the patient monitoring [5,6]. The application of WSNs in healthcare might offer an efficient solution for patient monitoring in an automatic way [7,8]. For example, sensors can automatically collect patients’ physical data and send these collected data to a computer for analysis. Sensors can sense even small changes in vital signals that humans might overlook, and automatically and quickly notify doctors of these changes. Since these data collected from WSN can be stored in the electronic format, the electronic devices such as computers may assist a human physician to make more informed diagnoses. In this way, the diagnosis and treatment process may be semi-automated.However, the traditional WSN is data-centric, and it is a sensor node that takes the initiative in sending data to a sink which aggregates data and then forwards the aggregated data to a computer for later analysis [9,10]. For example, when a sensor node senses changes in vital signals, such as heart rate and blood oxygen levels, it takes the initiative in sending these abnormal data to a computer in the emergency for diagnoses. During the diagnosis process, if a physician needs more real-time data for further analysis, it is impossible for a physician to take the initiative in obtaining the real-time physical parameters. Moreover, if there is an interval between the data collection and data analysis, then it is hard to achieve the real-time patient monitoring. Also, in some emergency cases, it is difficult for a physician to perform a real-time treatment because the physician cannot obtain a patient’s current location information.Therefore, it is important for a physician to take the initiative in obtaining the real-time physical parameters and location information of a patient at any time and at any places. This is a main motivation of our study, and the objective of our study is to propose a scheme where a physician can take the initiative to get any patient’s physical parameters at any time and at any places to achieve the real-time monitoring. In order to achieve this objective, this paper proposes a patient monitoring scheme based on all-IP WSNs. Since the all-IP WSN can use the IPv6 protocol to achieve the end-to-end communication with the IPv6 Internet, a physician can take the initiative to get any patient’s physical parameters at any time and at any places to achieve the real-time monitoring through the proposed scheme. This scheme is based on all-IP WSNs, and it has the following contributions:(1)The all-IP WSN architecture based on gateway trees is proposed. Based on this architecture, the hierarchical IPv6 address structure for the all-IP WSN is presented in order to compress the valid length of an address and reduce the transmission cost and delay.Based on this architecture, the routing algorithm is proposed and it is performed in the link layer without route discovery, so the communication delay is shortened, the control cost is reduced and the packet loss rate is lowered.In this scheme, a mobile node is always identified by its home address and it does not need to be configured with a care-of address during the mobility process, so the communication disruption caused by the address change is avoided. As a result, the communication delay is shortened, the control cost is reduced and the packet loss rate is lowered.Through the proposed scheme, a physician can monitor the vital signs of a patient at any time and at any places. According to the IPv6 addresses of mobile nodes a patient is equipped with, a physician can obtain the location information of the patient in order to perform an effective and timely treatment.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the related work on the patient monitoring systems based on WSNs is discussed. The architecture for the all-IP WSNs is proposed in Section 3, the mobility handover algorithm is discussed in Section 4, the patient monitoring based on all-IP WSNs is presented in Section 5, and the performance of the proposed scheme is evaluated in Section 6. We conclude the paper with a summary in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
