@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Integrating electronic health record information to support integrated care: Practical application of ontologies to improve the accuracy of diabetes disease registers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Multiple clinical perspectives must underpin a multi-attribute phenotyping ontology.Ontological integration of EHR data elements can compensate for deficiencies in data quality.Ontological approaches can improve accuracy of phenotyping algorithms.Ontologically integrated EHR data and best practice guidelines can support integrated care.An integrated ontological approach to “big clinical data” can render them more usable and useful.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Case finding,Integration,Patient register,EHR,Ontology,Knowledge engineering,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundInformation in Electronic Health Records (EHRs) are being promoted for use in clinical decision support, patient registers, measurement and improvement of integration and quality of care, and translational research. To do this EHR-derived data product creators need to logically integrate patient data with information and knowledge from diverse sources and contexts.ObjectiveTo examine the accuracy of an ontological multi-attribute approach to create a Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM) register to support integrated care.MethodsGuided by Australian best practice guidelines, the T2DM diagnosis and management ontology was conceptualized, contextualized and validated by clinicians; it was then specified, formalized and implemented. The algorithm was standardized against the domain ontology in SNOMED CT-AU. Accuracy of the implementation was measured in 4 datasets of varying sizes (927–12,057 patients) and an integrated dataset (23,793 patients). Results were cross-checked with sensitivity and specificity calculated with 95% confidence intervals.ResultsIncrementally integrating Reason for Visit (RFV), medication (Rx), and pathology in the algorithm identified nearly100% of T2DM cases. Incrementally integrating the four datasets improved accuracy; controlling for sample size, data incompleteness and duplicates. Manual validation confirmed the accuracy of the algorithm.ConclusionIntegrating multiple data elements within an EHR using ontology-based case-finding algorithms can improve the accuracy of the diagnosis and compensate for suboptimal data quality, and hence creating a dataset that is more fit-for-purpose. This clinical and pragmatic application of ontologies to EHR data improves the integration of data and the potential for better use of data to improve the quality of care.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Electronic Health Records (EHRs) and informatics-enabled integrated care can improve chronic disease management (CDM). There are benefits for health care providers and consumers through more accurate and timely information exchange, improved work efficiency by avoiding repetition of information collection and tests, and better decision-making [1]. A widely used CDM is the Chronic Care Model (CCM) [2,3]. The CCM has six dimensions: health care organization, delivery system design, decision support, clinical information systems, self-management support, and community resources/policies to optimize integrated CDM. The CCM describes an activated patient engaged with an activated health care team to optimize patient-centred care [4] and the activated patients involved in self-management.Patient registers or lists derived from routinely collected data in EHRs may be developed through “phenotyping” [5] or “case-finding” algorithms to identify cases. The increasing use of health-related social media, particularly in socially shaped diseases such as obesity and depression, can and should be exploited to enhance traditional ways of using EHRs to support care and care delivery [6].The limitations of traditional EHR-based registers have been reported in the USA [7], UK [8,9], Australia [10] and Canada [11]. The Canadian diabetes registry to support patient identification and disease tracking was scrapped due to cost overruns and failure to deliver to expectations. Basic questions about the accuracy and completeness of EHR-based registers were only partially answered. The sensitivity (extent to which all patients with the disease were included) and specificity (extent to which patients who do not have the disease were excluded) of these registers were often not recorded.The STrengthening the Reporting of OBservational studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) and REporting of studies Conducted using Observational Routinely collected Data (RECORD) initiatives recognize this gap. However, RECORD and STROBE are in their infancy and, in our view, lack sufficient and necessary support of clinical informatics [12,13] and knowledge engineering communities. There is scope to make greater use of semantic web technologies to exploit propositional knowledge (http://www.phekb.org/) as well as other domain knowledge: about health professionals, patients’ health status, and the health system.The design of many EHRs and EHR-based disease registers is not transparent [14], mostly to protect intellectual property. The quality of disease registers has been critiqued in the UK [9,14,15] and those within an electronic Practice Based Research Network (ePBRN) in Australia [16,17]. Whilst some progress has been made, the core outstanding issue is uncertainty about true negatives, namely people without diabetes who are identified as such.Our theoretical approach combines ontological and realist perspectives. We use Gruber’s classic description of an ontology as the “specification of a conceptualization” [18]. We incorporate Carlsson’s work as the guiding principle within a critical realist approach; [19] whilst adopting the practicality of Pawson and Tilley’s method of conducting a realist evaluation. They describe this straightforwardly as: “What works for whom in what context” [20]. Pawson and Tilley also describe how: “Context+Mechanism=Impact/Outcome (CMIO).” [21]. Finally we take a knowledge engineering approach (KE) to linking key data, information and knowledge.We develop a phenotype ontology for type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) with a focus on supporting multidisciplinary integrated care of patients with chronic diseases capable of supporting the implementation of the CCM. Our ontological approach recognizes that the quality of EHRs and EHR-derived utilities such as patient registers is influenced by the data, knowledge modeling, system architecture, implementation protocols, training and support and associated knowledge management and information governance processes. We adopt an ontological layered approach [22] that incorporated rule-based methods, clinical guidelines and data quality dimensions.Ontologies can potentially support several categories of integration including:•Data integration: from disparate clinical data sources within and across EHRs.Knowledge integration: from diverse health and social professionals’ knowledge.Clinical integration: linking clinical concepts to model the phenotype.Interdisciplinary integration: bringing together multiple disciplines to model and support multidisciplinary coordinated care and information exchange in CDM over the patient’s journey through a complex ecosystem of clinical and social factors and contexts such as co-morbidities, health risks, health financing and insurance.We used the Australian extension to the Systematized Nomenclature Of Medicine Clinical Terms (SNOMED CT-AU®) as a standardized terminology for knowledge representation in multidisciplinary clinical practice. SNOMED CT-AU® is an ontology which formally defines classes of medical procedure, pharmaceutical or biologic product, and body structure (http://www.nehta.gov.au/our-work/clinical-terminology/snomed-clinical-terms). In Australia, SNOMED CT-AU® Ontology (SCAO) is available in Web Ontology Language (OWL) from the National E-Health Transition Authority (NEHTA). Preliminary tests of SNOMED CT-AU demonstrated its suitability for integration with our specified ontology to identify patients with T2DM.Our realist CMIO framework is applied as follows:•The context is the health system, including multidisciplinary teams, continuity and integration of care, quality improvement indicators, disease surveillance and population health. We emphasize a need to collect and manage complete, correct, consistent and timely information about the cycle of care, risk factors, disease indicators, quality of life and patient satisfaction.The mechanism to meet this need are the informatics and knowledge engineering tools, including the EHR, its data and ontologies to conceptualize the concepts and relationships required to implement and evaluate evidence-based best practice guidelines for a range of contexts and purposes.The outcome in this study is the accuracy of the disease register.We aim to embed “ontological” thinking in clinical practice to facilitate more realistic and relevant translation of clinical practice into knowledge modeling to improve knowledge collection, management and use in practice as well as the design of relevant decision support systems. The congruence of clinical and technical ontologies is essential to facilitate semantic and syntactic integration to promote the development of more proactive and intelligent CDM systems to reduce the burden on providers while still integrating patient information to guide integrated multidisciplinary practice, research and policy.A KE approach [23] has the potential to integrate knowledge with the complex processes, sophisticated functions and rich information inherent in CDM. Ontologies are especially important when dealing with people with multiple chronic diseases, whose health data are often distributed among different health and social care providers and in different formats.The ePBRN in South West Sydney provided the dataset to create an EHR-based register of patients with diabetes, to assess the accuracy of the tools and ontology-specified algorithm, and to test the resulting informatics and KE infrastructure developed. The records were linked, using a probabilistic matching and record linkage tool [24], to assess the extent of duplicate patient records and to avoid double counting of patients who used multiple practices in the study area (medical neighborhood).This paper describes the use of ontology and KE tools to design, develop, implement and validate the T2DM phenotyping algorithm component of a comprehensive ontological approach to identifying and managing patients with T2DM from primary care EHRs.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
