@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Inter-terminology mapping of nursing problems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Fifty-six percent of ICNP diagnosis/outcome concepts map to SNOMED–CT.Mapping challenges include lexical variations and semantic differences.Coverage of positive nursing diagnostic concepts in SNOMED–CT is low.Some judgment concepts were interchangeably used in nursing diagnostic concepts.A broad community-based review of cross-mapping is underway for quality assurance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Terminology,Mapping,International Classification for Nursing Practice,Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine–Clinical Terms,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
PurposeThe purpose of this study was to determine the degree of overlap between the International Classification for Nursing Practice (ICNP®) and the Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine–Clinical Terms (SNOMED–CT), with a specific focus on nursing problems, as a first step towards harmonization of content between the two terminologies.MethodsWork within this study was divided across two ICNP subsets. The first subset (n=238) was made up of ICNP diagnosis/outcome concepts that had been included in previous experimental mapping activities with Clinical Care Classification (CCC) and NANDA-International (NANDA-I). These ICNP concepts and their equivalent concepts within CCC and NANDA-I were used within the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) framework to derive automatically candidate mappings to SNOMED–CT for validation by two reviewers. The second subset (n=565) included all other ICNP diagnosis/outcome concepts plus those concepts from the first subset where the candidate mappings were rejected. Mappings from the second subset to SNOMED–CT were manually identified independently by the same two reviewers. Differences between the reviewers were resolved through discussion. The observed agreement between the two reviewers was calculated along with the inter-rater reliability using Cohen’s Kappa (κ).ResultsFor the first semi-automated mapping, according to the two reviewers the great majority of ICNP concepts (91.6%) correctly mapped to SNOMED–CT in UMLS. There was a good level of agreement between the reviewers in this part of the exercise (κ=0.7). For the second manual mapping, nearly two-thirds of ICNP concepts (61.4%) could not be mapped to any SNOMED–CT concept. There was only a moderate level of agreement between the reviewers (κ=0.45). While most of the mappings were one-to-one mappings, there were ambiguities in both terminologies which led to difficulties. The absence of mappings was due to a large extent to differences in content coverage, although lexical variations and semantic differences also played a part.ConclusionsThis study demonstrated a degree of overlap between ICNP and SNOMED–CT; it also identified significant differences in content coverage. The results from the semi-automated mapping were encouraging, particularly for ‘older’ ICNP content. The results from the manual mapping were less favorable suggesting a need for further enhancement of both terminologies, content development within SNOMED–CT and further research on mechanisms for harmonization.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The usefulness of electronic health records relies on a consistent description of health care. The use of standardized patient care data in decision support and quality evaluation can minimize undesirable consequences of health care; standardization can also maximize opportunities for identifying new knowledge from massive and increasing volumes of clinical data. Standardized health terminologies are seen as essential in supporting meaningful use and interoperability between different electronic healthcare systems [1,2].A variety of nursing terminologies have been developed to provide a source of standardized data for electronic health records. One such terminology, the International Classification for Nursing Practice (ICNP®), has been developed by the International Council of Nurses (ICN) to support nursing practice in any setting worldwide [3]. Recognizing that multiple terminologies might be required to support the various needs of terminology users, ICN has been involved in a number of initiatives to harmonize content within the World Health Organization (WHO) Family of International Classifications (FIC) and with the International Health Terminology Standards Development Organisation (IHTSDO).ICNP as a related classification harmonizes content within FIC, for example with the International Classification of Functioning (ICF) [4] and more recently with the emerging International Classification of Health Interventions (ICHI). Outside FIC, a harmonization agreement between ICN and IHTSDO seeks to ensure consistency in nursing content between ICNP and the Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine–Clinical Terms (SNOMED–CT) [5].As a first step towards instantiating the ICN-IHTSDO agreement, we designed a study to determine the degree of overlap between ICNP and SNOMED–CT. While the focus of this study was on so-called nursing problems, within ICNP, diagnoses, goals, and outcomes are modeled in the same way. These are referred to as diagnosis/outcome statements covering both positive and negative statements about health status for individuals, families or communities. In this paper we report on the results of the study, presenting overlapping content as cross-mappings between ICNP and SNOMED–CT. We discuss similarities and differences between the two terminologies, building on other studies to provide a rationale for and route towards mutual enhancement and to serve as a foundation for greater harmonization of content.ICNP is a workstream within the ICN eHealth Programme which aims to transform nursing through the visionary application of information and communication technology [6]. The purpose of the ICNP as an international nursing terminology is to provide standard content for nurses worldwide to document their practice consistently [3]. ICNP has evolved significantly since its inception, transitioning through a multi-axial representation [3] to its current more formal form, in response to its increasing size and complexity, more sophisticated requirements of users, and the need to ensure quality [7].ICNP takes as its foundation a formal Web Ontology Language (OWL) model [7]. Under this model, pre-coordinated nursing diagnosis, outcome and intervention statements (introduced in response to users’ requests to facilitate implementation and reduce potential ambiguity) are composed of more primitive ICNP concepts [7]. The use of a modeling style guide and automated reasoning on the ontology assures consistency and conformance with the international standard for nursing terminologies, ISO 18104: Reference Terminology Model for Nursing [8].ICNP is structurally stable and released every two years. The main change between releases is additional content. This stability is a result of greater consistency in modeling and the implementation of a quality improvement program [9]. The 2013 release includes 3894 concepts, 41% of which are pre-coordinated, including 783 diagnosis/outcome statements and 809 nursing interventions (this is an increase from 17% in Version 1). In order to support implementation of the increasing number of pre-coordinated concepts, a number of clinically relevant subsets of the terminology, called ICNP Catalogues, have been developed for specific conditions, specialties or practice areas [10]. A similar harmonization agreement is in place between ICN and SabaCare for ICNP and the Clinical Care Classification (CCC) [11].With its origins in the Systemized Nomenclature of Pathology (SNOP), SNOMED–CT has evolved to become an important international standardized terminology to support broader health care [12]. Accordingly, harmonization efforts have been made between IHTSDO and WHO for the International Classification of Diseases (ICD) Version 10 and SNOMED–CT [13], and between IHTSDO and the Regenstrief Institute for Logical Observation Identifiers Names and Codes (LOINC) and SNOMED–CT [14].SNOMED–CT is released every 6months as a set of tables comprising, among other elements, concept names and codes, descriptions, and relationships [15]. In common with ICNP, SNOMED–CT is also underpinned by description logic and organized in a tree structure with 19 top-level concepts [16]. The top-level concepts represent a range of domains such as body structures, clinical findings (e.g., diseases, disorders, drug actions), events, observable entities, procedures (e.g., treatment/therapy, surgical procedure, laboratory procedure), situations with explicit context, and substances [15]. Lower-level concepts are organized hierarchically. SNOMED–CT concepts may also have multiple ‘parent’ concepts. For example, the concept ability to manage medication (285033005) has two parent concepts: drug therapy observable (363819003) and instrumental activity of daily living (414514009) – both within the Observable Entity hierarchy.In the early stages of development of SNOMED–CT, attempts were made through the U.S. College of American Pathologists (CAP) [17] at harmonization with a number of nursing terminologies that had been recognized by the American Nurses Association (ANA) [18]. These included the CCC, NANDA-International (NANDA-I), the Nursing Interventions Classification (NIC), the Nursing Outcomes Classification (NOC), the Omaha System, and the Perioperative Nursing Data Set (PNDS) [19–22]. As appropriate nursing content was not always available within SNOMED–CT at the time of the harmonization activity, new nursing content was added so that mappings could be made from the source terminologies. It is noted that harmonization with ICNP was not attempted at that time because of its multi-axial representational form.However, previous work has explored the feasibility of harmonizing ICNP primitive concepts and SNOMED CT. For example, when mapping ICNP Version 1 primitive concepts (which are used to create a pre-coordinated diagnosis, intervention and outcome concepts) to SNOMED–CT, Park et al. (2011) found that 80% (i.e., 1331 of 1658) of primitive concepts were mapped to SNOMED CT (1-31-2007 release) [23], indicating the possibility of post-coordinating the primitive ICNP concepts for cross-mapping. Although any EHR system can take advantage of compositional capabilities of healthcare terminologies for data sharing and exchange, it could potentially create inconsistency in mappings across EHR systems. In light of this, the harmonization agreement between ICN and IHTSDO currently focuses on maximizing consistency in mappings of ICNP pre-coordinated concepts and exploring solutions for post-coordinating primitive concepts for unmatched pre-coordinated concepts.While SNOMED–CT contains nursing content, it is not possible to retrieve this content directly as a nursing-relevant subset. The Unified Medical Language System (UMLS), a product of the U.S. National Library Medicine (NLM) on the other hand, provides a framework that allows its constituent terminologies to be viewed either as an individual entity or as an integrated whole [24,25]. Within UMLS semantically equivalent concepts are assigned to the same concept unique identifier (CUI) regardless of their source [24,25]. This ideally makes it possible to link equivalent concepts drawn from multiple terminologies using CUIs, while retaining the ability to identify their source. Our previous related research indicated that UMLS is a reliable source to extract cross-mappings between some nursing terminologies within the unified framework although there were a number of gaps in mappings with ICNP [26]. Indeed, a current nursing problem list was based on cross-mappings of nursing terminologies that were available in UMLS (followed by expert review) [27]. The development of the problem list, however, demonstrated that additional work, described within this paper, would be needed to be able to identify and retrieve appropriate candidate mappings between ICNP and SNOMED–CT within UMLS [26,27].Similarly there have been some success and failure with automated or semi-automated approaches to cross-mappings. For example, using string-based and semantic-based searches, a machine-aided mapping of ICD-9CM to SNOMED–CT through UMLS resulted in a 91% coverage, a 43% recall and a 27% precision [28]. However, it would appear that automated approaches alone are not adequate for all domains. For example, in one study that sought to automatically map a local medication terminology to SNOMED–CT using UMLS, more than one third of source concepts could not be mapped due to the complexity of the three systems [29].In addition, several authors have reported challenges in cross-mapping between SNOMED–CT and other standardized terminologies [30,31]. One study that sought to map between LOINC and SNOMED–CT in UMLS resulted in a high proportion of unmatched LOINC concepts due to unspecified concept definitions, a lack of pre-coordinated concepts and a different granularity within SNOMED–CT [30]. In a second study, quality issues (i.e. inconsistencies, redundancies, and deficiencies) in SNOMED–CT were found to be barriers in mapping legacy data to SNOMED–CT [31]. These issues also have been addressed in a recent survey of SNOMED–CT users, requiring the ongoing enhancement of SNOMED–CT, for example in order to support meaningful use [32].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
