@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
CNV-ROC: A cost effective, computer-aided analytical performance evaluator of chromosomal microarrays

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Chromosomal microarrays (CMAs) are important research and diagnostic tools.CNV-ROC is a software tool that can aid in the evaluation of CMA platforms.CNV-ROC uses a per-probe approach for comparison of copy number variants (CNVs).CNV-ROC calculates genome-wide true and false positive and negative results.CNV-ROC can use both unique and common, polymorphic CNVs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Microarray,Sensitivity,Specificity,Precision,ROC,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Chromosomal microarrays (CMAs) are routinely used in both research and clinical laboratories; yet, little attention has been given to the estimation of genome-wide true and false negatives during the assessment of these assays and how such information could be used to calibrate various algorithmic metrics to improve performance. Low-throughput, locus-specific methods such as fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), quantitative PCR (qPCR), or multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) preclude rigorous calibration of various metrics used by copy number variant (CNV) detection algorithms. To aid this task, we have established a comparative methodology, CNV-ROC, which is capable of performing a high throughput, low cost, analysis of CMAs that takes into consideration genome-wide true and false negatives. CNV-ROC uses a higher resolution microarray to confirm calls from a lower resolution microarray and provides for a true measure of genome-wide performance metrics at the resolution offered by microarray testing. CNV-ROC also provides for a very precise comparison of CNV calls between two microarray platforms without the need to establish an arbitrary degree of overlap. Comparison of CNVs across microarrays is done on a per-probe basis and receiver operator characteristic (ROC) analysis is used to calibrate algorithmic metrics, such as log2 ratio threshold, to enhance CNV calling performance. CNV-ROC addresses a critical and consistently overlooked aspect of analytical assessments of genome-wide techniques like CMAs which is the measurement and use of genome-wide true and false negative data for the calculation of performance metrics and comparison of CNV profiles between different microarray experiments.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Chromosomal microarray (CMA) is a broad term used to describe testing for copy number variation utilizing either single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) or comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) microarrays. CMA has been used in research for years and has also proven valuable in the clinical setting exhibiting a much higher diagnostic yield than conventional chromosome analysis and/or subtelomeric fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for a range of developmental phenotypes [1–3]. The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) recommends that CMA be used as a first tier diagnostic test in the evaluation of patients with multiple congenital anomalies not specific to a well-delineated genetic syndrome, non-syndromic developmental delay/intellectual disability, and autism spectrum disorders [2,4]. The ACMG has also published guidelines for the interpretation and reporting of constitutional copy number variants (CNVs) as well as for the design and performance expectations of microarrays used in clinical CMA testing [5]. The ACMG recommends that CMA platforms should be able to detect genome-wide CNVs of at least 400Kb at 99% analytical sensitivity (with a lower limit at the 95% confidence interval >98%) and a false-positive rate of <1% [5]. In order to generate such performance metrics detected CNVs must be classified as either true or false positives but also regions called diploid by a CMA must also be classified at either true or false negatives.Evaluation of a CMA platform typically involves the selection of several dozen or more well-characterized cases that contain a collection of appropriately sized (majority being <1Mb), unique CNVs that are located throughout the genome. For smaller laboratories, or those just starting up the assay, the collection of enough appropriate cases can be difficult. We sought to develop a method that could aid the CMA evaluation process by allowing laboratories to calculate performance metrics in a high-throughput, low cost way that relied on fewer cases. This method can utilize both unique and common/polymorphic CNVs and is based on a per-probe approach to quantify outcome metrics such as true and false positive and negative results, as well as sensitivity/recall, specificity, and precision. Calculation of precision is critical given the disproportionate amount of true negative data in such genome-wide comparisons (most of the genome will not be affected by a CNV). Using two CMA designs that differ in the level of resolution we show that performance metrics can be adequately calculated with as few as 20 cases. This approach relies on comparing the CNV profiles of the same samples run on different CMA designs, however, by using a per-probe approach, an arbitrary decision concerning the minimal degree of overlap two CNVs must share in order to be called the “same” CNV is not necessary and thus provides for a much more granular analysis of copy number data. In addition, the high-throughput nature of this comparative methodology allows for the simultaneous calibration of algorithm metrics such as log2 ratio threshold, minimum number of probes to call a CNV, or others. We created several Perl scripts, CNV-ROC, that can be executed to accomplish this methodology.In the clinical setting, CMA testing influences management of patients in many ways including generation of medical referrals, and providing guidance for diagnostic imaging and specific laboratory testing [6]. Given the complexity of CMA testing and the implications it holds for future patient management, the ability to assess quality control and performance metrics in a variety of ways can be very useful. Even if manufacturers of chromosomal microarrays have performed extensive validation, it is still necessary for individual laboratories to establish for themselves the performance characteristics in their own setting and with their unique set of samples. Thus, the establishment of a comprehensive and low cost method of measuring the performance of a given CMA platform is of great significance to the laboratory community.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
