@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
ReVeaLD: A user-driven domain-specific interactive search platform for biomedical research

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We develop a visual approach for intuitive query formulation by non-technical users.53 Linked biomedical data sources are queried in real time for data discovery.User-defined graphic rules dynamically assemble media-rich interfaces from results.Domain-specific languages increases the usability of semantic web technologies.Our knowledge-driven platform can be used for information querying in other domains.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Domain-specific languages,Human–computer interaction,Semantic web technologies,Knowledge discovery,Visual query system,Data visualization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Bioinformatics research relies heavily on the ability to discover and correlate data from various sources. The specialization of life sciences over the past decade, coupled with an increasing number of biomedical datasets available through standardized interfaces, has created opportunities towards new methods in biomedical discovery. Despite the popularity of semantic web technologies in tackling the integrative bioinformatics challenge, there are many obstacles towards its usage by non-technical research audiences. In particular, the ability to fully exploit integrated information needs using improved interactive methods intuitive to the biomedical experts. In this report we present ReVeaLD (a Real-time Visual Explorer and Aggregator of Linked Data), a user-centered visual analytics platform devised to increase intuitive interaction with data from distributed sources. ReVeaLD facilitates query formulation using a domain-specific language (DSL) identified by biomedical experts and mapped to a self-updated catalogue of elements from external sources. ReVeaLD was implemented in a cancer research setting; queries included retrieving data from in silico experiments, protein modeling and gene expression. ReVeaLD was developed using Scalable Vector Graphics and JavaScript and a demo with explanatory video is available at http://www.srvgal78.deri.ie:8080/explorer. A set of user-defined graphic rules controls the display of information through media-rich user interfaces. Evaluation of ReVeaLD was carried out as a game: biomedical researchers were asked to assemble a set of 5 challenge questions and time and interactions with the platform were recorded. Preliminary results indicate that complex queries could be formulated under less than two minutes by unskilled researchers. The results also indicate that supporting the identification of the elements of a DSL significantly increased intuitiveness of the platform and usability of semantic web technologies by domain users.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The challenges in integrating the deluge of life sciences data flooding the web in the past decade have prompted researchers in bioinformatics and biomedical informatics to become early adopters of a new generation of integrative technologies based on Semantic Web and Linked Data concepts [1,2]. Various researchers have emphasized the use of these technologies for publishing biomedical data resources as SPARQL endpoints [3–7]. SPARQL [8] is the query language for the semantic web and the W3C-recommended standard for structured queries over highly heterogeneous information. These technologies have, on several occasions, facilitated naming disambiguation and retrieval of properties associated with bioinformatics-relevant entities (e.g. genes, proteins, drugs) from multiple sources [9–12]. Aggregated information gathered in this way can subsequently be applied to various bioinformatics tasks such as functional analysis, protein modeling or image analysis. In the majority of cases, the information necessary to answer a biological question requires data retrieval from various providers, each commonly making data available through custom interfaces. Questions such as “Are there drugs with molecular weight under 400 tested against ‘Colon Cancer’?” or “Do any Pubmed Publications refer to assays using ‘Aspirin’ as the primary Drug” can be accurately answered if information is aggregated in real-time from multiple reliable sources. Biomedical communities engaged in the Linked Data efforts have agreed extensively on ontologies and standards for exchanging experimental data and biomedical information [13,14]. Although these technologies have become commonplace for many computer scientists, who can easily interact with SPARQL endpoints and ontologies using dedicated applications, the ultimate end-users of the biomedical data exposed as SPARQL endpoints are primarily the domain experts – either biologists or clinical researchers, who can use it to improve their rate of discovery [15]. However, the assembly of SPARQL queries to aggregate information necessary for bioinformatics analysis still poses a high cognitive entry barrier, which continues to challenge wide adoption and acceptance of integrative technologies in biomedical domains. This problem is further compounded when we consider that most biomedical data sources are too large and dynamic for reliable data centralization [16], thus requiring federated SPARQL approaches [9,17]. Assembling a federated SPARQL query is a time-consuming and highly technical process, even for computer scientists. It relies extensively on the familiarity with the data representation schema and the granularity of each federated source.Visual query systems (VQSs) [18], powered by visual languages lower the cognitive entry level of assembling a SPARQL query, thus increasing the intuitiveness and usability of query languages [19]. Semantic visual query languages such as vSPARQL [20] and IML [21] support the assembly of queries with visual models of the data (typically the schema), guiding the user in the selection of the appropriate query elements. Freely available web-based query tools, such as Openlink iSPARQL [22] and NITELIGHT [23] provide graph-based, touch-and-click interfaces for query formulation where the outcome is a SPARQL query. These systems typically require a schema to be available at runtime or the schema is extracted by issuing SPARQL queries that extract the elements necessary to assemble queries [24]. These approaches are effective when targeting a single SPARQL endpoint but do not easily support federated SPARQL scenarios. Furthermore, we have shown in the past [25] that biomedical data representation schemas are still highly diverse, even when Linked Data technologies are applied. As such, even if those systems could be used in federated approaches, their reliance on schema extraction for assembling the visual models can easily overwhelm the users of the system due to too many overlapping terminologies, thus decreasing their intuitiveness [26]. Moreover, the display of the query results in these systems is still too geared towards textual representation; whereas faceted classification systems [27] like Exhibit [28] make the navigation of multi-dimensional datasets simpler and increase the presentation of results, the high-level of technical expertise required in configuring these interfaces makes them unfeasible for federated queries. In this report, we apply human–computer interaction (HCI) principles towards providing a methodology for the development of a federation-enabled semantic VQS and an optimized display of results.In the context of HCI, usability describes the ease of use, intuitiveness and learnability of human–computer interactions [29]. One of the core principles in usability design is early and frequent focus on the users requirements and frequent interactions with early versions of the system – although this concept sounds intuitive, most semantic VQSs are not designed with this principle in mind and, instead, focus more on extensively supporting every extension to the SPARQL protocol as opposed to supporting intuitive interaction with the end users. Alternatively, interactive and intuitive VQSs should rely on the assumption that the users of the system can and should be able to decide and configure what and how information is displayed in the interface [30]. In our approach, we explore the application of a user-defined domain-specific language (DSL) as the intermediate layer between the end-user and the system’s interface, similar to what has been used in other approaches [31–33]. The term DSL is typically used to refer to a specification language devised to address a particular design problem such as describing a biological process or designing intuitive interfaces. DSLs in biomedical sciences have been used in the past to model and describe biological interactions – Greg, for example [34], was developed to model the various concepts of the Gene Regulatory Mechanism; the development of various formal DSLs has also been driven by the need to orient user’s interaction with bioinformatics applications such as Cell Illustrator [35], GINSIM [36] and Cytoscape [37]. Alternatively, more generic DSLs can be derived from domain-specific biomedical ontologies [33,38] – in the context of semantic VQS design, these DSLs can function as intermediary mechanisms or “glue” between the visual exploration requirements, data available in various SPARQL endpoints and the set of rules and graphic elements necessary to design an attractive VQS. DSLs differ from ontologies in their motivation and size: the term ontology in computer science is used to describe a conceptualization, which may and should entail any number of other ontologies. As such, ontologies can grow indefinitely and a well-construed ontology requires subscription to a set of upper ontologies which adds further non-domain-specific concepts to the ontology (e.g. “Thing”, “continuant”, “occurent”, “dependent continuant”, etc.). Alternatively, DSLs are typically much smaller and self-contained as they are designed to address a specific problem and do not attempt to be extensive in their representation. S3QL [31] is an example of a compact DSL devised by domain experts, where the intricacies of specific conceptual domains are captured in the DSL and applied in the generation of a SPARQL query. S3QL has been used to devise VQSs like AGUIA [30] – ontologies are used, in those cases, as sources of controlled vocabularies, but are not applied in the user’s interaction with the VQSs to avoid increasing the complexity of the system and overwhelming the user with unnecessary details. Other VQSs like DistilBio [39], VIQUEN [40] and Cuebee [41], which were devised and tested with life sciences datasets, assemble the visual model using ontologies. The main disadvantages of these systems are (1) the requirement that users of most of these VQSs need to know the formal ontology schema, which can often be very large and unmanageable [42] and (2) federated querying is not supported. As such, there are advantages to applying a user-designed DSL to configure a visual model, as opposed to an ontology, since the former ensures that some of the cognitive challenges associated with learning a new visual interface are removed by the fact that the system relies on the “user’s own language”.Our application of a user-designed DSL, as opposed to an ontology, as the intermediate layer is based on two main usability hypotheses – (1) that usage of a DSL makes the interface more intuitive (familiarity) and that (2) the size of the visual model affects the time needed to assemble a query (concept overload).Traditional laboratory studies, in which evaluators are presented with a set of tasks to be completed and the time required to execute any task is measured, along with the number of clicks or errors, exist to evaluate the usability of any system. However, for the effective adoption of a semantic web application in the biomedical domain, it is essential to identify from the beginning, whether the domain users, found the whole user experience (UX) engaging, which is a bit tricky to estimate. Specifically, the term ‘usability’ is used to indicate whether the user can easily, efficiently and effectively configure any system to function according to his requirements, whereas ‘user experience’ is the understanding of how any user feels about using the system [43]. The traditional laboratory studies could be extended easily to collect experiential insights of the evaluator, during the preliminary stages of application prototyping as proposed under [44].In this report we present our approach for the development of a semantic VQS prototype named ReVeaLD, which we used to collect evaluation data from domain experts. ReVeaLD (Real-time Visual Explorer and Aggregator of Linked Data) relies on a DSL-driven and easily configurable visual exploration method that translates graphically assembled queries into its SPARQL equivalent and returns the corresponding query results. The SPARQL query engine that ReVeaLD relies on is a SPARQL federated framework that transforms a simple SPARQL query into its federated equivalent by relying on a dynamic catalogue of more than 50 life sciences datasets. In the following sections we will address the requirements for visual exploration in biomedical domains and the federated architecture of ReVeaLD. A key feature enabled by the DSL-driven design is the ability to define, for specific data elements (e.g. chemical elements or biological pathways), the visual display interface that makes more sense to the domain users (e.g. 3D molecular structure or a pathway diagram), as opposed to generic interfaces. We showcase the different usability features of ReVeaLD, whilst addressing four common requirements identified by domain experts in cancer chemoprevention research:(1)Retrieving information for simple queries. For example, toxicity and referred publications of chemopreventive agents, derived from ‘pomegranate’ (source) and are responsible for affecting pathways involved in ‘Estrogen’ production.Assembly of Dataset-specific SPARQL queries. For example, discovering drugs, with molecular weight below 1000, and supplementary information, from DrugBank, which are used to treat diseases reported in Diseasome datasets entitled ‘Colon Cancer’.Enabling user-specific extensions to the underlying DSL. For example, addition of a new concept named ‘RNAMolecule’, a new string property ‘containsNucleotide’ associated to this concept indicating the symbol of the nucleotide (A, C, U or G), and reuse of a concept termed ‘DNAMolecule’ extended by another researcher.Secure querying of datasets generated from private experiments. For example, querying molecules whose functional activity, as qualitatively assessed in the assays described in a study [45], produced desirable results for potential cancer chemoprevention, and correlating them to similar molecules mentioned in public knowledge-bases.We evaluated ReVeaLD using a game-based evaluation method for measuring the intuitiveness of the tool. The evaluation focused on resolving two usability concerns regarding the DSL-driven design of ReVeaLD: (1) Does familiarity of the users with the DSL affect the time needed to formulate the query, and (2) Does a constrained DSL (smaller DSL), lead to less time needed for query formulation? Finally, we will discuss the applicability of ReVeaLD beyond the cancer chemoprevention domain in which it has been tested and its portability to other semantic web frameworks i.e. although the ReVeaLD proof-of-concept relies on a federated SPARQL engine, it can also support visual query assembly in more traditional SPARQL endpoints.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
