@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Clinical simulation: A method for development and evaluation of clinical information systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A methodological approach for using clinical simulation in development of e-Health.Key issues using clinical simulation in form of 10 steps to a successful simulation.Clinical simulation reveals unintended benefits and challenges of e-Health.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Clinical simulation,eHealth,Evaluation,Human factors,Clinical information systems,Clinical practice guidelines,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Use of clinical simulation in the design and evaluation of eHealth systems and applications has increased during the last decade. This paper describes a methodological approach for using clinical simulations in the design and evaluation of clinical information systems. The method is based on experiences from more than 20 clinical simulation studies conducted at the ITX-lab in the Capital Region of Denmark during the last 5years. A ten-step approach to conducting simulations is presented in this paper. To illustrate the approach, a clinical simulation study concerning implementation of Digital Clinical Practice Guidelines in a prototype planning and coordination module is presented. In the case study potential benefits were assessed in a full-scale simulation test including 18 health care professionals. The results showed that health care professionals can benefit from such a module. Unintended consequences concerning terminology and changes in the division of responsibility amongst healthcare professionals were also identified, and questions were raised concerning future workflow across sector borders. Furthermore unexpected new possible benefits concerning improved communication, content of information in discharge letters and quality management emerged during the testing. In addition new potential groups of users were identified. The case study is used to demonstrate the potential of using the clinical simulation approach described in the paper.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
eHealth is extremely complicated due to the substantial complexity of organizations, work practices and physical environments in healthcare. These matters greatly influence the development and application of IT in the healthcare sector. Additionally, poor eHealth puts patient safety at risk. Up to 70% of patient safety incidents are estimated to be related or due to human factors [1]. The study of human factors is also called ergonomics and may be described as the “scientific discipline concerned with the understanding of interactions among human and other elements of a system, and the profession that applies theory, principles, data and methods to design in order to optimize human well-being and overall system performance” [3, p. 2]. The impact that information systems may have on clinical work practices is also difficult to assess by use of quantitative methods, necessitating application of qualitative approaches. Clinical simulation has gained acceptance during the last decade as a powerful qualitative method for evaluating clinical information systems and their impact on human factors and work flow [4,5]. A simulation or a simulator may be defined as a device “that attempts to re-create characteristics of the real world” [6, p. 52]. This may be real work actions or processes. Clinical simulation has been used for training clinical skills for more than 40years [7–10]. Also social-team-oriented and cognitive-individual-oriented aspects of clinical work practice may be trained by use of simulation [11–13]. During the last decade clinical simulation has gained a growing place in the design and evaluation of clinical information systems [4]. Simulation testing can be a beneficial method for evaluation of clinical information systems, as the tests can take place in controlled environments, without the risk of injuring real patients [14]. Simulation based evaluation may take place in all phases of the life cycle of a clinical information system [15], and may be used for a number of different purposes [5].Simulation-based evaluation can also be used for testing IT-systems in new contexts. This may involve consideration of performance optimization, safety engineering, modeling of natural or human systems, examining effects of alternative conditions and courses of actions when real systems are not accessible [4,16–18].Simulation may be conducted with [17] or with-out end-users, or as a hybrid, where simulations with end-users are combined with computer-based simulations [4]. This paper focuses on clinical simulation with real users enacting realistic clinical work scenarios in relation to development and evaluation of clinical information systems.Clinical simulation should cover the sociological aspects in the socio-technical interaction, and these kinds of tests are focused at the “human-in-the-loop” as opposed to computer-based simulations focused on the “computer-in-the-box” simulations [16]. Simulation-based evaluations lead to both technical changes in the IT system and organizational changes. The technical part of changes might be user-interface aspects as well as functional changes according to the support of clinical work flows [2,23,25]. The socio part of changes might be changes or optimization of work practice and implementation aspects such as training [26,27,39].In the Capital Region of Denmark clinical simulation has been applied since 2007 for evaluation of clinical information systems before they are implemented at the hospitals in the region. The clinical simulations take place at the IT Experimentarium (ITX) [17,19], which is located at the Danish Institute for Medical Simulation (DIMS) [20] at one of the major university hospitals in Copenhagen. The ITX-lab was established in 2007 with the purpose of improving the quality and optimization of clinical information systems. The results have been promising, and since 2011 it has been mandatory to conduct clinical simulation evaluations before new systems that affect clinical work practice are implemented. In the last 5years there have been more than 20 clinical simulation studies conducted in the ITX-lab, as seen in Table 1, to improve the development of activities and assist in the evaluation of clinical information systems [17].The simulation studies vary from design of computerized clinical support [21,22] and standardized nursing documentation [23] to evaluation of the impact of innovative technology [24,25]. This has included evaluation of various kinds of clinical information systems ranging from Computerized Prescription Order Entry (CPOE) for medications [26] and clinical documentation templates [27] to the evaluation of entire Electronic Health Records (EHR) [28].Usability may be defined as the “extent to which a system, product or service can be used by specified users to achieve specified goals with effectiveness, efficiency and satisfaction in a specified context of use” [29, p. 3]. When using simulations it is possible to assess the effect of an information system in different contexts as well as evaluating efficiency, satisfaction and effectiveness [30]. Efficiency may be defined as “resources expended in relation to the accuracy and completeness with which users achieve goals” [29, p. 3], effectiveness may be defined as “accuracy and completeness with which users achieve specified goals” [29, p. 3], and satisfaction may be defined as “freedom from discomfort and positive attitudes towards the use of the product” [29, p. 3]. Traditional usability testing methods such as heuristic inspection and usability testing tend to focus on technology assessing the user-technology interface taking the clinical context into account, whereas clinical simulation enables inclusion of additional aspects of the complex clinical work context [17]. Heuristic inspection focuses on the user interface and low fidelity usability testing focuses on the observation of representative user interacting with the technology while carrying out representative tasks. These methods may make a rigorous evaluation of the user interface and uncover usability challenges in the graphical user interface. They do not, however, include the full clinical context and the interdisciplinary aspects of everyday clinical work. Clinical simulation also focuses on work flow and organization looking into human–job, human–environment and human–organization interface technologies as opposed to usability testing and heuristic inspections looking mostly into human–technology interface technologies.The aim of this paper is to describe a methodological approach for planning, preparing and conducting clinical simulations. The method is a generalization gleaned from our experiences from more than 20 studies where clinical simulation has been used to support the design, evaluation and optimization of clinical information systems before launching them in real practice. In this paper one simulation study of a prototype for a planning and coordination module will be used as a running example [25]. In addition, some of the unintended consequences and benefits discovered during the evaluations will be discussed. In the end key issues and a methodological approach, in form of 10 steps to conduct a successful simulation will be highlighted.In this section of the paper a case study involving clinical practice guidelines will be presented and the case study will be used to illustrate our approach to clinical simulations. Clinical practice guidelines have been used more frequently in recent years [31]. Continuity of care programs, containing clinical practice guidelines aimed at planning and decision support for healthcare professionals, have been a focus of some of recent work [32]. The Capital Region of Denmark is exploring the potential benefits of an information system for supporting the planning and coordination of chronic patient across sectors [33]. Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) and Diabetes Mellitus Type 2 (DM2) were selected to establish a proof of concept project. At that time there were no information systems supporting coordination and planning across community nursing, general practitioners and hospitals in Denmark. The consequence was limited planning and reduced coordination across the three sectors followed by decreased quality and compliance with clinical practice guidelines. International experiences indicated that information systems can enhance compliance as well as quality of care so such systems began to be considered [34,35].The project called “Chronic 5” was launched and aimed to demonstrate the potential benefits of a Planning and Coordination Module (PCM) [36]. The project analyzed and specified the requirements for such a system involving clinician end-users, clinical managers, quality managers, IT-architects and health informatics experts. In the end a PCM prototype was built on the basis of the gathered requirements.The purpose of the PCM was to support the coordination across sectors, concerning status and planning for patients with COPD and DM2 according to clinical practice guidelines, and handling of derived activities and services. Fig. 1shows the connection between user groups and the PCM. The digital support was anticipated to be groundbreaking in Denmark, and was hoped to offer new opportunities for coherence and continuity in care activities. Moreover it was expected that the system would be able to ensure a higher compliance with the existing continuity programs and clinical practice guidelines.To realize the intended benefits of a PCM the usability of the system was essential [37]. The objective of the simulation study was to assess the potential benefits of a PCM for health care professionals involved in planning and coordination of patients with COPD and DM2, primarily focusing on effectiveness and usefulness of the PCM and user satisfaction. Prototypes may be evaluated in relation to accuracy and completeness with which users achieve specified goals, but evaluations of the resources spent in relation to this is difficult with prototypes and immature systems, and efficiency cannot be assessed. The clinical simulation approach is well suited for assessing user satisfaction in realistic contexts of use.Nine leading simulation questions have been proposed in the project discussed in this paper as a case study:1.Will the PCM increase clinical utility by allowing users to easily see recommended activities in the Continuity Programs?Will the digital plan for recommended activities lead to improved decisions?Will it be easy for users to adjust the course of disease for a chronic patient in a standardized program?Will the PCM increase clinical utility by allowing users to get an overview of the plan and activities in the course of disease for a patient?Will the PCM increase clinical utility by allowing users to see the activities and responsibilities in the course of disease?Will the PCM increase clinical utility by allowing users to see relevant diagnoses for co-morbidity and complications, relevant findings and referrals in a separate window?Will the PCM increase clinical utility by allowing users to use an assisted referral without having to re-enter data?Will the PCM increase clinical utility by allowing users to monitor compliance in the Continuity Programs?Will the PCM increase utility if patients can easily access data?The nine leading simulation questions were to be verified or falsified in order to demonstrate the usefulness of the system.Fig. 2shows an example of the user interface of the system. The column furthest to the left consists of activities and check-ups in relation to the continuity of care programs (i.e. measurement of blood pressure or weight and 1year check-up), the second column from the left shows status for the activities (i.e. planned or done) and the third and fourth column from the left shows starts and end dates for activities and check-ups. The columns to the right show what activities have taken place at a certain date. Every line is an activity or a check-up according to the clinical practice guidelines in the continuity program for a certain area of disease.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we described a method for conducting clinical simulations highlighting 10 steps to a successful simulation. The results from the simulation case study about the PCM indicate that HC professionals from primary care, community nursing and the hospitals will benefit from an implementation of such a module. The benefits concern primarily communication issues, planning and coordination, work practice enhancements, and quality management. Several organizational issues have to be addressed, including use of terminology and delegation of responsibilities before an information system as PCM can be implemented.Furthermore the results from this, and additional simulation studies, show that full scale simulation studies are a useful method for testing the feasibility of information systems especially when taking into account the resources spent. Not only were the leading simulation questions confirmed in this study but new unintended potential benefits were identified during the simulation test. Clinical simulation covers only part of the range of tests which should be conducted, and it should not be a substitute for a pilot implementation test in real settings. However it is possible to use clinical simulations to gain important knowledge concerning work practices, usability and human factors prior to widespread system release, and they can thereby contribute greatly to ensuring patient safety.