@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A chronic disease dietary consultation system using OWL-based ontologies and semantic rules

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We build a KBS with OWL-based ontologies to infer for CKD dietary consultation.The KBS can perform standard CKD problem solving inference of as the dietitians.We propose and implement a methodological framework for building OWL-based KBS.We demonstrate a PSM process: Problem, Tasks, Axioms, Inferred Properties, and Rules.The KBS is extensible to include CC for comprehensive chronic disease diet care.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Chronic kidney diseases,Dietary control,Problem solving,Ontology,Semantic rules,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Chronic diseases patients often require constant dietary control that involves complicated interaction among factors such as the illness stage, the patient’s physical condition, the patient’s activity level, the amount of food intake, and key nutrient restrictions. This study aims to integrate multiple knowledge sources for problem solving modeling and knowledge-based system (KBS) development. A chronic kidney disease dietary consultation system is constructed by using Web Ontology Language (OWL) and Semantic Web Rule Language (SWRL) to demonstrate how a KBS approach can achieve sound problem solving modeling and effective knowledge inference. For system evaluation, information from 84 case patients is used to evaluate the performance of the system in recommending appropriate food serving amounts from different food groups for balanced key nutrient ingestion. The results show that, excluding interference factors, the OWL-based KBS can achieve accurate problem solving reasoning while maintaining knowledge base shareability and extensibility.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Chronic diseases are persistent illnesses that often require careful dietary management to delay progression and maintain the patient’s quality of life. This study seeks to construct a general dietary consultation system for chronic disease patients. We chose chronic kidney disease (CKD) as the research domain for problem solving modeling and knowledge-based system (KBS) development. CKD patients suffer from deteriorating kidney functions and the inability to process certain nutrients and therefore require strict dietary control [1]. Traditional dietary consultation requires dietitians to perform a series of steps to integrate various knowledge sources before giving dietary advice. These steps include: (1) collecting patient physical profile and biomedical examination data as baseline information; (2) calculating patient’s clinical CKD stage, calorie requirements, key nutrient baselines, and suggested servings from each food group; (3) comparing the patient’s actual diet to the suggested servings for dietary adjustment. These general steps involve many knowledge sources: the patient’s conditions, illness progress, nutrition requirements, nutrient restrictions, and food nutrition composition. With such knowledge sources, the dietitian then considers the complicated logical relationships between the patient’s conditions and the various knowledge-intensive sources in order to provide dietary guidance.This study aims to construct a KBS for CKD dietary consultation. The emphasis of the KBS development is to create the problem solving mechanisms with inference capability. Knowledge models, when extensively analyzed and defined, are robust and extensive in knowledge inference. Also, new facts can be stored into existing knowledge model, and the existing logical relationships are inherited for reasoning with no additional data processing required. Therefore, KBSs are suitable for solving knowledge-intensive problems that require inference mechanisms. This study is a collaboration between dietitian practitioners and knowledge engineers. The first task in knowledge engineering is to analyze, break down, and reassemble knowledge content in order to extract the concepts and data required for modeling. The main ontological KBS design components employed in this study include: (1) using open data and domain knowledge to construct a domain ontology consisting of common constructs, concepts, and instances with super-subordinates and inheritance using the “is-a” relationship; (2) to enable problem solving, developing “has-a” properties to contain two types of objects where one object (often called the composited object) is a part or member of another object; and (3) defining the problem solving steps in the instance layer with semantic rules to infer implicit knowledge based on known facts. Although many ontologies are available, most ontologies are no more than taxonomies of classes. Without problem solving design, ontologies only function as repositories rather than KBSs. For example, the popular Web Ontology Language (OWL) data model (or schema) only provides limited elements (such as class, attribute, and individual) and simple relationships (“is-a” and “has-a”). It is therefore difficult to model the problem solving processes (such as reasoning mechanisms and business logics) based on the specifications. To construct a knowledge model that is deployable, coherent, and with the ability of interaction between roles and tasks would require substantial artificial intelligence efforts.The remainder of this article is arranged as follows: Section 2 is a literature review that includes background knowledge of CKD, diet and key nutrients, ontological engineering, and development issues of building OWL-based KBSs; Section 3 describes the research design and elaborates the problem analysis process through the construction of the domain ontology and the task ontology; Section 4 focuses on the development of semantic rules for problem solving inference; Section 5 is an experiment that uses information from 84 case patients to evaluate the effectiveness of the KBS; Section 6 includes the conclusion and discussions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
