@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimal marker placement in hadrontherapy: Intelligent optimization strategies with augmented Lagrangian pattern search

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
SAPS is an algorithm for markers optimization in IR optical tracking in hadrontherapy.Two optimization methods are integrated in SAPS: simulated annealing and pattern search.Prior knowledge, such as visibility and spatial constraints, is taken into account.SAPS has better performance than state of art methods, especially when a high number of markers is used.The SAPS algorithm is a valuable strategy for the patient set-up error reduction.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Radiotherapy,Marker placement,Simulated annealing,Pattern search,Constrained optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
PurposeIn high precision photon radiotherapy and in hadrontherapy, it is crucial to minimize the occurrence of geometrical deviations with respect to the treatment plan in each treatment session. To this end, point-based infrared (IR) optical tracking for patient set-up quality assessment is performed. Such tracking depends on external fiducial points placement. The main purpose of our work is to propose a new algorithm based on simulated annealing and augmented Lagrangian pattern search (SAPS), which is able to take into account prior knowledge, such as spatial constraints, during the optimization process.Material and methodsThe SAPS algorithm was tested on data related to head and neck and pelvic cancer patients, and that were fitted with external surface markers for IR optical tracking applied for patient set-up preliminary correction. The integrated algorithm was tested considering optimality measures obtained with Computed Tomography (CT) images (i.e. the ratio between the so-called target registration error and fiducial registration error, TRE/FRE) and assessing the marker spatial distribution. Comparison has been performed with randomly selected marker configuration and with the GETS algorithm (Genetic Evolutionary Taboo Search), also taking into account the presence of organs at risk.ResultsThe results obtained with SAPS highlight improvements with respect to the other approaches: (i) TRE/FRE ratio decreases; (ii) marker distribution satisfies both marker visibility and spatial constraints. We have also investigated how the TRE/FRE ratio is influenced by the number of markers, obtaining significant TRE/FRE reduction with respect to the random configurations, when a high number of markers is used.ConclusionsThe SAPS algorithm is a valuable strategy for fiducial configuration optimization in IR optical tracking applied for patient set-up error detection and correction in radiation therapy, showing that taking into account prior knowledge is valuable in this optimization process. Further work will be focused on the computational optimization of the SAPS algorithm toward fast point-of-care applications.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In high precision photon radiotherapy and in hadrontherapy (HT), the theoretical geometrical selectivity of the treatment (particularly enhanced in charged particle therapy) requires specific technological and methodological efforts to minimize the occurrence and size of geometrical deviations with respect to the treatment plan at each treatment session. In HT, in particular when active scanning beam delivery is applied, inter- and intra-fractional uncertainties may produce severe consequences in dose deposition patterns, thus frustrating highly conformal treatment plans designed to treat deep-seated solid tumor in critical sites.Beside in-room X-ray imaging and image registration methods, valuable tools for inter- and intra-fractional deviations mitigation consist of infrared (IR) optical tracking and point-based registration [1–4]. Surface tracking methods have also been used in radiotherapy [5–7] but in HT, patients are usually immobilized with a thermoplastic mask that prevents the tracking camera from visualizing the patient’s surface directly. In this case, surface-based methods are not suitable for the target registration and this is why we focused on point-based tracking.Point based IR optical tracking in radiation oncology is based on the real-time detection of the 3D position of a set of external markers placed on patient’s skin. Fast iterative estimation of the 6° of freedom rigid transformation is obtained by minimizing the measured marker displacements with respect to corresponding references coming from the treatment plan dataset obtained with Computed Tomography (CT): this technique allows the compensation of geometrical deviation mainly due to patient set-up errors. The root mean square (RMS) of the distance between corresponding markers, defined as fiducial registration error (FRE) [8] represents the metric for the estimation of the corrective transformation of patient position, under the usual assumption that FRE minimization implies minimizing geometrical deviations affecting the target of the treatment. The distance between the real target position and its corresponding reference position is defined as target registration error (TRE) [9]. TRE cannot be directly calculated, since it is not possible to know the real position of the target. However, statistical predictors can be applied to estimate TRE size as a function of residual FRE and of the geometric distribution of markers on patient surface. Under the hypothesis that optical tracking is efficacious in registering corresponding surface surrogates of the target achieving a minimum FRE, there is the need to identify, by means of appropriate optimization methods, the optimal marker configuration that minimizes the corresponding value of TRE. The final goal is to obtain a higher accuracy in target repositioning [10].Several authors have faced the issue of optimal marker placement by proposing different optimization methods.Liu et al. [11] described a floating optimization based on genetic algorithm and obtained a 50% TRE reduction with respect to a random marker configuration. Nevertheless, the methods turned out to be computational expensive, due to the large number of parameters to be optimized and to the continuity of the search space that slows down the execution of the algorithm. Moreover, marker visibility constraints imposed by the optical tracking system (OTS) were not taken into account.An interesting strategy to deal with complex optimization problems is to resort to methods that are able to incorporate prior knowledge in the search of the best solution, usually by adding a suitable set of constraints. This is typically possible by applying algorithms belonging the AI and to the statistical learning tradition, such as neural networks, genetic algorithms and simulation annealing [12,13].These strategies lie at the intersection of data analysis and knowledge-based system, an area that is known as “intelligent data analysis” or IDA [14–17]. IDA, since the late 90s, has produced several interesting studies and tools with a noteworthy number of applications in medicine and biology [18–21].In the area of optimal marker placement, an IDA approach has been implemented by Riboldi et al. [22], who combined genetic algorithm (GA) with Taboo search (TS) in a method called Genetic Evolutionary Taboo Search (GETS). They proposed a permutation encoding with the goal to characterize candidate solutions and make the search space discrete. Consequently, the execution time of the algorithm turned out to be reduced with respect to the approach described in [11]. Taboo search allowed the algorithm to reject marker configurations, which would have featured critical visibility for the OTS cameras and to exclude irradiation field areas from the surface available for marker placement. The results obtained on data coming from ten prostate patients showed an average 26.5% reduction of TRE (compared to a random marker configuration), against the 19.4% obtained when a quasi-Newton method was applied. Limitations of the GETS algorithm reside in the fact that possible overlap of markers, commonly occurring when a high marker number is used, is not taken into account. As another example of knowledge-driven approaches, in the frame of image-guided neurosurgery, Shamir et al. [23] described a collaborative framework that allows the surgeon to optimally plan marker location on routine diagnostic images before preoperative imaging, and to select during surgery the fiducial markers and the anatomical landmarks that minimize the target registration error (TRE). The optimal fiducial marker configuration selection can be performed on diagnostic image dataset interactively, by monitoring target selection on a visual Estimated TRE (E-TRE) map, which is automatically updated when the surgeon adds and deletes candidate markers and targets. Data coming from five patients were used and results showed a reduction of the average TRE from 4.7mm to 3.2mm.As a whole, methods previously described exhibit limitations related to a long execution time [11] incomplete constraints about marker placement [22] and the requirement of invasive procedures for the selection of additional anatomical landmarks [23].The current spread of the clinical centers dedicated to the hadrontherapy and the increasing availability of this therapy worldwide demands new approaches, more accurate and repeatable than the previous ones, with the aim of identifying a standard procedure that ensures the highest precision in tumor localization.In this paper, we present a novel IDA algorithm that answers to these issues by integrating two different optimization methods: simulated annealing (SA) and pattern search (PS). We have named the algorithm “SAPS”. Simulated annealing was selected for its capability of avoiding the entrapment in local minima; pattern search provides reduction of execution time required by SA to converge to a global minimum. Some knowledge-based features of the GETS algorithm [22] have been included in the SAPS algorithm: marker visibility constraints, a priori definition of the surface allowed for marker placement and permutation encoding of candidate solutions. In addition, we have introduced specific constraints that prevent markers overlapping. Table 1summarizes how the prior knowledge has been converted in specific constraints for the marker placement.SAPS has been tested on data collected on thirteen head-and-neck and pelvic cancer patients who were treated with proton therapy. Results show that constrained optimization allows us to improve TRE minimization with respect to random fiducial configurations and to those obtained by the GETS algorithm, especially when the number of markers is high. The SAPS algorithm lends itself as a valuable and clinically applicable alternative to improve the accuracy of target localization when IR optical tracking is applied.The SAPS algorithm was tested on a set of clinical data collected at the National Centre of Oncological Hadrontherapy (CNAO Foundation) in Pavia, Italy [24]. The patient cohort included 6 head and neck and 7 pelvic cancer patients, who were fitted with external surface markers for IR optical tracking applied for patient set-up preliminary correction and continuous monitoring during beam delivery. The number of markers used for each patient is reported in Table 2. Target registration error was calculated for the Planning Target Volume (PTV): PTV is a geometrical concept which takes into consideration the net effect of all the possible geometrical variations and inaccuracies, and it ensures that the prescribed dose is actually absorbed in the clinical target volume (CTV) [25]. We adopt the PTV because it represents the standard model used in treatment planning evaluation and the recommended tool to shape dose distribution. Moreover, in hadrontherapy differences between PTV and CTV dimensions are negligible and they do not influence the calculation of the TRE.Particle beam treatment planning system (Syngo PT Planning, version VB10, Siemens, Germany) was applied on 3mm thickness CT slices for anatomical structures delineation (target, organs at risk, skin) and treatment planning. Contours data were saved as DICOM-RT structures.Within Matlab (MATLAB R2012a, Mathworks, Inc., Natick, MA, USA), contours were extracted from the DICOM file and specific anatomical landmarks (center of the PTV and OARs) were selected to be included in the procedure for marker configuration optimization. The patient skin surface model, available in the DICOM-RT structure file, was used as the set of spatial position potentially available for marker placement. The model is described by the matrixS∈RNp×3such thatST={p1,…,pNp}where the vector pjcontains the coordinates of the jth point with j=1,...,Npand Npis the total number of points.From the surface model S, the irradiation fields were removed, as incompatible with marker placement. By knowing the geometry of the optical tracking system set-up in the treatment room, surface areas on which markers would have been invisible to the OTS cameras were identified and excluded from the set of available marker positions.The expression of the expected value of TRE, obtained by West et al. [26] is given by:(1)TRE2(r)=FRE2Nm-21+13∑k=13dk2fk2where Nm>2 is the number of fiducial points (or fiducials), r is the vector of target position coordinates measured with respect to the centroid of fiducials, fkis the RMS distance of the fiducials from the kth principal axis of the fiducials configuration and dkis the distance of the target from the same axis. The objective function of the iterative optimization procedure was the TRE/FRE ratio, which depends only on the number of fiducials and on their spatial distribution with respect to the target [9,10,26]. According to Riboldi et al. [22], the assumption is that for a given FRE, which results from the intrinsic accuracy in marker 3D localization performed by the OTS, TRE can be minimized if a marker configuration with the minimum TRE/FRE ratio is applied.The SAPS algorithm combines simulated annealing (SA) and pattern search (PS), described in Sections 2.5 and 2.6, respectively. SA initializes the search for the best configuration of the markers and PS refines the results provided by SA. This choice has been made to avoid the entrapment of the optimization process in local minima and, at the same time, to grant convergence in a relatively short time to the global minimum.Optimal marker configurations found by the SAPS algorithm were compared to the random configuration that was applied for the treatment. The differences provided by the optimal marker configuration were quantified in terms of the TRE/FRE ratio and spatial distribution of markers, also when SAPS and GETS performance were compared. Repeated simulations provided information concerning the repeatability of the optimal solution and the execution time of both algorithms. Moreover, we performed a sensitivity analysis of the algorithm performance as a function of the number of available markers and the inclusion of additional targets (typically the OARs). SAPS algorithm implementation and statistical analysis were performed in Matlab.Optimal marker placement is a complex combinatorial optimization problem: such problems can be solved by SA, a heuristic algorithm that refers to a stochastic procedure grounded on the analogy with the physical process of heating a material and then slowly lowering the temperature to decrease defects and to minimize the system energy [27,28]. In our case, candidate solutions of SA are the possible configurations of surface markers. As implemented in the GETS algorithm [22] candidate solutions are defined by means of permutation encoding: at step i the configuration of Nmpoints is defined in the following equation(2)xi=IDi,1,IDi,2,………,IDi,Nmwhere each element IDi,jrepresents the ordinal position of the corresponding marker j in the list of points encompassing the skin surface model S. Points of S are ordered in the frontal plane so that consecutive IDs in the list correspond to contiguous points in the model. By adopting this encoding, the search space of solutions becomes discrete and the complexity of the algorithm is significantly reduced.The initial guess x0 is randomly chosen. Then, with fixed temperature (T), the algorithm makes a random step in the neighborhood of the current value of the solution (xi) and a solution xnewis generated by sampling from a multivariate normal probability density distribution centered in xi:(3)xnew=round[mvnrnd(xi,Σ)]The matrix Σ is a function of T: as the temperature decreases, the algorithm reduces the search space width in order to converge to a minimum. The covariance terms, which represent the correlation between markers, are defined according to the constraint that the markers must not overlap.A crucial aspect of our approach stands in its capability of including constraints, which can be generated on the basis of the knowledge available on the specific problem.1.Each configuration must satisfy the marker visibility constraint, as implemented in the GETS algorithm [22]: configurations exhibiting an inter-marker distance lower than a given threshold are rejected, in order to avoid that multiple markers are recognized as a single marker by the OTS. Inter-marker distance is measured on the camera image planes (three cameras are installed in the treatment room), by backprojecting the 3D markers position (estimated at each iteration) through the known OTS camera calibration parameters. The inter-marker distance threshold was fixed to 3 pixels in order to ensure the correct recognition of each marker in all the possible experimental configurations. The constraint is given by:2.In the SAPS algorithm, we also introduced a marker spatial constraint, defined as:This constraint is necessary to avoid marker overlap on the patient’s mask. It requires that the minimum distance between the centroids of two neighboring markers is equal to 10mm in each dimension, since the radius of each marker is 5mm.The value of the objective function f(xnew),where f is the TRE/FRE, ratio is compared with f(xi).The algorithm accepts the new iterate according to the rule of Metropolis, with an acceptance probability given by:(6)P0=1ifΔf<0exp-ΔfTifΔf⩾0where Δf=f(xnew)−f(xi). Let us observe that xnewis accepted also when f increases, but with a probability P0 depending on T: this feature guarantees that the algorithm is able to explore more widely the space of possible solutions and consequently avoids being trapped in local minima.T represents the control parameter in SA since it affects the region width of solutions investigated by the algorithm. We set the initial temperature T0 equal to 150°C and we define T as a variable with an oscillating behavior in the initial phase with the final goal to explore a wider region in lower time.After the initial phase, temperature decreases gradually as the algorithm proceeds, according to a cooling schedule: the reannealing interval (Lk) is set equal to 250 points and T decreases according to the following formula(7)Tk=Tk-1·αkwhere k is the kth iteration and 1>α>0 is a parameter that, together with Lk,determines the rate of T decrease.The adopted stopping criterion is based on the maximum number of iterations, which is set equal to 200 (the so called stall iteration limit): this strategy guarantees a reasonable computational time. Actually the algorithm could be stopped before the final optimal solution has been reached [28,29].With the final goal to reduce the computational time, a pattern search strategy was implemented: starting from the solutions found by the simulated annealing, we refined the search in the neighborhood of these solutions, and then we achieved both a further reduction of the TRE/FRE ratio and a lower global execution time.Pattern search (PS) is a direct search method, firstly proposed by Lewis and Torczon [30], for nonlinearly constrained optimization as adaption of a bound constrained augmented Lagrangian method, as proposed by Conn et al. [31]. We will refer to it as augmented Lagrangian pattern search (ALPS).Unlike optimization methods that use information about the gradient and higher derivatives to search for an optimal point, a direct search algorithm scans a set of points belonging to a grid (mesh) built around the current point and looks for a point where the objective function is lower than the current value of the function. The mesh is built starting from a set of vectors {vk} (pattern) that define the search directions, and from a scalar (mesh size), which defines the distance between points. The pattern can be defined according to two different strategies: in the first one, the pattern is made of Nm+1 vectors corresponding to Nmbasis vectors and the vector given by the opposite of the sum of the previous ones; the second strategy considers 2 Nmvectors properly defined. In our implementation, the first approach was selected. At each step the algorithm builds the mesh (Mi) centered around the current point (xi) according to:(8)Mi={xi±Δivk,k=1,…,Nm+1}and polls the points of the mesh by evaluating the objective function in those points. Δiis the mesh size, which depends at each step upon the poll, according to the following equation:(9)Δi+1=τΔiwhere the initial value of τ is set to 1. If the algorithm finds a point in the mesh where the objective function decreases with respect to the previous step, the poll is called successful and that point becomes the center of the new mesh: in this case, the algorithm sets τ>1 and continues to explore the search space in the new mesh. Otherwise, the poll is called unsuccessful: the current point does not change and the search space must be narrowed, i.e. the algorithm sets τ<1 (actually, it is likely that the algorithm is near the global optimum).The algorithm proceeds in this way until the stop criterion is met i.e. when the mesh size Δ becomes smaller than mesh tolerance δ[30,32,33]. In the approach we adopted, δ is defined as(TolMesh/Nm)2where the default value of TolMesh is 1e−6.The ALPS algorithm, in addition to the classical PS, allows one to deal with the problem of nonlinear constrained optimization: it replaces the explicit knowledge of derivatives with a stopping criterion based on the pattern size in a way that preserves the convergence properties of the augmented Lagrangian method [30]. In general, the mt nonlinear constraints are the following:(10)ck(x)⩽0,k=1,…,m(11)ceqk(x)=0,k=m+1,…,mtwhere c(x) represents m inequality constraints and ceq(x) represents m equality constraints. In the frame of this approach, we formulate the minimization problem by resorting to strategy well-known in statistical learning, i.e. by combining the objective function, the log-barrier function (for inequality constraints, converted into equality constraints by means of slack variables) and the quadratic penalty function (for equality constraints). The augmented Lagrangian is then defined as(12)Φ(x,λ,s,ρ)=f(x)-∑k=1mλksklog(sk-ck(x))+∑k=m+1mtλkceqk(x)+ρ2∑k=m+1mtceqk(x)2where the componentsλk⩾0of the vector λ are the Lagrange multiplier estimates; the elementssk⩾0of the vector s are shifts (slack variables); ρ>0 is the penalty parameter.The ALPS algorithm minimizes a sequence of subproblems defined as(13)minΦ(j)(x,λj,sj,ρj),j=1,2…Each subproblem has a fixed value of λ, s, and ρ and it is solved providing a solution with a required accuracy and satisfying the constraints. Then the Lagrangian multipliers and the penalty parameter are properly updated [30,31,34,35]. Let us note that in our case, we considered only inequality constraints (the visibility and spatial constraints defined in Section 2.5): such constraints make the algorithm rather time-consuming.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The SAPS algorithm lends itself as a valuable strategy for fiducial configuration optimization in IR optical tracking applied for patient set-up error detection and correction in radiation therapy. Moreover, target registration error can be reduced to approximately half of the residual fiducial registration error when marker configuration is optimized, thus granting consistently submillimetric target localization in presence of FRE around 1mm, which is an acceptable number including instrumental intrinsic accuracy and marker manual repositioning accuracy. Of course, we are aware of the fact that this conclusion is valid only if one assumes that external fiducials represent reliable surrogate of the target. Any inter- and intra-fractional relative motion of internal target with respect to surface fiducials, widely documented in literature [37–39] cannot be interpreted by any optimization algorithm of external fiducials. Nevertheless, we believe that in the frame of a combined use of in-room imaging and IR optical tracking, external fiducials optimization may lead to improvement in quality control of irradiation geometry, thus representing a good practice in radiotherapy clinical routine.Future improvements concern the SAPS algorithm optimization leading to a point-of-care utilization, for providing health practitioners with an immediate feedback describing TRE/FRE values as a function of changes in marker positioning. Thanks to our approach, it is possible to envisage the automated definition of the SAPS constraints on the basis of the anatomical features of the specific patient. Computational optimization can be obtained by parallelizing the algorithm according to the techniques described in [40]. In particular, asynchronous SA would ensure significant improvements, by exploiting processors that exchange information asynchronously to bring the system toward a global minimum, thus leading to a decision support system that can be used in clinical practice.One of the limitations of our study is the small patient cohort that includes only 13 patients. Let us point out that patients treated in the CNAO center are few since hadrontherapy is a specific technique applied only for those cancers where conventional radiotherapy does not provide significant advantages, such as for radio-resistant tumors and for those located close to organs at risk. However, the spread of cases in terms of geometry of thermoplastic masks is sufficient to draw general conclusions about the capability of our approach to improve the state of art, i.e. semi-random placements of markers, as well as previously presented approaches. Anyway, we plan to widen the cohort in the future work in order to further validate our results.