@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A method for detecting and characterizing outbreaks of infectious disease from clinical reports

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We describe a Bayesian method for detecting and characterizing infectious disease outbreaks.The method takes as input clinical reports from an electronic medical record system.The method outputs the probability of an outbreak and estimates of the outbreak’s characteristics.We applied the method to the detection of influenza outbreaks from emergency department reports.Results from simulated and real influenza outbreaks support that the method is promising.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Infectious disease,Outbreak detection,Outbreak characterization,Clinical reports,Bayesian modeling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Outbreaks of infectious disease can pose a significant threat to human health. Thus, detecting and characterizing outbreaks quickly and accurately remains an important problem. This paper describes a Bayesian framework that links clinical diagnosis of individuals in a population to epidemiological modeling of disease outbreaks in the population. Computer-based diagnosis of individuals who seek healthcare is used to guide the search for epidemiological models of population disease that explain the pattern of diagnoses well. We applied this framework to develop a system that detects influenza outbreaks from emergency department (ED) reports. The system diagnoses influenza in individuals probabilistically from evidence in ED reports that are extracted using natural language processing. These diagnoses guide the search for epidemiological models of influenza that explain the pattern of diagnoses well. Those epidemiological models with a high posterior probability determine the most likely outbreaks of specific diseases; the models are also used to characterize properties of an outbreak, such as its expected peak day and estimated size. We evaluated the method using both simulated data and data from a real influenza outbreak. The results provide support that the approach can detect and characterize outbreaks early and well enough to be valuable. We describe several extensions to the approach that appear promising.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
There remains a significant need for computational methods that can rapidly and accurately detect and characterize new outbreaks of disease. In a cover letter for the July 2012 “National Strategy for Biosurveillance” report, President Obama wrote: As we saw during the H1N1 influenza pandemic of 2009, decision makers—from the president to local officials—need accurate and timely information in order to develop the effective responses that save lives[1]. The report itself calls for “situational awareness that informs decision making” and innovative methods to “forecast that which we cannot yet prove so that timely decisions can be made to save lives and reduce impact.” The report echoes a call made by Ferguson in 2006 in Nature for similar forecasting capabilities [2].The current paper describes a Bayesian method for detecting and characterizing infectious disease outbreaks. The method is part of an overall framework for probabilistic disease surveillance that we have developed [3], which seeks to improve situational awareness and forecasting of the future course of epidemics. As depicted in Fig. 1, the framework supports disease surveillance end-to-end, from patient data to outbreak detection and characterization. Moreover, since detection and characterization are probabilistic, they can serve as input to a decision-theoretic decision-support system that aids public-health decision making about disease-control interventions, as we describe in [3].In the approach, a case detection system (CDS) obtains patient data (evidence) from electronic medical records (EMRs) [4]. The patient data include symptoms and signs extracted by a natural language processing (NLP) system from text reports. CDS uses data about the patient and probabilistic diagnostic knowledge in the form of Bayesian networks [5] to infer a probability distribution over the diseases that a patient may have. For a given patient-case j, the result of this inference is expressed as likelihoods of the patient’s data Ej, both with and without an outbreak disease dx. In a recently reported study, CDS achieved an area under the ROC curve of 0.75 (95% CI: 0.69 to 0.82) in identifying influenza cases from findings in ED reports [6].A second component of the system, which is the focus of this paper, is the outbreak detection and characterization system (ODS). ODS receives from CDS the likelihoods of monitored diseases for all patients over time. ODS searches a space of possible epidemic models that fit the likelihoods well, and it computes the probability of each model, denoted as P(epidemic modeli|dataall). The distribution over these epidemic models can be used to detect, characterize, and predict the future course of disease outbreaks. The output of ODS may be used to inform decisions about disease control interventions.For each day, ODS also computes a prior probability that a patient seen on that day will have disease dx. To do so, ODS uses its estimate of (1) the extent of dx in the population, and (2) the fraction of people in the population with dx who will seek medical care. These ODS-derived patient priors can be used by CDS to compute the posterior probability that patient j has disease dx, that is, P(dx|dataj). The probability that a patient has a disease can inform clinical decisions about treatment and testing for that patient, public health case finding, and public health disease reporting.We previously described the overall disease surveillance system architecture shown in Fig. 1, including a high-level description of ODS [3]. The purpose of the current paper is to provide a detailed mathematical description of the current ODS model and inference methodology, as well as an initial evaluation of it using data from a real outbreak and from simulated disease outbreaks. The paper focuses on epidemiologic applications of ODS, which includes all the information flowing from left to right that are shown with solid arrows in Fig. 1.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper describes a novel Bayesian method called ODS for linking epidemiological modeling and patient diagnosis to perform disease outbreak detection and characterization. The method was applied to develop a system for detecting and characterizing influenza in a population from ED free-text reports. A SEIR model was used to model influenza. A Bayesian belief network was used to develop an influenza diagnostic system, which takes as evidence findings that are extracted from ED reports using NLP methods. An evaluation was reported using simulated influenza data and a real outbreak of influenza in the Pittsburgh region in 2009. The results support the approach as promising in being able to detect outbreaks well before the peak outbreak date, characterize when the peak will occur, and estimate the total size of the outbreak in the case of simulated outbreaks. The general ODS framework is flexible and supports many directions for future extensions.