@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
NCBI disease corpus: A resource for disease name recognition and concept normalization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
NCBI disease corpus is built as a gold-standard resource for disease recognition.793 PubMed abstracts are annotated with disease mentions and concepts (MeSH/OMIM).14 Annotators produced high consistency level and inter-annotator agreement.Normalization benchmark results demonstrate the utility of the corpus.The corpus is publicly available to the community.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Disease name recognition,Named entity recognition,Disease name normalization,Corpus annotation,Disease name corpus,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Information encoded in natural language in biomedical literature publications is only useful if efficient and reliable ways of accessing and analyzing that information are available. Natural language processing and text mining tools are therefore essential for extracting valuable information, however, the development of powerful, highly effective tools to automatically detect central biomedical concepts such as diseases is conditional on the availability of annotated corpora.This paper presents the disease name and concept annotations of the NCBI disease corpus, a collection of 793 PubMed abstracts fully annotated at the mention and concept level to serve as a research resource for the biomedical natural language processing community. Each PubMed abstract was manually annotated by two annotators with disease mentions and their corresponding concepts in Medical Subject Headings (MeSH®) or Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM®). Manual curation was performed using PubTator, which allowed the use of pre-annotations as a pre-step to manual annotations. Fourteen annotators were randomly paired and differing annotations were discussed for reaching a consensus in two annotation phases. In this setting, a high inter-annotator agreement was observed. Finally, all results were checked against annotations of the rest of the corpus to assure corpus-wide consistency.The public release of the NCBI disease corpus contains 6892 disease mentions, which are mapped to 790 unique disease concepts. Of these, 88% link to a MeSH identifier, while the rest contain an OMIM identifier. We were able to link 91% of the mentions to a single disease concept, while the rest are described as a combination of concepts. In order to help researchers use the corpus to design and test disease identification methods, we have prepared the corpus as training, testing and development sets. To demonstrate its utility, we conducted a benchmarking experiment where we compared three different knowledge-based disease normalization methods with a best performance in F-measure of 63.7%. These results show that the NCBI disease corpus has the potential to significantly improve the state-of-the-art in disease name recognition and normalization research, by providing a high-quality gold standard thus enabling the development of machine-learning based approaches for such tasks.The NCBI disease corpus, guidelines and other associated resources are available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/CBBresearch/Dogan/DISEASE/.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This work presents the NCBI disease corpus, a richly annotated corpus with disease names and their corresponding MeSH and/or OMIM identifiers. This resource contains 793 PubMed abstracts, and lists 6892 disease mentions, which are linked to 790 unique concepts, thus providing an important foundation for improving the text-mining research on disease named entity recognition. Our experiments demonstrated the feasibility of using the corpus as the basis for training learning models in both named entity identification and concept recognition, and we expect these results to serve as benchmark for other future methods. To facilitate future benchmarking experiments, the corpus is also divided into training, development and testing sets.The NCBI disease corpus contains annotations for all sentences in a PubMed document (title and abstract), an important aspect in facilitating development of complex information retrieval tasks that connect diseases to treatments, causes or other types of information. This corpus provides annotation of disease mentions in four major categories: Specific Disease (i.e., clear-cell renal cell carcinoma), Disease Class (i.e., cystic kidney diseases), Composite mentions (i.e., prostatic, pancreas, skin, and lung cancer), and Modifier (i.e., hereditary breast cancer families) [21]. Disease normalization annotation guidelines were designed with the goal of allowing flexible matching to MeSH (diseases branch) and OMIM concepts, while retaining the true meaning of the specific mention. The current corpus was reviewed several times by several annotators and describes a refined scale of the annotation categories. The NCBI corpus can act as a basis for the development of more accurate machine learning systems for disease name recognition and normalization, as well as boost research into other areas of biomedical knowledge discovery pertaining to diseases.NCBI disease corpus is publically available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/CBBresearch/Dogan/DISEASE/. The data file, including all annotations of 793 PubMed abstracts will be available in XML, plain text and in the PubTator-compatible format. The disease corpus website also includes detailed description of the annotation process and the annotation guidelines.Conceived and designed the experiments: RID ZL. Performed the experiments: RID, RL. Analyzed the data: RID. Wrote the paper: RID, RL, ZL. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.