@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Semi-supervised clinical text classification with Laplacian SVMs: An application to cancer case management

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Semi-supervised learning can exploit the vast amounts of unlabeled data stored in EMRs.Semi-supervised Laplacian SVMs outperform supervised SVMs.These methods can be used to identify patients at risk for developing cancer from free text radiology reports.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Semi-supervised learning,Support vector machine,Graph Laplacian,Natural language processing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveTo compare linear and Laplacian SVMs on a clinical text classification task; to evaluate the effect of unlabeled training data on Laplacian SVM performance.BackgroundThe development of machine-learning based clinical text classifiers requires the creation of labeled training data, obtained via manual review by clinicians. Due to the effort and expense involved in labeling data, training data sets in the clinical domain are of limited size. In contrast, electronic medical record (EMR) systems contain hundreds of thousands of unlabeled notes that are not used by supervised machine learning approaches. Semi-supervised learning algorithms use both labeled and unlabeled data to train classifiers, and can outperform their supervised counterparts.MethodsWe trained support vector machines (SVMs) and Laplacian SVMs on a training reference standard of 820 abdominal CT, MRI, and ultrasound reports labeled for the presence of potentially malignant liver lesions that require follow up (positive class prevalence 77%). The Laplacian SVM used 19,845 randomly sampled unlabeled notes in addition to the training reference standard. We evaluated SVMs and Laplacian SVMs on a test set of 520 labeled reports.ResultsThe Laplacian SVM trained on labeled and unlabeled radiology reports significantly outperformed supervised SVMs (Macro-F1 0.773 vs. 0.741, Sensitivity 0.943 vs. 0.911, Positive Predictive value 0.877 vs. 0.883). Performance improved with the number of labeled and unlabeled notes used to train the Laplacian SVM (pearson’s ρ=0.529 for correlation between number of unlabeled notes and macro-F1 score). These results suggest that practical semi-supervised methods such as the Laplacian SVM can leverage the large, unlabeled corpora that reside within EMRs to improve clinical text classification.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The widespread adoption of electronic medical records (EMR) has led to the creation of large repositories of structured and unstructured clinical data. Leveraging this data has the potential to transform biomedical research and the delivery of healthcare. Automated text classification techniques extract structured information from narrative clinical text, empowering novel secondary uses of unstructured data [1,2]. Supervised machine learning based text classification approaches use a labeled training corpus for classifier development. Acquisition of suitably large training corpora for machine learning techniques may be prohibitively expensive, as this requires manual review of notes by trained clinicians. Because of the cost involved in assembling training corpora, they are typically limited in size (between one hundred and several thousand instances). Furthermore, labeled training corpora represent a tiny fraction of the clinical text corpus: typical EMRs contain between tens of thousands and millions of unlabeled notes. Semi-supervised machine learning algorithms use both labeled and unlabeled data to build classifiers, and may outperform their supervised counterparts. Semi-supervised algorithms have been shown to outperform their supervised counterparts on general-language text classification tasks [3,4]. The goal of this study was to compare supervised and semi-supervised learning algorithms for the classification of clinical text.The application motivating this study is a cancer case management system. Delays in cancer diagnosis and treatment can result from a failure to follow up abnormal radiological findings [5]. At the Veterans Affairs Connecticut Healthcare System (VACHS), we implemented case management processes and supporting informatics tools to help ensure the timely and appropriate diagnostic workup of patients with suspected cancer. We recently deployed a natural language processing (NLP) system that applies manually defined rules to diagnostic imaging reports to identify patients with potentially malignant lung or liver lesions for follow-up [6]. In this application of supervised and semi-supervised machine learning, we sought to train classifiers that improve upon rule-based methods for the identification of potentially malignant liver lesions from diagnostic imaging reports, and to develop a methodology for the training of machine-learning based classifiers to identify potentially malignant lesions in other organ systems. In this study we focus on the Laplacian SVM, a scalable semi-supervised learning algorithm that has been shown to outperform supervised SVMs and other semi-supervised algorithms on a variety of text classification tasks [3].This paper is organized as follows: in the background section, we provide an overview of semi-supervised machine learning and an overview of the cancer case management application motivating this study. In the methods section, we describe the construction of our training corpus and our evaluation method. In the results and discussion section, we present the results of different algorithms, and discuss the relevance and practicality of various approaches for clinical text classification in general, and our application in particular.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
