@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Comparison of UMLS terminologies to identify risk of heart disease using clinical notes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Our submission was the best rule-based system at the 2014 i2b2 challenge.Combining UMLS concepts and regular expressions is effective.Terminology-restricted version of our system evaluates a specific terminology.Performance comparison conclude that the Consumer Health Vocabulary was most useful.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Natural language processing,Electronic health records,Rule-based system,Unified Medical Language System,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The second track of the 2014 i2b2 challenge asked participants to automatically identify risk factors for heart disease among diabetic patients using natural language processing techniques for clinical notes. This paper describes a rule-based system developed using a combination of regular expressions, concepts from the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS), and freely-available resources from the community. With a performance (F1=90.7) that is significantly higher than the median (F1=87.20) and close to the top performing system (F1=92.8), it was the best rule-based system of all the submissions in the challenge. We also used this system to evaluate the utility of different terminologies in the UMLS towards the challenge task. Of the 155 terminologies in the UMLS, 129 (76.78%) have no representation in the corpus. The Consumer Health Vocabulary had very good coverage of relevant concepts and was the most useful terminology for the challenge task. While segmenting notes into sections and lists has a significant impact on the performance, identifying negations and experiencer of the medical event results in negligible gain.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Electronic medical record-based phenotyping has been a topic of great interest in the biomedical informatics community. The annual i2b2 natural language processing (NLP) challenges play a key role in the advancement of NLP for this task. These challenges also serve as a unique source of publicly-available de-identified clinical data, overcoming traditional barriers of privacy and data access that prevent comparison of different NLP approaches. The task for the second track of the 2014 i2b2/UTHealth challenge [1] asked participants to automatically identify risk factors for heart disease among diabetic patients by applying NLP techniques on longitudinally-ordered cropus of clinical notes. Participants were provided with exhaustive annotation guidelines to extract these risk factors and the temporal information associated with them. The risk factors were divided into six categories (referred to as tags, in the annotation guidelines): medications, hypertension, diabetes, coronary artery disease (CAD), hyperlipidemia, family history, smoking status and obesity. There have been i2b2 challenges in NLP based on the identification of most of these tags individually in the past [2–4]. The second track of the 2014 challenge brings these together for one comprehensive task.We submitted a novel rule-based system as an entry for this track of the challenge. This system leverages freely-available resources such as the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) [5], MetaMap (version 2013AB) [6], and ConText [7]. The performance of our system is largely dependent on UMLS concepts extracted from the challenge corpus of clinical notes. We used our system to evaluate the utility of different terminologies for the task of identifying risk factors for heart disease among diabetic patients. To achieve this goal, we restricted the performance of our system to concepts from specific terminologies. The performance of our terminology-restricted systems was used to measure the utility of a terminology for the task. The paper is organized as follows: The corpus used in this work is described in Section 2. A brief review of rule-based approaches using a combination of regular expressions and UMLS concepts in previous i2b2 challenges is discussed in Section 3. We describe different components of the system in Section 4 and the results in Section 5. Sections 6 and 7 compare terminologies based on concept coverage and contribution to performance. We present ablation tests analyzing the impact of different components of our system in Section 8 and a brief error analysis in Section 9. This is followed by a discussion of our results and the conclusion.The corpus provided for the challenge consists of longitudinally ordered clinical notes from three cohorts of diabetic patients: (1) Patients who have a coronary artery disease (CAD) in all the notes, (2) Patients who never had CAD, and (3) Patients who develop CAD over the course of their notes. There are three to five notes corresponding to different times of care for each patient record. These notes belong to different categories of clinical narratives such as discharge summaries, admission notes, discharge notes and letters of communication between physicians. The corpus was divided into a training set of 790 notes (178 patients) and a testing set of 514 notes (118 patients). The participants were supplied with the training data in two stages: 521 notes (119 patients) at the beginning of the challenge, followed by 269 notes (59 patients) a month later, to generate their NLP systems. The unlabeled test set was made available at the end of two months for two days to generate and submit the system outputs.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
