@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The clinician in the driver’s seat: Part 2 – Intelligent uses of space in a drag/drop user-composable electronic health record

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
3 Main interaction strategies: gather and view, dynamic stage, purposive and organized.Left->right pattern of orienting materials, data, action items.Workers use spatial arrangement to facilitate workflow, cognition, fit to task.Users purposive in design for communication with others.Users are engaged, aware of problems, enthusiastic.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
User-configurable EHR,User-composable EHR,Human–computer interaction,Electronic health record,Electronic medical record,MedWISE,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
User-composable approaches provide clinicians with the control to design and assemble information elements on screen via drag/drop. They hold considerable promise for enhancing the electronic-health-records (EHRs) user experience. We previously described this novel approach to EHR design and our illustrative system, MedWISE. The purpose of this paper is to describe clinician users’ intelligent uses of space during completion of real patient case studies in a laboratory setting using MedWISE.Thirteen clinicians at a quaternary academic medical center used the system to review four real patient cases. We analyzed clinician utterances, behaviors, screen layouts (i.e., interface designs), and their perceptions associated with completing patient case studies.Clinicians effectively used the system to review all cases. Two coding schemata pertaining to human–computer interaction and diagnostic reasoning were used to analyze the data. Users adopted three main interaction strategies: rapidly gathering items on screen and reviewing (‘opportunistic selection’ approach); creating highly structured screens (‘structured’ approach); and interacting with small groups of items in sequence as their case review progressed (‘dynamic stage’ approach). They also used spatial arrangement in ways predicted by theory and research on workplace spatial arrangement. This includes assignment of screen regions for particular purposes (24% of spatial codes), juxtaposition to facilitate calculation or other cognitive tasks (‘epistemic action’), and grouping elements with common meanings or relevance to the diagnostic facets of the case (20.3%). A left-to-right progression of orienting materials, data, and action items or reflection space was a commonly observed pattern. Widget selection was based on user assessment of what information was useful or relevant.We developed and tested an illustrative system that gives clinicians greater control of the EHR, and demonstrated its feasibility for case review by typical clinicians. Producing the simplifying inventions, such as user-composable platforms that shift control to the user, may serve to promote productive EHR use and enhance its value as an instrument of patient care.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Designing electronic health records (EHRs) that meet the complex needs of clinical work is a challenge. We introduced an innovative model using a modular user-composable EHR platform for addressing this challenge by giving clinician users the ability to design interfaces by drag/drop [1], as one of many new functionalities. This is based on the idea that clinician control of EHR design has the advantage of reflecting clinicians’ needs, domain knowledge, and ways of thinking. The ability to create, select and arrange information elements spatially, as well as mark, collapse and expand widgets are novel functions designed to meet specific and contextual information needs and support expression of individual preferences. Essentially, the modular user-composable EHR platform enables the user to assemble the system from building blocks, and rearrange these during clinical tasks. While drag/drop and draggable ‘widget’ or window functionality has been present for some time in other systems, use of this functionality in EHRs by clinicians is novel. Our review of the literature and an environmental scan did not reveal another EHR platform which allows the end-user to compose the complete layout; others allow only partial control, such as creation of order sets.The theoretical rationale for creating such a system, architectural design, and literature review of related systems [1–3] and results pertaining to accuracy/errors, efficiency, and user perceptions [4–6] have been previously reported. The purpose of this paper is to describe clinician users’ intelligent uses of space in a user-composable EHR platform (MedWISE) [2,7] during completion of real patient case studies in a laboratory setting.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We proposed a new modular, user-composable platform approach to EHRs, which can be adapted to variable or rapidly changing needs. We developed and tested an illustrative system that gives clinicians greater control of the EHR, and demonstrated its feasibility for case review by typical clinicians. However, the potential broad and varied uses of modular composable systems can only be realized with more in-depth research including controlled deployments. User control and system flexibility provide new options for developing EHRs as real tools for thinking, with greater match-to-task requirements. Producing simplifying inventions, such as user-composable platforms that shift control to the user, may serve to promote productive EHR use and enhance its value as an instrument of patient care.