@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automated patient-specific classification of long-term Electroencephalography

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Novel EEG classification system for patient-specific classification of long-term EEG.It aims to maximize the sensitivity rate with the minimum human feedback.CNBC-E strives for accurate detection of all seizure frames in a generic way.The adopted “Divide and Conquer” ability can truly take benefit of a large feature collection.The average sensitivity and specificity rates achieved are 89.01% and 94.71%, respectively.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
EEG classification,Seizure event detection,Evolutionary classifiers,Morphological filtering,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a novel systematic approach for patient-specific classification of long-term Electroencephalography (EEG). The goal is to extract the seizure sections with a high accuracy to ease the Neurologist’s burden of inspecting such long-term EEG data. We aim to achieve this using the minimum feedback from the Neurologist. To accomplish this, we use the majority of the state-of-the-art features proposed in this domain for evolving a collective network of binary classifiers (CNBC) using multi-dimensional particle swarm optimization (MD PSO). Multiple CNBCs are then used to form a CNBC ensemble (CNBC-E), which aggregates epileptic seizure frames from the classification map of each CNBC in order to maximize the sensitivity rate. Finally, a morphological filter forms the final epileptic segments while filtering out the outliers in the form of classification noise. The proposed system is fully generic, which does not require any a priori information about the patient such as the list of relevant EEG channels. The results of the classification experiments, which are performed over the benchmark CHB-MIT scalp long-term EEG database show that the proposed system can achieve all the aforementioned objectives and exhibits a significantly superior performance compared to several other state-of-the-art methods. Using a limited training dataset that is formed by less than 2min of seizure and 24min of non-seizure data on the average taken from the early 25% section of the EEG record of each patient, the proposed system establishes an average sensitivity rate above 89% along with an average specificity rate above 93% over the test set.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Epilepsy is a chronic disease of the central nervous system that predisposes patients to experiencing recurrent seizures which are abnormal brain activities and stem from many diseases. Seizures are not a disease themselves; rather a transient symptom of synchronous neuronal activity in the brain [1]. In contrast to methods such as Magnetic Resonance Imaging [2] and three-dimensional accelerometer [2], using Electroencephalography (EEG) is a more common method for long-term epileptic patient monitoring. EEG is a multi-channel recording of the electrical activity generated by neurons in the brain. The so-called scalp EEG, henceforth referred as EEG, is measured by non-invasive electrodes arrayed on an individual’s head. One percent of population in the world is suffering from epilepsy and 80% of its burden is in the developing countries [2], and this shows the importance of seizure detection and epilepsy diagnosis.In recent years, several feature-based epileptic seizure detection studies using EEG signals have been done. They can be divided into two categories: patient specific and non-patient specific methods. EEG presents significant complications and serious drawbacks to the classification of the epileptic seizures due to the physical properties of the EEG signal, which is extremely sensitive to the activity of the neurons on the brain surface; however, the neurons in the deeper sections of the brain have only limited or no effect on the signal. The major problem in EEG that complicates the accurate classification of epileptic activities the most is the significant variations of the EEG signals for seizure and non-seizure states across the individuals [3,4]. The opposite is also true, i.e., the signal properties of one patient’s seizure may closely resemble the characteristics of a normal EEG signal gathered from the same or a different patient [4,5]. This is obviously why the limited success achieved by those non-patient specific methods. Furthermore, EEG is susceptible to contamination of physiologic (e.g. involuntary body or organ movements such as eye blinks, heart beats and muscle contractions) and non-physiologic noise (e.g. the sway of electrodes, the coupling of AC harmonics of the machinery, etc.) [4]. As a result the features, too, are contaminated by a certain level of noise, which degrades their characterization power and the noise level can also vary among patients and/or the EEG devices used. Even for a patient-specific approach it is a well-known fact that the performance of EEG classification strongly depends on the characterization power of the features extracted from the EEG data and on the design of the classifier (classification model or network structure and its parameters) [4]. Due to the massive size and duration of the long-term EEG signal, the majority of the patient specific approaches were proposed on a single or few manually selected features in order to avoid the “Curse of Dimensionality” phenomenon, e.g., [4,12,15]. Unfortunately, the aforementioned variations in the EEG signal and in the level of noise contamination over the features make the characterization power of any feature significantly varying from patient to patient, meaning that no feature can guarantee a certain level of detection and/or classification accuracy for all patients. Fig. 1demonstrates this fact for two features, coefficient of variation using wavelet Daubiches 2 and delta Short-Time Fourier Transform (STFT), commonly used for EEG classification where both of them have a clear discrimination of the seizure section with the highest peak on one recording (the plots on the top; left belonging to same patient and right to another) but fails to do so for the other (the plots at the bottom). The latter issue, the design of the classifier, is also critical since all patient-specific methods usually rely on a single and static (fixed configuration) classifier, which cannot scale well to such massive magnitude of data. Such a priori fixations on the features and the classifier configuration may further cause an unpredictable level of unreliability for any patient-specific method and this is perhaps why the most of those methods use the majority of the EEG dataset for training the classifier to achieve an acceptable level of sensitivity on seizure (onset) detection. This is obviously cumbersome or not even feasible at all for long-term EEG records and in fact, a true “patient-specific” approach should, therefore, search for the best possible feature set and the optimal classifier configuration for the patient’s EEG signal characteristics.In order to address such deficiencies and drawbacks, in this paper we propose a generic and robust system for patient-specific classification of long-term EEG. The proposed system, first of all, is not only a seizure onset detector; rather attempts to classify the entire seizure section using an ensemble of the collective network of binary classifiers (CNBC), each of which encapsulates binary classifiers (BCs) that are optimized for a particular feature set and EEG signal from an individual channel. The recently proposed multi-dimensional Particle Swarm Optimization (MD-PSO) [9] is used as the primary evolution technique and evolutionary feed-forward Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) [10,11] are used as the BCs; however, any other classifier type can also be used within the CNBC topology. Our main objective is to maximize the detection accuracy especially for the seizure sections (i.e. sensitivity) with an acceptable level of false positives (i.e. specificity) whilst using the minimum feedback from the Neurologist. To accomplish this, we shall use the major state-of-the-art features proposed in this domain and for each patient the underlying network topology will learn to weight the features according to their ability to discriminate epileptic seizures. The proposed system is fully generic, which does not require any a priori information about the patient such as the list of relevant EEG channels. In addition to the learning the most discriminative features, the proposed system will also learn the most informative EEG channels during the training phase and favor their outputs accordingly during the classification phase. Moreover, in order to maximize the sensitivity rate, the output of each CNBC is then used to aggregate epileptic seizure frames and a morphological filter forms the final epileptic segments while filtering out the outliers within the non-seizure segments. At the end, the CNBC ensemble (CNBC-E), once evolved using the Neurologist’s labels over an earlier EEG record of a patient, can then be used to classify automatically the long-term EEG signal of that patient.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the related work in this area. Section 3 outlines the EEG dataset used in this study and provides a detailed description of the feature extraction methodology for the proposed patient-specific EEG classification system. Section 4 briefly presents the recently proposed evolutionary search technique, The MD PSO and its application over the evolutionary feed-forward ANNs. In Section 5, the proposed classifier network topology, the CNBC, and the overall systematic approach for the EEG classification using CNBC ensembles (CNBC-E) are described in detail. The classification results and comparative performance evaluations using the benchmark CHB-MIT scalp long-term EEG dataset [8] are given in Section 4. Finally, Section 7 concludes the paper and suggests topics for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we proposed a novel patient-specific classifier for long-term EEG signals. The classifier topology of this system, CNBC-E, is not only a seizure onset detector; rather attempts to accurately classify all seizure frames in the seizure sections in a generic way. Another major difference from the majority of the methods proposed in this domain is that it aims to maximize the sensitivity rate using the minimum feedback from the Neurologist. To mimic this, we only used about 2min of seizure and 24min non-seizure labeled data per patient on the average to evolve the system and this training dataset is formed from the Neurologist’s labels of the early 25% section of the patient’s EEG record. To maximize the learning ability from such a limited training dataset and to learn as much patient’s EEG pattern characteristics as possible, the CNBC-E uses the majority of the state-of-the-art features proposed in this domain. This is indeed the opposite path followed by many methods in the literature based on a single and static classifier so as to avoid the well-known “Curse of Dimensionality” phenomenon. CNBC-E, on the other hand, can truly take benefit of such a large feature collection due to its “Divide and Conquer” philosophy that is the basis of its topology. Furthermore, rather than relying on sub-optimum static classifiers fixed in advance; each binary classifier within all CNBCs is individually evolved to find out the optimal ANN configuration for the problem (i.e., for the patient, the EEG channel and the feature) in hand. In this way, each CNBC can “learn” and weight accordingly which features and channels are the most relevant and discriminative for the patient and the CNBC-E can aggregate the new seizure frames detected in each CNBC whilst filtering the classification noise as much as possible.The results of the classification experiments, which are performed over the benchmark CHB-MIT scalp long-term EEG database show that the proposed system can achieve all the aforementioned objectives. Using such a limited training dataset, the proposed system established an average sensitivity rate of 89.01% along with an average specificity rate of 94.71% over the test set. The comparative evaluations against the competing methods indicate the superiority of the proposed system which achieves 13% higher average sensitivity rate over the best competitor. Another observation worth mentioning is that for more than half of the patients, the proposed system achieved the sensitivity rates above 90% and for only 3 patients (Patients 4, 17 and 23) out of 21 it is below 80%. A detailed investigation reveals that for these patients the seizure has a highly non-stationary nature. Therefore, the training set formed from the labels of the early 25% EEG recording do not have the entire seizure and non-seizure characteristics that can be learned. It is obvious that for those patients, further feedback from the Neurologist is needed for the misclassified seizure sections so as to incrementally evolve the CNBC-E system and thus to improve the overall classification performance. This will be the topic for our future research.