@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Text classification for assisting moderators in online health communities

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a method for improving the quality of online health communities.We present a solution to reduce the workload of the online community moderators.We explore low-cost text classification methods to a new social media domain.We uncover social, ethical, and legal issues in creating a gold standard.We discuss using precision versus recall in supporting the community moderators.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Online health communities,Consumer health,Human–computer interaction,Text mining,Health information seeking,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectivesPatients increasingly visit online health communities to get help on managing health. The large scale of these online communities makes it impossible for the moderators to engage in all conversations; yet, some conversations need their expertise. Our work explores low-cost text classification methods to this new domain of determining whether a thread in an online health forum needs moderators’ help.MethodsWe employed a binary classifier on WebMD’s online diabetes community data. To train the classifier, we considered three feature types: (1) word unigram, (2) sentiment analysis features, and (3) thread length. We applied feature selection methods based on χ2 statistics and under sampling to account for unbalanced data. We then performed a qualitative error analysis to investigate the appropriateness of the gold standard.ResultsUsing sentiment analysis features, feature selection methods, and balanced training data increased the AUC value up to 0.75 and the F1-score up to 0.54 compared to the baseline of using word unigrams with no feature selection methods on unbalanced data (0.65 AUC and 0.40 F1-score). The error analysis uncovered additional reasons for why moderators respond to patients’ posts.DiscussionWe showed how feature selection methods and balanced training data can improve the overall classification performance. We present implications of weighing precision versus recall for assisting moderators of online health communities. Our error analysis uncovered social, legal, and ethical issues around addressing community members’ needs. We also note challenges in producing a gold standard, and discuss potential solutions for addressing these challenges.ConclusionSocial media environments provide popular venues in which patients gain health-related information. Our work contributes to understanding scalable solutions for providing moderators’ expertise in these large-scale, social media environments.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In clinic-sponsored, face-to-face support groups, moderators bring in clinical expertise when appropriate, such as when patients need clarification of clinical concepts or medical consultation. In these settings, patients not only benefit from peer-patients’ knowledge but also from the clinical knowledge of the moderators.Although online health communities facilitate large-scale information exchange among peer-patients, few communities employ moderators [1]. For those few communities who do provide moderators, time and resource limitations make it challenging for the moderators to answer the hundreds of posts uploaded each day.Not all posts in online community forums require moderators’ response. Some posts discuss everyday strategies, such as recipes for healthier diet, which could be supported purely by patients’ responses. However, other posts asking for medical consultation or clarification of medical concepts need moderators’ help. Moderators redirect patients to their health care providers, point to related health professionals’ blog articles, or provide medical information. Given the large amount of information exchanged online, the challenge lies in helping moderators efficiently select the posts that need their expertise.In this paper, we present our exploration on low-cost text classification methods—namely the approach not requiring manual annotation for the training data and using readily available features—for prioritizing posts that need moderators’ help. Our method can help moderators of online health communities to more efficiently prioritize which patients’ posts they need to respond to, which will also help fulfill patients’ information needs. We built a binary classifier and explored various feature types, feature selection methods, and under sampling of the training data for performance optimization. We then performed an error analysis on a subset of the data to find ways to achieve a better gold standard and to further understand the remaining social and technical challenges.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
