@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Simulation of an adaptive artificial neural network for power system security enhancement including control action

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper presents a developed method to find the significant control action.The developed model is able to deal with any scale of system operation between PL min to PL max.Automatic data generation for AANN and data selection and extraction methods are developed.The algorithm designed for automating the procedure of system security assessment and control.This improvement was confirmed by the results obtained to ensure system security.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Steady-state security assessment,Artificial neural network,Back-propagation,Remedial action,Contingency analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a new method for enhancing power system security, including a remedial action, using an artificial neural network (ANN) technique. The deregulation of electricity markets is still an essential requirement of modern power systems, which require the operation of an independent system driven by economic considerations. Power flow and contingency analyses usually take a few seconds to suggest a control action. Such delay could result in issues that affect system security. This study aims to find a significant control action that alleviates the bus voltage violation of a power system and to develop an automatic data knowledge generation method for the adaptive ANN. The developed method is proved to be a steady-state security assessment tool for supplying possible control actions to mitigate an insecure situation resulting from credible contingency. The proposed algorithm is successfully tested on the IEEE 9-bus and 39-bus test systems. A comparison of the results of the proposed algorithm with those of other conventional methods reveals that an ANN can accurately and instantaneously provide the required amounts of generation re-dispatch and load shedding in megawatts.set to a random number in the beginning of the training processset to 1 to speed up the convergence processdetermines the shape of the function=1number of contingencies

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The goal of security analysis, which involves monitoring, assessment, and control, in a power system operation is to determine if the system is currently operating normally within the system constraints. Therefore, including the variables for the safe operation and contingency operation of a system for at least a single component failure, such as the loss of a transmission line or transformer, is common practice. In addition, the use of artificial intelligent systems has become a major aspect in the implementation of new technologies involved in a large interconnected electrical power plan. In a normal operation, cases of thermal line flow and bus voltage limit violation increase. Researchers and engineers focus their efforts on enhancing the reliability and security of power systems. Such systems must be capable of dealing with emergencies, such as line outage and generation failure. In fact, line overloading occurs because of the loss of a transmission line or load increases in the network, which often cause line limit violations and bus voltage instability. In these situations, the operator must intervene with an optimal corrective or preventive control action to restore the secure operation of the system. The effective approaches to alleviating line overloading are generator rescheduling and load shedding.Under contingency events, the system should operate within the security criteria of the thermal line flow, frequency, phase angle, and bus voltage. The problem formulation of line overload alleviation [1], generation rescheduling, and load shedding provides a proper sequence of control actions to improve system security. The work in [2] was the first to demonstrate the ability of a supervised neural network to help the operator in making a decision. The proposed method considers generator shedding as a control action when a fault occurs to improve power system stability. Several studies investigating artificial neural network (ANN) techniques have been used in many power system applications, such as in static and dynamic security assessment, load flow, contingency analysis, and fault diagnoses [3–10]. The developments in computer programming have heightened the efficiency of the ANN and provided other opportunities for it to be used in power systems control [11].The adaptive neural network using the delta rule was implemented to estimate the signal parameters of voltage or current waveform contaminated by noise [12]. All weights showed good adaptability, but the learning termination factors, which are important in ending the training process, were not considered. Another drawback of the work developed in Ref. [12] is that the data normalization process was not finalized, in which case the designed neural network would not work effectively with another system. Yoo and Pimmely [13] applied a self-supervised adaptive neural network algorithm in a power system for short-term load forecasting. They used the temperature and load records of one year for training. The designed neural network was adaptable and accurate with 0.90% error for hour-ahead forecasting and 1.92% error for day-ahead forecasting. However, the data knowledge generation process and data processing were not considered before the training of the neural network. Therefore, the testing results and power system representation could have been affected. In addition, there work did not include a contingency analysis that could help avoid weight overlapping during system disturbance and high errors in predicted value.A group of researchers [14] designed control learning laws with a projection algorithm and used these laws to guarantee the bound of neural network weight vector. They also introduced a command filter to emulate the mechanical or operating limitations of actuators for Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO) nonlinear systems with unknown control coefficient matrices. The proposed method was able to eliminate the analytic computations of the virtual control law derivatives via the command filter in [15,16]. However, the robust adaptive neural network was based on the filter design that considered back stepping control to stabilize the closed-loop adaptive system and reduce the error convergence by updating the designed parameters.In 2011, Liu et al. [17] proposed an adaptive approach for a class of uncertain MIMO nonlinear systems in a discrete time form. In this approach, the desired controller values are approximated by using a small number of adjustable parameters for the neural network. The developed robust adaptive neural network guarantees the security of the power system with small error convergence by adjusting the neural network weights based on new changes in the power system parameters.Recent studies focused on the use of an Adaptive Artificial Neural Network (AANN) for time varying systems used in forecasting applications [18,19]. The developed algorithms prove the ability of the ANN to be used specifically in both static and real-time series predictions with high robustness value. ANN implementation is made difficult by increasing the number of inputs/outputs. Such difficulty considered as a main motivation to develop a means to control the whole system with robust data knowledge generation and control action. This study was initiated in 2010 [20] based on simple system with high level of success but it was not efficient with bigger power system, therefore, a new algorithm has been recommended in this paper for any system.In the present work, a smart system for a control action scheme using AANN is developed. The new system is entirely dependent on system experience and uses historical and contingency analysis data for training. This feature will allow the neural network to solve the nonlinear changes in the system and achieve optimal amounts of generation re-dispatch and load shedding. The results obtained are compared against a steady-state security assessment method using conventional corrective action analysis programs. Simulations are performed using the Power System Simulator for Engineering (PSS™E) for data knowledge generation. A simulation code is written using the Python language for the AANN learning and testing process as well as for the contingency analysis.Superior data quality is essential for the neural network approach. Therefore, training data should be correctly generated, and the neural network should possess good data generation capability. In this regard, several points are considered for the proposed enhanced neural network:1.The automatic procedure guarantees good data quality because a wide variety of system operating points and contingencies are demonstrated for each load level.The accuracy and applicability of the proposed approach is based on the use of feature selection and extraction methods in the data generation process. The selection of AANN model inputs and outputs is based on a statistical feature selection.To verify the ability of the robust AANN to detect a situation and provide an appropriate action, training data are generated from the minimum load up to the maximum load levels with constant increments.Optimization methods are used to estimate the parameters of the AANN. The Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) equation demonstrates several advantages, particularly in terms of improving neural network sensitivity when an error reaches its minimum with a reduced number of iterations.These factors enhance the performance of the neural network application, making it more robust than the standard back-propagation method.The automatic data knowledge generation is based on operating point variation, which in turn is based on load profile, production, contingency, and operational practices. Most contingency effects can be reduced by applying a preventive/corrective control action. Conversely, the output or target data (generator re-dispatch and load shedding amounts) are automatically generated for each contingency to be included with a sample of the neural network. Generation rescheduling and load shedding are considered solutions for increasing system reliability and security.One important part of power system operation is contingency analysis. Contingency analysis allows the designer and operator to examine the system under different operational conditions within the system criteria. Eventually, the design engineers are required to maintain a secure system operation within the system criteria based on the test results. The operator must be able to deal with most contingency events, such as line outage and generation trip. The operator must act quickly before the occurrence of cascading failures, which may cause a system blackout or the separation of the system into islands. In the proposed algorithm, contingency analysis data are used with support from the historical data of the system operation. Hence, the AANN is able to provide the suggested control action under different contingency cases. These parameters are based on a power system model that is used to study outage events and make an automatic decision instead of alerting the operators about overloads or voltage limit violations.Contingency events correspond to changes in network admittances. Hence, network reconfiguration can be estimated using the sensitivities of voltages, reactive outputs, and thermal flows with respect to admittance changes [21]. As shown in Fig. 1, data are generated for each subsystem separately for a number of n areas (depending on the power system division designed by the utility). Security assessment summary reports are provided for each contingency case at each load level, and the user can access these data as insecure cases. Contingency analysis is used in security assessment. Thus, a report on bus voltage or line overloading violations can be presented at this stage. These reports help to enhance system design by diagnosing the weak parts of the system. However, contingency analysis depends on the power system model, which is used to study the outage effects and alert the operator of any overloads or voltage violations.The load level profile is selected based on the system load profile, as shown in Fig. 2(the profile usually functions from a minimum operating point of 60% up to a maximum operating point of 100% using a 5% increment in load scale distributed across all loads). This feature helps the neural network gain the ability to determine its output over various levels of system operating points. However, a small (large) increment in load level results in the generation of many (few) cases or patterns. A non-slack generator must first be rescaled before running the load flow solution to ensure that no mismatch tolerance exists in the system. The non-slack generator is used to check for the largest initial active or reactive power mismatch. In other words, no extra generation exists when the load is increased or reduced. The maximum machine active power output (PMAX) and the minimum machine active power output (PMIN) are entered in megawatts and set as power limits in the working case.After corrective action is taken and stored in the data knowledge, the running case is saved for recording purposes. This procedure is repeated until the maximum load level at which the system can operate without suffering any blackout case is reached.The application of the ANN in power systems is prevalent in many aspects. Neural network architectures have been classified into several types based on their learning mechanisms [22]. Back-propagation is a neural network learning algorithm that is more instructive than other methods because of the parameters that can reduce the mean error and increase model performance, a feature that is highly advantageous for power system security. In the current study, a developed feed forward back-propagation algorithm is used to solve the power control (generation dispatch/load shedding) problem caused by changes in contingency aspects. Fig. 2 shows the pseudocode for the developed adaptive neural network algorithm. Two conditions are applied in this approach. First, a new system is selected. Therefore, the weights are randomly initialized, and a number of input/output neurons are created based on the number of power system buses, generators, and loads. Second, the training process is based on an existing power system that has been selected in first step. Moreover, when there are any changes or updates in the current system, the new data are adapted to the data knowledge considering the saved weights from pervious training. The training process is terminated if the number of maximum epochs is achieved (2*104) or if the RMSE reaches the selected performance goal.Back-propagation method is similar to the perceptron network algorithm with more than one layer as shown in Fig. 3. There are three layers, the first one is connected to the inputs followed by the second layer which contains the activation function and the third layer is the output of the network.The back-propagation learning technique is an extension of the delta rule as shown in Eqs. (9) and (10), which give the ability to adapt the weights when new inputs are introduced. Finally, the error is calculated during every single iteration and the learning procedure repeated for all patterns (p=1, 2, ..., N) or epochs ([Input, Output]) until the specified threshold value of error is reached or until a total iteration is reached. However, the back-propagation learning algorithm has a highly mathematical foundation.The ANN input data that are considered are the thermal line flows and bus voltage for all buses in the power system, which are calculated using a steady-state Newton–Raphson load flow method. The training and testing data sets were generated using the PSS™E software.Due to the rescheduling of generators, there are some negative values for generator re-dispatch. Thus, the vector data xiis normalized for the inputs and targets are required to put all the data in the range −1 to 1 to prevent any volatility in the weights. For the same reason, choosing the activation function for the hidden and output nodes is based on the input and output data ranges. In addition, there is no specified number of neurons in the hidden layer. An optimization method is used for this matter [23]. The input layer has the same number of neurons as the number of inputs. The output layer has the same number of neurons as the number of outputs [24,25].During the training process the inputs are applied against their output targets and propagate through the network layers and then calculate the sum of the errors. The inputs are then applied into the network through the first weights between the inputs and the hidden layer into the activation function as given in Eq. (1). The output is calculated in the first layer by Eq. (2):(1)netk=∑wkiOi+bk(2)neto=∑wokOkThe activation function of the hidden neurons and output neurons are a hyperbolic tangent function as given by Eqs. (3) and (4):(3)Ok=f(netk)=eλnetk−e−λnetkeλnetk+e−λnetk(4)Oo=f(neto)=eλneto−e−λnetoeλneto+e−λnetoThe error is back-propagated until one of the stopping factors is obtained. Two error signals are calculated for weights adaption. First, the error signal between the output and hidden layer. Second, the error signal between the hidden layer and the input layer. These error signals are calculated based on the following equations:(5)δo=(to−Oo)(1−Oo)Oo(6)δk=Ok(1−Ok)∑δowokThe new weights are adopted using Eqs. (7) and (8), respectively:(7)Δwok(t+1)=ηδoOk+αΔwok(t)(8)Δwki(t+1)=ηδkOi+αΔwki(t)Thus, the changes of weights in the network are calculated as follows:(9)wok(t+1)=wok(t)+Δwok(t+1)(10)wki(t+1)=wki(t)+Δwki(t+1)The threshold error (RMSE) is calculated based on Eq. (11) for finding the training error. Finally, the error is back-propagated if it does not reach one of the stopping factors.(11)RMSE=Esum=1N∑p=1N(top−Oop)2A simple 9-bus test system is used for demonstrating the ability of applying the proposed algorithm as a power system security assessment tool. The system is shown in Fig. 4and consists of 9 buses, six transmission lines, three synchronous machines, three transformers and three loads.The developed AANN tool involved two stages of simulation. In the first stage, the simulation work was conducted on the security assessment tool using the PSS™E software to collect the data for training/testing over many different contingencies for the IEEE 9-bus test system. In the second stage, the robust AANN was integrated into the security assessment tool to alleviate the computational time of estimating the optimal amount of preventive/corrective action in power system. The input parameters must be normalized. In the training process, the inputs and outputs are supplied to each pattern from the steady-state load flow. Moreover, each contingency is taken into the input pattern against a control action that should be considered as the target in the same pattern. The generator buses are controlled by an Automatic Voltage Regulator (AVR) which keeps those buses stable with almost the same voltage when a contingency occurs. Therefore, the generator buses are not considered in the neural network inputs. A total of six bus voltages and six power flow lines were selected as input to the ANN. The feature selection of the data generation process has been chosen to start from a 60% load level up to the maximum load level of 100% with a 5% load scale increment. Nevertheless, the control action is based on the security assessment at each load level and this will give the neural network the flexibility to deal with any contingency within the load level variety (60–100%).This system has 12 inputs derived from the load flow including the bus voltage and percentage of the thermal line flow loading rate. A total number of 117 cases with different security levels were used to create the training data. The AANN was then tested using different testing data sets that had not been used in the training process. The testing data set was divided into three groups:•Light load: the base case is within the range 60–70% of total system load.Medium load: the base case is within the range 70–80% of total system load.Heavy load: the base case is within the range 80% up to the maximum system load.A total of 13 contingency cases including the base case (BC) were tested for the different load profiles to check the AANN accuracy and system performance at different operating points. Table 1shows these three different operating points. The simulation of various operating scenarios was computed using the PSS™E software. A variation of operational conditions was arranged by the adjustment of variables such as generators and loads. After the training process, a remedial action was obtained for 12 single contingencies for each load scenario. In this system, there are three generators and three loads that can respond to a single contingency, thus there are six outputs for the neural network.An optimization process using different network architectures was trained and tested to determine the optimal topology for the AANN tool. The training performance (minimum percentage of RMSE) and accuracy (testing correlation coefficient) were used to evaluate the studies. The network configuration did not reach the threshold error value, while the second stopping factor was achieved using 20,000 epochs.The performance of the RMSE formula attained a value of 0.7564%. The momentum factor and learning rate were 0.1 and 0.01 respectively. By using a low learning rate the learning process might be slow but this increases the network performance which is most concern aspect in this study. An optimized number of 18 neurons were used in the hidden layer. The numbers of input and output neurons were automatically fixed to 12 and 6 neurons respectively based on the inputs and outputs of the network.The training/testing results presented in Table 2clearly show that the network with 18 neurons in the hidden layer significantly improved the training process with an acceptable RMSE, while the testing accuracy was maintained at close to 100% in most generators and loads. Strong evidence of the AANN was found, which means that the AANN has the ability to apply proper control actions to bring the system to a secure operation.The training process is performed by using the RMSE equation to back-propagate the error in the next epoch. In other words, once the entire pattern has been trained, the total error is calculated and begins to back-propagate. The results were compared with the simulation output for generation re-dispatch and load shedding for the three testing load scenarios as shown in Figs. 5–10.The results of the AANN outputs show that the neural network has the ability to deal with different operating points under various contingencies (N−1). From Table 2 it can be observed that the testing correlation factor was decreased to 0.97649 in the third generator (about 2.351% percentage of error) when the system was heavily loaded (99% of total system load). This was due to the reactance of the generators and loads in order to prevent a cascading condition or system blackout.The BC was considered in the testing data to evaluate the efficiency of the neural network at the beginning of the testing process.For the BC, the AANN gave an almost zero value which is a true value since a secure condition does not require any type of remedial action. By comparing the two results from the PSS™E and the AANN, it can be seen that the error difference is constantly small for all tested data. In addition, the AANN takes about 0.001s to determine the corrective action values for all generators and loads where the PSS™E process time is 0.453s. The AANN computation time during the training process is not very important against the error value because it is a one-time running simulation only, and the weights are adapted and saved when new data is added.The effectiveness of the corrective actions for the three tested load scenarios is shown in Figs. 11–16. It is clear that at contingency 1 (transformer between line 1 and 4), 4 (line 4–5 outage), 5 (line 4–9 outage) and 8 (line 7–8 outage), generation rescheduling is required as well as load shedding in order to reduce the effect of the contingency and bring the system back to a secure operating state. The voltage security margin as shown in the figures is between maximum voltage of 1.05 p.u. and minimum voltage of 0.95 p.u.The generator buses 1, 2 and 3 are not affected by the contingency because they are controlled by the generator itself under an automatic voltage regulator controller. First, contingencies 1, 4 and 5 are the most risky contingencies since they require a high generation re-dispatch and load shedding as shown in Figs. 5 and 6 (note that the contingency number 1 represents the base case).In the second load scenario a high risk assessment is observed on the buses as shown in Fig. 13. For this reason, more generation is required to be re-dispatched and more loads to be shed to bring these buses back into the secure region (the minimum is 0.95 and maximum is 1.05) as shown in Figs. 7 and 8. The voltage violation reduced for most of the buses after control action as shown in Fig. 14.It is clear from Fig. 16 that a secure operation has been increased for the entire set of contingencies (see Fig. 15) when the required values of generation re-dispatch and load shedding were estimated by the AANN. Furthermore, the bus voltages were out of their security limits in some contingencies and thus a preventive/corrective action was estimated by the AANN tool to reduce the risk on these buses.This system is well known as a 10-machine New-England Power System. The first generator represents the aggregation of a large number of generators. The system, shown in Fig. 17, consists of ten generators connected at buses 30–39 in which bus 31 is a slack bus. All generators are equipped with identical Automatic Voltage Regulator (AVR) Over Excitation Limiters (OEL). Both the AVR and OEL regulate the voltage at the synchronous generator terminal by performing both regulating and excitation system stabilizing functions [26].The system is divided into three areas based on the number of buses, generators and loads. Furthermore, there are three AANN handling this system and each area has different neural network architecture. This division brings some advantages to the power systems such as each area has a different neural network, which gives the ability for individual system control. Since the control action corresponds to generation and load amounts, the cost will be reduced as the contingency is controlled from within the area. The division of the system will reduce the shortcoming of the neural network when many inputs and outputs are applied. Therefore, this can enhance the network accuracy.The network architecture including the input, the hidden and the output layers is represented by Table 3. The inputs were bus voltages and thermal flow percentages inclusive of transformers and generator buses. For all the studies conducted, the weights and thresholds were initialized at random values set between −0.5 and +0.5. The number of hidden neurons was optimized for best AANN performance. The momentum factor and learning rate were 0.1 and 0.01 respectively.The contingency analysis for each area was determined by the PSS™E simulation to generate the training/testing data. However, the data knowledge of the training data contained various contingencies starting from the minimum operating point (60% of total system load) up to the maximum load with a 5% increment as given in Table 4.The total numbers of contingencies are given in Table 4 for each data set. The data knowledge of the testing data was generated at different load levels as given in Table 5. Each area was tested using three load level scenarios to check the AANN accuracy at different operating points. For example: the testing data set of the first area consisted of 21 contingencies including the BC at three load levels, which gives 63 cases.In order to verify the AANN performance corresponding to different security margins, three testing load scenarios for each area were demonstrated as given in Table 5.Based on the training error statistics, there were 48 neurons in the hidden layer architecture for the training as well as the testing process. A sample of the test result for the enhanced back-propagation algorithm using the selected AANN architecture is shown in Fig. 18. Furthermore, Fig. 18 shows the difference between the desired and estimated output for the test data expressed in MW. The maximum AANN testing error was 44.37MW when the training RMSE was 1.402874% as shown in Fig. 18(a) light load, which had a minimum correlation coefficient of 0.989 as given in Table 6, generator number 37.The difference between the maximum error and based generation was in the neighborhood of 988.2MW (given in Table 5, Area 1 and light load) indicating a better accuracy of more than 95.51% in the AANN test results. On the other hand, the lowest correlation coefficient of 0.981565% at load 26 was achieved but the difference between the desired output and the computed output was 34.96MW. The difference between the maximum error and based generation was in the neighborhood of 1597.364MW (given in Table 5, Area 1 with heavy load), which indicated a better accuracy of more than 97.811% in the AANN test results. Therefore, the AANN accuracy was computed based on the difference between the desired output and the computed output.Accomplishing further statistical tests revealed that the AANN was also significantly able to compute the optimal values of generation re-dispatch and load shedding in the second area. There were 43 neurons in the hidden layer in the second neural network architecture. The minimum RMSE for the back-propagation algorithm was 0.94435% as given in Table 7. A positive correlation was found between the desired and computed output for the test data with a minimum of 0.9449% at generator number 39 under a heavy load condition.In Fig. 19there is a clear trend of decreasing the AANN test error between the two outputs especially in case (a) and (b). However, the correlation of some units decreased when the system was heavily loaded due to the increasing control action that was required in order to maintain system security. The maximum AANN testing error was less than 50MW as can be seen in Fig. 19 case (c). The difference between the maximum load and base load was in the neighborhood of 2353.725MW which indicated an accuracy of more than 97% in the AANN test result.The correlation coefficient was found to be at its lowest value at the 2137.905MW load level. The maximum AANN testing error was less than 100MW at generator number 35 as shown in Fig. 20, case (b). The difference between the maximum generation error of 85.7MW and the base generation of 1856.5MW indicated an accuracy of better than 95% in the AANN test result.Interestingly, the correlation is related to the system load level and neural network architecture. Therefore, the result obtained from the third area (as given in Table 8) showed a low correlation coefficient in some units when the training RMSE was 1.9571%.The histogram in Fig. 20 indicates that the correlation coefficient value is based on the redundancy of the AANN test error in each unit for one contingency data set at one operating point. For instance, the errors appeared in the third area when the system was heavily loaded resulting in a low correlation coefficient.The results show how the AANN was able to estimate the optimal values of the required remedial action when the system was exposed to unexpected contingencies. In addition the neural network was able to satisfy the system security requirement with the predicted preventive/corrective control action with an accuracy of better than 95% in the highest risky conditions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
