@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An application of a bio-inspired visual attention model for the localization of vehicle parts

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A two-step approach localizes vehicle parts using a bio-inspired visual attention.Bounding-boxes roughly locate parts of interest in the saliency map.Average bounding-box localization rates of 99.8% are obtained for different parts.Active contour models capture the boundaries of each vehicle part within each bounding box.A large number of parts can be identified in different views of a vehicle.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Bio-inspired systems,Visual attention,Automotive vehicles,Vehicle part identification,Image classification,Active shape models,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The automated servicing of vehicles is becoming more and more a reality in today's world. While certain operations, such as car washing, require only a rough model of the surface of a vehicle, other operations, such as changing of a wheel or filling the gas tank, require a correct localization of the different parts of the vehicle on which operations are to be performed. The paper describes a two-step approach to localize vehicle parts over the surface of a vehicle in front, rear and lateral views capitalizing on a novel approach based on bio-inspired visual attention. First, bounding-boxes are determined based on a model of human visual attention to roughly locate parts of interest. Second, the bounding-boxes are further searched to finely tune and better capture the boundaries of each vehicle part by means of active contour models. The proposed method obtains average bounding-box localization rates over 99.8% for different vehicle parts on a dataset of 120 vehicles belonging to sedan, SUV and wagon categories. Moreover, it allows, with the addition of the active contour models, for a more complete and accurate description of vehicle parts contours than other state-of-the-art solutions. This research work is contributing to the implementation of an automated industrial system for vehicle inspection.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The increase in the number of vehicles on the roads generates new requirements for car dealers and garages to offer fast and efficient service. While more complicated operations within the car will continue to require the high expertise of human technicians, many simpler operations such as filling the gas tank or changing wheels could become automated and executed with the help of servicing robots in the near future. The successful execution of such operations requires an as-accurate-as-possible localization of specific vehicle parts to avoid excessive movement of the robotic equipment that is usually time-consuming and leads to safety concerns.The work in this paper addresses this issue by proposing a novel solution to the problem of localization of vehicle parts such as wheels, windows, headlights and rear lamps, front and rear bumpers, lateral mirrors and gas tank trap in a set of images representing multiple views of vehicles. It initially proposes an original bounding-box approach to roughly locate vehicle parts based on biological visual attention. Human visual capabilities are a rich source of inspiration for the improvement of computational vision algorithms, since human beings show a significantly superior performance in interpreting visual scenes and extracting regions of interest than most of the current machine vision technologies. Mimicking the role of human visual attention that extracts relevant regions of interest within a visual scene, a computational visual attention model is used in the context of this work to identify areas of interest over the surface of a vehicle. Visual attention models output a representation, called a saliency map (SM), in which areas of high visual interest are highlighted [1]. The projection curves on the two axes of the binary converted saliency map, which appears as a features-of-interest map, contain important information on the location of different parts of a vehicle and allow for the identification of a set of bounding-boxes that contain those vehicle parts. The set of bounding boxes is spatially adjusted over the vehicle surface according to the category of the vehicle. Active contour models (ACMs) [2] are then applied within the boxes to obtain a finer description of the contour of each part of interest. The proposed method goes therefore beyond state-of-the-art work on vehicle parts localization that is in general limited to fixed sized bounding boxes. It also allows the identification of a significantly larger number of parts in different views, compared to the current literature that is generally restricted to a limited number of vehicle parts and to a single view of a vehicle.The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the related work on the topic and Section 3 describes the proposed method for localization and fine tuning of vehicle parts. Section 4 discusses the experimental results and compares them with state-of-the-art solutions. Finally, the conclusions and the future work are presented in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
