@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A self-adaptive joint bandwidth allocation scheme for heterogeneous wireless networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A mobility prediction module is proposed to predict the mobility pattern of mobile host.A lookup table records the probability for the possible handoffs moving into the coverage of the BS.Bandwidth is estimated for the possible arriving MHs outside the coverage of the BS.The optimization of utilization and fairness for the bandwidth allocation are addressed.Hybrid Genetic Algorithm is employed to achieve real-time computation requirement.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Heterogeneous network,Bandwidth allocation,Optimization,Hybrid Genetic Algorithm,Local Search,Pareto set,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Recently, people have been able to connect with different types of networks anytime, anywhere using advanced network technologies. In order to properly distribute wireless network resources among different clients, this work proposed a user mobility prediction algorithm, which takes the coverage of different kinds of base stations, and the volatile mobility of pedestrians, vehicles, and mass transportation, into consideration. In addition, a novel bandwidth utilization optimization technique is proposed in the algorithm to allocate bandwidth more efficiently. The Hybrid Genetic Algorithm, which combines the Genetic Algorithm and local searches to improve the frequency of finding a Pareto set, is used to realize the optimization problem as well. Compared with our previous work and the other four methods in the literature, the simulation results show that our proposed work can achieve desirable performance by network utilization, throughput, and QoS quality in the heterogeneous wireless networks.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Different radio access technologies (RATs) have their own advantages and limitations. However, the Internet service provider (ISP) can have sufficient capacity not only to achieve the required QoS but also to decrease the cost of the various traffic demands generated by mobile users, if the resources provided by different RATs can be integrated.Multi-homing techniques have been widely used for balancing the traffic among multiple networks and lowering bandwidth costs over the past few years [1,2]. Goff et al. investigated how parallel transmission and bandwidth aggregation can be handled at different layers of TCP/IP stack [3]. Yousaf et al. [4] presented an architecture that exploits the existence of multiple network interfaces in multi-homed devices and provides vertical handover and bandwidth aggregation services for TCP applications. Performance analysis results given in [3,4] exhibited the feasibility of providing vertical handover service seamlessly, as well as the bandwidth aggregation service with prominent throughput gains while using multiple network interfaces in multi-homed devices.Joint radio resource management (JRRM) was proposed to ensure the development of efficient, economic and sustainable solutions for managing radio resources and spectra in the context of B3G cognitive wireless heterogeneous systems [5]. JRRM is expected to efficiently manage the allocation and deal location of radio resources among different radio access technologies. However, it was pointed out that JRRM cannot perform smoothly in the heterogeneous wireless network environment [6,7]. Because the mobility of mobile hosts are difficult to predict exactly, and the volatile change of connection capability during switching from one radio access technology to another, there is also the main problem of performance deterioration of the JRRM.Although Luo et al. [7] provided joint session admission control (JOSAC) and joint resource scheduling (JOSCH) techniques for common radio resource management (CRRM), multi-homing was not supported in the JOSAC. Hasib and Fapojuwo [8] presented an adaptive CRRM project, which considers the variables of user service type, user mobility and location information, and service cost in order to provide stable message communication with the result of minimizing unnecessary vertical handoff decreases in users’ call blocking probability, and service cost in the different RATs. Although some CRRM schemes that used multiple attribute decision-making methods for RAT selection in the heterogeneous wireless environment were addressed in the literature [9], they did not take mobility information into account for more efficient resource management. Although Huang et al. [10] presented an adaptive joint radio resource management scheme that was inspired by the concept of stem cell regeneration (SCR-JRRM) for strengthening various radio access technologies to adapt to the volatile change characteristics of heterogeneous wireless networks, the initial setting for the parameters of membership function used in the fuzzy inference rules experienced difficulty in achieving the expected bandwidth allocation. Meanwhile, Huang et al. [10] did not take some parameters, such as mobility information and signal strength of connection, into account in the resource management scheme.Owing to the well-developed digital maps and global position system (GPS) of recent years, researchers have started considering the users’ mobility in their resource management. However, most works only considered a single RAN [11,12]. Shenoy et al. [13] integrated the WLAN and cellular network by taking normal user movement and biased user movement patterns into account based on a 2D random walk model proposed by Chiang and Shenoy [14]. However, the result had some limitations due to the assumed transition probabilities between macro cell and microcell. Hasib and Fapojuwo [8] presented a mobility model scheme for heterogeneous wireless networks; however, this method is not suitable for real-time situations because of its complexity of calculation.Recently, some researchers have applied memetic algorithms in the resource allocation issues. Memetic algorithm is an evolutionary computation with separate individual learning or local improvement procedures to search for optimal solutions. Ghosh et al. [15] proposed a modified Differential Evolution (DE) algorithm to diminish the high peak-to-average power ratio (PAPR) of Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM) systems. Islam et al. [16] presented a modified Discrete Differential Evolution (MDDE) algorithm to enhance the converging process in the proposed effective optimization framework for a multi-objective Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) scheduling problem. M. Nasir et al. [17] proposed an evolutionary multi-objective sleep scheduling scheme for differentiated coverage in wireless sensor networks. S. Sengupta et al. [18] developed a novel multi-objective evolutionary algorithm to optimize the coverage, energy consumption, lifetime and number of nodes maintaining connectivity in wireless sensor networks. Notably, it is not unusual for researchers to adopt GA for solving the optimization problems in the literature. The disadvantage of GA is its slowness compared to other traditional optimization methods. Some studies have thus utilized the Hybrid Genetic Algorithm (HGA) [19] to improve the computation time of finding the global optimum. Quintero and Pierre [20] combined the advantage of both the Genetic Algorithm and the Tabu Search and presented Hybrid Genetic Algorithms with a local refinement strategy to solve the problem of assigning base stations (BSs) under the jurisdiction of suitable radio network controllers (RNCs) in a large-scale universal mobile telecommunications service (UMTS) mobile network.The aim of this work is to improve the efficiency and fairness of resource allocation in heterogeneous wireless networks. The solution of optimization is obtained by utilizing the Hybrid Genetic Algorithm. By combining the GA and the Local Search, we can decrease the computation complexity largely in order to obtain the optional bandwidth allocation. We also take the transportation types of mobile hosts (MHs) into consideration, and provide a lookup table which records the probability with which a MH moves into the coverage of the specific BS. With the help of the proposed lookup table method, we can quickly predict the probabilities of connectivity with neighboring BSs, and reserve the appropriate amount of bandwidth for possible handoffs without sacrificing the efficiency of bandwidth usage.The following is the remainder of this paper. Section 2 presents the algorithm for the proposed joint bandwidth allocation scheme. The simulation results are given in Section 3. The conclusion is made in Section 4.Properly distributing wireless network resources among different clients is a popular issue in the field of joint radio resource management. This work manages radio resources with multiple RATs according to our proposed user mobility prediction algorithm, considering the coverage of different kinds of base stations and the volatile mobility of pedestrians, vehicles, and mass transportation. There are three main modules in the proposed system, including the mobility prediction module, the remaining bandwidth estimation module, and the common bandwidth utilization optimization module. The mobility prediction module and a remaining bandwidth estimation module are established at each BS as shown in the lower part of Fig. 1. The global radio resource manager located at the upper part of Fig. 1 consists of a bandwidth utilization optimization module. First, a user collects required parameters, such as the service type, current location, and the signal strength of a MH. When a MH's status changes, the latest MH's status is immediately updated at the BS where the MH resides, and the mobility prediction module will check with a pre-built lookup table to determine whether the handoff will occur. Notably, the functionality of the lookup table is used to reduce computation overhead during the computation of the mobility prediction in real time in the system. If the handoff is predicted to occur, the MH sends out a bandwidth requirement to the nearest BS, and the remaining bandwidth estimation module in the target BS will be activated to determine the amount of remaining bandwidth that can be used by the handoff. In the case that a given BS finds that its bandwidth is going to be inadequate, a bandwidth adjustment coordinator located at the BS will request the common bandwidth utilization optimization module be applied with the Hybrid Genetic Algorithm to overcome the shortcoming of the genetic algorithm in terms of low speed of convergence at its upper level to reallocate the bandwidth for the BSs/APs of different RATs. The results of the bandwidth reallocation will then be sent back to each BS to reassign the bandwidth to the MHs.This module is proposed to predict the mobility pattern of MH. There are three cases of mobility prediction according to MHs’ moving characteristics, including the low-speed pedestrian's mobility prediction, the fixed-route vehicle's mobility prediction, and the prediction for a MH on a driveway.The predicted location of a MH may be changed due to the MH's movement. We can predict a user's desired location by detecting and calculating the related data, including the location and the velocity, during each periodical time. The probability that a MH moves to a distance r can be expressed by(1)p(r)=ce−ur,where r is the moved location of the MH, u is the probability distribution function in terms of time, and c is a preset constant.Because the total probability should be equal to 1, we obtain:(2)∫0∞2πr⋅p(r)dr=1.We then substitute p(r) in Eq. (1) and obtain c by the following four equations:(3)∫0∞2πr⋅ce−urdr=1,(4)2πc∫0∞re−urdr=1,(5)2πc⋅1u2=1,and(6)c=u22π.Thus, the MH's next possible location after a period of time t can be expressed by(7)p(r)=u22πe−ur.We further take velocity and acceleration into consideration, and define a desired locationb⇀as follows:(8)b⇀=x0⇀+v0⇀t+12a0⇀t2,wherex0⇀,v0⇀, anda0⇀are the detected position, velocity, and acceleration, respectively, and t is a time period used to predict the MH's next desired location.As a result, Eq. (7) can be rewritten as:(9)pb⇀(x⇀)=u22πe−u|x⇀−b⇀|,Three cases are considered for a pedestrian's mobility prediction as follows.• Case 1: The probability that a MH will move into the coverage of a BSIn Fig. 2, a MH X is currently outside the coverage of all BSs. The nearby BSs can then adopt location information with the help of GPS to compute the probability density function that the MHs will move into the communication range of the BSs.The spanned angle θ of MH X can be addressed by(10)θ=2⋅cos−1x2+l2−r22⋅l⋅x,where r represents the radius of the communication range, l stands for the distance between MH X and the location of the BS, and x is the distance between some location within the BS and MH X.As shown in Fig. 2, when MH X moves into the boundary designated by arcABˆ, the probability can be expressed by(11)xθ⋅p(x)dx.Accordingly, the probability density function that MH X moves into the communication range of the BS can be shown as follows:(12)I(r,I)=∫l−rl+rxθ⋅p(x)dx.If the radius of the communication range and the distance between MH X and BS are known in advance, Eq. (12) can be written as follows:(13)I(r,I)=u2π∫l−rl+rxe−uxcos−1x2+l2−r22⋅l⋅xdx.In case that the radius of the communication range r is assumed to be a constant, we only need to calculate the probability density function that a MH moves into the communication range of the BS in one dimension by the table lookup method, and it can be represented as I(l).• Case 2: The probability that a MH moves out of the coverage of a BSAs shown in Fig. 3, the MH X can be anywhere inside the communication coverage of BS. The probability density function for the MH X moving out of the coverage of BS can then be expressed as follows:(14)O(r)=∫r∞2πr⋅p(r)dr=(1+ur)e−ur.Considering the situation that the radius of communication range r is larger than the distance between MH X and BS l, the probability density function can be presented as(15)I(r,l)=u2π∫l−rl+rxe−uxcos−1x2+l2−r22⋅l⋅xdx.If the MH resides in the non-designated location, the probability density function for MH X moving out of the coverage of BS can be expressed by(16)Q(r,l)=O(r−l)−I(r,l).After substituting O(r−l) from Eq. (14) and I(r, l) from Eq. (15), we can obtain:(17)Q(r,l)=(1+(r−l)u)e−(r−l)u−u2π∫r−lr+lxe−uxcos−1x2+l2−r22⋅l⋅xdx.• Case 3: the probability that a MH will handoff from one BS to a neighboring BSIn Case 3, imagine that there are grid points orderly deployed within the radius of the communication range between two neighboring BSs. Next, we assume the distance between two grid points is h, and hence the area of the square among four neighboring points is h2. Therefore, the probability distribution function at locationx⇀can be expressed by(18)sb⇀(x⇀)=h2⋅pb⇀(x⇀),whereb⇀is the desired location that the MH will arrive at in the next time period, Notably, the derivation of the probability distribution function can be more accurate if the distance to each neighboring grid point is much smaller.As a result, the probability that a MH hands off from one BS to its neighboring BS can be expressed by(19)p(b⇀,G)=∑x⇀∈Gsb⇀(x⇀),where G represents the gray area in Fig. 4.Although the computational complexity of this method is more complicated than that used in Cases 1 and 2, this method is feasible in practice because the results can be recorded in the table to look up the handoff probability in real time.Since the computation of the probability that a MH moves into the coverage of any specific BS is complex, a table lookup method as shown in Fig. 5is presented in this work to avoid the computation overhead. Assume that the predicted location of the MH is at (x, y). Because each BS maintains a table to record the probability that the MH moves to any specific location under its coverage, the probabilities that a MH moves to each nearby BS can be thus derived by accumulating the above-mentioned probabilities in the table.In Cases 1 and 2, the relationship between l and I, and between l and O can be derived in advance because the radius of the communication range r is a constant. Accordingly, we can obtain the values for I(l) and O(l) in a table-lookup with one parameter only. On the other hand, a table-lookup with two parameters, including the desired locationb⇀and the designated area G as shown in Fig. 4, is required in Case 3 because two neighboring BSs are involved in the computation.This case can be used in the system in which fixed routes are adopted for vehicles, such as the high-speed train. We first assume the speed of the fixed-route vehicle can be expressed in terms of time as follows:(20)v(t)=αt(β−t)(γ−t),where β is the total time of the fixed-route vehicle traveling between two stations, α and γ represent two coefficients that are to be determined and t is the passing time of the vehicle. Notably, when the fixed-route vehicle arrives at the destination, it reduces its velocity to zero, and thusv(β)=0in Eq. (20).The location of the vehicle can be predicted by(21)x(t)=∫v(t)dt=α14t4−13(β+γ)t3+12βγt2.Besides, the acceleration of the vehicle can then be predicted by(22)a(t)=v′(t)=α(3t2+2(β+γ)t+βγ).We assume the distance between two stations is L, and L=x(β). According to Eq. (21), we obtain:(23)αβ3(2γ−β)=12L.Next we assume the vehicle has the highest speed M, i.e. x(u)=M, when t=u. We can obtain:(24)αu(β−u)(γ−u)=M.From Eqs. (23) and (24), we can eliminate α and obtain:(25)12Lu(β−u)(γ−u)=Mβ3(2γ−β).Since the acceleration of the vehicle will be zero when the train achieves its maximum speed, i.e. a(u)=0, we can then obtain:(26)3u2−2(β+γ)u+βγ=0.Next we set u=βδ and γ=βω in Eqs. (9) and (10), and we can obtain:(27)12Lδ(1−δ)(ω−δ)=Mβ(2ω−1),(28)3δ2−2(1+ω)δ+ω=0.From Eq. (14), we obtain ω=(2δ−3δ2)/(1−2δ). Then we substitute ω in Eq. (11) and let K=βM/2L and δ=0. Accordingly, we obtain:(29)f(δ)=δ2(1−δ)2+Kδ2−δ+16=0.By applying Newton's method, we obtain a recurrence relation from Eq. (19):(30)δi+1=δi−f(δi)f′(δi).We can then obtain the sequence after solving the recurrence relation:(31)δ0=13,δ1=3K2(9K−4).Notably, δ can be accurate enough after several iterations. After solving δ in Eq. (28), we can then obtain the values of ω, u, γ and α. As a result, the predicted arrival time and location of the fixed-route vehicle can be determined.Now that the location of the high-speed vehicle has already been predicted, we then can set the probability that a MH moves into or out of the coverage of a BS to be 0 or 1 according to the predicted location information of the MH.We assume that a MH is moving on a driveway. Based on the traffic-flow model proposed by Tampere et al. [21], the average time for the MH moving on the driveway can be determined. We thus derive the velocity in terms of time as follows:(32)v(t)=k+αt(β−t)(γ−t),where β denotes the average time mentioned above, γ<0<α and 0<t<β, and we know that while t=0 and t=β, the speed will be minimal.Now supposing the minimum velocity is k, the length of the road section can be expressed by(33)L−βk=112αβ3(β−10γ).Let maximum velocity of the vehicle beM=v(u)when t=u, and we obtain that:(34)M−k=αu(β−u)(u−γ).From Eqs. (33) and (34), we can derive:(35)u(β−u)(u−γ)=β3(M−k)12(L−βk)(β−10γ).Notably, the acceleration is zero when the vehicle achieves the maximum velocity at t=u. Thus:(36)−3u2+2(β−γ)u−βγ=0.Next we let u=βδ and γ=βω in Eqs. (35) and (36) we obtain:(37)−3δ2+2(1−ω)δ−ω=0,(38)δ(1−δ)(δ−ω)=η(1−10ω),where η=β(M−k)/12(L−βk). From Eq. (37), we obtain ω=(2δ−3δ2)/(1+2δ). By substituting it to Eq. (38), we can get:(39)δ2(1−δ)(5δ−1)=η(30δ2−18δ+1).Once again, by applying Newton's method as we did in the preceding subsection, we can obtain the predicted location of the MH in terms of time as follows:(40)x(t)=η(p1+p2η+p3η2+p4η3),where the variable η=t/β, and the values of the four constants are p1=βk,p2=−12(12(L−βk)/(1−10ω)), p3=(1−ω)(12(L−βk)/(1−10ω)), and p4=−1/4(12(L−βk)/(1−10ω)).Similar to the approach taken in the preceding subsection, the probability that a MH moves into or out of the coverage of a BS can be set to 0 or 1 according to the predicted location information of the MH, if the MH is moving on a driveway and is far away from a road intersection.Next we consider that case that a MH reaches a road intersection before or at time t as shown in Fig. 6. We first set that the probability that the vehicle moves into the coverage of each of the three BSs is 1/3 because the vehicle may drive toward three possible directions. The probability for the vehicle moving into the coverage of the three BSs can be set to 0 or 1 after the driver gives the right or left turn signal. Notably, the probability for the vehicle to move directly is set to 1 if the driver does not give the right or left turn signal within a preset short distance between the vehicle and the road intersection.A bandwidth estimation mechanism is established at each BS in this work for the consideration of the possible arriving MHs outside the coverage of the BS. Based on the mobility prediction obtained in the preceding section, we first estimate the available bandwidth left at each cell at time t to allow the MHs outside the coverage of the BS to acquire the required bandwidth when they arrive. The equation for estimating remaining bandwidth can be expressed as follows:(41)Ri(t)=BWi−∑j=1nBUi,j(t)+∑j=1n(BUi,j(t)×Pj,out(t))−∑k=1m(BUi,k(t)×Pk,handoff(t))−∑l=1o(BUi,l(t)×Pl,in(t)),where i is the index for the BS, BWidenotes the total bandwidth of the ith BS, BUi,j(t) represents the bandwidth used by the MH j which resides in BS i and will stay with BS i at time t. The third term on the right hand side of the equation denotes the bandwidth released by the MHs that will move out of the coverage of BS i at time t; the fourth term on the right hand side of the equation stands for the bandwidth required by the incoming handoffs; and the fifth term represents the bandwidth required by the incoming MHs which are currently located outside the coverage of all BSs.In this work, the optimization of utilization and fairness for the bandwidth allocation among all MHs are addressed. We first attempt to achieve maximal bandwidth utilization of all BSs by modifying the work presented by Wu and Liao [22]. Then the fairness of link-sharing is addressed by using the well-known Jain's fairness index [23]. Accordingly, two objective functions for the optimization of efficient and fair bandwidth allocation can be expressed in the following two equations:(42)max∑i=1vU(Ri(t))=max∑i=1vri(t)×log2(1+∑i=1vBWi−Ri(t)BWi),(43)max∑j=1nwj⋅∑i=1vBUi,j(t)2n⋅∑j=1nwj⋅∑i=1vBUi,j(t)2,subject to:(44)ri(t)=RSSIi(t)σiRSSIMin×RTTMaxRTTi(t),(45)Bj,Min≤∑i=1vBUi,j(t)≤Bj,Max,(46)BUi,k(t)≤Ri(t)−Bk,Min,(47)0≤wj≤1,(48)BWi−Ri(t)BWi=0,asRTTMax<RTTi(t),(49)BWi−Ri(t)BWi=0,asRSSIi(t)<σiRSSIMin,where Eqs. (42) and (43) represent the optimization of utilization and fairness for the bandwidth allocation among all MHs, respectively. Ri(t) stands for the remaining bandwidth of BS i as given by Eq. (41), and BWirepresents the total bandwidth of BS i. Notably, the term∑i=1v(BWi−Ri(t))/BWidenotes the bandwidth utilization rate of BS i. The indices j and k used in Eqs. (45) and (46), which are identical to the ones used in Eq. (41), represent the index of the MH currently residing in BS i and that of an incoming handoff, respectively.The expression Ri(t) as given in Eq. (42) is defined as the weight of bandwidth utilization of BS i. Here RTTi(t) is the round-trip time of the packet transmission at BS i, RTTMAXdenotes the maximum threshold of round-trip time; RSSIi(t) is the received signal strength at BS i, σiis the signal strength weight of BS i, and RSSIMinstands for the minimum of the threshold for the received signal strength at BS i.Notably, Eq. (45) gives a restriction that the bandwidth allocated to the MH j must fall between lower limit, Bj,Min, and upper limit, Bj,Max, of j's bandwidth requirement. Eq. (46) allows that the incoming handoffs can not only be satisfied with the minimum bandwidth requirement, but also have the opportunity to request more unused bandwidth from BS i. The weight as given in Eq. (47) specifies the priority of each MH.The evolving procedures of GA utilized in this work are presented in Fig. 7. The bandwidth that the BS intends to allocate to the MHs is first transferred into a binary code as an initial population called chromosomes. Each element in the chromosome is either 0 or 1, and the higher fitness value will be kept to generate the next generation during the procedure of crossover and mutation.A set of the initial population is generated randomly before searching for the best solution with the Genetic Algorithm. The chromosomes in a matrix format with n BSs and m MHs are shown in Fig. 8. Each element on the matrix is a 32 bit string representing the allocated bandwidth for the MH. The horizontal row stands for the total bandwidth which a MH can acquire from n BSs, and the vertical column represents the bandwidth which the BS is able to allocate to m MHs. Obviously, the sum of each element on the same row should be less than or equal to the maximum bandwidth which a MH can request from the BSs, and the sum in the same column should be less than or equal to the maximal bandwidth that a BS can supply. Notably, if MH i was not under the coverage of BS j, the entry of the matrix, aij, is set to 0.In the literature, it can be shown that an effective Local Search algorithm can effectively lower the computation time and maintain the quality of the Genetic Algorithm solution. Sanchez et al. [24] proposed the Hill Climber with Sidestep (HCS) approach that is adopted as the Local Search algorithm in our work. The reason that we choose HCS is that HCS was successfully applied the in some multi-objective optimization evolutionary algorithms (MOEAs) and was verified the effectiveness on the multi-objective optimization problems.We made a roulette wheel selection and one-point crossover as the reproduction and crossover method, respectively. The crossover rate is 100%, and each crossover is allowed only in the same column as shown in Fig. 9to ensure that the sum of each column equals to the total bandwidth that can be allocated by a BS. Besides, the mutation rate is set as the reciprocal of the size of the initial population in this work. A bit from the element in the matrix is chosen at random to perform the NOT operation on it.In our experiment, WiMAX BSs equipped with five Wi-Fi APs and twelve HSDPA BSs were distributed in the simulation environment. The density of BS/AP is at 15 per km2. Two hundred iterations were run during the experiment, and the average was taken as the result. We adopted the Gauss–Markov Mobility Model to reflect the characteristics of the real world. The proposed algorithm (HGA) was compared with our previous research named the Stem Cell Regeneration Joint Resource Allocation Mechanism(SCR-JRRM) [10] and another four representative bandwidth allocation schemes in the literature named the Delay-Centric Dynamic Resource Allocation Algorithm (DCDRA) [25], the Non-cooperative Game-Theoretic Framework (NGTF) [26], the Utility Based on Expected Throughput algorithm (UBET) [27], and the OSCAR [28] presented by Habak et al. DCDRA assumes a delay-centric approach in that it maximizes resource utilization of the overall system while minimizing the packet delay. NGTF is used to obtain the bandwidth allocations for a service area from the different access networks available in that service area, with an admission control to limit the number of ongoing connections to ensure the QoS performance. In addition, UBET is designed to efficiently distribute traffic among the available radio access technologies while providing adequate QoS levels under heterogeneous traffic scenarios. OSCAR aims at maximizing throughput, automatically estimating the system's context and dynamically scheduling various connections and packets to different interfaces while maintaining the average cost and energy consumption at user defined levels.Fig. 10shows the comparison of the throughput among the four algorithms. SCR-JRRM used a call admission control mechanism to check if the overall free bandwidth in different radio access networks fulfills the need of the new call while a new request arrives. It can be observed that the performance becomes considerably deteriorated when the new connections intensively increase, and UBET also results in the same situation as SCR-JRRM. DCDRA chose the minimum packet delay as the main parameter to modify the requirement of bandwidth, and it is not permitted to adjust the allocation of the bandwidth to achieve optimal throughput as well. As a result, the bandwidth allocation task will also be tough along with the increment of connections. NGTF adopted an admission restraint to control the number of ongoing connections and reserve some resource to maintain the bandwidth allocation mechanism among different types of MHs. It can be shown this may deteriorate system performance in the excess of reserved bandwidth. OSCAR schedules each connection-oriented stream to a network interface, and each packet-oriented stream over different network interfaces, to increase its throughput. The proposed scheme can effectively manage the bandwidth assignment/reservation among different BSs with the help of the accurate prediction of the mobility pattern of the MHs and the effective allocation optimization by using the Hybrid Genetic Algorithm.The comparison of the average delay time is given in Fig. 11. Although the SCR-JRRM used a SCR-based adaptive joint resource allocation module with effectiveness during the regeneration period derivation that is used to determine the frequency of the bandwidth reallocation, the initial setting for the parameters of membership function used fuzzy inference rules with which it is difficult to achieve the exact bandwidth allocation. Therefore, the delay time of the SCR-JRRM was longer than our proposed work. Although DCDRA separately managed the real-time and non-real-time services to set up different delay standards according to different service types, some delay problems still exist. NGTF maximizes the connections in the network via the Nash equilibrium, but the delay time is still rising with the increase of the new connections. UBET was preassigned to a RAT according to the required QoS and the RAT capabilities, however, doing so could be inefficient due to the fact that a service demand increase may lead to congestion on the associated RAT. OSCAR has similar performance to the proposed work in terms of controlling delay time. The proposed work makes more effective management of handoff by considering MH's mobility. The Bandwidth reservation and admission control approach not only guarantees network stability but also effectively lowers average delay time. The proposed table lookup method makes the derived probability of the MH's predicted mobility feasible in the real-time HWNs environment.The comparison of jitters is illustrated in Fig. 12. Because both SCR-JRRM and DCDRA do not have mechanisms to reserve bandwidth for handoffs in advance, the jitters take place while the shortage of the bandwidth occurs. Besides, UBET and OSCAR have considered the bandwidth reservation mechanism in advance, so the performance is better in terms of controlling jitters. NGTF formulates a bargaining game to obtain the capacity reservation thresholds for different types of connections, but the jitters still take place while MHs play real-time streaming video without taking the dynamical adjustment into account. The remaining bandwidth estimation module proposed in this work considers three different cases where handoff may occur to adaptively reserve the bandwidth for handoffs, and thus the jittery performance of our proposed scheme is more stable than NGTF. Although DCDRA adopting the minimum packet caused delay in adjusting to the requirement of bandwidth and achieved a similar performance, the jitter problems became serious in DCDRA if more connections occurred.The comparison of the bandwidth utilization is given in Fig. 13. Because the scenario of our proposed simulation environment is for real time application, the traditional GA has the shortcoming of low speed in convergence, and it is not suitable for our work. However, some literature [19,20] has pointed out that HGA can improve the computation time for finding the global optimum, and this can decrease overall computation time significantly. Therefore, our work adopted the common bandwidth utilization optimization module applied with HGA to increase the overall bandwidth utilization, and had better performance than the other compared frameworks. SCR-JRRM lacks the capability to adjust the parameters dynamically in the membership function, so the performance in the area of bandwidth utilization is a little worse than in our work. Although DCDRA also maximizes the utilization of resource utilization, the congestion or resource waste problem may occur at some specific BSs because it does not take the mobility prediction into account. NGTF limits the number of ongoing connections by using an admission control approach, but it does not increase the overall bandwidth utilization because of no consideration of dynamically adjusting the bandwidth utilization. OSCAR has poor performance in terms of overall bandwidth utilization because it lacks the ability to address real-time issues related to real-time streaming applications and load balancing in rapidly fluctuating mobile wireless networks.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this work, an adaptive bandwidth allocation mechanism for MHs that can access different radio accessing technologies simultaneously in heterogeneous network environments is presented. In order to solve the problems exhibited in our previous research work, we apply GA to dynamically adjust the parameters used in the membership function to achieve a better and exact bandwidth allocation. Furthermore, a novel bandwidth utilization optimization technique is employed to allocate the bandwidth efficiently among the heterogeneous wireless networks. According to experimental results, the proposed work which considers user mobility can accurately predict whether the handoffs may occur, and it improves network utilization, throughput and QoS quality effectively. In addition, a lookup table method is used to reduce computation overheads during the computation of the mobility prediction. The capability of self-adaption in volatile radio access technologies helps the effectiveness and practicability of our proposed approach.