@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Wind turbine micrositing by using the firefly algorithm

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper demonstrates that the recently discovered firefly algorithm is a better technique for the optimization of large wind farms.It compares the firefly algorithm with the genetic algorithms or by the use of spread sheet methods such as finite difference method.It demonstrates the higher power derived and the lower cost of power produced by using the FA.This paper demonstrates that the firefly algorithm outperforms the genetic algorithms and finite difference method by a wide margin.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wake function,Jensen wake model,Nature inspired algorithms,Firefly algorithm (FA),Genetic algorithms (GA),Wind turbines,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Traditionally energy has been a burning issue of mankind, however, this trend has changed with the advent of clean technologies such as wind power. It is common knowledge that wind turbines need to be installed in an open, unobstructed area to obtain the maximal power output. This document attempts to solve the problem of optimization of the layout of large wind farms by the use of nature inspired algorithms. Particular reference is made to the use of the firefly algorithm. A good comparison is made with the past approaches of the use of spread sheets and GA's for optimization.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Aolean energy [1] has become the fastest growing energy segment across the globe and is competing with traditional forms of energy such as nuclear and thermal power.Many wind farms have been setup to provide power to the grid. Wind farm planning entails planning of the sites on which to place the wind turbines after careful and meticulous calculations and year-long wind resource studies.After a site is selected the next most important task is the terrain selection and its characteristics. Most often hilly areas have to be taken care of such that the turbines are placed in advantageous positions along the ridges of the hills.The development of a wind farm entails dealing with intricate and difficult details and it involves the landowners, developers, utility companies, transmission company, civil and project works and local/national authorities [2].Huge wind farms can be planned to perfection to yield the optimal amount of wind energy. Several attempts have been made to reach the optimal configuration in literature. This paper attempts to utilize the recently introduced firefly algorithm to solve this problem.Wind is an upcoming form of renewable energy poised to fulfil the needs of energy of mankind. It is free, non-polluting and stochastically dependable form of energy. Most wind farms are setup after lengthy year-long wind availability studies that determine the viability of the venture.It is common knowledge that wind is not a steady form of energy and statistical models have to be developed to quantify the amount of Energy dissipated by the wind resource. Thus, in order to calculate the mean power produced it is necessary to ascertain the probability distribution function. Most wind energy availability studies yield the Weibull distribution as a result of the above studies. In some cases even the uniform distribution can be seen for short periods of one month which indicates excellent resource availability.These wind farms can be onshore or offshore depending upon the wind availability. The offshore wind farms require special paints to protect from corrosion, needs the nacelles and the working parts to be sealed and fitted with special platforms for repair and maintenance [3].It is the responsibility of the wind farm developer to meet the guidelines pertaining to the protection of the environment and the communities [3].Traditionally the wind farms are setup with wind turbines aligned perpendicularly to the predominant wind direction. Maximization of wind resource can also be made by aligning the wind turbines along the ridges of hills and crevices [3].The first attempt to model the wind farm arrangement was made by Mosetti [4]. He proposed to utilize the Jensen model for analysing the multiple wake interactions. Fig. 1illustrates the wake model used by the Jensen.This study is also regarded as the premier study on wind farm optimization techniques. His results were based on cost attained for three scenarios,(1)Unidirectional wind direction with constant speedMultidirectional wind with constant speedMultidirectional wind with variable speedThe layout with a square grid with a spacing of 200m and a square grid with 100 grid locations was utilized. While the turbine featured,(1)Height of Hub (z) at 60mRadius of rotor (rr) at 40mCoefficient of thrust (cT) at 0.88Hence, the Jensen wake and cost model proposed that a reduction in cost by 1/3 was possible due to each subsequent wind turbine installation.The work was improved upon through a solution proposed by Grady for optimization of wind farms by the use of genetic algorithms [5]. In Mosetti's [4] work a population of over 200 individuals was allowed to evolve over 400 generations. While Grady allowed 600 individuals in 20 sub-populations to evolve for 3000 generations. Hence, with the same set of conditions the results of Grady were better than Mosetti for the three test cases.Another author Marmidis [6] utilized a probabilistic Monte Carlo simulation to arrive at more optimal results instead of the above method. Moreover, Emami [7] proposed a solution with a modified objective function to arrive at similar results.The present work builds on the work of Anshul Mittal [8], who had proposed a genetic algorithm (GA) based solution with a slightly wider grid spacing of 2km×2.2km, to obtain better results.There are two broad categories of wind machines, these are slow wind machines (SWM) usually for <3m/s wind speeds and fast wind machines (FWM) for >3m/s wind speeds. This study focuses on the latter.A good number of wind turbine models have been tried and tested in literature, these include,(1)The Jensen model [9,10] – one of the earliest and simplest models widely used in literature.The Larsen model [10] – more famous as the EWTSII model and is based on the famous Prandtl turbulent boundary conditions.Analytical model by Fradsen [10] – aka the Storpark analytical model (SAM). This model was modelled on the basis of a square grid conditions.The Ainslie model [10] – the model was proposed as an alternative model to the Jensen model in 1988. It uses the Navier Stokes equations in its calculations.The UPMWAKE model [10] – proposed by the Universidad Polytechnic de Madrid. It is a 3-D model and also known as the WAKEFARM model. It utilizes the 3-D parabolized Navier–Stokes code.This model was proposed by Jensen at Riso National Laboratory Denmark in the year 1983 [9].It discusses a simple model for the wake generated behind a wind mill. A comparison of the model is made with experimental results and computed for accuracy and found to be in cohesion. It also computes the production of power from an array of wind turbines both in linear and circular alignment. It also discusses single and multiple wakes as generated by interaction of multiple wind turbines aligned behind each other in the direction of the wind.Initially the present work shall focus on the proposed model of Jensen because of its widespread applicability. The basic assumptions are the same as in past studies such as, hub height=60m, rotor radius=40m, thrust coefficient=0.88, etc. Thus the following diagram Fig. 2may be generated.The Jensen model shown in Fig. 2 has an initial wind velocity of u0, acting on a wind turbine with a rotor radius of rr. At a distance of χ behind this turbine the wake effects can be felt at a radius of r1 that is a function of the terrain parameter α and the distance χ.The Jensen model incorporates the momentum conserved inside the turbulent wake. It also states that the wake expands linearly with the downstream distance thus multiple wakes and their interaction may be accounted for in this model. The following variables are used, rr=turbine radius and initial wake radius; r1=wake radius at any instance; x=downstream distance at which wake, r1 is calculated.According, to Betz's theory the wind speed after the rotor is given by,(1)U=u0+1−2a1+αxr1Thus, we obtain the mean or free stream wind speed denoted by U0. Whereas the axial induction factors denoted by a can be calculated from the thrust coefficient, CTas,(2)CT=4a(1−a)As x is the distance downstream from the turbine and r1 is related to rras follows:(3)r1=rr1−a(1−2a)Whereas, the entertainment constant α, can be obtained from,(4)α=0.5lnzz0In the above equation the hub height is denoted by z whereas the terrain roughness is denoted by z0, which is constant for plain terrains at (z0=0.3).The Jensen model can be extended for wind turbines that face multiple wakes generated from multiple turbines in the direction of the wind and is given by,(5)u=u01−∑i=1Nt1−uiu02where Ntis the number of turbines installed that lie in the same wake, u0 is the original or unhindered wind speed, uiis the wind speed at the ith turbine, u is the resultant wind speed after wake interaction at the wind turbine.As per the Jensen model the number as well as the placement of the wind turbines is of equal importance.The available power is given by the equation,(6)Available power=12ρAu3Incorporating the efficiency of the turbine in the above equation gives,(7)Available power=η12ρAu3Whereas the power produced is given by,(8)Power produced=0.3u3kWIt refers to the aerodynamic efficiency of the blades or rotors. It is limited by the Betz limit and can be calculated by,(9)Efficiency,η=∑Nti=10.3×ui3Nt(0.3×u03)or(10)Efficiency=PowerTotalNt(0.3×u03)The cost model utilized in this study is the same as the model used in earlier literature. The cost used is non-dimensional and it predicts a maximum reduction in cost by one third with each subsequent turbine installed. Hence, the cost model may be derived from the number of turbines, Ntinstalled as follows:(11)Cost=23+1e−0.00174Nt3It is evident from the above that a reduction in cost by about one third is possible with every subsequent turbine installation.Generally the optimization algorithms can be classified into two classes deterministic and probabilistic/stochastic. The results obtained from deterministic algorithms are always the same if the same initial starting point is used, however, the results are unique in the case of stochastic algorithms.The main limiting factor for deterministic algorithms is that they may be limited to finding a local optima whereas the global optima becomes out of bounds. In this case an element containing stochastic component is added so that it facilitates the finding of globally optimal solutions. Hence, the need for stochastic algorithms is evident from the intractable problems where deterministic algorithms do not work or provide only locally optimal solution.The main focus of this study is to align the wind turbines in such a way that the wind turbines generate the highest amount of power. This is done by the use of the firefly algorithm [11,12] and compared with the past work done by the use of the genetic algorithms etc. The firefly algorithms shall be run with large number of iterations to solve the Jensen model solution optimally.The firefly algorithm was developed to solve nonlinear optimization problems under many constraints [11–13]. It is not a deterministic algorithm but a stochastic one which means that with the same set of assumptions one may reach a different solution set. This solution set may however converge to a similar solution set given a high number of iterations.The firefly algorithm [11–13] may be explained as follows:(1)The fireflies are unisexual, hence positively attracted to each other.The brighter the firefly the more attractive it is, hence it will attract the less brighter ones. Hence, mathematically, brightness and attractiveness are proportional to the distance between the two fireflies. If two fireflies have equal brightness then they will move randomly.The brightness/attractiveness is governed by its objective function that requires to be optimized. Hence, the brightness is proportional to the objective function.The light intensity varies monotonically and exponentially with distance hence,(12)I=I0e−γrwhere I(r) is the light intensity; r is distance; I0 is original light intensity; γ is light absorption coefficient. Hence, if attractiveness is proportional to intensity then we may now have,(13)β=β0e−γr2Which is also sometimes written in a generalized form as,(14)β(r)=β0e−γrm(m≥1)Hence, the distance between any two fireflies i and j at xsand at xjis given by the Cartesian equation,(15)rij=∥∥xi−xj∥∥=∑k=1d(xi,k−xj,k)2Hence, xi,kdefines the kth component of the spatial co-ordinate xiof the ith firefly.The movement of a firefly i which is attracted to a firefly j is given by the equation,(16)Xi=Xi+β0e−γr2(xj−xi)+αεiWhere the second term defines the attraction and the third term defines the randomness from a Gaussian distribution or just a random guess.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
