@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel approach for mining cyclically repeated patterns with multiple minimum supports

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We consider the mining of cyclically repeated patterns (CRPs) with skewed repetition distribution.The problem of mining CRPs with multiple minimum supports is formally defined.An efficient method is developed to discover significant CRPs.Our approach is efficient and can discover valuable CRPs in all tests.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data mining,Cyclically repeated pattern (CRP) mining,Multiple minimum supports,Sequential pattern,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Periodic patterns and cyclic patterns have been used to discover recurring patterns in sequence databases. Toroslu (2003) proposed cyclically repeated pattern (CRP) mining, in which a new parameter called repetition support is considered in the mining process. In a data sequence, the occurrence of a subsequence must satisfy a single user-specified minimum repetition support. However, in real-life applications, items may occur at various frequencies in a database. The rare item problem may occur when all items are set to a single minimum repetition support. To solve this problem, we included the concept of multiple minimum supports to enable users to specify the multiple minimum item repetition support (MIR) according to the natures of items. In this paper, we first redefined CRPs based on the MIR and original form of the sequence minimum support. A new algorithm, rep-PrefixSpan, was developed for discovering a complete set of CRPs in sequence databases. The experimental results indicate that the proposed approach exhibits performance superior to that of conventional CRP mining. The proposed method can be applied in many application domains including customer purchase behavior, web logging, and stock analyses.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Sequential pattern mining is a crucial data mining method for determining time-related behavior in sequence databases [1–8]. In sequential pattern mining, a specific set of sequences, called data sequences, are used as input data. Each data sequence is a list of transactions, and each transaction contains a set of literals called items. Under user-specified minimum support (minsup), sequential pattern mining is performed to discover all subsequences that satisfy minsup in a sequence database. Currently, sequential pattern mining is conducted in various areas, including the analysis of customer purchase behavior, process analysis of scientific experiments, web-log analysis, DNA sequence analysis, and medical record analysis [9–13].In practical applications, a pattern may exhibit periodicity or cyclically occur in a data sequence. For example, understanding the repeat purchase behavior of customers who have long-term relationships with a retailer is valuable. Consequently, a previous study addressed the concept of periodic pattern mining [14]. When applied to an ordered list of events, periodic pattern mining is used to discover a complete set of recurring patterns that occur in every regular time period in a time series database. Although periodic pattern mining enables discovering events that repeatedly occur, it is based on the assumption that the dataset consists only of data on a single long sequence; however, this assumption does not hold in several other research domains (for example, discovering repeat purchasing behavior in multiple customer sequences). A feasible solution is to conduct cyclically repeated pattern (CRP) mining, which involves managing the mining of recurred events from multiple data sequences [15]. By using the concept of repetition support in the mining process, users can efficiently retrieve useful CRPs that frequently occur in a sequence database.Although CRP mining can be applied in numerous applications, such as purchasing behavior analysis, web usage mining, DNA sequence analysis, and stock market analysis, it is based on the assumption that all items are of the same nature or have similar frequencies in a sequence database. However, this assumption does not hold in several applications. For example, at a large grocery retailer, the frequency of repeat purchase may vary because of the diversity of product characteristics (for example, a bottle of Coke vs. a package of Coke). The purchase frequency of every product may differ according to the number of pieces in or capacity of a package and the usage frequency of customers. Because only a single repetition support is set in traditional CRP mining, an immediate problem is the manner in which a threshold suitable for all products is set. When the repetition threshold is set too high, CRPs involving products with low purchase frequencies cannot be determined. By contrast, when the repetition threshold is set too low, numerous meaningless CRPs are discovered.Consider the following purchase sequence: 〈(peanut butter, toast), toast, toast, toast, (peanut butter, toast), toast, toast〉. The purchase frequency of peanut butter is lower than that of toast. When this sequence is subjected to CRP mining and the minimum repetition support is set too high (for example, minimum repetition support=3), the repeat purchase relationship between peanut butter and toast cannot be identified. When the minimum repetition support is set too low (for example, minimum repetition support=1), almost all combinations of products become CRPs.To solve this problem, we extended the concept of multiple minimum supports to CRP mining [16]. In our proposed scheme, users specify a minimum item repetition support (MIR) for each item to reflect its nature and frequency, and every sequence has a distinct minimum sequence repetition support (MSR). In other words, when calculating repetition supports for various sequences, the proposed method can retrieve CRPs based on the MSRs of the corresponding sequences. Moreover, we considered the compactness constraint; specifically, the difference between the timestamp of the first item and that of the final item in a pattern must be no larger than a specified threshold [17–19]. Applying this constraint ensures that the CRPs occur in a reasonable period.In this study, we first redefined CRPs, which consider multiple MIRs in sequential pattern mining. Subsequently, a novel algorithm named rep-PrefixSpan was developed to discover a complete set of CRPs in a sequence database. The patterns proposed in this study are generalizations of traditional CRPs; in other words, because all MIRs are set to a single value, the proposed method can be used to discover a complete set of conventional CRPs. The proposed method can be applied in analyzing sequence data on purchase behavior as well as several other domains; moreover, it enables decision makers to adjust thresholds easily and provides them with opportunities and flexibility to discover more valuable patterns.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents reviews of previous research on periodic pattern mining, CRP mining, and the concept of multiple minimum supports; Section 3 formally defines the problem of CRP mining with multiple minimum supports; Section 4 presents the development of the rep-PrefixSpan algorithm, which is employed to discover complete CRPs with multiple minimum supports; Section 5 describes the preparation of data, performance measures, and experimental setup; and, lastly, Section 6 provides the conclusion.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
