@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Situational variables in online versus offline channel choice

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model the interaction between channel choice and the purchase situation.We examine the moderating effect of product category.Channel choice is more affected by physical situational variables.The decision to purchase online is dependent on constraints in time availability.Social interaction has opposite effects for low/high involvement categories.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Channel choice,Internet,Situational variables,Experimentation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Since the advent and rapid diffusion of the Internet, the subject of consumer channel choice has attracted a large amount of research, mainly focused on the influence of channel, consumer and product category characteristics as its drivers. The interaction between channel choice and the purchase situation has been largely ignored, however. This paper is an attempt to fill this gap by identifying the key purchase situation variables and conducting an experiment to assess their impact on the choice between the traditional retail outlet and the online store. The results show that the key determinants of channel choice relate to time and distance. Distance-to-store and time pressures are among the factors affecting the probability of online purchase. Using a conceptual framework to explore differences in the impact of situational variables across product categories (high/low involvement, search/experience good), we show that distance-to-store has more influence on the likelihood of online purchase in situations involving search goods, while social variables are found to play a role only in the context of high-involvement goods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
For approximately two decades, the range of purchase channels open to consumers has been steadily increasing. Self-service technologies (SSTs), telephone sales and online sales channels have widened the options for retail shoppers, who have adjusted their preferences accordingly, embracing the new channels and increasingly adopting a multichannel approach to shopping (Ansari et al. 2008, Cortiñas et al. 2010, Double Click Inc. 2004).At the same time, both researchers and marketing professionals have shown a great surge of interest in exploring consumers’ behaviour in relation to new purchase channels and their channel preferences for specific products. This preliminary research has revealed that the primary determinants of intended and actual use of a given purchase channel are consumers’ perceptions of channel characteristics (Gehrt and Yan 2004, Neslin et al. 2006, Huang and Oppewal 2006) the characteristics of the underlying technologies (Meuter et al. 2000), personal attitudes toward using them (Zhou et al. 2007), consumers’ socio-demographic, psychological and psychographic characteristics (Dabholkar and Bagozzi 2002, Gehrt and Yan 2004, Neslin et al. 2006, Zhou et al. 2007), consumers’ experience and use of technology (Meuter et al. 2000, Zhou et al. 2007) and product characteristics (Gehrt and Yan 2004, Cortiñas et al. 2010).Nevertheless, these variables do not appear to explain all of the observed variation in channel choice behaviour patterns across different purchase occasions. They appear to fail to fully explain why a given consumer sometimes buys a specific product in a brick-and-mortar store, and at other times uses the Internet or another channel.Belk (1974, 1975) offers a possible explanation for this. Purchase-channel choices depend on the context in which they are taken. The new flexibility of options, although potentially benefiting consumers, may present a new challenge to marketing managers, by adding an element of unpredictability and incoherence to consumer behaviour whereby every purchase by every consumer is potentially unique.Thus, to improve resource allocation and productivity, while enhancing the customer experience, successful advertising, promotion and merchandising campaigns require an awareness and deep understanding of the relationship between the purchase situation and channel choice.For the above reasons, and to fill gaps identified by authors such as Verhoef and Langerak (2001) and Hand et al. (2009), this paper explores the effect of situational variables on channel choice by asking not “which one?” but “when?”.We place the focus on the decision whether to shop in a traditional retail store or via the Internet, which is the most frequent choice problem faced by multichannel shoppers (Cortiñas et al. 2010, Double Click Inc. 2004).Despite repeated confirmation of the product-channel relationship in numerous channel choice studies (Gehrt and Yan 2004, Nicholson et al. 2002, Zhou et al. 2007, among others) category-driven variation in the impact of situational variables on channel preferences has remained virtually unexplored. Nevertheless, some studies have shown that the potential moderating effect of product category must always be considered when exploring online shopping behaviour patterns (Morrison and Roberts 1998, Zhou et al. 2007). A further aim of this study, therefore, is to test for variation in the impact of situational variables across product categories.The Internet’s capacity to convey only written and certain forms of pictorial information has put into question its suitability as a shopping channel and led to research resulting in a multitude of product classifications based on intrinsic, perceived or other attributes, such as tangibility, cost, degree of differentiation, and complexity (Alba et al. 1997, Degeratu et al. 2000, Peterson et al. 1997, among others). This paper focuses on two of the main taxonomies used in channel choice research since the advent of the Internet: one that sorts products by level of involvement (high or low), and another that sorts them into search or experience goods.Based on the above considerations, this paper pursues three objectives. The first is to explore the role played by five broad categories of situational variables in channel choice decisions. The second is to compare, by experimental means, the roles of different situational variables in the probability of online purchase. The third is to use the same experiment to explore the moderating effect of product category on the impact of situational factors.The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review the literature analyzing the impact of situational variables on channel choice and explain how our paper fits into this line of research. In Section 3, we describe our exploratory study of the relative importance of a set of situational variables prior to selecting the variables for our experiment and formulating hypotheses for them. In Section 4, we present a conceptual framework to explore the moderating effect of product category on the impact of the selected variables. In Section 5, we provide details of the empirical specification and the methodology used to test the hypotheses. Finally, we present the main findings, provide some conclusions, and indicate the implications for retail managers.Situational variables are “all those factors particular to a time and place of observation which do not follow from a knowledge of personal (intra-individual) or stimulus (choice alternative) attributes” (Belk 1974, p. 157).Consumer behaviour is largely driven by these situational variables or shopping contexts, which can influence their information search (Gehrt and Shim 2002, Mattson and Dubinsky 1987), preferences, product assessment and product choice (Belk 1974, 1975), price sensitivity (Wakefield and Inman 2003), their preferred store layout (Van Kenhove et al. 1999), their use of in-store self-service technology (Dabholkar and Bagozzi 2002, Wang et al. 2012) and, of course, their choice of purchase channel (Nicholson et al. 2002, Hand et al. 2009, among others).Situational variables can have a direct influence on channel choice decisions (Nicholson et al. 2002, Gehrt and Yan 2004, Hand et al. 2009, Chintagunta et al. 2012, Oppewal et al. 2012). Some authors (Hand et al. 2009) even suggest that channel choice is an erratic process that is more circumstantially than cognitively driven. Moreover, situational variables can also influence the decision indirectly through the consumer’s value perceptions of the different channels, the relevance of their respective features, or their compatibility with an individual shopping style (Gehrt and Yan 2004, Huang and Oppewal 2006, Verhoef and Langerak 2001). These variables may also cause consumers to hesitate to adopt a particular purchase channel, even if they feel comfortable with the technology, able to see its advantages over other alternatives or positively inclined towards it (Forman et al. 2009).Situational variables can be grouped as follows (Belk 1975): 1. Variables relating to the physical surroundings in which the choice process takes place. These include distance-to-store, crowdedness, the weather, and retail store environment variables (background music, tidiness, etc.). 2. Time-related variables, which include time-of-day or day-of-the-week, urgency of purchase, product availability and time pressures. 3. Variables relating to the social environment, such as the presence of others at the time of the decision, the apparent roles of such persons, and the chance for social interaction. 4. Variables relating to antecedent states, including temporary physical or mental states, moods, and fatigue. 5. Task-definition variables, which include the cognitive and motivational aspects of the purchase situation (whether the item is required as a gift or for personal use, etc.).In Table 1, we use Belk’s taxonomy to classify empirical studies that use some means to measure the effects of situational variables on channel choice, which is the line of research into which this paper fits. The general impression is that time-related factors have attracted more interest than other situational dimensions. It is also apparent that previous analyses have involved a single product category. There appear to have been no previous attempts to test for category-related variation in the influence of situational variables on channel choice. One study (Gehrt and Yan 2004) considers two product categories, books and apparel, representing a search good and an experience good, respectively, but the analysis treats product category as a situational variable in itself.There is a wide range of potential situational variables and a wide range of empirical methods to address our research objectives. We therefore performed an exploratory study to identify which situational variables might more decisively influence the consumer’s decision to use one channel versus another.Basing our selection on a review of the literature including Belk (1975) and past research on the role of situational variables in channel choice (see Table 1), we selected 21 such variables for use in a questionnaire, where subjects were required to rate how much or how little these factors influence them when selecting a purchase channel, irrespective of product category. They responded by indicating their level of agreement with a series of statements using a 5-point scale (ranging from strongly disagree to strongly agree). The questionnaire also included questions designed to capture information on frequency of Internet purchase across different product categories.The questionnaire was administered in a purposely-designed venue to aid respondents’ concentration. A trained interviewer was on hand to ensure the correct understanding of all the questions and each participant completed the scoring in isolation from the rest.The survey took place in November 2009 in the city of Pamplona, capital of Navarra, Spain. The questionnaire was put to a gender-balanced sample of 85 consumers who had at some time purchased products via the Internet. The age distribution of this sample was as follows: 26.5% 24years of age or less, 38.56% between 25 and 34, approximately 15% between 35 and 40 and the remainder over 40.The results, given in Table 2, indicate the percentage of participants per response category, per statement. Since exploratory study makes no specific hypotheses as to whether the influence of the variables is positive or negative, central trend measures are of no use in identifying the most influential variables. Dispersion measures also serve little purpose, since we wish to examine not only variables with a strong unidirectional impact and therefore low dispersion (such as those that strongly encourage online purchase) but also variables that may differentiate between consumers and therefore have high dispersion (such as those that drive online purchase in some consumers and physical-store purchase in others). Thus, because of the ordinal scale of the variables, we identified those with the highest and lowest scores and selected the six with the highest percentages of extreme values. The last column in Table 2 gives the sum of the extreme values of the scale.The six variables selected included two physical factors: store tidiness and distance-to-store; two temporal factors: time of purchase and time pressures; and two social factors: shopping alone/in the presence of others and the chance for social interaction. Since one of these variables involved physical store layout, it was decided that the experimental design should also include virtual store layout to better balance the criteria.The fact that no antecedent or task-definition dimensions figured among the key variables challenged their relevance, which could only be confirmed by means of a more conclusive scale-dimension analysis. Nevertheless, the three most relevant dimensions (physical, temporal and social) are consistent with those that emerged in an exploratory study of factors influencing online purchase patterns by Nicholson et al. (2002).This section offers a generic description of the effects we expect to find in our analysis of the influence of the selected variables on channel choice and provides details of our theoretical model for the moderating effect of product category. Fig. 1summarizes the research model.Products can be classified according to their different attributes, such as tangibility, cost, degree of differentiation, and complexity (Alba et al. 1997, Degeratu et al. 2000, Peterson et al. 1997, Zhou et al. 2007, among others). This paper focuses on two of the main taxonomies used in previous channel-choice studies: one that classifies them by the level of product involvement (high or low), another that sorts them into search or experience goods.The literature has shown consumer involvement with a product category to be a key factor in overall purchase behaviour (e.g. Laurent and Kapferer 1985, Zaichkowsky 1985). Product involvement is a consumer-defined construct whereby products are defined as high- or low-involvement goods based on the perception of the majority of consumers (Beatty and Smith 1987, Wang et al. 2006). Generally speaking, high-involvement goods tend to be of high monetary value and/or low purchase frequency, and thus involve greater risks for the consumer.Differences in involvement levels across product categories have a variety of effects on purchase behaviour. These include the length of time and effort spent on the purchase process (Zaichkowsky 1985), the number of attributes taken into consideration when assessing the product (Beatty and Smith 1987), the level of satisfaction expected from the purchase (Antil 1984) and consumers’ information demand (Krugman 1965). The product involvement level also influences consumers’ post-purchase behaviour, in aspects such as the complexity of their cognitive reactions and store and brand loyalty (Quester and Lim 2003, Westbrook 1987).Another product classification commonly used in channel choice studies sorts attributes according to their value as quality indicators and differentiates between search and experience goods, based on their dominant type of attribute (Nelson 1970). Search attributes can be identified prior to purchase, while experience attributes can only be assessed after purchase or during consumption (Nelson 1974). Consumer behaviour will therefore differ according to the type of product being considered for purchase. Thus, with an experience good, the emphasis is more likely to be on extrinsic attributes, such as price, brand and recommendations, as cues to product quality and the consumer will want to feel or taste the product (Wright and Lynch 1995). Furthermore, since certain attributes of experience goods are difficult to assess (Bone 1995), consumers will be willing to pay higher prices to offset some of the increased perceived risk involved in purchase decisions for this category of goods, based on the assumption of a direct relationship between price and quality (Rao and Bergen 1992). Clothing and fresh food products are examples of experience goods, because their attributes (durability, fabric quality, freshness, flavour, etc.) cannot be fully evaluated before use or consumption. The attributes of search goods, in contrast, are easy to assess even before use (Jain et al. 2000) without having to try them. Since their quality is easier to verify a priori, the purchase decision is less risky. Books and dried food products are considered search goods because the blurb on the back cover or information on the packet makes it much easier to judge the contents (Grewal et al. 2004).Situational variables in the physical environment, such as distance-to-store or retail store environment variables, influence channel choice potentially more than any other kind (Nicholson et al. 2002).The literature relating to the online purchase decision and the related options (Meuter et al. 2000) reports that one of the main advantages of the new shopping channels is the ability to purchase goods from any location. This effectively removes the distance obstacle, making the Internet a viable alternative for purchases that would otherwise involve a long trip.The easy accessibility of online purchase channels saves the consumer time, money and effort (Akaah et al. 1995) thus offering greater convenience than physical stores (Schröder and Zaharia 2008). Oppewal et al. (2012) recently obtained that distance had a negative effect on the use of traditional purchase channels.According to Downs’ (1961) consumer efficiency theory, consumers seek to minimize purchase costs, which include time as well as money. They will therefore judge each channel by the costs it involves. Based on a spatial competence model designed to explore online-offline channel substitution in a multichannel environment (Balasubramanian 1998, among others), we assume, furthermore, that the offline purchase decision obliges the consumer to consider the fixed costs associated with getting to the store. These will depend on where the decision takes place and will increase with the distance between purchaser and vendor, whereas the fixed costs are invariable for all online purchases.Thus, the further the store, the greater the utility and the higher the probability of online purchase. This has been confirmed by recent studies, such as Chintagunta et al. 2012 and Forman et al. 2009, the first of which estimates that a household can save an average of 0.47 Euros per kilometre by shopping for groceries online rather than offline.As far as product category is concerned, the broad literature on variation in consumer involvement across product categories has so far not considered how this factor might affect the interaction of situational variables with channel choice. Predictably, however, the role of situational variables will co-vary with product involvement, given the influence of the latter on the evolution of the purchase process. When it comes to distance-to-store, for instance, the purchase process for high-involvement products takes longer and consumers are willing to travel further to ensure a correct choice (Zaichkowsky 1985). We can therefore assume that distance-to-store is less important than it would be for a low-involvement product, because consumers will expect a more positive purchase experience as a reward for the extra effort of going further afield.As in the comparative analysis of consumer behaviour towards high- versus low-involvement goods, the broad literature analysing consumer behaviour towards search versus experience goods has given little consideration to possible variation driven by situational variables. Nevertheless, previously documented differences between purchase processes for experience versus search goods give reason to assume that situational variables will have a different impact in each context. For instance, the greater risk involved in decisions regarding experience goods will incentivize consumers to try to see, touch and test the product they are about to purchase. This suggests that distance-to-store will be less of an issue in the experience goods than in the search goods context, because, if consumers are confident that a more accurate product-quality assessment can be made in situ, they will be readier to face any potential travel costs.Based on the above, we state our first hypothesis and two sub-hypotheses. Hypothesis 1 refers to the generic influence of distance on channel choice and Hypotheses 1a and 1b refer to the moderating effect of product category:H1As distance-to-store increases, so does the probability of online purchase.The effect of distance-to-store on the probability of online purchase is more pronounced in the low-involvement than the high-involvement context.The effect of distance-to-store on the probability of online purchase is more pronounced in the search goods than in the experience goods context.Keen interest among researchers in the effect of traditional retail store environment variables on buyer behaviour has led to a wealth of empirical evidence (Turley and Milliman 2000). Retail store environment variables, both external (entrances, display windows, parking availability, etc.) and internal (temperature, music, colour schemes, decoration, cleanliness, placement and grouping of merchandise, product displays, etc.) appear to influence consumers’ choice of store, length of visit, amount of money spent, number of products purchased, degree of impulse buying, etc. (Nicholson et al. 2002, Turley and Milliman 2000).Traditionally, this line of research has viewed retail store environment variables as being subject to the control of the retail manager, who can adjust them to influence customer behaviour. It must also be noted, however, that the customers themselves affect the shopping environment with their noises, smells, behaviour, etc. Despite the best efforts of sales staff, the products in some stores can be found in disarray due to the behaviour of previous shoppers. Store untidiness can make it difficult to find the desired product, induce stress, diminish quality perception, prompt a rejection response and cause the customer to leave without completing a purchase. Exploring this issue, Oppewal et al. (2012) found that consumers are more likely to approach the channels they perceive to offer higher quality.This factor, however, has less relevance in relation to the purchase of high-involvement products, where the consumer’s main aim is to make the right choice, regardless of the effort required, and more relevance in relation to that of low-involvement products, where the consumer wishes to minimise the time and effort spent searching for and comparing products. We therefore expect store tidiness to have less impact on channel choice in the high-involvement purchase context.As already stated, a tidy store will always ease the decision-making process, provided there is some congruence between how consumers categorize products in their minds and how they are categorized in the purchase channel layout (Morales et al. 2005). This relevance of this factor is fairly similar for both search and experience goods, since the consumer always appreciates a sufficient degree of organization as to be able to compare the available options (Lurie 2004).Thus, we propose the following hypothesis:H2The more untidy the traditional store, the higher the probability of online purchase.The effect of store tidiness on online purchase probability is stronger in low-involvement than in high-involvement contexts.The effect of store tidiness on online purchase probability is equal in both search and experience goods contexts.There is as much empirical evidence regarding the impact of environmental variables on buyer behaviour in the online context as there is in the traditional store context (Manganari et al. 2009).One online environment variable is website design, which usually determines the layout and navigability of the web page (Lociacono et al. 2002, Montoya-Weiss et al. 2003).Well organized websites offering clear information layout, simple purchase process instructions, ease of navigation, etc. drive both intended and actual purchase levels (Lociacono et al. 2002, Montoya-Weiss et al. 2003, Nicholson et al. 2002, Richard 2005).When it comes to product category effects, either in the purchase of high involvement versus low involvement products or in that of experience versus search goods, the reasoning for store tidiness applies equally to the clarity of website layout. A well-organized web page makes it easier to find the desired product type and compare the options. This factor is less important in the high- than in the low-involvement context, but has fairly equal importance for both search and experience goods, since clarity of organization is always desirable for easy comparison of the available options.This leads us to the following hypotheses:H3The clearer the website layout, the higher the probability of online purchase.The effect of the clarity of website layout on the probability of online purchase is stronger in the low-involvement than in the high-involvement context.The effect of the clarity of website layout on the probability of online purchase is equal in both the search and experience goods contexts.Due to their effect on convenience, time and distance variables have been repeatedly mentioned in the comparison of online versus offline service output levels (Kaufman-Scarborough and Lindquist 2002, Nicholson et al. 2002). As already noted, the time variables considered in this paper are time-of-day-of-purchase and time pressures.The range of purchase channel options depends on the time of day the decision is being made (Black et al. 2002, Meuter et al. 2000, among others). Opening hours in traditional stores are usually shorter than the 24-h shopping available on the Internet. Online shopping allows consumers greater independence by removing external restrictions and enabling them to shop at any time of day or night (Schröder and Zaharia 2008). This is particularly important in countries with very strictly regulated shop-opening hours.Furthermore, consumers approach stores hoping to gather the information they need in order to complete a purchase. Fear of not having enough time to research the products and thus making too hasty a purchase may therefore discourage them from shopping in a traditional store very near to closing time. In terms of time, therefore, the convenience of a purchase channel is a matter of consumer perception (Kleijnen et al. 2007).This time factor can be expected to play a more decisive role in low-involvement contexts. In high-involvement contexts, consumers will try to select the best store for their purchase, even if faced with less convenient opening hours, whereas, in low-involvement contexts, they will be more likely to take the easier option. The amount of effort they are willing to make will vary according to the time of day.Similarly, time-of-day has a more decisive impact on channel choices involving search goods. Decisions relating to experience goods take longer because of the greater risk and information-processing involved. Thus, it is reasonable to assume that proximity to store closing time matters.The above leads us to state the following hypothesis:H4The nearer it is to store closing-time, the greater the probability of online purchase.The time-of-day effect on the probability of online purchase is stronger in low-involvement than in high-involvement contexts.The time-of-day effect on the probability of online purchase is stronger in search than in experience goods contexts.Perceived time pressures on task completion may modify purchase behaviour. Busy consumers may decide to make a purchase online rather than offline because of the time it saves (Black et al. 2002, Meuter et al. 2000,Verhoef and Langerak, 2001) and the enjoyment it provides (Huang and Oppewal 2006). This was, indeed, the conclusion reached by authors such as Hand et al. (2009), Huang and Oppewal (2006) and Verhoef and Langerak (2001) in the context of grocery shopping; whereas Gehrt and Yan (2004) found no such relationship in the book or apparel categories.A further aspect of the above is the time spent waiting to be served or standing at the cash-out. Customers tend to be impatient and to dislike waiting. They look for the shortest queue and seek quick-purchase options, even when their preference is for another product, if this avoids waiting (Dabholkar and Bagozzi 2002, Wang et al. 2012).The same reasoning applies for time pressures as given above for time-of-day effects. Time pressures will make consumers more likely to take the easier option in low-involvement contexts. They will also have a more decisive impact in the search than in the experience goods context.The above leads us to the following hypothesis:H5The greater the time pressures, the higher the probability of online purchase.Time pressures have more impact on the probability of online purchase in low-involvement than in high-involvement contexts.Time pressures have more impact on the probability of online purchase in search than in experience goods contexts.The literature has traditionally highlighted the social motives for shopping in traditional retail stores and demonstrated the influence of this factor on consumer behaviour (Nicholson et al. 2002, Sommer et al. 1992).There is sufficient evidence to suggest that the presence of other people at the time of purchase has a positive effect. This kind of social support might predictably reduce the perceived risk and uncertainty associated with the purchase process, thereby increasing the consumer’s confidence in making the right decision (Borges et al. 2010, Kiecker and Hartman 1994, Nicholson et al. 2002). Information, advice or moral support from others in the store may reduce the anxiety and stress caused by an unfamiliar situation and thereby heighten the buyer’s sense of control in the process. In the same vein, Raghunathan and Corfman (2006) found that the presence of others might be desirable because it enables human bonding and enhances shared experiences and the perception of having made the right choice.The purchase experience may even transcend the actual nature of the product being purchased (Alba et al. 1997), in which case the social support will also have a hedonic effect (enjoyment, fun) (Borges et al. 2010, Nicholson et al.2002) leading consumers in traditional stores to linger longer and make more purchases (Sommer et al. 1992).Social support can come from a friend or relative accompanying the shopper or from a casual stranger. The effectiveness of the uncertainty-reducing mechanism varies according to the closeness of the bond. According to Kiecker and Hartman (1994), support from close relatives or friends is assumed to reduce perceived risk, particularly that of a social or symbolic nature, while support from strangers tends to be more functional. The hedonic effect is more likely if the shopper receives support from a friend than if accompanied by a relative or shopping alone.Sometimes, however, the presence of strangers in a purchase situation in a traditional store context can have a negative effect, potentially causing the buyer to feel stress, loss of control, or social anxiety (e.g., Hui and Bateson 1991). Social anxiety may influence attitudes towards available purchase channels, causing consumers to focus on the advantages of those options that free them from having to deal with crowds, and thus swaying their usage intentions. This was the conclusion reached by Dabholkar and Bagozzi (2002) in their research on the choice between a touch screen and a verbal order when ordering fast food.There are also occasions on which people have neither the need nor the wish to speak to others in order to obtain information or verify their choices, in which case the presence of others may even prove annoying (Raghunathan and Corfman 2006). Such individuals may derive limited satisfaction from social bonding or support for their own decisions.Finally, the presence of others may reduce purchase effectiveness by distracting the purchaser’s attention away from the tasks involved in the purchase process, and may explain some people’s preference to shop alone (Borges et al. 2010).Thus, consumers who are particularly averse to social interaction when shopping are very likely to prefer online shopping, which is commonly known for its non-social nature (Alba et al. 1997, Meuter et al. 2000, Nicholson et al. 2002). The online purchase experience lacks warmth and sociability (Gefen and Straub 2003) tending to be more impersonal, anonymous and automated (Van der Heijden et al. 2003, Wang and Emurian 2005).Online retailers therefore face the challenge of making virtual stores more socially enriching (Kumar and Benbasat 2002, Hassanein and Head 2007). Zhu et al. (2006) use the term “collaborative online shopping” to describe the experience of shopping online together with one or more remotely located “shopping buddies”. Web characteristics that might evoke a sense of collaborative online shopping include chats (Kumar and Benbasat 2002), human assistants (Aberg and Shahmenhri 2000, Hostler et al. 2005); virtual communities (Kumar and Benbasat 2002), socially-enriching pictorial and textual content (Gefen and Straub 2003) and telepresence (Zhu et al. 2006). These features are not yet widely available in existing online purchase channels, however.Without denying the enjoyment to be had from using the Internet and its potential for providing a collaborative shopping experience, we assume, in line with the literature, that physical stores have greater capacity than virtual stores to address the socio-recreational needs of the shopper.The above leads us to the following hypothesis:H6The probability of online purchase is lower if a friend or relative is present at the time of the channel choice decision.The effect of the opportunity for social interaction on the probability of online purchase varies across consumers and product categories.One of the phenomena associated with the purchase of high-involvement goods is consumers’ tendency to consult a range of product information sources (Antil 1984, Krugman 1965). In this case, channels enabling social interaction are perceived to be better than those that do not. Such channels are less well-rated for the purchase of products in low-involvement categories, however, where the aim is to minimize time and effort, and where having to engage in social interaction might even prove bothersome. Similar reasoning applies with respect to the issue of shopping alone or in the presence of others. The presence of a companion enhances the experience of shopping in a traditional retail store for a high-involvement product, but does quite the opposite if the purchase involves a low-involvement product. Therefore:H6aThe presence of others has more negative impact on the probability of online purchase in low-involvement than in high-involvement contexts.The effect of the opportunity for social interaction on the probability of online purchase is negative in low-involvement contexts.Finally, we expect the impact of socio-environmental variables to vary between search goods and experience goods. It has been widely demonstrated, for example, that the opinions of others are particularly important to the consumer shopping for experience goods. This is because, by providing a source of indirect experience of sensory attributes that extrinsic cues fail to convey, they help to reduce the perceived risk associated with the purchase of experience goods (West and Broniarczyk 1998). Conversely, King and Balasubramanian (1994) find that consumers will probably select a search good based on their own criteria. Therefore, the positive impact of the opportunity to confer with others and the presence of others will be greater in the context of experience goods than in that of search goods.This leads us to the next hypotheses:H6bThe presence of others has more negative impact on the probability of online purchase in the context of experience goods than in that of search goods.The effect of the opportunity for social interaction on the probability of online purchase is positive in the context of experience goods.We test the above hypotheses by experimental means. We first define levels for the seven variables selected in phase 1, using two levels for each variable to limit the number of possible scenarios and thereby the complexity of the analysis and to reduce error in the results (Wang and Li 2002). This study uses a between-subject design to examine the moderating effect of product category and a within-subject design to examine the effect of the situational variables. We begin with a 7-factor model with two levels of each factor to test the effects of the situational variables.The factor levels are as follows:•Store Tidiness: very untidy/very tidy.Clarity of website layout: very poor/very good.Distance-to-store: 20min by car from consumer’s residence to the town centre/consumer resident in town centre.Time-of-day-of-purchase: 3h before closing time/15min before closing time.Time pressures: a lot to do/nothing to do.Presence of others at time of channel choice decision: alone/with someone else.Opportunity for social interaction in the store: someone to talk to in the store/no one to talk to in the store.All possible combinations of these factors (7) and their different levels (2) give a total of 128 scenarios (27). Since every respondent will be faced with the different choice scenarios, it is necessary to find a way to keep the scenario rating task within reasonable limits without losing any valuable response variation data. An orthogonal design enables the researcher to reduce the rating task required of survey respondents while still identifying all estimable effects (Ortúzar et al. 2000). An orthogonal design uses a given number of stimuli in which all estimable effects are uncorrelated (Louviere et al. (2000), thus enabling estimation of all the main effects. For the case in hand, SPSS Statistics21.0 software is used to generate a set of 8 highly representative choice scenarios from the 128 possibilities.Fig. 2shows one of the 8 cards presented to the participants, where the levels are as follows:•Store tidiness: very tidy.Clarity of website layout: very poor.Distance-to-store: 20min by car from consumer’s residence to town centre.Time-of-day-of-purchase: 3h prior to closing timeTime pressures: a lot to do.Presence of others at time of channel choice decision: alone.Opportunity for social interaction in store: no one in store to talk to.Two important methodological reasons require us to base this study on selected product categories. Firstly, since one of the objectives is to analyse the moderating effects of product category (high/low involvement, search/experience good) we need to select a product from each category. Secondly, we need to ensure the validity of the data we obtain from the survey by linking each choice scenario to a particular product category for the sake of authenticity.The selection of product categories for this study is based on three criteria. Firstly, they must be among those most frequently purchased online, to ensure the survey participants’ familiarity with the channel-choice scenario. Our guidelines are provided by the 12th AIMC Internet user survey (AIMC 2010). Secondly, they must include both search and experience goods. Thirdly, the selected products must cover different consumer involvement levels.The selected products were books (search good, low involvement), T-shirts (experience good, low involvement), plane tickets (search good, high involvement) and personal computers (experience good, high involvement). According to the results of our exploratory analysis, the levels of penetration for these four categories are high (books: 75%, fashion: 56%, IT products: 63.1%, airline tickets: 88.1%).We used a between-subjects design to control for the product category effect without creating too complex a rating task. In this case, any more than 8 choice scenarios per respondent could result in practice, sensitization, and carry-over that may limit interpretation of results (Greenwald 1976).As well as asking participants to state their channel choice preferences in eight different choice scenarios for a single product category, the questionnaire is designed to solicit other types of data. For the four products considered, the first section requires respondents to rate on a scale of 0–10, (0=totally unsuitable; 10=highly suitable) the suitability of the traditional store versus the virtual store for their purchase (Moore and Benbasat 1996). This provides an indication of their frequency of purchase for each product (number purchased in the last year) and their frequency of purchase per channel (using percentages per product/per channel). Questions to ascertain respondents’ socio-demographic data, including age, gender, marital status, size of hometown, income level, etc. appear inserted between one scenario and the next.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
