@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-objective fuzzy multiprocessor flowshop scheduling

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper considers the bi-objective hybrid flowshop scheduling problems with bell-shaped fuzzy processing and sequence-dependent setup times.To minimize two criteria, namely makespan and sum of the earliness and tardiness a bi-level algorithm is proposed in this paper.In level 1, the population is decomposed into several sub-populations and genetic algorithm is designed using a scalar bi-objective concept.To improve the first level results, after unifying the solutions in big population, a PSO is proposed in level 2.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fuzzy hybrid flowshop scheduling,Bi-objective optimization,Pareto optimal solution,Particle swarm optimization,Parallel genetic algorithm,Bell-shaped fuzzy number,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper considers a bi-objective hybrid flowshop scheduling problems with fuzzy tasks’ operation times, due dates and sequence-dependent setup times. To solve this problem, we propose a bi-level algorithm to minimize two criteria, namely makespan, and sum of the earliness and tardiness, simultaneously. In the first level, the population will be decomposed into several sub-populations in parallel and each sub-population is designed for a scalar bi-objective. In the second level, non-dominant solutions obtained from sub-population bi-objective random key genetic algorithm (SBG) in the first level will be unified as one big population. In the second level, for improving the Pareto-front obtained by SBG, based on the search in Pareto space concept, a particle swarm optimization (PSO) is proposed. We use a defuzzification function to rank the Bell-shaped fuzzy numbers. The non-dominated sets obtained from each of levels and an algorithm presented previously in literature are compared. The computational results showed that PSO performs better than others and obtained superior results.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Scheduling problems are the allocation of machines to perform a set of jobs in a period of time. In general, scheduling requires both sequencing and machine allocation decisions. When there is only one machine, the allocation of that machine is completely determined by sequencing decisions. As a consequence, in the single-machine model, no distinction exists between sequencing and machine allocation. To appreciate that distinction, we must examine models with more than one machine. A hybrid flowshop scheduling (HFS) problem, as described by Linn and Zhang [1], consists of a series of production stages, each of which has several machines operating in parallel. Some stages may have only one machine, but at least one stage must have multiple machines. The HFS is an adequate model for several industrial settings such as semiconductors, electronics manufacturing, airplane engine production, and petrochemical production [2]. The flow of products in the plant is unidirectional. Each product is processed at only one facility in each stage and at one or more stages before it exits the plant. The machines in stages can be identical, uniform, or unrelated and each job is processed by at most one machine at each stage.Many real-world problems involve simultaneous optimization of several objective functions. In general, these functions often compete and conflict with themselves [3]. Many industries such as aircraft, electronics, semiconductors manufacturing, etc., have tradeoffs in their scheduling problems where multiple objectives need to be considered in order to optimize the overall performance of system. For reflecting real-world situation adequately, we formulate the scheduling problems as bi-objective ones that simultaneously minimize the maximum completion time (makespan), and the sum of the earliness and tardiness (ET) of jobs. The use of both objectives is well-justified in the practice, as makespan minimization implies the maximization of the throughput and the second objective comes from the make-to-order philosophy in management and production theory: an item should be delivered exactly when it is required by the customer. Therefore, both early and tardy delivery of a task with respect to its due date is penalized. Interestingly, the objective of the ET problem fits perfectly to just-in-time (JIT) production control policy where an early or a late delivery of an order results in an increase in the production costs.Fuzzy set theory has been studied extensively over the past 40 years and many approaches have been proposed in this field. Most of the early interest in fuzzy set theory pertained to representing uncertainty in the human cognitive processes. Fuzzy set theory is now applied to problems in the various sciences and it is being recognized as an important problem modeling and solution technique [4]. Several successful applications and implementations of fuzzy set theory in the production management have also been reported. Fuzzy scheduling is a very important research topic not only because of the fuzzy nature of most real-world problems, but also because there are still many open questions in this area.Four important motivations that fuzzy set theory is relevant to scheduling are as follows [5].•In the scheduling environment, the information required to formulate an objective function, decision variables, constraints and parameters may be vague or not precisely measurable.Third, imprecision and vagueness as a result of personal bias and subjective opinion may further dampen the quality and quantity of available information.A fuzzy scheduling algorithm constructs the real system flexibility and models the uncertainty inherent in real environments.This notice has led to the development of fuzzy scheduling. The “most obvious place” to introduce fuzzy concepts for modeling uncertainty in scheduling algorithms is with a task's operation and due date time. Typical scheduling algorithms assume this information to be crisp value; this may or may not be reliable. By modeling these times of a task with a fuzzy number, a system designer can build flexibility into the scheduling algorithm and reach to better solution.Machine setup time is a significant factor for production scheduling in many factories. In sequence-dependent scheduling, the length of time required to do the setup depends on both the prior and the current job to be processed [6]. Due to great saving when setup times are explicitly included in scheduling decisions, we take into account the existence of sequence-dependent setup times in our problem. Sequence-dependent setup times (SDST) hybrid flowshop scheduling can be found in a vast number of industries. Numerous examples are given in the literature, including the plastics manufacturing, rolling slitting in the paper industry [7] and wafer testing in semiconductor manufacturing [8]. Since recently, considering SDST becomes popular researches’ area [9], according to taxonomy of Quadt and Kuhn [10] only few studies considered setup times.Our goal in this paper is to develop a two level algorithm to bi-objective fuzzy hybrid flowshop that gives a set of compromise (non-dominated) solutions, so that, these solutions should represent a good approximation to the Pareto optimal front.The paper has the following structure. Section 2 gives literature review. Section 3 presents mathematical modeling. Section 4 is the bell-shaped fuzzy number description and its arithmetic. Section 5 introduces the two-level algorithm and characteristics of the proposed algorithms. Section 6 presents the experimental design which compares the algorithms’ results. Finally, Section 7 is devoted to conclusions and future works.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
