@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A routing defense mechanism using evolutionary game theory for Delay Tolerant Networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A general purpose defense mechanism is proposed against routing attacks on DTNs.Evolutionary game theory is applied to analyze DTNs routing security issues.The initial parameters affect both the convergence speed and the final ESS.The initial strategies of the nodes affect only the game process.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Delay Tolerant Networks,Evolutionary game,Routing attack,Routing security,Evolutionary strategy stable,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Delay Tolerant Networks (DTNs) often suffer from intermittent disruption due to factors such as mobility and energy. Though lots of routing algorithms in DTNs have been proposed in the last few years, the routing security problems have not attracted enough attention. DTNs are still facing the threats from different kinds of routing attacks. In this paper, a general purpose defense mechanism is proposed against various routing attacks on DTNs. The defense mechanism is based on the routing path information acquired from the forwarded messages and the acknowledgment (ACK), and it is suitable for different routing schemes. Evolutionary game theory is applied with the defense mechanism to analyze and facilitate the strategy changes of the nodes in the networks. Simulation results show that the proposed evolutionary game theory based defense scheme can achieve high average delivery ratio, low network overhead and low average transmission delay in various routing attack scenarios. By introducing the game theory, the networks can avoid being attacked and provide normal transmission service. The networks can reach evolutionary strategy stable (ESS) under special conditions after evolution. The initial parameters will affect the convergence speed and the final ESS, but the initial ratio of the nodes choosing different strategies can only affect the game process.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Delay Tolerant Networks (DTNs) [1] are designed to cope with the challenging conditions in the restricted networks with sparse density, intermittent disruption and limited energy. DTNs can be used in military, industry, transport, monitor, deep space communication and other challenging networks environments [2]. The messages are relayed hop by hop by means of the store-carry-forward mechanism. Importantly, routing is the main challenge in DTNs, and the routing techniques in traditional networks cannot work effectively in DTNs since it is extremely difficult to determine the potential end to end path toward the destination [3].The unique features of DTNs result in unique security challenges [4]. DTNs have features such as multiple hops, self-organization, and no central administration. However, in most cases DTNs are deployed in the open environment, and security problems are tough issues. The security threats of DTNs are different from those of traditional wireless networks because of the unique features, so the traditional methods to deal with network security threats are not necessarily effective and alterations need to be made [5]. As shown in Fig. 1, there are different types of DTNs security problems, and they should be sufficiently considered in different network layers. In the physical layer, the main problems are wireless communication jamming and nodes being compromised. In the link layer, the main problems are collision and wireless resource allocation. In the routing layer, the main problems are the routing attacks and routing security. The various routing attack countermeasures are discussed in this paper.Packets in DTNs are opportunistically routed toward the destination, making them robust against simple attacks such as packet dropping attacks [6]. However there are still some routing attack methods in DTNs. The primary attack methods include wormhole attack, blackhole attack, greed attack, tampering attack and so on. These routing attacks will severely affect the network performance [7]. In this paper, a general solution to deal with routing attacks in DTNs is proposed. First, a proactive defense mechanism is established based on the routing path information and the ACK information. Then, the evolutionary game theory is introduced with the defense mechanism to solve the routing attack problems in DTNs.The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 outlines the current state of routing security in DTNs. In Section 3, the defense mechanism is proposed and different strategies of nodes are analyzed in the evolutionary game system. The simulation results under various scenarios are presented in Section 4, followed by the conclusions and future work in the last section.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, first a general purpose defense mechanism is proposed for DTNs based on the routing information acquired from the messages forwarded by the relay nodes and the ACKs generated by the destination nodes. Then the proposed mechanism is applied with the evolutionary game theory to form a routing defense scheme which encourages the nodes not to attack but to cooperate with others. The evolutionary process is analyzed and the ESS of the game in different cases is obtained. Simulation results show that the proposed scheme can effectively deal with various routing attack issues and make the malicious nodes participate in the normal data transmission. We plan to carry out the future research work in two directions. One is to investigate other promising intelligent methods and malicious nodes routing attack models. The other is to further expand the mechanism to opportunistic networks.