@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Heuristic based trading system on Forex data using technical indicator rules

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Forecasting on time series data from finance domain (Forex).Using genetic algorithm for parameter selection and rule combination.Generating trading rules using technical indicators.Using greedy search heuristic for rule selection and combination.Applying hybrid evolutionary methods on real life very large data set.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Forex,Technical analysis,Technical indicator,Trading rule,Heuristic methods,Genetic algorithm,Trading system,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Technical indicators are widely used in Forex and other financial markets which are the building blocks of many trading systems. A trading system is based on technical indicators or pattern-based approaches which produces buy/sell signals to trade in the market. In this paper, a heuristic based trading system on Forex data, which is developed using popular technical indicators is presented. The system grounds on selecting and combining the trading rules based on indicators using heuristic methods. The selection of the trading rules is realized by using Genetic algorithm and a greedy search heuristic. A weighted majority voting method is proposed to combine the technical indicator based trading rules to form a single trading rule. The experiments are conducted on 2 major currency pairs in 3 different time frames where promising results are achieved.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Forex (FX in short) which stands for foreign exchange is the biggest financial market in the world with a daily transaction exceeding $5 trillion [1]. In FX, the currencies are exchanged simultaneously between 2 parties [2]. The participants in FX are widespread including banks, corporations, brokers/dealers, individuals, etc. EUR/USD is the most traded currency pair in FX market.Many practitioners and scientists are closely interested in price forecasting in FX. In this context, the analysis approaches are divided into two groups: fundamental and technical analysis. Fundamental analysis deals with the macroeconomic factors to explain and forecast the changes in price. Technical analysis aims to forecast the price changes using historical market data. Technical analysis approaches can be grouped as chart analysis and technical indicator based price analysis. Chart analysis focuses on the price charts with the aim of finding recurrent patterns in price. Technical indicators transform the historical time series price data to another time series data to detect patterns, identify trends, measure volatility in price and define the relationship between price and volume.The unstable and chaotic structure of price in FX market complicates forecast analysis. This leads to the usage of optimization methods. There are many generic heuristic methods, such as genetic algorithm (GA), simulated annealing (SA), etc. to solve optimization problems. GA is one of the most popular generic heuristic optimization method that generates solutions which evolve in time [3,4]. GA is based on evolution and genetics. Heuristic methods yield nearly but not necessarily optimal solution with reasonable computational effort and time.In this paper, a GA based trading system which is developed using trading rules based on technical indicators is described. The system is based on testing the technical indicator based trading rules for qualification, selection among these qualified rules and combining the selected rules. GA is used in the qualification test of the trading rules. The selection of the qualified rules is realized using both GA and a greedy search heuristic. The latter one is used to generate baseline results. A weighted majority voting method is proposed to combine the trading rules. Training data is used in all these phases and the system is tested using test data. The experiments are conducted on 2 major currency pairs in 3 different time frames.Combining technical indicator rules of various types, such as crossover and pattern based (i.e., Bollinger Bands based and divergence), is not common in the literature. There are two important challenging problems related to this combination process:•Crossover type rules’ signals can be calculated at each time instant by just using technical indicator values at that time. However, for the pattern based rules, technical indicator values of some time frame should be processed in order to discover the pattern of the signal.Different indicators may generate opposing decisions at the same time frame.Although crossover signals are calculated for each time instance separately, it is common to observe the same signal is generated in consecutive time instances in trend behaviors. However typically, pattern signals occur just at single time instance when the required pattern has been observed. Therefore, usually pattern signals do not exhibit trend behaviors. Therefore, in our model, when a pattern corresponding to a pattern based signal has been discovered, that signal is not produced only just for that final time instance, but that signal has been assumed to be generated for a short predefined time period. This approach made it possible to produce several signals at a time instance and combine various types of signals for decision making.In order to overcome the second problem, first, the strengths of the rules are calculated. Then, a rule selection method is applied, and finally, a weighted combination method has been utilized to combine the decisions of various, potentially opposing rules.We have tested our proposed rule selection and combination methods using a real data set. Especially when GA based rule selection mechanism is used, our system has produced stable and high profit for all test cases. In financial domain, it is not easy to construct a stable mechanism that always generates profit.The rest of the paper is composed of 5 sections. Section 2 presents the related studies on using technical indicators to forecast in FX market. Section 3 introduces the fundamentals of FX and trading as well as technical indicators and trading rules. Section 4 presents and elaborates on the proposed trading system. Section 5 presents the results of the experiments conducted on 2 currencies in 3 time frames. Section 6 gives a summary of the study, discusses the results and concludes with the future directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
