@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Efficient multi-feature PSO for fast gray level object-tracking

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel fast object tracking algorithm based on particle swarm optimization (PSO) method is proposed.The object's model is based on the gray level intensity.This model combines the effects of different object cases such as zooming, scaling, rotating, etc. into a single cost function.The proposed algorithm is independent of object type and shape and can be used for many object tracking applications.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Object tracking,Particle swarm optimization,Multiple-feature model,Swarm intelligence,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Robust and real-time moving object tracking is a tricky job in computer vision systems. The development of an efficient yet robust object tracker faces several obstacles, namely: dynamic appearance of deformable or articulated targets, dynamic backgrounds, variation in image intensity, and camera (ego) motion. In this paper, a novel tracking algorithm based on particle swarm optimization (PSO) method is proposed. PSO is a population-based stochastic optimization algorithm modeled after the simulation of the social behavior of bird flocks and animal hordes. In this algorithm, a multi-feature model is proposed for object detection to enhance the tracking accuracy and efficiency. The object's model is based on the gray level intensity. This model combines the effects of different object cases including zooming, scaling, rotating, etc. into a single cost function. The proposed algorithm is independent of object type and shape and can be used for many object tracking applications. Over 30 video sequences and having over 20,000 frames are used to test the developed PSO-based object tracking algorithm and compare it to classical object tracking algorithms as well as previously published PSO-based tracking algorithms. Our results demonstrate the efficiency and robustness of our developed algorithm relative to all other tested algorithms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Object detection and tracking is a fundamental component of artificial intelligence and computer vision. Object tracking methods are used in various areas such as military, surveillance, industry, medicine, etc. Interest in object tracking is fast growing in order to deal with the prohibitive amount of information we encounter in our daily life. Automation is desperately needed to handle this information explosion.Tracking objects in video sequences faces many problems such as the movement of the camera, the projection of 3D world on 2D image, non-rigid or articulated nature of objects, object fading obscuration, clutter, partial and full object occlusions, scene illumination changes and complex object shapes/motion. The appearance, position, and the scale of the object may vary with the background changes causing a loss of information. Therefore, tracking algorithms under such situations should be adaptive with complex scenes, robust with noisy images, and capable of real-time execution [1,2].Visual tracking usually comprises an optimization process for estimating the motion of an object from measured images in a video sequence. In the optimization process, either deterministic or stochastic methods can be used. The Mean-shift [3–5] and Snakes model [6] are most representative in all deterministic methods. Stochastic methods are usually fast but they can easily become trapped in local extremes because they depend on an iterative search for the local optimum of the cost function between the template image and the current image. On the other hand, one of the more appealing characteristic of the stochastic methods is that they can deal with strongly multimodal error/cost functions. Kalman Filter KF [7] and Particle Filter PF [8–10] are most representative in all stochastic methods. The computational cost strongly depends on the specific optimization method.Recently PSO (Particle Swarm Optimization) [11–15], a new population based stochastic optimization technique, has received more and more attention due to its implementation simplicity and considerable success. The particles in PSO interact locally with one another and with their environment in analogy with the cooperative and social aspects of animal populations, as found, for example, in birds flocking. In particle swarm optimization, particles move in the search space, where the position of a particle represents a candidate solution to the optimization problem. Each particle searches for better positions in the search space by changing its velocity according to rules originally inspired by behavioral models of bird flocking. Thus, a potential solution flies through the search space by following the current optimum particles and by adjusting itself according to its former experience and its relationship to other particles in the population and the environment. The advantages of this mechanism are, on one hand, the robustness and sophistication of the obtained group behavior and, on the other hand, the simplicity and low cost of the computation associated with each particle. Much of the success of PSO algorithms comes from the fact that individual particles have a tendency to diverge from the best known position in any given iteration, enabling them to ignore local optima while the swarm as a whole gravitates toward the global extreme.Since it was originally introduced, the PSO algorithm has been studied by a number of different authors [16]. During the last decade, many modifications of the original particle swarm optimization algorithm have been proposed [17]. The algorithm has been demonstrated to perform well for many static [18] as well as dynamic [11,19] optimization problems. PSO has been proven very successful for non-Gaussian and non-linear estimation problems. PSO is easy to implement and has been successfully applied to solve a wide range of optimization problems, ranging from biological and medical applications to computer graphics and object tracking. For more details on Particle Swarm Optimization Methods, taxonomy and applications see [20–23].In [61], another PSO-based object tracking algorithm entitled PSO Fuzzy Mean Clustering (PSO-FMC) was proposed. PSO-FMC uses hybrid image segmentation method and pattern matching method of the segmented objects between frames. Segmentation using fuzzy c-mean clustering to isolate object then performing matching consumes more time; moreover segmentation was difficult to be applied to other sequences because of the similarity between the background and the target.In this paper we present an object tracking algorithm that is based on particle swarm optimization. At the beginning of each frame the particles are drawn from a simple first order model with Gaussian uncertainty to cover the promising object locations and afterwards the particles motion takes place to concentrate the particles in the proximity of the center of the object template. In evaluation of the particle scores we employ the SIMilarity (SIM) and Bhattacharyya Coefficient (BC) fitness functions. The object template is represented by two object shapes. Every shape votes for the considered position of the object undergoing tracking. Owing to robust combination of such fitness-functions’ votes the object tracker is able to cope with considerable partial occlusions. Also, the usage of multi-feature object representation enables the algorithm to possess better recovery capabilities.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes related and existing work in this field. Section 3 introduces basic Particle swarm optimization PSO for object tracking. Section 4 discusses the feature selection for target representation and the tuning of the features’ parameters. The proposed system models, which utilize the unified similarity (SIM) function and the normalized Bhattacharyya Coefficient (BC) are discussed in Section 5. Over 30 video sequences, representing four distinct tracking environments, are used in section 6 to tests the proposed system. Conclusive remarks are addressed at the end of the paper in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this article, a robust PSO-based object tracking algorithm is developed. The algorithm uses window-based swarm particles. It, also, utilizes feature fusion between the Similarity and Bhattacharyya Coefficient to achieve robustness. The algorithm uses the pixel luminance only, rather than full color information of the tracked object; hence it is suitable for real-time systems.The proposed tracking uses two main features which combine most object changes like motion, scaling and rotation. We developed a test bench example to select the best feature combinations that achieve robust object selection under the aforementioned object changes. This test bench revealed that Similarity (SIM) and Bhattacharyya coefficient (BC) are the best combination for object tracking. The SIM fitness function is a robust function for tracking the object under motion and scaling conditions, and preserves the spatial domain characteristics, where the BC is good under rotation because it preserve the texture characteristics of the target.Over 30 video sequences and having over 20,000 frames and FLIR dataset are used to test the developed PSO-based object tracking algorithm and compare it to classical object tracking algorithms as well as previously published PSO-based tracking algorithms. Testing results, based on PETS criteria, are explained in detail. Compared to several published tracking algorithms, our proposed tracking algorithm shows improved performance as indicated by the tracking detection rate, occlusion handling and tracking error while preserving target size.PSO as optimization method is tested against PF and MS with the same fitness function. The PSO algorithm has the following advantages for real time object tracking:•Simple calculation per particle.Simple particle to particle interaction.High suitability for parallel processing.