@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A fuzzy information-based approach for breast cancer risk factors assessment

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Identifications of modifiable and non-modifiable factors that are contributing to the occurrence of breast cancer.A computer-aided approach to understand and to better evaluate root causes of breast cancer.Determination of these factors’ weights that can help breast cancer oncologists.An useful and efficient model to recommend preventive and protective treatments for breast cancer.Analysis of the results in different scenarios.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Rule-Based Fuzzy Cognitive Maps,Breast cancer risk factors,Fuzzy information,Fuzzy inference rules,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The aim of this study is to define the risk factors that are effective in Breast Cancer (BC) occurrence, and to construct a supportive model that will promote the cause-and-effect relationships among the factors that are crucial to public health. In this study, we utilize Rule-Based Fuzzy Cognitive Map (RBFCM) approach that can successfully represent knowledge and human experience, introducing concepts to represent the essential elements and the cause-and-effect relationships among the concepts to model the behavior of any system. In this study, a decision-making system is constructed to evaluate risk factors of BC based on the information from oncologists. To construct causal relationship, the weight matrix of RBFCM is determined with the combination of the experts’ experience, expertise and views. The results of the proposed methodology will allow better understanding into several root causes, with the help of which, oncologists can improve their prevention and protection recommendation. The results showed that Social Class and Late Maternal Age can be seen as important modifiable factors; on the other hand, Benign Breast Disease, Family History and Breast Density can be considered as important factors as non-modifiable risk factors. This study is somehow weighing the interrelations of the BC risk factors and is enabling us to make a sensitivity analysis between the scenario studies and BC risk factors. A soft computing method is used to simulate the changes of a system over time and address “what if” questions to compare between different case studies.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cancer has been among the most important health problems recently. Due to frequent occurrence rates and high mortality, cancer was ranked fourth among the known-cause of death in 1970s but now it comes second after the cardiovascular disease, which is the leading cause of death. Breast cancer (BC) has the second highest incidence rate in the world after the lung cancer and it is the leading cause of death in terms of cancer in women [1]. BC incidence and mortality may have conversion in different geographical areas. Though developed countries report higher rates of BC incidence and mortality, changes in the incidence of BC are most dramatic in low−middle income countries (LMC) including Turkey [2]. Overall, BC mortality declined thanks to higher-awareness and advances in detection, protection and treatment. However, it is well known that BC requires an expensive treatment as well as the use of limited resources. All of these bring burden on not only patients but also governments. Thus, originating strategies against BC prevention, protection and treatment have crucial value.Medical decision systems are complex systems that can be decomposed to non-related and related subsystems and elements, where many factors have to be taken into consideration that may be complementary, contradictory and competitive. These factors have a bilateral influence on each other and determine the overall clinical decision within a different angle. Building a mathematical model to identify the illness had previously been advocated using statistical model [3], generalized linear models [4] and so on.In this paper, a fuzzy cognitive maps (FCMs) approach is presented in order to explore the importance of these factors in medical decision making. To this purpose, a framework is formalized, based on the critical analysis of literature and experts opinions, in terms of factors affecting breast cancer and the causal relationship between them. After that, an application of FCMs approach is developed for the assessment of such factors in terms of influence on BC.Fuzzy Cognitive Maps (FCMs) can successfully represent knowledge and human experience, introducing concepts to represent the essential elements and the cause-and-effect relationships among the concepts to model the behavior of any system. In this study, we propose Fuzzy Cognitive Map (FCM) model that can help BC oncologists to better identify and evaluate the weights of modifiable and non-modifiable factors that are contributing to the occurrence of BC in their patients. FCM is a relatively new soft computing approach that makes use of the existing experience in the operation of a complex system and compound fuzzy logic and neural networks. Another very useful property of FCM is enabling the use several expert opinions and providing the opportunity to predict the degradation of a product. Thus, FCMs are compatible with medical decision support systems. In this study for the construction of FCM, fuzzy inference system (FIS) is used. FIS is a rule-based method and uses fuzzy weights by using linguistic representation with an associated fuzzy set, instead of binary variables. In this paper, the opinions of the BC experts are combined with the help of Rule-Based FCM (RBFCM), main risk factors are organized in order, eventually, and the relations among the factors are brought into light. RBFMC is an efficient knowledge representation and reasoning method, which is based on human knowledge and experience. It accommodates the knowledge-based building property and can be constructed by experts and/or historical data. The advantageous characteristics of this approach such as simplicity, supporting of inconsistent knowledge, and circle causalities for knowledge make it applicable to many diverse scientific areas from knowledge modeling, prediction and decision making. The results of the proposed methodology will allow better understanding into several root causes, with the help of which, oncologists can improve their prevention and protection recommendation.This paper is organized as follows: The next section presents an overview to BC and reviews risk factors for BC. In Section 3, the base concepts and the construction process of FCM are defined. In Section 4, the application of RBFCM to BC risk factors is done to indicate causal relationship. This section generates the weights of factors and presents a scenario analysis to propose the preventive actions against BC. The study is concluded in Section 5.BC emerges in breast tissues, usually the ducts (tubes that carry milk to the nipple) and lobules (glands that make milk). BS is the most common female cancer and the first most common cause of cancer in women mortality. The etiology of BC has great number of factors [5]. The risk factors for BC can be divided into “factors that cannot be modified” and “life style related factors that can be modified”.FCM is a causal knowledge-driven methodology for modeling complex decision systems, coming out from the combination of fuzzy logic and neural networks [32]. Extensions by Taber and Kosko [32–34] allow fuzzy numbers or linguistic terms to be used to describe the degree of the relationship between concepts in the FCM. FCM has been widely used in modeling and preparing decision supportive systems tool in different scientific and managerial problems. The medical decision process is complex because data collection is demanding and the combination of these data is vague, confusing or tough to interpret. At this point, FCM helps to overcome these difficulties and it has been used in many different medical research areas [35–39].A FCM describes the behavior of a knowledge-based system in terms of concepts: each concept represents an entity, a state, a variable, or a characteristic of the system [33]. FCMs include concept nodes and weighted arcs that are graphically showed as a signed weighted graph with feedback. Signed weighted arcs, connecting the concept nodes, display the causal relationship that exists among concepts. Generally, concepts of a FCM represent key-factors and characteristics of the modeled complex system and stand for events, goals, inputs, outputs, states, variables and trends of the complex system taken as model [40]. Concepts variables are represented by nodes and this set can be shown like C={C1,C2,...,Cn}. Arcs (Cj,Ci) are used to define causal links between concepts; that is how concept Cjcauses concept Ci. Causality between concepts allows degrees of causality and not the usual binary logic, so the weights of the interconnections can range in the interval [–1,1] or linguistic terms, such as “negatively very strong”, “zero”, “positively weak”, etc. Fig. 1illustrates the graphical representation of a simple FCM. (Fig. 2.)The sign of wijindicates whether there is a relationship between concepts Ciand Cj, or not. If wij>0, positive causality, if wij<0, negative causality and if wij=0, no relationship between concepts Ciand Cj. The direction of causality indicates whether concept Cicauses concept Cj, or not, or vice versa. These parameters have to be considered when a value is assigned to weight wij. So, for example, a decision of the example to create C4 will cause an increase in C5 to a degree w45. The value of each concept is calculated, computing the influence of other concepts to the specific concept, by applying the following calculation rule:(1)Ai(k+1)=fAik+∑J≠I˙J=1NAj(k)wjiwhere Ai(k) is the value of concept Ciat iteration step k, Aj(k+1) is the value of the concept Cjat iteration k+1, wjiis the weight of the connection from Cjto Ciand f is a threshold function.In order to be able to use the linguistic model, we need an algorithm that allows us to compute the output value, given some input value. This algorithm is called the fuzzy inference algorithm (or system). A FIS is a rule base reasoning way of mapping an input space to an output space using fuzzy logic. The set of rules in a fuzzy expert system is known as knowledge base. The functional operations in FIS proceed in the following four steps; evaluate the input for each rule, obtain each rule's conclusion, aggregate conclusions and defuzzification.The overall architecture of the study is reported step by step in Fig. 3and is intended as a basis for developing applications to support preventive decisions for BC. In the first part of the paper, the weight matrix of RBFCM is constructed and the weights of interconnections are obtained with help of fuzzy inference rule based method and using MATLAB (matrix laboratory). The connection strength is inferred on the basis of the cause-and-effect relationship for these factors by weight value. In the second part, factors that affect BC occurring are evaluated through a fuzzy recognition map and the weights of BC risk factors are calculated. Then, in the third part, the RBFCM is simulated in order the consequences of the imposed scenarios to be found using FCMapper Software. (Fig. 4.)In this part, we followed the following main steps to design knowledge base and construct the weight of interconnections [32][41];1.Determination of the factors that affect BC: In this paper, BC risk factors are determined based on deep literature survey and by experts and they were given to the experts to evaluate the relation. 26 risk factors, which are the most frequently searched among various concepts, are detailed in Table 1.Sign of the cause-and-effect relationship: The indication of causal relationship among defined concepts can be divided into three phases [42][43]. First one is determining the sign, negative or positive, of each relationship among concepts. The experts have deep knowledge about cancer, solid background and great clinical experience in medical oncology, especially in BC. Thus, each expert is able to determine the influence of one concept on another.Fuzzification (The representation of imprecise input data as fuzzy sets and definition of membership functions on input variables): While indicating the sign of causal relationship, second phase is evaluating the degree of influence using a linguistic variable, for example “very”, “some”, “few”, etc. The third phase can be defined as the mapping of linguistic terms to numerical values with a fuzzy degree of causation. In the study, the causal interrelationships among concepts are explained using the variable influence which is interpreted as a linguistic variable taking values in the universe U=[–1,1]. Its term set T (influence) is suggested to contain nine variables. Employing these variables, the experts defined in detail the influence of one concept on another and could distinguish between different degrees of influence. The nine variables used are: T(influence)={negatively very strong (nvs), negatively strong (ns), negatively medium (nm), negatively weak (nw), zero (z), positively weak (pw), positively medium (pm), positively strong (ps), positively very strong (pvs). [42].The corresponding memberships functions for these fuzzy terms are shown in Fig. 5and they are: μnvs, μns, μnm, μnw, μz, μpw, μpm, μps, μpvs. The sign of each relationship, relationship by means of linguistic terms and conversion from linguistic terms to numerical values according to first expert is shown in Tables 8–10 respectively.Knowledge-based fuzzy inferencing process: (Apply implication method IF-THEN rules) This approach has the advantage that experts do not have to assign numerical causality weights but describe the degree of causality among concepts. The experts explained the degree of influence between the concepts and they determined the relationship among concepts by using IF-THEN rule to reveal a linguistic weight representing the cause-and-effect relationship between each pair of concept.In this study, the single input single output Mamdani fuzzy model [42] is used. One example of the IF_THEN rule for the 3 experts is explained in below:1st Expert: IF a positive small change happens in the value of concept “Family History” THEN positive small change in the value “Benign Breast Disease” occurs.Infer: The influence from Family History to Benign Breast Disease is positively weak.2nd Expert: IF a positive medium change happens in the value of concept “Family History” THEN positive high change in the value “Benign Breast Disease” occurs.Infer: The influence from Family History to Benign Breast Disease is positively strong.3rd Expert: IF a positive high change happens in the value of concept “Family History” THEN positive very high change in the value “Benign Breast Disease” occurs.Infer: The influence from Family History to Benign Breast Disease is positively very strong.5. Aggregation of all outputs: Once three experts described each interconnection as above and the causal relationships for the same interconnection are determined, the outputs of each rule are combined into a single fuzzy set using SUM method. This weight is transformed to a numerical value, wij, belonging to the interval [–1,1] with the defuzzification method of Centre of Gravity (COG) [42,44].Fig. 6illustrates the three suggested linguistic variables for this particular example. These linguistic variables are summed and an overall linguistic weight is produced with which the defuzzification method of COG is transformed into the numerical value of e72=0.56. Then, the weight matrix of BC risk factors is created and is located in Table 11. Each weight represents the causal relationships that, according to the experts, exist between the concepts. This matrix, Table 11, is used in the scenario analysis process of FCMs, constituting an essential part in the inference process. According to the results of Weight Matrix, RBFCM model for 26 BC Risk Factors is constructed and shown in Fig. 7.This section describes how the RBFCM supports BC risk factors evaluation process. The value Aiof a concept Ciis calculated by computing the influence of the interconnected concepts Cj's on the specific concept Ciusing the Eq. (1). The FCM is a discrete time system where the activation levels of all the concepts are simultaneously updated, that is the system has synchronous updating. Each concept Ciof the FCM graph is accompanied by a numberAitthat represents the activation level of concept Ciat time step t. If n is the number of FCM's concepts, then the vectorAt=A1t,A2t,…,Antgives the state of the FCM at time step t. Each concept has an initial and final vector. The initial and final vectors of a concept, i.e. the values of FCM's concepts, represent the event at a given time and the last state, respectively. The steps of FCM process to obtain the final vector are the following:Step 1: Copy the matrix: The RBFCM process starts with the initial vector.Step 2: Check the matrix: The values of this vector are updated by using Eq (1) and a threshold function. Since the values Aiof the concepts can be negative and their values belong to the interval [–1,1], the function f(x)=tanh(x) is used. This new vector is considered as an initial vector in the next iteration.Step 3: Calculate indices: Calculate indegree, outdegree, centrality, Number of Vertices, Number of connections. (Table 2)Step 4: Calculate FCM outputs: Each concept (risk factor) influences the other concepts according to the weighted connections that exist between them (see Table 3and Fig. 7). The value of each factor is obtained by taking all the causal event weights and multiplying it by the value of factor that causes the event, that is, as per Eq. (1).Steps 2–4 are repeated until positive and negative interactions, between the concepts of the FCM, have reached equilibrium, i.e. until the |vector(t)−vector(t+1)|≤ɛ where ɛ>0 and small enough. After 125 iterations, the system is stabilized thus while chancing factors iteration number is not changed (Table 3). The BC concepts’ weights, ranked the most important, are shown in Table 4.After analyzing the system, the results showed that Social Class and Late Maternal Age can be seen as important modifiable factors; on the other hand, Benign Breast Disease, Family History and Breast Density can be considered as important factors as non-modifiable risk factors. Socio-economic level, both when it is high and low, contributes to the emergence of BC by influencing distinct risk factors. Menstruation in individuals, raised by wealthy, socio-economically improved families, starts earlier as they grow up relatively faster because of good nutrition. Besides, the children of such families have marriages and babies when they are much older due to their education and jobs. Eventually, high socio-economic level increases the effects of modifiable and non-modifiable factors such as early menarche age, late pregnancy, meat overconsumption, which contributes to the overall emergence rate of BC. However, lower socio-economic levels tend to lead an increase in Oral Contraceptive Usage as well as the rate of late diagnosis, eventually resulting in higher risks of factors such as family history, BRCA1/2 Genes.Another result obtained by RBFCM and observed in Table 4 is benign breast disease risk factor. The presence of certain benign tumours that are not cancer may increase the risk of developing cancer in various rates. Similarly, the second most significant non-modifiable risk factor is defined to be family history, in that, the women whose relatives had breast cancer are at higher risks of having BC. On the other hand, it has been observed that early menstruation, late menopause and the extension of fertile period promote the risk of developing breast cancer.First delivery age is yet another significant factor in developing breast cancer (Table 4). The risk of developing breast cancer increases in women who receive hormone replacement treatment for menopause. Also, Oral Contraceptive Usage results in a tiny increase in BC risk. Overconsumption of alcohol in women is a medium-level risk booster when compared with women who do not. While smoking is considered to be a medium-level factor, obesity in women contributes to the risk of developing breast cancer. Especially meat consumption is observed to have a high level impact on breast cancer.While doing case analysis, the weights of concepts are used as an input to the scenario cases. In the scenario analysis, FCMapper is used to dynamically simulate the resulting system and to test the influence of experts’ scenarios on system components. It allows simulating the changes of a system over time and addressing “WHAT IF” questions. After calculating the weights, we started to change the weights of the factors and tried to understand the changes of other factors weights. The changes can be positive or negative. Scenarios can be introduced to this FCM, examining, for example, what will be the consequences of changing BC risk factors’ weight. Moreover, the strength of the change can be tracked. Strength value of concepts and explanation is located in Table 5. In Table 6, the first column represents the weight of the factors, whereas the other columns demonstrate the changes taking place in the factors within each scenario. In the following part of the study, each scenario is observed in terms of the changed factor and the influence of the change on other factors. A study of this RBFCM inference processing for various scenarios, in terms of change value and straight, can be found in Table 7.(Tables 8–11.)Scenario 1: As observed in Table 6, when the weight of social class decreases, the weights of alcohol consumption, time interval in pregnancy, age at first birth and smoking increase and gain importance with a contribution to the occurrence of BC. The decrease in the gravity of the Social Class risk factor results in an increase in the gravity of the factors of Null parity and Oral Contraceptive Usage factors, while also causing a decrease in meat intake and late maternal age factors. In other words, since the women in lower social scales are not expected to benefit from an adequate infertility treatment, the gravity of the null parity risk factor will increase. Similarly, women with lower income and education levels tend to resort to Oral Contraceptive Usage as a birth control method and as a result, the gravity of OCs risk factor, which has an important place in BC occurrence elevates. On the other hand, as the meat intake is expected to decrease in lower socio-economic scales, the gravity of meat intake factor declines, just as the gravity of late maternal age factor as they deliver babies at early ages.Scenario 2: FCMapper allows changing more than one concept so meat intake and alcohol consumptions are combined. It is not surprising that women, who are consuming more red meat, have higher BMI, energy and fat intakes. It can be seen that when the weight of meat intake and alcohol consumption increases, they have impact on not only on modifiable but also non modifiable factors such as Menopause, TP 53 and Breast Density.Scenario 3: When the weights of alcohol consumption and smoking factors are increased, acknowledging the assumption that they are interrelated, nullparity and abortion factors gain importance. In other words, women with alcohol and smoking habits possess more risk in terms of BC if they are also nullparious or if they have a history of abortion.Scenario 4: Family history is an important risk factor for BC. The risk of developing BC is higher among women whose close blood relatives have BC. Before that, scenario analysis about modified risk factors is made; however, many people do not have any family history or genetic heritage. Therefore, we could also try uncovering what is the important factor if one does not have any clear risk factor with the help of FCMapper. To understand that, family history was changed from 0,98820417 to 0. When Family History weight changed, all the concepts’ weights dropped dramatically except for three concepts: Breast Density, HRT and Breast Feeding. The most decreased ones were BRCA1/2 Gene, TP53, Null parity and Early Maternal Age. Surprisingly Sporadic weight also dropped to 0.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
