@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Greedy breadth-first-search based chain classification for nondestructive sizing of subsurface defects

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Coupling the chain classification with greedy breadth-first-search (GBFS) algorithm, a new approach has been proposed for automated sizing of defects, utilizing radial basis function neural network (RBFNN) and support vector machine (SVM). It has been established that the proposed approach can successfully size subsurface as well as surface defects.Chain classification has incorporated dependency among the class variables (length, width, depth and height) and optimal sequence for sizing has been determined, for the first time.Chain classification with SVM appears very good for sizing of subsurface defects, especially, the depth and the height. This algorithm has ensured a mean accuracy of 94% as compared to 91.5% achieved by RBFNN.Chain classification has been able to significantly incorporate the dependency existing among the class variables and has successfully resulted in sizing of defects located even 3mm below the surface.Chain classification has been able to successfully classify, depth and height of the surface as well as near-surface defects, confirming its robustness.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Machine learning,Radial basis functions,Neural networks,Support vector machine,Greedy breadth-first-search,Eddy current testing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Machine learning including neural networks are useful in eddy current nondestructive evaluation for automated sizing of defects in a component or structure. Sizing of subsurface defects in an electrically conducting material using eddy current response is challenging, as the skin-effect and radial extents of magnetic fields are expected to strongly influence. Moreover, the information about all defect characteristics such as length, width, depth, and height is available within an eddy current image. Inspired by the recent developments in machine learning for multidimensional classification and their promise, this paper proposes chain classification for sizing of defects. Chain classification enables incorporation of dependency between the class variables which can enhance the performance of the machine learning algorithms. The best sequence among the class variables has been optimized using a greedy breadth-first-search (GBFS) algorithm and systematic studies have been carried out using the GBFS. Two well established machine learning classification algorithms, namely, radial basis function neural network and support vector machine have been used in chain classification. Coupling the chain classification with the GBFS, an approach for automated sizing of defects has been proposed. From modeled as well as experimentally obtained eddy current images, it has been established that the proposed approach can successfully size subsurface as well as surface defects.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Machine learning, neural networks, and fuzzy systems play a vital role in eddy current (EC) nondestructive evaluation (NDE), for automated and accurate sizing of defects. Sizing is critical for accessing severity of defects and in turn, ensuring structural integrity and safety of components in many areas of complex engineering, including nuclear, aerospace, and defense industries [1–5]. Due to the classical skin-effect, the eddy currents decay exponentially with depth in a material and the area of interrogation by an EC probe in the material is larger than the actual probe size due to the radial extent of eddy currents [6]. As a result of these effects, there is a possibility that a smaller size defect present in a material, close to an EC probe (surface defects) can produce an identical response to a larger defect, buried deeper (subsurface defects) in the material. This is expected to influence the reliability of interpretation and sizing of defects during time-critical decision making by human experts. Automated sizing of defects using EC response is an active area of research in NDE [7].Machine learning algorithms such as artificial neural networks (ANN) and its variants such as probabilistic neural networks (PNN) and radial basis function neural networks (RBFNN) were widely used for defect sizing using EC signals/images. Song and Shin [8] used a PNN for classifying four different types of defects. A numerical model was used to predict EC signals of 200 defects in an Inconel-600 tube. 22 features are extracted from the EC signals, and given as input to the PNN. This method was reportedly classified the heights of the defects with 91% classification accuracy. Rao et al. [9] proposed ANN for estimating the heights of surface defects in welds. From multi-frequency numerical simulations of EC signals, 8 features were extracted and used as input for the ANN. The ANN was able to detect and size defects with height 0.40mm with a maximum deviation of 0.08mm. Thirunavukkarasu et al. [10] proposed a RBFNN for estimating the height of surface defects. The generalization, interpolation, and extrapolation capabilities of the RBFNN were investigated using artificial defects in stainless steel plates. Reportedly, cross validation using the RBFNN was successfully able to evaluate the defects with height 1.2mm with the maximum deviation of 35μm. Recently, Bernieri et al. [11] studied sizing of subsurface defects in aluminum plates using ANN and support vector machine (SVM). In this work, 200 numerically simulated subsurface defects (with minimum defect dimension of 3.0mm in length and 1.0mm in height and 1.0mm below surface) were used for sizing of the length, depth and height of defects. They were able to estimate the length with a mean absolute error of 0.048 and 0.120 for depth and height, respectively.Sizing multiple defect characteristics such as length, width, depth, and height of subsurface defects is scarce in the literature [8–11]. This involves prediction of multiple (multiclass) class variables and it is a new concept in machine learning, called multidimensional classification [12,13]. This can be approached by developing one independent classifier for each class variable. However, this approach will not capture dependencies among the class variables. Recent studies have revealed that incorporating dependency improves the performance of classification [12–17]. Chain classification is a method to incorporate dependency. It is a method of sequencing class variables where previous predictions in the sequence are used for present classification [14,15,17]. Sizing of defects using chain classification requires thorough investigation to determine an optimal sequence as well as for efficient classification, which is addressed in this paper.The primary objective of this paper is to develop classification algorithms with four class variables for automated and accurate sizing of subsurface defects. This paper proposes the chain classification coupled with greedy breadth-first-search (GBFS) algorithm to address dependency. Systematic studies have been carried out using GBFS algorithm with RBFNN and SVM to assess an optimal sequence for the chain classification that explicitly represent the dependency structure between the class variables. The efficacy of chain classification has been demonstrated with numerically modeled as well as experimental EC images of defects in stainless steel plates.Eddy current (EC) testing is an important NDE technique widely used in aerospace, nuclear, petrochemical, and other industries. Almost all heat exchangers (boilers, steam generators, condensers) and load-baring structures of aircrafts are inspected using this technique, for detection and sizing of wall thinning, fatigue cracks, pitting corrosion, stress corrosion cracks, hydrogen embrittlement, denting and deposits. The main reasons behind this widespread use are higher sensitivity to surface as well as subsurface defects, high testing speeds (up to 10m/s), repeatability, ease of operation, versatility and data storage possibility. The most popular applications of this technique include detection of defects in plates, tubes, rods, bars, multi-layer structures, discs, welds, blades, and other regular as well as irregular geometries; material sorting; heat treatment adequacy assessment; proximity sensing; and coating thickness measurements [6].Eddy current testing technique works on the principle of Faraday's law of electromagnetic induction. In this technique, a coil (also called probe or sensor) placed over an electrically conducting material, e.g. stainless steel, aluminum, etc., as shown in Fig. 1is excited with sinusoidal alternating current to induce eddy currents in the material. According to Lenz's law, the induced eddy currents will produce a secondary magnetic field in the direction opposite to the primary magnetic field of the coil. This interaction results in impedance change. The change also arises due to defects such as cracks in the material [6]. The flow of eddy currents in the material is not uniform in the depth and lateral directions. The eddy currents are quite dense at the surface as compared to deep inside due to the skin-effect. Theoretical standard depth of penetration of eddy currents, δ, the depth at which the surface EC density has fallen to 37%, describes the skin-effect:(1)δ=1πfμσwhere f is excitation frequency, μ is magnetic permeability and σ is electrical conductivity. The locus of changes in impedance or induced voltage during the movement of EC probe over the material is called an EC signal. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the probe response or signal from a line scan of a probe is displayed on a complex plane with resistance as abscissa and inductive reactance as ordinate. In general, maximum magnitude of an EC response is the magnitude corresponding to maximum interaction region of a probe with defects which is highlighted in Fig. 1. The phase angle ϕ, at the maximum magnitude of the response is also displayed in Fig. 1.A series of parallel line scans (raster scan) of the probe over the material surface produces an EC image that gives a better perspective of defect with the information on spatial extent. Interestingly, it is also possible to simultaneously excite an EC probe with currents at several frequencies and obtain a response that has the information from entirely different interrogating depths. Multi-frequency technique is very important for sizing of subsurface defects. As can be seen from Fig. 1, four important characteristics of subsurface defects are length, width, depth and height. The information about length, width, depth and height of defects is embedded together in an EC image and cannot be readily separated. Typical EC images of a defect at 4 different frequencies are shown in Fig. 2. It can be observed from Fig. 2 that the length and width of the EC response of the defect are oversized than the actual length and width due to convolution of probe footprint with the defect and also due to the divergence of electromagnetic field in the thickness region. The image blur depends on the excitation frequency as well as the size of the defect. As a result, defect sizing will be inaccurate. In general, length and width of defects can be approximately estimated from EC images with image processing and the knowledge of probe footprint while determination of depth and height is rather complex. For sizing of defects, several researchers preferred classification algorithms to continuous mapping [2,3,8,11].Defect sizing is achieved through supervised classification by representing features extracted from EC images as input. The target is to predict the size of length, width, depth and height of a defect. The targets are represented as multiple (output) class variables and each class variable, for example, length, is by itself a multiclass classification [8]. Three possibilities exist for classification of multiple class variables as follows:•Decomposing each class variable into a distinct multiclass classification (independent classification).Representing a new class variable, formed from all possible combinations of every class variable (compound classification).Sequencing the class variables where previous predictions in the sequence are used for present classification (chain classification).Independent classifications cannot incorporate dependency between the class variables and the expressive power of classification algorithms is restricted. Compound classifications incorporates dependency, however, it will lead to data scarcity for each new class and a high potential to overfit them. Chain classification is a sequence of independent classifications combined with dependency [14,15,17]. This is an attractive method for sizing of defects from EC images with multiple class variables.In chain classification, d independent classification functions (g1(.), g2(.), …, gd(.)) are trained, representing d class variables. The process starts with the functiong1({xi}i=1N), wherex∈χ⊂ℝmis a vector of input features, predicting class values{ci1}i=1Nfor N input instances. Then, during execution of the function g2(.), along with x, the class values c1 is also provided as input:g2({xi}i=1N,{cˆi1}i=1N), that predicts class values{ci2}i=1N. In this way, the input feature x along with all predicted class values c1, c2, …, ck−1 is provided to the function gk(.). The chain process completes with the functiongd({xi}i=1N,{cˆi1}i=1N,…,{cˆid−1}i=1N)predicting the class values{cid}i=1N. The classification function g(.) can be any supervised classification algorithm such as ANN, SVM, decision trees and k-nearest neighbours. A typical chain classification for subsurface defect sizing is illustrated in Fig. 3. In this study, two diverse representations and learning algorithms, namely, RBFNN and SVM have been considered in chain classification.RBFNN has demonstrated its capability of classification in various domains including fault detection [18] and gene classification [19]. RBFNN consists of three layers, an input layer, a hidden layer, and an output layer. The hidden layer is formed from centroids that are determined by performing cluster analysis on the input layer. Determining the number of clusters is a user defined parameter called clustering factor, α, which is a fraction of the size of input data. For better generalization, and reliable classification, lower α is preferred. The hidden layer is activated by the Gaussian activation function governed by the spread parameter, μ. The output layer corresponds to the possible output class values and computed by minimizing the error between the hidden and the output layer. RBFNN can be used for multiclass classification. RBFNN is described in detail elsewhere [20].SVM has also received considerable attention for binary and multiclass classification in diverse areas of science and engineering such as fault diagnosis [21], speech recognition [22] and power prediction [23]. The basic concept of SVM is to find a decision boundary in the form of a hyperplane that bisects binary classification training data to its respective class. A constraint is posed to the decision boundary that it should contain a large margin between the classes. Formally, it leads to a convex optimization problem that is solved in its dual form. For nonlinear separable data, such as EC image features, use of kernel functions such as RBF, polynomial and sigmoid are highly preferred. The kernel functions are governed by the parameters such as δ for RBF, degree of polynomial, d for polynomial, and β and γ parameters for sigmoid. Detailed description of SVM, along with its properties can be found elsewhere [24,25].For defect sizing, RBFNN and SVM have been considered as the classification algorithms in the present chain classification study. The central question remains with chain classification is the determination of an optimal sequence of class variables to incorporate in the chain. This is an optimization problem which aims at identifying a sequence that maximizes the performance of the chain.The determination of an optimal sequence for chain classification is an optimization problem that can be represented as a search tree and it is different from traditional search strategies [26] in the following aspects:•Initially, the target (optimal sequence) is unknown.Performance evaluation (requires computation of classification algorithm) at each node (node expansion) of the search tree is computationally intensive than a mere visit to the node.Performance is a vector (a component for each class variable) and depending on the path and level of the search tree, the evaluation function modifies different components of the performance vector.Performance evaluation at a node of the search tree provides only partial information about the target.To address the above optimization problem, in this paper a modified breadth-first-search (BFS) called, greedy breadth-first-search (GBFS) is proposed. GBFS can optimize the sequence rapidly than traditional uninformed search strategies. The objective of the GBFS is to avoid tracing poor performing sequences that possibly degrade the performance and further, propagate the degradation in the chain.An example search tree for the GBFS is illustrated in Fig. 4. Three class variables {C1, C2 and C3} are taken in the example and represented as{Vc1,Vc2,Vc3}.Vc1is considered as the root node of the search tree and the first level and the second level chain is also displayed in Fig. 4. In the example, initially,Vc1is visited and expanded, followed by the visit and expansion of{Vc1→Vc2}and{Vc1→Vc3}.{Vc1→Vc2}represents the class values of C1 that are included during prediction of C2. The searching process continues, following the BFS. In the example, the performance of{Vc1→Vc2→Vc3}is computed by classification, only if, the performance of C2 in{Vc1→Vc2}is greater or equal to the performance of C2 during independent classification. Similarly, the performance of{Vc1→Vc3→Vc2}is computed by classification only if the performance of C3 in{Vc1→Vc3}is greater or equal to the performance of C3 in{Vc1→Vc2→Vc3}, if it is expanded, otherwise it is compared to independent classification of C3. The fact that GBFS algorithm ensures optimal sequence has been shown in Appendix.The pseudo code for GBFS is given in Fig. 5. Input to the GBFS algorithm is a class variable represented as a root node of the search tree. The children of this node are first level chain formed from all possible remaining class variables and so on. The algorithm initiates with a queue, for implementation of the BFS, and a bestPerformance tracker, containing the performance of each class variable. Any comparison is carried out only to the concerned individual class variable. The tracker bestPerformance is updated at each node expansion. A node is expanded using computePerformance(.) only if the performance of its parent is equal to the value of the bestPerformance tracker for the concerned class variable. At the end all the paths which improved performance over independent classification are returned. The performance evaluation is discussed in the next section.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
