@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Genetic evolving ant direction particle swarm optimization algorithm for optimal power flow with non-smooth cost functions and statistical analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Statistical evaluation for 20 test runs of PSO is added in the revision.Flowchart and CPU time are added.Statistical analysis is suppressed.Missing legends and labels are provided.References are provided in Journal's style.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Evolving ant direction particle swarm optimization (EADPSO),Optimal power flow (OPF),Velocity updating operator,Genetic algorithm,Non-smooth cost functions,Statistical analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents an evolving ant direction particle swarm optimization algorithm for solving the optimal power flow problem with non-smooth and non-convex generator cost characteristics. In this method, ant colony search is used to find a suitable velocity updating operator for particle swarm optimization and the ant colony parameters are evolved using genetic algorithm approach. To update the velocities for particle swarm optimization, five velocity updating operators are used in this method. The power flow problem is solved by the Newton–Raphson method. The feasibility of the proposed method was tested on IEEE 30-bus, IEEE 39-bus and IEEE-57 bus systems with three different objective functions. Several cases were investigated to test and validate the effectiveness of the proposed method in finding the optimal solution. Simulation results prove that the proposed method provides better results compared to classical particle swarm optimization and other methods recently reported in the literature. An innovative statistical analysis based on central tendency measures and dispersion measures was carried out on the bus voltage profiles and voltage stability indices.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Optimal power flow (OPF) is an important tool for power system operators both in planning and operation in the present day power systems. The important aspect of OPF is to determine the optimal settings of control variables for economic operation, while satisfying various equality and inequality constraints. The OPF problem is a large-scale highly constrained nonlinear non-convex optimization problem. Many conventional methods such as quadratic programming (QP), linear programming [LP], nonlinear programming (NLP), interior point methods (IPM), and Newton method have been applied to solve the OPF problem successfully [1–7]. Generally, these methods assume that the fuel cost characteristic of a generating unit is a smooth, convex function. However, there are situations where it is not appropriate, or possible, to represent the unit's fuel cost characteristics as a convex function. This situation arises when valve-points, units’ prohibited operating zones, and piece-wise quadratic cost characteristics are present [8].In the recent past, many heuristic algorithms, such as evolutionary programming [9], particle swarm optimization [10], tabu search [11], simulated annealing [12], and genetic algorithms (GA) [13] have been proposed for solving the OPF problem, without any restrictions on the shape of the cost curves. Further, many hybrid algorithms have been proposed to improve the search efficiency. For instance, an improved evolutionary programming (IEP) [14] was successfully used to solve combinatorial optimization problems; a hybrid evolutionary programming and tabu search or improved tabu search (ITS) [15] was used to solve the economic dispatch problem with non-smooth cost functions. Meanwhile, a hybrid tabu search and simulated annealing (TS/TA) [16] was applied to solve the OPF with flexible alternating current transmission systems (FACTS) device problem.In recent years, a new evolutionary computation technique, called particle swarm optimization (PSO) has been proposed by Kennedy and Eberhart in 1995 [17]. PSO has been motivated by the behavior of bird flocks and fish schools. PSO is one of the latest versions of nature inspired algorithms with characteristics of high performance and easy implementation. This method has been found to be robust for solving problems featuring non-linearity, non-differentiability, multiple optima and high dimensionality. PSO has been successfully applied to various fields of power system optimization such as power system stabilizer design [18], economic dispatch [19], and reactive and voltage control [20].Colorni [21] proposed the concept of ant system (AS) and applied to the traveling salesman problem (TSP) [22]. Ant algorithm has been inspired by the behavior of real ant colonies, in particular, by their foraging behavior. Recently, the ant algorithm has been applied to various optimization problems, such as unit commitment [23], hydro-electric generation scheduling [24], and the short-term generation scheduling problem [25].In this paper, an efficient evolving ant direction PSO based approach is proposed to solve the OPF problem with non-smooth cost functions. Evolving ant direction velocity updating operator selection is suggested to the original PSO algorithm. There are five velocity updating operations stated in this paper, but the EADPSO uses only one velocity updating operator during the solution process in each generation. The proposed EADPSO approach embedded with the ant colony search is able to constantly choose different but most suitable velocity updating operators during the solution process to accelerate the search for the global solution. The proposed approach has been tested on IEEE 30-bus and IEEE 39-bus standard test systems with three different types of objective functions. Simulation results demonstrate that the EADPSO method outperforms the classical PSO and provides significantly improved results compared to the methods reported in the literature.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 explains the formulation of an optimal power flow problem, while Section 3 details the standard PSO approach. Section 4 then describes the procedure of proposed evolving ant direction PSO. Section 5 presents the statistical analysis details and Section 6 gives the results of the optimization and compares methods to solve the case studies of optimal power flow problems with IEEE 30-bus, 39-bus and 57-bus systems. Lastly Section 7 provides the conclusion.The main goal of OPF is to optimize a certain objective subject to several equality and inequality constraints. The problem can be mathematically modeled as follows:(1)MinOF(x,u)subject to(2)g(x,u)=0(3)hmin≤h(x,u)≤hmaxwhere vector x denotes the state variables of a power system network that contains the slack bus real power output (PG1), voltage magnitudes and phase angles of the load buses (Vi, δi), and generator reactive power outputs (QG).Vector u represents control variables that consist of real power generation levels (PGN) and generator voltages magnitudes (|VGN|), transformer tap setting (TK), and reactive power injections (QCK) due to volt-amperes reactive (VAR) compensations; i.e.,(4)u=[PG2…………PGN,VG1………VGN,T1………TNT,QC1……QCS]where N is the number of generator buses, NT is the number of tap changing transformers, CS is the number of shunt reactive power injections.The OPF problem has two categories of constraints:Equality constraints: These are the sets of nonlinear power flow equations that govern the power system, i.e.,Inequality constraints: These are the set of constraints that represent the system operational and security limits like the bounds on the following:generators real and reactive power outputs(7)PGimin≤PGi≤PGimax,i=1,…,N(8)QGimin≤QGi≤QGimax,i=1,…,Nvoltage magnitudes at each bus in the network(9)Vimin≤Vi≤Vimax,i=1,…,NLwhere NL is no. of load busestransformer tap settings(10)Timin≤Ti≤Timax,i=1,…,NTreactive power injections due to capacitor banks(11)QCimin≤QCi≤QCimax,i=1,…,CStransmission lines loading(12)Si≤Simax,i=1,…,nlwhere nl is no. of transmission lines.Since voltage instability occurs when the system attains low voltages at load buses, the voltage stability L-index [26] is incorporated as an inequality constraint.voltage stability index(13)Lji≤Ljimax,i=1,…,NLHandling of constraints: There are varied ways to handle constraints in evolutionary computation optimization algorithms. In this paper, the constraints corresponding to state or dependent variables are incorporated into fitness function by means of a penalty function method. In this method, a penalty factor multiplied with the square of the violated value of variable is added to the objective function and any infeasible solution obtained is rejected. The constraints corresponding to control or independent variables are self-restrictive and handled in programming part by forcing them to be within the limits.PSO was introduced by Kennedy and Eberhart in 1995 [17] as an alternative to GAs. The PSO technique has ever since turned out to be a competitor in the field of numerical optimization. Similar to GA, PSO consists of a population refining its knowledge of the given search space. PSO is inspired by particles moving around in the search space. The individuals in PSO thus have their own positions and velocities. These individuals are denoted as particles. Traditionally, PSO has no crossover between individuals, has no mutation, and particles are never substituted by other individuals during the run. Instead, the PSO refines its search by attracting the particles to positions with good solutions. Each particle remembers its own best position found so far in the exploration. This position is called personal best and is denoted by pbest. Among these, there is only one particle that has the best fitness, called the global best and is denoted by gbest. The velocity of the ith dimension is defined as(14)Vi=ϖVi+C1rand()(pbest−Xi)+C2rand()(gbest−Xi)where ϖ is known as the inertia weight and Xiis the position of the i-th particle. The parameters C1 and C2 are acceleration coefficients, whereas rand() is a randomly generated value between 0 and 1. The position of each particle is updated for every generation. This is done by adding the velocity vector to the position vector, as described below:(15)Xi=Xi+ViThe main PSO algorithm is described as follows:(1)Create an initial population of particles with random positions and velocities within the solution space.For each particle, calculate the value of the fitness function.Compare the fitness of each particle with pbest. If current solution is better than its pbest, then replace its pbest by the current solution.Compare the fitness of all the particles with gbest. If the fitness of any particle is better than gbest, then replace gbest.Update the velocity and positions of all particles according to Eqs. (14) and (15).Repeat steps (2)–(5) until a stopping criterion is met.In this paper, the promising optimization approach such as ACO is applied for the selection of best velocity updating operator with best set of ACO parameters evolved by a genetic algorithm [27].The main objective of EADPSO is to use the ant colony search system to find the proper velocity updating operator to accelerate the search for the global solution [28]. The optimal values of ant colony parameters are evolved by genetic algorithm [27]. The EADPSO is discussed in the following:Step 1: InitializationThe initial population is generated randomly and is given by the following equation.(16)Xi0=Xi,min+rand().(Xi,max−Xi,min),i=1,.....,Npwhere rand () denotes a uniformly distributed random number within the range [0,1]. This produces Npindividuals ofXi0randomly. During initialization, the control variables, real power generations, generator voltages, transformer taps shunt reactive power injections and velocities for the control variables are randomly generated within the allowable ranges. The maximum and minimum values of generator voltages, transformer taps and shunt reactive power injections are given in Table 1.The ant colony parameters such as, the relative importance of the pheromone trail α, relative importance of the visibility β, evaporation factor ρ, scaling factor for the modification of the trail Q are randomly generated as binary strings to be subjected to GA search and are converted into the values within the limits given in Table 2as mentioned in reference [27] and pheromone trail τ is initialized heuristically to a small value.Step 2: Run power flow and evaluate the fitness value of each individualStep 3: Evolving ant direction searchIn every generation, each of Npants selects a mutation operator according to heuristic information and pheromone information. In normal ant direction search, the α, β, ρ and Q are fixed, where as in this proposed method these parameters are evolved using genetic algorithm method so that ant direction search is progressed optimally. Here standard GA implementation is used for evolving which includes reproduction by Rowlett-wheel selection, crossover and mutation procedures to find the optimal set of parameters for ant colony search. The parameters taken for GA search are: the length of the strings 16, the crossover probability 0.95 and the mutation probability 0.01. The fluctuant pheromone quantity is constructed based on the difference between the objective function value in the next generation and the best objective function value in the present generation and is given by(17)Δτi=QLK,ifpropermutationoperatorischosen0,otherwise,i=1,……,NpIn Eq. (17), the proper mutation operator is chosen when the objective value of the next generation is better than the best objective function value of the present generation. Where Q is the scaling factor for the modification of the trail and LK is defined as the following:(18)LK=objectnewbestpresent−objectnewwhere bestpresentexpresses the best objective function value of the present generation and objectnewexpresses the objective function value of the next generation.The pheromone updating employs the following rule:(19)τinew=(1−ρ)τiold+ρΔτiIt is observed that the probability of selecting a mutation operator is proportional to the pheromone quantity τiand the information ηi, i=1,……,N. The information ηiis defined as follows:(20)ηi=∑j=1nXijG+1−XbjGXijG+120.5whereXijG+1denotes the jth gene of the i-th individual in a population in the (G+1)th generation, n is the number of units, andXbjGdenotes the jth gene of the best individual in a population in the Gth generation. Hence, the probability of choosing a mutation operator is defined as follows:(21)Pi(t)=τiα(t)ηiβ∑i=1Npτiα(t)ηiβwhere α and β are parameters to regulate the influence of τiand ηirespectively.Step 4: Velocity updating operationAccording to the probability of choosing a velocity updating operator, the procedure for selecting the velocity updating operator in every generation is given here. For the given five velocity updating operators, the probability from 0.0 to1.0 is divided into five parts say [0.20.40.60.81.0]. Five integers are generated randomly between 1 and 5 say [32514]. As per the probabilities calculated in step 3, if the probability of one ant is greater than 0.2 and less than or equal to 0.4, then operator 2 is selected and this process is continued for the remaining ants. The five velocity updating operators are constructed as given below:(i) Using adaptive acceleration coefficients C1 and C2[29], the velocity updating operator is(22)ViG+1=ϖViG+C1φ1(PidG−XiG)+C2φ2(PgdG−XiG)where i=1,…,Np; ϖ is the weighting factor, φ1, φ2∈[0,1] are random numbers, C1, C2 are acceleration coefficients which vary with each generation are given below(23)C1=(C1f−C1i)GGmax+C1i(24)C2=(C2f−C2i)GGmax+C2iwhere C1i, C1f, C2iand C2fare constants. C1 decreases from 2.5 to 0.5 and C2 increases from 0.5 to 2.5. The weighting factor ϖ is given by(25)ϖ=1−GGmaxwhere G and Gmax are the number of current generation and the maximum number of generations respectively.(ii) Using adaptive weighting factor ϖ[30], the velocity updating operator is(26)ViG+1=ϖViG+C1r1(PidG−XiG)+C2r2(PgdG−XiG)where C1, C2 are acceleration coefficients equal to 2.0 and r1, r2 are modified as follows:(27)riG+1=4.0×riG×(1−riG)riG∈[0,1],i=1,2The weighting factor ϖ which varies with each generation is given by(28)ϖ=ϖ(0)exp−σGGmaxwhere ϖ(0) is the initial weighting factor and σ is the control parameter. The initial values are chosen as ϖ(0)=3.0 and ri(0)=0.48.(iii) Using iteration particle swarm optimization (IPSO). In this procedure, a new index called “iteration best” is incorporated into the velocity updating scheme of PSO to improve the quality of the solution [31]. The velocity updating operator is(29)ViG+1=ViG+C1φ1(PidG−XiG)+C2φ2(PidG−XiG)+C3φ3(IbestiG−XiG)where φ3∈[0,1] is a random number, C1=C2=0.002, C3=C1(1−exp(−C1G)) andIbestiGis the best value of the fitness function that has been achieved by any particle in generation G.(iv) Using the IPSO as above, the same velocity updating operator is used for updating the velocity using Eq. (29), but with different acceleration coefficients [32] given below:C1=C2=0.01,C3=C1(1−exp(−C1G))(v) Using fitness distance ratio particle swarm optimization (FDR PSO) [33,34], the velocity updating operator is(30)ViG+1=ϖViG+C1φ1(PidG−XiG)+C2φ2(PgdG−XiG)+C3φ3(PndG−XiG)wherePndGis the nearby particle that has better fitness. C1=C2=2.0 and C3=1.0. The nearby particle should satisfy the following criteria:(i)It must be near the current particle.It should have visited a position of higher fitness.The simplest way to select a nearby particle that satisfies the above two criteria is that maximizes the ratio of the fitness distance to the one-dimensional distance. In other words, the d-th dimension of the i-th panicle's velocity is updated using a particle called the nbest, with prior best position Pj. The fitness distance ratio that is to be maximized is given below:(31)Fitness(Pj)−Fitness(Xi)|Pjd−Xid|Step 5: Position updationEach particle changes its position by adding the updated velocity to the previous positionXiG:(32)XiG+1=XiG+ViG+1Step 6: Estimation and selectionThe fitness of the offspring is in competition with its parent. The parent is replaced by its offspring if the fitness of the offspring is better than that of its parent. On the other hand, the parent is retained in the next generation if the fitness of the offspring is worse than that of its parent. These two forms are presented as follows:(33)XiG+1=argmaxf(XiG),f(XiG+1)(34)XbG+1=argmaxf(XiG+1)where argmax means the argument of the maximum. Here argmax is used because the fitness function, fit=1/OF, where objective function OF is to be minimized.Step 7: Repeat steps 2 to 6 until maximum generation quantity is reached.The power flow algorithm is applied for each candidate solution to evaluate its fitness and determine the state variables. The optimization procedure stops whenever a predetermined number of generations are reached. Fig. 1gives flowchart of the proposed algorithm.In the statistical analysis, when observations, discrete or continuous, are available on a single characteristics of a large number of individuals, sometimes it will be useful to represent the entire data as far as possible by a single number without losing any information of interest. The statistical constants comprehend in a single effort the significance of the whole. They give us an idea about concentration of the values in the central part of the distribution. The statistical measures used in this paper are taken from [35]. The five measures of central tendency that are common in use are arithmetic mean, median, mode, geometric mean and harmonic mean. The dispersion measures used in this paper are quartile deviation, mean deviation, standard deviation.It is often useful to represent a frequency distribution by means of a diagram which also facilitates the comparison of two or more frequency distributions. In this paper histograms are plotted using the load bus voltage profiles and voltage stability indices based on predefined intervals.The proposed algorithm was implemented in MATLAB computing environment with Pentium-IV, 2.66GHz computer with 512MB RAM. The standard IEEE 30-bus test system was used to test effectiveness of the EADPSO approach. The test system consists of six generating units interconnected with 41 branches of a transmission network with a total load of 283.4MW and 126.2 MVAR. The bus data and the branch data are taken from [36]. The original system has two capacitors banks installed at bus 5 and 24 with ratings of 19 and 4 MVAR respectively. These capacitor banks are not considered in this work, rather the shunt injections are provided at buses 10, 12, 15, 17, 20, 21, 23, 24 and 29 as given in [10]. In this case study, bus 1 is considered as the swing bus.The cost coefficients and maximum and minimum limits of real power generations with three different types of generator cost curves are taken from [37]. The maximum and minimum values for the generator voltage and tap changing transformer control variables are 1.1 and 0.9 in per unit respectively. The maximum and minimum voltages for the load buses are considered to be 1.05 and 0.95 in per unit. The line flow limits are taken from [36]. The voltage stability index is considered from [26].In the normal ant colony search procedure the parameters α, β, ρ, Q are fixed. Generally, it is not easy to find optimal set of parameters for ant colony search. This is to be done heuristically through trail and error procedure. In this paper, these parameters are not fixed, but are evolved using genetic algorithm [27] so that better solution of OPF can be found with best mutation operator using optimal parameters of ant colony search. The ranges of evolving parameters are given in Table 2. Five velocity updating operators are used in this approach. Ant direction search selects one but effective velocity updating operator in each generation.In this simulation study, minimization of different objectives under different cases is considered to test the proposed algorithm. The objective functions taken into consideration are quadratic fuel cost, piece-wise quadratic fuel cost, and quadratic cost model with valve-point loading effects. All the objective functions are augmented with the equality, inequality, and voltage stability constraints. The maximum velocity is considered to be 1/10th of the difference between maximum and minimum values of the control variables.In each case study, two sets of 20 test runs for solving the OPF problem, were performed; the first set (PSO-OPF) is based on the classical particle swarm optimization algorithm and the second one (EADPSO-OPF) is based on the evolving ant direction particle swarm optimization algorithm. Population sizes, maximum number of generations and penalty factors are given in Table A.1.Nowadays the interconnected power systems are being operated under stressed conditions which impose threat to voltage stability due to low voltages. Hence, the voltage stability index is incorporated as an inequality constraint in the OPF problem. The proposed method uses L-index to assess how far the system is from voltage instability [26].In this case the fuel cost characteristics for all generating units are modeled by quadratic functions given by(35)fi=ai+biPGi+ciPGi2where ai, bi, and ciare the cost coefficients of the ith generating unit.The extended objective function incorporating the constraints is given by:(36)OF=∑i=1N(ai+biPG,i+ciPG,i2)+Kp(PG1−PG1lim)2+kV∑i=1NL(V−iVilim)2+kq∑i=1N(Q−G,iQG,ilim)2+kS∑i=1nlabs(S−iSilim)2+kL∑j=1NL(L−jLjlim)2where Kp, Kv, Kq, Ks, and KLare the penalty factors, NL is the number of load buses, nl is number of transmission lines and xlimis the limit value of the dependent variable x given as(37)xlim=xmax;x>xmaxxmin;x<xminThe minimum and maximum limits of real power generations and their cost coefficients are taken from [37].The control parameter settings of EADPSO algorithm are given in Table A.1. Table 3gives the optimal set of evolved ant colony parameters. Table 4illustrates the best control variables of OPF solution for population size of 50 for classical PSO and for population sizes of 30, 40, and 50 for EADPSO. The optimal fuel cost obtained by EADPSO for case 1 is 800.2276$/h, whereas for classical PSO the fuel cost is 800.4036$/h. Note also that all control and state variables remained within their permissible limits. Fig. 2shows the comparison of convergence characteristics of fuel cost of both classical PSO and EADPSO. The convergence of EADPSO for different population sizes is depicted in Fig. 3. It is quite evident that EADPSO gives the better results compared to classical PSO.The fuel cost characteristics for the generating units connected at bus 1 and 2 are now represented by a piecewise quadratic function to model different fuels given by(38)fi(Pi)=ai1+bi1PGi+ci1PGi2,fuel1,PGimin≤PGi≤PGi1ai2+bi2PGi+ci2PGi2,fuel2,PGi1≤PGi≤PGi2………aim+bimPGi+cimPGi2,fuelm,PGm−1min≤PGi≤PGimaxwhere aim, bim, and cimare cost coefficients of ith generating unit with fuel type m.The cost coefficients for these two generating units are taken from [37].The control parameter settings of the EADPSO algorithm in this case are also given in Table A.1. Table 5gives the optimal set of evolved ant colony parameters for case 2. Table 6illustrates the best control variables of OPF solution (case 2) for population size 50 for classical PSO and for population sizes 30, 40 and 50 for EADPSO. The optimal fuel cost obtained by EADPSO for case 2 is 629.4692$/h, whereas for classical PSO the fuel cost is 646.8027$/h. Note also that all control and state variables remained within their permissible limits. Fig. 4shows the comparison of convergence characteristics of fuel cost of both classical PSO and EADPSO. Fig. 5depicts the convergence characteristics of fuel cost of EADPSO for different population sizes. It is quite clear that EADPSO gives better results compared to PSO in case 2 also.In this case a sine component is added to the cost curves of the generating units at bus 1 and 2 to reflect the valve point loading effects given by [38]:(39)fi=ai+biPG,i+ciPG,i2+disin(ei(PGimin−PGi))where ai, bi, ci, di, eiare the cost coefficients of the ith generating unit.The fuel cost function is augmented with the constraints and is given by:(40)OF=∑i=1N(ai+biPG,i+ciPG,i2+disin(ei(PGimin−PGi)))+kp(PG1−PG1lim)+kV∑i=1NL(V−iVilim)2+kq∑i=1NG(Q−G,iQG,ilim)2+kS∑i=1nlabs(S−iSilim)2+kL∑i=1NL(L−jLjlim)2The cost coefficients for the first two generators are taken from [37].The fitness function used in the above three cases is given by(41)f=1OFwhere OF is the augmented objective function given in the above three cases.The control parameter settings of the EADPSO algorithm in this case are also given in Table A.1. Table 7gives the optimal set of evolved ant colony parameters for case 3. Table 9 illustrates the best control variables of OPF solution (case 3) for population size 50 for classical PSO and for population sizes 30, 40 and 50 for EADPSO. The optimal fuel cost obtained by EADPSO algorithm for case 3 is 930.7454$/h, whereas for classical PSO the fuel cost is 952.5912$/h. Note also that all control and state variables remained within their permissible limits. Fig. 6shows the comparison of convergence characteristics of fuel cost of both the classical PSO and EADPSO. Fig. 7depicts the convergence characteristics of fuel cost of EADPSO for different population sizes. It is quite clear that EADPSO algorithm gives the better results compared to PSO in case 3 also. Statistical results of 20 test runs of EADPSO are presented in Table 8.Table 10gives the comparison of the proposed EADPSO approach with classical PSO and other methods reported in the literature. Results clearly show the superiority of EADPSO over other methods.Fig. 8shows the statistical evaluation of the mutation operator selection in all the three cases. The statistical central tendency measures and dispersion measures are evaluated using load bus voltages and voltage stability indices of the global solution of OPF and are given in Tables 11 and 12. The intervals considered for evaluating the statistical measures for both load bus voltages and voltage stability indices are given in the histograms shown in Figs. 9 and 10.The histograms shown in Figs. 9 and 10 are constructed for load bus voltage profiles and voltage stability indices (L-indices) of the global best solutions of EADPSO and classical PSO methods. It can be seen from the histograms that voltage profiles are confined to the permissible limits as shown in histograms.From the histograms it can be observed that the number of load bus voltages at the boundary points, i.e. 0.95 and 1.05 are very less in number and majority of the voltages are in between 1.0 and 1.045 for EADPSO indicating that proposed approach gives better voltage profiles and voltage stability. From Table 12, it is also observed that the central tendency measures that are evaluated using voltage profiles in case 3 are more sensitive to voltages when compared to case 1 and 2.The standard IEEE 39-bus test system consists of ten generating units interconnected with 46 branches of a transmission network with a total load of 6150.5MW and 1409.5 MVAR. The bus data and the branch data are taken from MATPOWER [40]. In this system there are no shunt capacitors banks. In this case study, bus 31 is considered as the swing bus. The cost coefficients and maximum and minimum limits of real power generations are taken from MATPOWER. The maximum and minimum values for the generator voltage and tap changing transformer control variables are 1.1 and 0.9 in per unit respectively. The maximum and minimum voltages for the load buses are considered to be 1.06 and 0.94 in per unit from MATPOWER. The voltage stability index is considered from [26].In this simulation study, minimization of different objectives under different cases is considered to test the performance of the proposed algorithm. The objective functions taken into consideration are quadratic fuel cost, quadratic fuel cost with voltage stability enhancement, and quadratic fuel cost with voltage profile improvement (voltage deviation). All the objective functions are augmented with the equality and inequality constraints.In each case study, 20 test runs were performed for solving the OPF problem using evolving ant direction particle swarm optimization (EADPSO) algorithm. Population size is taken to be 50 and maximum number of generations is 250. The maximum velocity is considered to be 1/10th of the difference between maximum and minimum values of the control variables. The control parameter settings of the EADPSO algorithm for IEEE 39-bus system for all the three cases are also given in Table A.2.The objective function is(42)fi=∑1Nai+biPGi+ciPGi2where ai, biand ciare the cost coefficients of the ith generating unit.The objective function is(43)fi=∑1Nai+biPGi+ciPGi2+kvsLmaxwhere kvsis the penalty factor for the voltage stability index and Lmax is the maximum of all voltage stability indices.The objective function is(44)fi=∑1Nai+biPGi+ciPGi2+kvp∑iNLVi−1.0where kvpis the penalty factor for the voltage profile improvement and NL is the no. of load buses.Table 13gives the optimal set of evolved ant colony parameters. Comparison of objectives in the three cases with base-case and MATPOWER are given in Table 14. The control variables of OPF solution are given in Table 16. The optimal fuel cost obtained by EADPSO for case 1 is 36,139.46$/h, for case 2 is 36,175.36$/h and for case 3 is 36,195.52$/h. Note also that all control and state variables remained within their permissible limits. Fig. 11shows the comparison of convergence characteristics of fuel cost of EADPSO for all the three cases. Statistical results of 20 test runs of EADPSO are presented in Table 15.For the IEEE 39-bus system, the statistical evaluation of mutation operator selection in all the three cases is shown in Fig. 12. The statistical central tendency measures and dispersion measures are evaluated using load bus voltages and voltage stability indices of the global solution of OPF and are given in Tables 17 and 18. The histograms shown in Figs. 13 and 14 are constructed for voltage stability indices (L-indices) and load bus voltage profiles of the global best solution of EADPSO. The intervals considered for evaluating the statistical measures for both load bus voltages and voltage stability indices are given in the histograms shown in Figs. 13 and 14.It can be observed in Fig. 13 that for case 2 (voltage stability enhancement), a few number of load buses have voltage stability indices are at the extreme end of the intervals when compared with remaining two cases. From Fig. 14 it can be observed for case 3 (voltage profile improvement) that most of the load bus voltages are concentrated at 1.0p.u. when compared with remaining two cases.The standard IEEE 57 bus test system consists of seven generating units interconnected with 80 branches of a transmission network with a total load of 1250.8MW and 336.4 MVAR. The bus data and the branch data are taken from MATPOWER [40]. In this system there are three shunt capacitors banks. In this case study, bus 1 is considered as the swing bus. The cost coefficients and maximum and minimum limits of real power generations are taken from MATPOWER. The maximum and minimum values for the generator voltage and tap changing transformer control variables are 1.1 and 0.9 in per unit respectively. The minimum and maximum values of shunt reactive power injections are 0.0 and 0.3 in per unit respectively. The maximum and minimum voltages for the load buses are considered to be 1.06 and 0.94 in per unit from MATPOWER. The voltage stability index is considered from [26]. The details of the objective functions used for IEEE 57-bus system are furnished in Section 6.2.In each case study, 20 test runs were performed for solving the OPF problem using EADPSO algorithm. Population size is taken to be 50 and maximum number of generations is 150. The maximum velocity is considered to be 1/10th of the difference between maximum and minimum values of the control variables. The control parameter settings of the EADPSO algorithm for IEEE 57-bus system for all the three cases are also given in Table A.3.Table 19gives the optimal set of evolved ant colony parameters. Comparison of objectives in the three cases with base-case and MATPOWER are given in Table 20. The control variables of OPF solution are given in Table 21. The optimal fuel cost obtained by EADPSO for case 1 is 41,697.54$/h, for case 2 is 41,802.78$/h and for case 3 is 41,867.68$/h. Note also that all control and state variables remained within their permissible limits. Fig. 15shows the comparison of convergence characteristics of fuel cost of EADPSO for all the three cases. The CPU times taken for EADPSO with population size 50 for case 1, case 2 and case 3 respectively per generation are given in Table 21. Statistical results of 20 test runs of EADPSO are presented in Table 22.For the IEEE 57-bus system, the statistical evaluation of mutation operator selection in all the three cases is shown in Fig. 16. The statistical central tendency measures and dispersion measures are evaluated using load bus voltages and voltage stability indices of the global solution of OPF and are given in Tables 23 and 24. The histograms shown in Figs. 17 and 18are constructed for voltage stability indices (L-indices) and load bus voltage profiles of the global best solution of EADPSO. The intervals considered for evaluating the statistical measures for both load bus voltages and voltage stability indices are given in the histograms shown in Figs. 17 and 18.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
