@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multiresolution semantic activity characterisation and abnormality discovery in videos

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a soft computing-based approach for automatic activity extraction from video.The proposed approach learns the activity model in an unsupervised way.Activities are characterised and analysed at different resolutions.Semantic information is delivered according to the resolution at which the activity is observed.The approach detects abnormalities based on analysis of statistics of the observed activities at different resolutions.The approach is generic and works both, indoors and outdoors.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Video understanding,Semantic multimedia extraction,Activity reporting,Human behaviour,Scene topology discovery,Abnormality detection,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper addresses the issue of activity understanding from video and its semantics-rich description. A novel approach is presented where activities are characterised and analysed at different resolutions. Semantic information is delivered according to the resolution at which the activity is observed. Furthermore, the multiresolution activity characterisation is exploited to detect abnormal activity. To achieve these system capabilities, the focus is given on context modelling by employing a soft computing-based algorithm which automatically enables the determination of the main activity zones of the observed scene by taking as input the trajectories of detected mobiles. Such areas are learnt at different resolutions (or granularities). In a second stage, learned zones are employed to extract people activities by relating mobile trajectories to the learned zones. In this way, the activity of a person can be summarised as the series of zones that the person has visited. Employing the inherent soft relation properties, the reported activities can be labelled with meaningful semantics. Depending on the granularity at which activity zones and mobile trajectories are considered, the semantic meaning of the activity shifts from broad interpretation to detailed description. Activity information at different resolutions is also employed to perform abnormal activity detection.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Advances in sensor devices, communication and storage capacities make it increasingly easier to collect large amounts of multimedia material. Recorded video and/or audio is then made available in standard databases. However, the value of this recorded data can only be exploited by technologies that can effectively transform this raw data into structured knowledge with rich semantics that can be naturally understood by an end-user. Specifically for long-term video monitoring applications, there is an increasing need for systems with automatic human activity characterisation and recognition and delivery of knowledge with semantics-rich content description.However, in the field of video data-mining (including semantic video indexing and retrieval [1,2], mining frequently occurring objects and actions from videos [3–5], multimedia data mining for traffic video sequences [6,7] and mining of multimedia data for behaviour and activity analysis [8]), the gap between low-level image features and high-level semantic information still persists; and attempting to deliver semantic-rich description of the activities contained in the video remains a highly challenging task, not only because of the difficulty on automatically assigning semantic terms, but also because the semantic description of an activity could vary depending on the spatial context and the resolution level at which it is most appropriate to interpret the activity. A person waiting on a bus stop, for example, would be considered as a normal activity but if the person stands in another area it may be considered suspicious. In a broader view, if the person stands at different uncommon areas, it could be considered loitering.This paper focuses on characterising and analysing the activity contained in the video in a multi-resolution way. The novelty consists in designing an unsupervised system for the extraction of semantic information on human activities from video where such semantic interpretation may vary following different resolution levels at which one observes the activity. Furthermore, abnormality detection is also performed based on the analysis of the characterised activity at different resolutions.The activity characterisation is achieved through trajectory analysis. By employing clustering techniques, activity zones (context zones) can be learnt characterising the scene dynamics. People activities are extracted by relating mobile trajectories to the learned zones. The activity of a person can then be summarised as the series of zones that the person has visited. Zone-based activity characterisation has already been proposed in the past [9] and shown to work successfully. However, delivering discovered activities with semantics and automatically detecting abnormal events has not been fully addressed in these approaches.This work proposes to automatically attribute semantic labels to activity zones allowing to express activities themselves with semantics. Moreover, it is proposed to fully exploit the multiresolution information inherent to this type of activity characterisation for the detection of abnormalities. Two kind of abnormalities are considered: People staying too long on the observed scene and unusual taken paths.Instead of learning specific models of normal/abnormal activity, statistical properties of zone occupancy and transition between zones are employed to infer statistical thresholds of abnormality. Detected mobiles can then be inferred as having a normal or abnormal activity. This work presents results from a number of different and representative surveillance domains and shows that the approach is viable.The remaining of the paper is structured as follows. The next section gives a short overview of the related work. The employed activity characterisation approach is presented in Section 3. It is explained how to perform abnormality detection in Section 4, then the semantic labelling methodology is presented in Section 5. Section 6 gives the main results and evaluation. Finally, Section 7 draws the main conclusions and describes possible future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper has presented a multiresolution approach to automatically characterise people activities, deliver such activity with semantic terms, and detect anomalous activity such as people abnormally staying long in an area, loitering or taking low-frequented paths. The main innovation in the approach is that zone-based multiresolution characterisation is exploited to adjust the semantic interpretation when needed and extract statistics on zone occupancy and transfer between activity zones to establish statistical thresholds which allow differentiation between normal/abnormal activity.More specifically, the activity characterisation is achieved through trajectory analysis. By employing clustering techniques, activity zones characterising the scene dynamics are learnt. It is possible to extract people activities by relating mobile trajectories to the learned zones. The activity of a person can then be summarised as the series of zones that the person has visited. The proposed approach relies on the semantics that can be deduced from end-user defined areas on the scene, as this is the link to establish possible interactions between mobile and environmental objects of the scene. In the proposed approach, the system attributes semantics to discovered zones, which allows description of the discovered zone in terms of user-defined zones when available. To this end two soft-computing relationships are considered: The comparison of areas between discovered and user-defined areas, and the distance relationships between discovered and user-defined areas. From them, it is deduced, for a discovered zone, to which end-user area is best to relate and give semantic meaning. Then, situational events are delivered as the transition between activity areas.In this paper two kind of abnormalities are considered: People unusually staying long on the observed scene and abnormal taken paths. Statistical confidence levels (at 95%) are calculated as a threshold of abnormality for each learned zone and at each calculated resolution. By observing how far detected mobiles appear from this abnormality threshold at each granularity, it can then be inferred whether the mobile can be characterised as having a normal or abnormal activity.The approach has been shown to be generic as it has been successfully tested on different domains with indoors or outdoors scenarios. According to the ground truth, the proposed approach achieves high values of precision and recall.For the ARENA dataset, the non-detected events occur because tracking of the mobile object had been lost. The approach is indeed reliant on tracking maintenance to deliver complex events. Particularly for detection of loitering or abnormal long-stay maintenance of the tracking is important. One other vulnerability on the system is that because the approach is fully based on trajectory analysis the proposed approach, for instance, in the CAVIAR scenarios, is unable to indicate if the person is abnormally staying long in an area simply standing or because they have fallen down. A possibility would be to analyse the change of size of bounding box or include more complex analysis like posture recognition (this also applies for the recognition of activities involving more instantaneous actions: sitting, eating, fighting). Future work could consider a combination of more low-level image descriptors that can strengthen the activity interpretation. In parallel, work could be undertaken at a higher level allowing the approach to potentially manage either broken tracks, tracks corresponding to different mobiles, or tracks of the same mobile in different cameras.