@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Intelligent customer complaint handling utilising principal component and data envelopment analysis (PDA)

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Determine the strengths and weaknesses of customer services based on statistical and mathematical method.Analysis CRM system based on most important’, ‘important’ and ‘ordinary’ customers.Study CRM system in important Australian port.Using DEA to optimised recognition of customers’ complaints.Using PCA in order to modelling in a optimised space.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Customer relationship management,Customer satisfaction,Principal component analysis,Data envelopment analysis,Customer complaint,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this study, we consider customer to be a company's crucial asset. In order to have a fast, efficient decision-making process, it is vital that a customer relationship management (CRM) decision-maker condenses and abstracts the existing information. A questionnaire survey was conducted among respondents in order to obtain the required data. The questionnaire contains nine categories of satisfaction variables. To perform the analysis, we used principal component analysis (PCA) and data envelopment analysis (DEA). PDA has been utilised as an abbreviation for the integration of these two methods. To effectively analyse the procedure, PCA was utilised to assign a number to each category of questions related to each satisfaction variable. To achieve optimal precision, DEA was applied to the three categories of customers (‘most important’, ‘important’ and ‘ordinary’ customers) in order to determine the strengths and weaknesses of customer services from these customers’ perspectives. Customers were clustered and then DEA was used to determine their viewpoints. Using DEA, we have optimised our recognition of customers’ complaints and then provided recommendations and remedial actions to resolve the current issues in logistics and transport industry in general, and at Fremantle port in particular.SignificanceThe current study integrates soft computing and optimisation technique in order to build the CRM recommender system. It demonstrates the hybrid soft computing strengthens in area of CRM as the relevance solution. The significance of the proposed algorithm is three fold. First, it integrates soft computing and optimisation technique in order to build the CRM recommender system. Second, it utilises the most standard CRM variables in its decision making process. Third, it is an optimising algorithm because it integrates DEA with PCA technique.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
To date, complaints and the ways with which they are dealt have posed a significant dilemma for companies, and companies respond in different ways. Likewise, each customer has an individual attitude towards a complaint issue, manifested in what is known as customer complaint behaviour [1,2]. Specifically, handling of customer complaints and providing satisfaction to customers have become unavoidable and must be acknowledged by organisations. Unfortunately, many of service recovery methods attempted by companies have been unsuccessful [3]. This is despite the fact that the manner in which companies respond to customer complaints will influence future customer behaviours [4]. The literature indicates that researchers have investigated and developed various techniques to address customer complaints. Although many frameworks and approaches have been proposed to evaluate and address customer complaints, most of the research work fails to address the fact that companies today are facing an immeasurable quantity of complaints, and due to customers’ high expectations, companies cannot address the complaints in an effective way. Moreover, not all complaints are being processed by the organisations. In the majority of cases, organisations do appear to resolve customers’ issues on the surface, but in fact use PR tactics to claim they have addressed all problems. Finally, none of the previous works have evaluated customers’ viewpoints and customer complaints. Thus, there are still many unresolved customer complaints that have not yet been addressed. In this study, we have identified many complaints from various customers which need to be addressed in order to restore the productivity in the logistics and transport industry. Also, complaints need to be handled in a manner that is appropriate, timely and effective in order to retain existing customers and acquire new ones. Customers are of paramount importance in every organisation. To manage and handle all kinds of issues related to them, customer relationship management (CRM) frameworks are used. CRM is a company's mindset and combination of policies and decision making procedures that are designed to acquire and retain customers as well as generating effective customer service and value. These frameworks help an organisation to improve customer satisfaction which is of vital importance to them. For example, research is the literature has shown that (a) existing customers comprise about 65–80% of a company's business research has depicted that organisations must be eager in maintaining customers whether current or potential, gratified. Statistical analysis taken from the literature has shown that [5]; (b) attracting a new customer to a company costs between 8 and 10 times more than retaining the current customers [6]; (c) 91% of unhappy customers do not have a tendency to repeat their purchase [5]; (d) an unhappy customer with an unpleasant service experience will spread negative word of mouth to approximately 8–16 people [6]; (e) if customer complaints are appropriately addressed, about 82–95% of customers may remain with an organisation [7]; and (f) an organisation's profit can be increased by as much as 100% by retaining an extra 5% of customers and a 5% decline in customer churn rate by 25–125% [8], [9]. According to [10], CRM creates relationship and value. By using CRM systems and strategies, we can optimise our ability to target valuable customers, create the most effective marketing messages, customise goods and services, and decrease the level of cost. Since CRM is a comprehensive business strategy, it is a sound investment for organisations, although it cannot always fully meet the needs of organisations in terms of profitability and cost effectiveness. Also, the relationships that CRM create are quite often superficial and short-lived [11]. On the other hand, CRM is considered to be a strategic weapon with which to acquire customers and retain them, and generates mutual value for both customers and organisation [12].CRM assists organisations in a variety of areas including marketing, business procedures, dealing with customers and complaints. In this paper, our focus is on complaints and complaint management. To better understand the nature of a customer's complaint, the significance of people, process and technology which is absolutely rooted in every single step of CRM process, need to be clarified [13]. Customers are central to all CRM activities regardless of environment. Customers are an intrinsic part of every organisation and CRM must be based on this fact. So, a complaint can be considered as a sub-set of voice. Whenever and wherever customers exist, it is inevitable that there will be both compliments and complaints; what must be acknowledged is that both can be used to increase the productivity of company and ensure the reliability of the systems and strategies. Complaint is defined as a disagreement that one has from the other. Complaint can be manifested in a set of behavioural and non-behavioural responses, and occasionally is demonstrated by an expression of dissatisfaction with a situation [1,2]. Likewise, CRM is a means of consolidating the relationship between clients and employees [13].To date, the application and implementation of CRM in various industries has not been exceptional. To this aim, cutting edge aspects of CRM should be considered to improve the existing situation of industries. The efficient capturing of the customers’ voice is one of the major facets of successful CRM systems that has not yet been seriously considered, and in some cases not perceived, by organisations. As discussed earlier, the customers’ voice, particularly regarding complaints, needs to be heeded to enable an organisation to evaluate customer complaints and viewpoints. This will lead to better customer satisfaction. In this study, to optimise receptiveness to customer complaints and voice, we adopt mathematical formulas and aim for maximum precision, which previous studies have failed to do. Also, using mathematical formula, key customers will be identified so as to derive the best possible feedback. In the final stage, proposing an algorithm, the raw data will be converted into policy making and recommendations to resolve customers’ issues.The structure of this paper is as follows: In Section 2, we discuss the typology and the studies which have been undertaken by other researchers. Then, we compare various approaches with the one which is conducted in this study, followed by a discussion of the shortcomings of this study. In Section 3, the tools used for this study will be described. Section 4 introduces a case study. It presents the methodology, conceptual framework and approaches that were taken to analyse and formulate the problems. Finally, in Section 5, the collected data is analysed. The paper ends with recommendations intended to resolve existing issues and improve the port system and level of customer satisfaction.In this study, we utilised a new method to collect the most valuable viewpoints and rank the comments using a mathematical tool.According to previous findings, there are three types of CRM: operational, analytical and collaborative.Operational CRM supports business procedures and customer touch points. It provides a comprehensive view of customers and delivers personalised services to them. It also includes the business processes which have the ability to enhance the effectiveness of daily customer interactions and operations [14].Collaborative CRM facilitates communications and interactions between customers and businesses. It is utilised to establish the long-term value of customers beyond the transaction by creating a value proposition and partnering relationship for them. It also includes components that enable a company to directly interact with its customers [14].Analytical CRM is used to test and analyse customer data generated by operational tools for the purpose of business performance management. It also, provides an analysis of customer data and behavioural patterns in order to improve business decisions [14].The methodology presented in this study is mostly analytical-oriented CRM the activities of which are intended to analyse and evaluate the acquired customer data; it is developed by operational tools with the aim of administering and improving business performance. Analytical CRM occurs after operational CRM as data is gathered at the operational level. In analytical CRM, the acquisition of data and the stages of data analysis and evaluation are an ongoing process. Also, analytical CRM refines data while processing it and ideally creates business policy making for the company because it is a step-by-step procedure. Analytical CRM can provide answers to questions such as: What happened? Why did it happen? What will happen? And what might happen if new issues arise? It is mostly adopted by companies to create an effective bond with customers. It also visualises and analyses business data to achieve customer recognition by the system and ascertain the company's performance.Analytical CRM can be implemented using the following tools:(A)Data mining: Data mining is the process of implicit and actionable extraction of knowledge from a database. It turns the data into information and knowledge which can possibly lead to decision-making for the company. Regarding customer communication with an organisation, different types and sizeable amounts of data are produced. Improved CRM performance depends on the extent to which customers’ needs are recognised. Data mining capability CRM is able to turn raw and enormous amounts of data into the knowledge of customers’ needs and preferences. Data mining includes five tasks: Prediction, estimation, clustering, classification and affinity grouping that could be used in different situations. Usually, data mining does not use optimisation techniques such as DEA to extract knowledge from raw data [15]. In other words, the focus of data mining is more on estimation, prediction, clustering and classification tasks that is far from DEA method [16]. The inclusion of optimisation techniques such as DEA and PCA in data mining algorithms is a possible future direction. The optimisation strength of these techniques may arm CRM system with solid solution. The current literature shows that optimisation techniques have not been used in data mining along the lines of the present study. Data mining can help to evaluate behaviour and customer complaints. According to Wei [17], CRM has the capability of retaining and acquiring customers. The authors used web mining and obtained loyal customers’ data from the company's website. The final outcome of this study was the recognition of customer demands. Also, Babu and Bhuvaneswari [18] adopted CRM to better interact with customers. Data mining was introduced in this study to maintain customer bond. Using the CRM data mining technique, they mined customers’ information from the company's database. The ultimate goal of using data mining was to provide long-term value and satisfaction for the customers. They optimised customer selection and some of the issues that arose with earlier approaches were prevented.ANOVA: Analysis of variance (ANOVA) is a statistical tool used to test different hypotheses in several groups. ANOVA has been usually used in CRM applications to determine if there is a significant difference in the level of customer satisfaction between categories. Also, ANOVA can be adopted to identify the difference between the dimensions of sources that have been applied within a research to be measured. The outputs of ANOVA generate recommendations at a high level and therefore cannot generate an applicable CRM improvement strategy. The study by Lin and Su [19] introduced linear modelling to ANOVA. ANOVA has been used to study the effect of interaction between circumstances. The sources have been found by the researchers and ANOVA was employed to identify the differences between two industries. Also, another study by [20]was intended to improve business quality and satisfaction. To analyse the questionnaire, they used single-factor ANOVA in order to ascertain facts and client behaviour with respect to the CRM strategies.Structural equation modelling (SEM): SEM is a statistical modelling tool used to evaluate a proposed scale of variables [21]. SEM is intended to fit models to data. Using SEM, the prediction of customer values and proposed hypotheses is more accurate. Likewise, it allows the relationship between variables to be determined. Also, with SEM, researchers can identify the usability and performance of the main variables applied in a model. Again it is only useful for some theoretical studies and could not produce applicable recommendation. It is utilised to predict customer values and proposed hypotheses. It only ascertain the hypotheses at the higher level; however, if we need to ascertain hypotheses in detail using recommendations, we should use other tools and approaches. Arnold et al. [22] provide insight that the management of every company must have a strategic focus on customer acquisition. They collected their data from 225 business entities, and provided a solution model based upon a conceptual framework. They formulated twelve hypotheses. They conducted six comprehensive interviews and surveyed twenty companies for data collection purposes. To obtain consistency, they built a coefficient of variance to determine the extent to which five dimensions deviated from the mean. They tested the validity of the hypotheses with SEM after applying factor analysis. The outcomes indicate that the influence of customer acquisition and retention is intensified when a company consistently implements a CRM strategy. In another study conducted by Farsijani et al. [23], SEM has been utilised to analyse the data in a questionnaire and to test the generated hypotheses. In a similar study done by Wu and Lu [24], the researchers considered the significance of CRM in terms of relationship marketing in the hotel industry in Taiwan. They used a questionnaire survey and the outcomes illustrate the positive impact that CRM has on business activities. To conduct the analysis, they adopted a qualitative study by which they selected hypotheses. In order to test the hypotheses, they adopted structural equation modelling to discover causes and effects.Probit model: This is an econometric model, a specific regression and ordinal method that belongs to the classification approaches. Actually, the Probit model is a data mining tool (classification task) that is popular because of its robustness and flexibility. Researchers tend to use this approach for the binary selection of variables and to overcome evaluation challenges. It could be used for classification modelling but cannot deal with unstructured data. The Probit model could be used as the churn analysis tool but it cannot generate suitable strategies in order to retain dissatisfied and risky customers. In other words, it is purely a statistical tool only. Using the binary formulation derived from [25], the researchers modelled customers’ feedback to decrease the chance of absorbing unprofitable customers. The Probit model has not been widely used in CRM studies; to create sustainability in a work setting, a CRM is essential. The Probit model in the study by Selim [26] is used to create satisfaction in the food industry. Also, Larivière and Van Den Poel [27] used the Probit model to study the shortage of customer churn in the Belgian banking system. A Probit model was used to investigate customers’ preferences in order to test findings of the analysis. The results illustrate that customer retention does not depend only on the personality of the customers.Factor analysis (FA): This is a statistical analysis method and a mathematical tool for testing a wide scope of data sets; this approach has been widely used in feature selection techniques. Therefore, it is a data mining tool in the modelling preparation stage. In a study by Agariua and Singh [28], a questionnaire survey was conducted of the banking sector using exploratory factor analysis. They ascertained that CRM is the only critical success factor in business performance. In another study conducted by Ang and Buttle [29], factor analysis was employed to sort out customer complaints in a CRM environment. Also, exploratory factor analysis was utilised by Zhang et al. [30], in hotel industry to test the relationship between environmental sustainability and performance.Analytical hierarchy process (AHP): The Analytical hierarchy process (AHP) is a multiple-criteria decision-making approach that is used for group decision-making based on various explanatory criteria. It is also is a structured technique for dealing with complicated decisions. AHP is based on the domain knowledge of the organisation experts; in other words, it is a supervised approach. When access to the domain knowledge and organisation experts is difficult, time-consuming and costly, AHP does not provide precise and suitable results. According to [31], AHP can be consolidated with linear programming to analyse tangible and intangible factors. Also, AHP can be used to determine the priority of the major factors. In [32], authors considered the impact of CRM on the success of an oil and gas company in Iran. For the data collection stage, they used questionnaire analysis, and then used the analytical hierarchy process tool to estimate and prioritise status. Wu and Cai [33] used the AHP model in the logistics industry in parallel with CRM to acquire more customers and to evaluate customers’ value.Analytical network process: ANP is an abstraction of AHP “It is an approach which can take the inner and outer dependencies among multiple criteria into consideration” [13]. ANP method is also used to analyse the inputs and outputs of multiple procedures. It is also utilised to assess technological or business decision choices [34]. This method has been used in [13], “to have a comparison over CRM performances of e-commerce companies utilising a multiple criteria decision making process”. Also, Chang and Yang [35] proposed the ANP method to capture customer preferences. Using the final outcome of the analysis, cosmetic companies can use attributes and provide an advantage to the consumers. Also, the company can effectively position the brand and the price in the minds of consumers.Data envelopment analysis (DEA): DEA is a non-parametric mathematical approach used to measure and analyse the effectiveness. It sorts out inputs and outputs simultaneously [36]. DEA evaluates and compares the relative efficiency of the questionnaire survey in order to generate success by targeting the most significant and profitable customers. DEA is utilised to estimate the degree of management efficiency in decision-making units. DEA has been used widely in different and various applications and is also used in CRM for the different objectives but it has never been used to analyse a questionnaire. [37] found that the customer-company relationship comprises customer satisfaction and the communication capability of the system. In this study, DEA was used to measure the effectiveness of multiple inputs and outputs. Min [38] conducted a study of the hotel industry to address the issue of hotels losing patrons. It was concluded that hotels need to adopt a CRM strategy to acquire more customers. This study used DEA to evaluate and find effective practices for customer acquisition.Principal component analysis (PCA): PCA is a multivariate statistical tool that tests a set of data with the aim of extracting the major information and display it in an integrated format [39]. It was the first time that PCA was used as a feature selection tool in the DEA modelling in the present study. In with the study by [40], PCA is used in a logistics company. It is incorporated with AHP to visibly eliminate the disadvantages of various other approaches when choosing the optimum weight. Dawson et al. [41] proposed that PCA can be applied to achieve the necessary cultural and personal characteristics required in a hospitality industry.In this study, we propose an integrated set of techniques to implement CRM in order to find and rank the viewpoints of key customers based on questionnaire data. Furthermore, the important features of the CRM system are identified based on customer complaints and viewpoints using text mining analysis. In fact, Text mining is used in the current work to determine main causes of customers’ dissatisfaction. The procedure is explained in detail in the work of Faed et al. [42]. In the final stage, customers’ viewpoints are optimised, forming the basis for recommendations and new policy to resolve customer issues.The major impact of CRM on organisations is the creation of customer satisfaction and generation of loyalty using people, process and technology. Also, it is a complete set of procedures and technologies for managing the relationship with potential and current clients and business partners across marketing, sales, and service areas, irrespective of the interaction pathways. While these two functions are valid, there are numerous issues facing companies and it appears that these issues are not being addressed appropriately. Likewise, the CRM approaches that companies take to solve the issues are not quite precise and most of the time they do not increase profitability. Motivated by the desire to significantly increase their profitability, companies adopt CRM strategies, but too often these do not produce the anticipated successful outcomes. Furthermore, today organisations are receiving numerous negative feedbacks; due to the nature of their particular region or simply because of expectations of customers in that specific part of the country, individuals has different needs, wants and demands that the organisation is expected to meet. Hence, we need to create a consolidated model by means of which organisations can meet all kinds of customers’ requirements as well as address customers’ complaints. In this study, we have multiple inputs and therefore expect to have multiple outputs. As there are many customers at the Fremantle port, one aim of the study was to create a cutting edge methodology to reduce the data and then categorise customer's viewpoints and customers’ complaints. Another aim was to optimise the analysis, thereby optimising the understanding of port customers’ viewpoints. The study concludes with recommendations addressing ongoing and recurrent issues at the port. The main objective of this research was to turn the raw data into a new policy-making procedure in order to effect a positive change in working environment. Also, in none of the previous studies have researchers used data envelopment analysis and principal component analysis to analyse the questionnaire surveys. It must be noted that, in previous literature, researchers failed to analyse CRM issues and customer's feedback using optimisation and performance measurements.A review of the literature indicates that the current customer relationship management and complaint management systems have the following shortcomings:1.No consideration is given to the optimisation and trustworthiness of the acquired data. None of the studies comprehensively evaluates the perceived value of the customers and employees. Nor is any methodical approach provided by which customer perceived value can be analysed using a mathematical method.Since many issues emerge everyday within work environments, more operators and experts must be recruited by companies to solve customer problems. In none of the studies in the literature have authors provided a solution to prevent negative feedback from customers.Hypotheses are analysed using descriptive and qualitative methods, whereas the use of quantitative data would yield more precise results.Although CRM is defined, discussed and its importance noted, no models are provided to identify customer expectations and the risk factors.No complete methodology has been proposed for the precise and accurate analysis of questionnaire data. Also, in the majority of cases, questionnaires are limited in terms of number of questions and scope of enquiry. The questionnaire used in our study is comprised of 5 sections and in each section one variable is addressed.No methodology has been proposed to determine the impact of DEA and PCA on questionnaire analysis. Also, none of the studies use the notion of prioritisation in customer feedback analysis.No innovative approach has been proposed for the evaluation and measurement of customer satisfaction and customer complaints.The CRM and complaint management systems (CMS) literature fail to provide a framework and a complete methodology to deal with all types of customer complaints tailored to all types of companies, including logistics companies.Customer relationship management (CRM), Customer satisfaction, Customer complaint and complaint management, Principal component analysis (PCA) and Data envelopment analysis (DEA) are discussed in the following sections:CRM is a combination of people, processes, and technology used to understand customers for a company. It focuses on customer retention and consolidates the relationship. To obtain the advantages of CRM, companies must have efficient CRM programmes to secure the loyalty of customers [43]. By using CRM, an organisation can more effectively target its customers. Likewise, marketing messages can be enhanced. And using business strategies related to CRM, an organisation can consolidate its internal and external procedures in order to transmit value to the targeted customers. CRM can also be used to identify the potential pitfalls in developing success for an organisation [44]. Also, CRM indicates that a company is committed to focusing on the customer experience as a priority and ensuring that incentive systems, processes, and information resources leverage the relationship by enhancing the experience. CRM is a strategy used to maximise profits and to distinguish the various clients [45]. CRM is a well-studied subject and a strategy favoured by most marketers and advertisers [46]. By means of CRM, companies can improve their interactions with customers by having a 360-degree view of them [43]. For this study, we have adopted Intelligent CRM to convert customers’ feedback into strategies and positive viewpoints to be implemented into the decision making of the company. Intelligent CRM is a system which has the capability of acquiring customers, meeting their needs, and retaining them for the long-term by providing added value. Moreover, this system can receive, categorise and analyse customer feedbacks, in particular negative ones, and provide recommendations and solutions for customers as well as the company.Satisfaction is a customer's response to the level of fulfilment obtained after purchase and utilisation of a product or a service. It reflects a product or a service failure and simultaneously highlights the level of a customer's contentment [47]. Luo and Homborg [48] illustrated that customer satisfaction is a significant factor in profitability. Likewise, Mithas et al. mentioned that customer satisfaction is a factor that directly or indirectly impacts on companies and society. Customer satisfaction has a direct influence on complaints of customers. More satisfaction creates security and decreases deficiency of clients [49]. Satisfied customers have an influence on the profitability of companies. Based on marketing literature, customer satisfaction is a significant element in corporate strategy also, and can be defined as a total estimation of an experience that a customer has with respect to a particular service or product [50].In a business environment, customer complaint management is a central issue and a significant success factor. We believe that negative customer feedback might have a stronger impact than positive customer satisfaction. Psychologists elucidate that negative information creates beneficial, distinctive and demonstrative view to recipient and impact of the negative information is usually greater than is the impact of anything positive. It can simply contribute to the system and cause improvement [51]. According to [52], customer complaints create an opportunity for companies to learn about issues and take action to rectify the problems. Customer complaints produce negative behaviour and it is usually a post-service-deficiency reaction initiated by a company's action.Although the processing of customer complaints is a highly expensive operation, companies can extract irreplaceable and precious knowledge about customers by efficiently sorting and categorising customer complaints and dealing with them appropriately. This has a big impact on customer loyalty and retention [53]. Hence, a company needs to have a management system enabling it to recover its customers by handling their complaints and creating recommendations and solution for them [54]. Furthermore, complaint management illustrates the financial effectiveness of the procedures of complaint management systems that generate profitability [55].Interactivity is defined as the awareness and ability of an individual or a company to create and generate an active communication process with the customers. It implies the dynamic and active essence of the involvement that occurs between a company and customers via a company's different interactivity methods. In such a procedure, two or more groups conjointly influence each other utilising transmitted information. Different researchers have illustrated the significance of interactivity to the loyalty of customers in the virtual or physical world. Shortage of interactivity is a main issue for many companies. There is inadequate information regarding enhancing interactivity approaches. Interactivity requires compatible and reciprocal communication functions and criteria [1,2].Customer complaint is a concept that can be considered as perceived value or the experience that a customer can obtain using a system. Not only does customer complaint bring about value for the customers, it also develops value and trust which in turn create customer satisfaction [56]. By assessing customer complaints, an organisation can prevent risks associated with procedures and transactions. Also, an organisation can estimate whether customers have any tendency to purchase or even repeat their purchase [57].PCA is widely used in multivariate statistics such as factor analysis. It is used to reduce the number of variables under study and analysis of decision-making units (DMUs) in industries, universities, hospitals, cities, etc. PCA is used to identify a new set of variables such that each new variable, called a principal component, is a linear combination of original variables. The first new variable y1 accounts for the maximum variance in sample data and so on. The new variables (principal components) are uncorrelated. PCA is performed by identifying Eigen structure of the covariance or singular value decomposition of the original data.PCA processPCA is performed by identifying the Eigen structure of the correlation matrix of the original data. Suppose X is a m×n matrix composed by new xij's defined as the value of jth index (indicator) for ith customer. Furthermore, supposeXˆis the standardised matrix of X with xij's defined as the value of jth standardised indicator for ith customer. PCA is performed to identify new independent variables or principal components (defined as Yjfor j=1,…,n), which are respectively different linear combination ofxˆ1...xˆn. As mentioned, this is achieved by identifying the Eigen structure of the correlation matrix of the original data. The principal components are defined by a m×n matrixY=(y1...yn)m×ncomposed of yij's. We have:To obtain the L and subsequently vectors Y and PCA scores, the following steps are performed:PCA Step 1: Standardise data X toXˆPCA Step 2: Calculate the sample spearman correlation matrix R forXˆ.PCA Step 3: Calculate Eigen-values (λ) and Eigenvectors (L) of correlation matrix RThose Eigenvectors comprise the principal components Yi. The components of Eigenvectors are respectively the coefficients in each corresponding Yi (Eq. (1)):(1)Y=L×XˆPCA Step 4: Calculate the weights wjof the principal components and PCA scores Z (the value of each indicator category).(2)wj=λj∑j=1nλj=λjnj=1,…,n(3)zi=∑j=1nwjYiji=1,…,mBased on DEA terminology, a decision-making unit (DMU) must be assigned to the customers in assessment categorization. DEA creates a surface which is the frontier that follows the peak performers and envelops the remainder [58]. Also, according to Luo and Homburg [48], DEA is a mathematical programming tool that estimates and assesses the effectiveness of resource application and exercise. DEA measures the comparative effectiveness of the companies [48]. When we create the observed effectiveness of individual DMUs, DEA helps to establish possible benchmarks against which performance might be assessed. The efficient DMUs are acknowledged as the ‘peer’ group for the ineffective DMU. Sometimes, it is necessary to scale data of the peer DMUs in order to obtain an impartial comparison between the inefficient DMU and the peer DMUs. The weighted consolidations of peers and the peers alone might create a standard measurement for relatively less effective DMUs. The genuine levels of input use or output production of efficient DMUs may serve as particular targets for less efficient DMUs, whilst the measurement and benchmarking of DMUs can be made known and communicated as information to managers of DMUs who are responsible for improving performance. The ability of DEA to recognise possible peers or role models and simple efficiency scores has already appealed to researchers. Also, this approach is a notable and trustworthy one in comparison with other performance measurement approaches.The four basic DEA models are Charnes, Cooper and Rhodes (CCR) model [58], the Banker, Charnes and Cooper (BCC) model [59], the multiplicative model, and the additive model. Only the CCR will be discussed here. These models can be distinguished by their envelopment surface and the orientation [59].The ultimate objective of DEA is to acquire the weights that improve the effectiveness of the DMU under assessment, when restricting the efficiency of all DMUs to less than or equal to 1.0 (for input-oriented models). Charnes et al. [58] affirmed the difficulty of searching the standard set of weights to formulate the comparative effectiveness, which may create DMUs to value inputs and outputs differently and therefore employ different weights. The authors proposed that each DMU needs to employ weights which place it in the most favourable light relative to the other DMUs. Flexibility of the weights is both strength and a weakness. It can be considered as a weakness because the thoughtful consideration of weights by a DMU is not related to the value of any input or output that might permit a DMU to expose efficiency. It may have more to do with the choice of weights than with operational efficiency. This flexibility can also be considered as strength because a DMU which is inefficient with even the most favourable weights cannot argue that the weights are unfair. Also, relationships may be included in the model to limit the weights as deemed appropriate. It should be noted that the efficiency values produced by DEA are valid only for that particular group of peers. A DMU that is adequate and efficient for one group might be inadequate and inefficient when compared with another group. Likewise, if a group of very poor DMUs were estimated using DEA, we would still have efficient DMUs. As suggested, building a generic frontier is one way of addressing this problem. Additionally, if the set of DMUs is small, there is a little discrimination between elements.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
