@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
New Neural Network-based Approaches for GPS GDOP Classification based on Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System, Radial Basis Function, and Improved Bee Algorithm

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
GDOP stands as a relevant measure of positioning accuracy.We propose hybrid intelligent methods, namely ANFIS, improved ANFIS, and RBF, for GPS GDOP classification.Bee algorithm (BA) and improved BA are proposed for finding the optimum radius vector of the ANFIS.To enhance the classification accuracy, PCA is utilized.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
GPS GDOP classification,Neural network,Radial basis function,Adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system,Improved bee algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Global positioning system (GPS) is the most widely used military and commercial positioning tool for real-time navigation and location. Geometric dilution of precision (GDOP) stands as a relevant measure of positioning accuracy and consequently, the performance quality of the GPS positioning algorithm. Since the calculation of GPS GDOP has a time and power burden that involves complicated transformation and inversion of measurement matrices, in this paper we propose hybrid intelligent methods, namely adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS), improved ANFIS, and radial basis function (RBF), for GPS GDOP classification. Through investigation it is verified that the ANFIS is a high performance and valuable classifier. In the ANFIS training, the radius vector has very important role for its recognition accuracy. Therefore, in the optimization module, bee algorithm (BA) is proposed for finding the optimum vector of radius. In order to improve the performance of the proposed method, a new improvement for the BA is used. In addition, to enhance the accuracy of the method, principal component analysis (PCA) is utilized as a pre-processing step. Experimental results clearly indicate that the proposed intelligent methods have high classification accuracy rates comparing with conventional ones.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nowadays, global positioning system (GPS), which is a satellite based navigation system, is extensively used in many world-wide applications including military, civil, commercial, and modern global air traffic systems [1–3]. It uses between 24 and 32 medium earth orbit satellites that transmit precise microwave signals. This enables GPS receivers to determine its altitude, longitude and latitude in every desirable point on earth, sea or air as well as space, time and velocity [2]. The GPS satellites are maintained by the United States Air Force. The dilution of precision (DOP) or geometric DOP (GDOP) is a geometric engineering expression that denotes how well the constellation of GPS satellites is organized geometrically [4,5].There are basically two approaches which are employed to justify satellite geometry based on the GPS GDOP, namely, approximation and classification. Unlike the GPS GDOP estimator which computes the necessary parameters for selection of the optimal subsets of the satellites, the GPS GDOP classifier is employed to choose one of the acceptable subsets (four optimum satellites from 24 existing satellites) of satellites for navigation use [4,5].The computation of GPS GDOP has a time and power burden that involves complicated transformation and inversion of measurement matrices. For the case of processing four satellite signals, it has been illustrated that the GPS GDOP is approximately inversely proportional to the volume of the tetrahedron which is made by four unit user-to-satellite vectors [4,5]. Therefore, it is favorable to choose a subset of satellites with larger volume. However, this method is not universally acceptable since it does not guarantee optimum selection of satellites.In order to reduce the computational burden to classify and approximate the GPS GDOP, Simon and El-Sherief have used the basic back propagation (BP) approach to train the neural network (NN) [6]. NN is a powerful tool to solve non-linear problems which is widely used in many engineering and scientific applications [7]. Although the BP is the most popular algorithm to train an NN, it has two important problems: (1) The BP training is very slow in many applications including the GPS GDOP classification; (2) The training algorithm easily falls into the local minima [8]. To overcome these problems, Jwo and Lai [4] were suggested utilizing the BP with momentum to train the NN (BPNN), the optimal interpolative network, general regression NN (GRNN), and probabilistic NN (PNN).Mosavi et al. utilized two valuable classification approaches based on the evolutionary algorithms (EAs), namely simulated annealing (SA) and modified ant colony optimization (ACO), to select optimum satellite subsets from the visible satellites [9,10]. Generally, there are two slight shortages for using EAs in the classification methods: (1) There are some parameters for EAs which must be selected appropriately by many trials; (2) Since EAs do not have a clear genotype–phenotype distinction, they are not very reliable in many applications such as GPS GDOP classification.Since the procedure of the GPS GDOP classification/approximation must be real-time or mobile based, in this article we propose effective methods with high classification accuracies and low timings based on two major modules. In the first module, we proposed an adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) which is a powerful multilayer feed-forward network based on the learning capabilities of an NN and reasoning capabilities of fuzzy logic for classification of GPS data. Fuzzy clustering algorithms are well-known as important unsupervised classification and recognition techniques which divide the input space into K clusters based on similarity and dissimilarity metric. In these techniques because of lack of training stage, the run times of the programs are good and acceptable, especially for real-time applications [11,12]. Since in the ANFIS training process, the radius of clusters has high impact on the system performance, in the second module, the bee algorithm (BA) and the improved BA (IBA) are chosen for optimization of the ANFIS parameter. This technique significantly improves the ANFIS performance. Moreover, in this paper because of the properties of fastness, robustness and stability of the radial basis function (RBF) NN, it is used as a new practical classification method for GPS GDOP. Also, in order to have uncorrelated and informative features of the GPS GDOP, principal component analysis (PCA) is used as a pre-processing step [13].The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the needed concepts including the GPS GDOP, PCA, RBF, and ANFIS. In Section 3, optimization algorithms namely, the BA and improved BA are explained. Section 4 describes the proposed methods. Simulation results and comparing with conventional well-known methods are discussed in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes the proposed methods.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
One of the most common factors which influences the precision of the performance of a GPS receiver and depends on positioning of the satellites is called GDOP. Automatic classification of the GPS GDOP is an important subject for the real-time systems. In this study, in order to enhance the performance of the GPS GDOP classifiers, several optimized powerful approaches which do not need to calculate inverse or any transformation of the matrices for all combinations of satellites have been presented. A multilayer feed-forward network approach for finding a solution of classification problems based on the learning capabilities of an NN and reasoning capabilities of fuzzy logic have been proposed. The network structure has been optimized by using the BA and proposed IBA. Also, the RBF as a powerful and fast NN has been used for the GPS GDOP classification. The simulation results have indicated that all of the proposed methods can improve the classification accuracy rates and give us an acceptable run time values, but among all of the proposed algorithms, the IBA-ANFIS has reached a superior performance rate of approximately 100% and timing value of less than 0.2s for the considered GPS GDOP for 70% and 80% of the training data. In addition, by using PCA, the accuracy rates and CPU times of all the proposed methods have been improved.