@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Two-stage SAR image segmentation framework with an efficient union filter and multi-objective kernel clustering

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A union filter, including maximum likelihood estimator and partial nonlocal means filter, is designed.A single-objective searching algorithm in AIS to discover the clustering number of SAR image is presented.A multi-objective SAR image segmentation framework in multi-objective kernel clustering is proposed.A systematic comparison of different image segmentation methods is given.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Artificial intelligence,Evolutionary computation,Multi-objective optimization,Image segmentation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a novel two-stage image segmentation framework by artificial immune system (AIS) thereof to partition synthetic aperture radar (SAR) images. The following three crucial tough problems have not been completely solved in current SAR image processing community thus far: (1) the automatic ability of discovering the true number of categories in different types of land covers; (2) the skill of smoothing speckle noise in SAR imagery, which is different from classical Gaussian and Salt & Pepper noise; (3) the better clustering performance in segmenting thousands of highly contaminating pixels in SAR image. With above three problems as goals, an effective two-stage SAR image segmentation framework (TSIS) is discussed here. Firstly, a union filter, combing maximum likelihood estimator and partial nonlocal means filter, is designed. Afterwards, a searching algorithm with variable length of chromosomes is designed to automatically discover the clustering numbers in SAR images. Finally, an efficient multi-objective clustering paradigm in AIS and kernel mapping thereof to implement final image partition is proposed. To test its performance, a systematic comparison of TSIS versus three famous variations of fuzzy c-means (FCM) and two graph partitioning methods is given. Experiments results show that TSIS can provide an effective option in segmenting the SAR imagery.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Image segmentation is the process of partitioning an image into different non-overlapped and consistent salient regions with some common characteristics, such as intensity, color, contour and objects. Synthetic aperture radar can obtain the image at high resolution from broad area of terrain and has obtained extensive applications in environmental monitoring, earth resource detection, and disaster assessment [1], because the equipment can work at day-and-night time and has the possibility to penetrate clouds and rain. Up to now, though tremendous methods have been proposed for image segmentation [2,3], it is still a challenge to design an efficient and effective SAR image segmentation system for its highly overlapped pixels and inestimable speckle noise in this particular type of imagery.Among the current a wide variety of image segmentation technologies, fuzzy clustering is one of the most popular methods during the recent years for its simplicity. FCM and its many enhanced versions have been proposed by introducing local spatial information to their objective function. The first pioneering work using FCM is Dunn's literature [4]. The algorithm is easy to implement and it can achieve reasonable segmenting result without noise. Ahmed et al. [5] modified the traditional objective function in FCM to compensate the homogeneities intensity when segmenting the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) image. The immediate neighborhood of each pixel is used to lead it toward piecewise-homogeneous labeling and it is said to be useful in partitioning images corrupted by Salt & Pepper noise. Chen and Zhang [6] has introduced two robust kernelized versions of FCM, called KFCM_S1 and KFCM_S2. Two filtered images, using mean filter and median filter, are formed to replace the neighborhood term in [5]. Experimental results show that they can improve the robustness of FCM in segmenting the image with Gaussian noise and Salt & Pepper noise respectively. To speed up the image segmentation, Szilagyi et al. [7] utilized the histogram statistics of the image pixels to perform clustering iteration operator. The segmenting time is only dependent on the number of the gray-levels rather than the size of image pixels. Besides, a linearly-weighted sum image from both the local neighborhood average gray level of each pixel and original image is used to perform histogram statistics. Cai et al. [8] proposed a fast and robust FCM clustering algorithm, called FGFCM. They have presented a local similarity measure by incorporating the local spatial information and the local gray-level relationship to replace the neighboring item of the objective function. The other recent representative literatures of enhanced FCM are Krinidis and Chatzis's FLICM [9] and Gong et al.’s KWFLICM [10]. The two methods aimed to introduce two local neighbor factors to replace the parameters in FCM [7,8]. Furthermore, KWFLICM introduced the kernel mapping theory into the objective function to enhance its robustness to noises or outliers. Overall considering these variations of FCM, the types of noise in the tested images have additive property, such as Gaussian noise, Salt & Pepper noise and Rician noise. The multiplicative speckle noises in SAR images are seldom involved in these algorithms. In addition, the number of clusters in the above FCMs is fixed a priori. However, such a priori knowledge cannot be available for many complicated and tight segmentation tasks. Thus, it is useful to discover the number of appropriate clusters automatically.Artificial immune systems attempt to extract ideas from the biological immune system to develop computational tools to deal with the science and engineering problems. Recently, AIS-based algorithms have begun to emerge as problem solvers in image segmentation [11]. The application of AIS into extracting road pixels from single band aerial imagery was presented firstly by McCoy and Devarajan [12]. Another early related work by negative selection theory in AIS to perform color images segmentation [13]. Recently, immune network theory and clonal selection algorithms in AIS have come into use to perform remote sensing image classification. Huang and Jiao [14] proposed an immune kernel clustering network and support vector domain description to segment SAR images. The antibody neighborhood is represented by support vector hyper-sphere. The partitioning results of the local hyper-spheres are merged to yield a global clustering solution. Zhong et al. respectively introduced a multi-valued immune network [15], a resource-limited immune network [16], and an adaptive artificial immune network [17] into the supervised classification of multi/hyperspectral remote sensing imagery. The multiple-valued logic theory, immune memory, resource limited principles and adaptively reorganization of radius learning are introduced into immune network theory to enhance its learning and clustering ability. Though the construction of artificial immune network for classification of remote sensing imagery is very hard for its inherent complexity and the large volume of imagery data, Zhong et al. [15] cleaved a path for us to overcome the above difficulties. Another theory in AIS, clonal selection algorithm, has also been widely applied to image processing for its efficiency and simplicity. Zhang et al. [18] presented three novel dimensionality reduction methods by clonal selection theory for hyper-spectral imagery segmentation. The immune operators, including clone, selection, mutation, and replacement, are designed to perform antibody evolution. Zhong et al. [19] proposed an unsupervised artificial immune classifier to perform remote sensing image classification. Three biological properties, such as clonal selection theory, immune network, and immune memory, are utilized to design an unsupervised classifier.In general, most of above classification techniques in AIS utilized just only one objective function or clustering index to lead the searching process in these computational intelligence approaches. In other words, the clustering index is assumed to have the ability to determine the quality of the image segmentation. However, the pixels in SAR images are highly overlapped and corrupted by multiplicative speckle noises. The selected clustering index may be very appropriate for particular type of data sets, but it cannot discover the clustering relation for the data sets with complicated and diverse characteristics [20]. Hence, a desirable searching strategy should lead the solutions from multiple paths or multiple objectives, since we have no prior knowledge about the distinct features or locations of the optimal partitioning of the input SAR images.Recently, multi-objective evolutionary algorithms (MOEAs) have attracted a large amount of interests [21,22,23]. Yet, the applications of them to SAR image segmentation are rare. In the recent study [11], the authors have presented the multi-objective SAR image segmentation framework by using adaptive rank clones, diversity maintenance by K-nearest-neighbor list and the fused feature set for texture representation and discrimination. The automatic ability to discover the true classes numbers and the skill to smooth speckle noise in SAR imager are still not well solved in that paper. Besides, though our study [11] has utilized the Gabor filter to extract texture features in low-and mid-frequency components and the gray level co-occurrence probability to measure information in high-frequency, the features in SAR images are usually complicated and diverse. Moreover, the unsuitable feature extraction methods can blur the image, which cannot give us the segmenting results with enough resolution.This paper aims to present an efficient and effective SAR image segmentation framework in AIS. Three challenging problems in current SAR image segmentation are the primary targets in designing the segmentation framework. The first one is how to suppress the multiplicative speckle noises in the SAR images. The second problem to solve is how to discover automatically the number of clusters or different land covers in SAR images by its intensity. The last one but the most important problem is to design an efficient clustering algorithm to implement the image segmenting process though the pixels are highly overlapped and speckle noise deteriorates the quality of SAR images seriously. With these ideas in mind, the novelties and main features of TSIS can be described as follows: (1) considering the speckle noises in SAR images, a union filter is designed, which includes maximum likelihood (ML) estimator and partial nonlocal means (PNM) filter [24]. ML estimator uses maximum likelihood rule to estimate the true signal within homogeneous regions and PNM filter is to suppress speckle and restore the true signals locating at the heterogeneous regions; (2) in order to discover the clustering number of SAR image, this paper presents a single-objective searching algorithm (SOCA) in AIS, which has the strategies of histogram statistics, fitness based proportional clone, variable length encoding strategy; (3) finally, a multi-objective SAR image segmentation framework in AIS theory is proposed to segment the despeckling image in the above stage. It has the novelties of simultaneous optimization of two fuzzy clustering validity indices in kernel distances measure, adaptive proportional clones, and diversity maintaining by dynamic crowding distances. The segmentation results are evaluated by comparing with three known variations of FCM algorithms: FGFCM [8], FLICM [9], KWFLICM [10], and two graph partitioning methods: kernel graph cuts (KGC) [25] and spectral clustering ensemble (SCE) [26]. Besides, the comparisons of TSIS with three the authors’ previous works and one very recent published method are also presented. Moreover, three synthetic SAR images and three real SAR images are adopted here for the comparison. The visual observation and statistical comparison are implemented to analyze the final segmentation results of the six algorithms.The remaining parts of the study are organized as follows. Section 2 gives the definitions of the preliminary theory in SAR image segmentation. Section 3 describes the details of the AIS-based SAR image segmentation framework. The related details and rationality of TSIS are discussed and explained. Next, the experimental evaluations of TSIS are presented in Section 4. Finally, we outline the conclusion of the paper.The speckle noise in SAR images usually bring uncertainty to the segmentation process of current algorithms. Therefore, the application of the fuzzy theory to the clustering is more suitable. In the SAR images, the different clustering subsets correspond to land covers or targets-of-interest and the pixels in the same local region should have largest membership values belonging to the category. The current clustering algorithms using fuzzy set theory usually produce fuzzy matrix U(I)=[uk,i] of an input SAR imageI, k=1, …, K and i=1, …, n, where uk,idenotes the membership degree of pixel xito cluster Ck. Moreover, fuzzy partition matrix should satisfy the following constrains:∑k=1Kuki=1, and 0<uki<1. The membership values can be computed as follows:(1)uk,i=1∑j=1KD(zk,xi)D(zj,xi)2/(m−1),zk=∑i=1n(uk,i)mxi∑i=1n(uk,i)mwhere D(zk, xi) is the Euclidean distance between pixel xito its cluster center zk. The parameter m is a weighting exponent on each fuzzy membership andzkis the center of kth cluster.The searching process of current clustering algorithms using fuzzy set theory is usually guided by certain clustering validity index. Nevertheless, since we have no prior information of the optimal partition, the multiple directions or indices can supply different searching paths and more feasible solutions with different characteristics. Thus, more than one clustering indices or objective functions are used to guide the searching process in the study. The definition of objective functions can be formulated in the followings.(2)MinmizeF(Z)=[XBkernel(Z),Jmkernel(Z)]Twhere Z=[z1, z2, …, zK] stands for the centers or prototype of the clusters and F:Z→R2 is the map of cluster centers to two real valued objectives. The objectives XBkernelandJmkernelare two kernelized versions of two conflicting and complementary indices, XB and Jm[27]. They can be defined as follows:(3)XB=∑k=1K∑i,j=1nukj2||xj−zk||2nmini,j||zi−zj||,Jm=∑j=1n∑k=1Kukj2||xj−zk||2Note that XB is formulated by calculating the ratio of the summation of variation to the minimum separation and the lower values of XB can provide the better partition of image. Jmis defined by minimizing the global fuzzy squared distance. Bandyopadhyay et al. [27] have noted that a rich set of alternate partitions for segmenting remote sensing data can be provide by these two indices.In order to further improve the performance of TSIS in suppressing speckle noise, another novelty of the study is the introduction of the kernel distance measure to the two objective functions XB and Jm. It has been shown that the clustering methods in kernel feature mappings can improve the robustness to noises or the outliers. As it is known, a non-linear function in kernel method is used to map the samples from the input space to a high dimensional feature space and the mapping function φ need not be explicitly specified. The kernel distance measure between two pixel xiand xjcan be calculated by the following equation using Gaussian kernel functionℵ(xi,xj)=exp(−||xi−xj||2/(2σ2)), where σ is the bandwidth.(4)||φ(xi)−φ(xj)||2=ℵ(xi,xi)−2ℵ(xi,xj)+ℵ(xj,xj)=2(1−ℵ(xi,xj))Then the two fuzzy clustering indices in Eq. (3) can be transformed to the following forms.(5)XBkernel=∑k=1K∑i,j=1nukj2(1−ℵ(xj,zk))nmini,j(1−ℵ(zi,zj)),Jmkernel=∑j=1n∑k=1Kupj2(1-ℵ(xj,zk))Accordingly, the fuzzy partition matrix U and cluster center Z is required to be recalculated by the following equations.(6)uk,i=1∑j=1K1−ℵ(zk,xi)1−ℵ(zj,xi)1/(m−1),zk=∑i=1n(uk,i)mxi∑i=1n(uk,i)mThe above two indices XBkernelandJmkernelcan find a set of optimal trade-off solutions or partitions of SAR image, which are the known Pareto-optimal solutions in multi-objective optimization. These trade-off solutions can be selected by decision maker by their preference information. Usually, there are two ways to select a suitable partition from the trade-off solutions set, which are the prior knowledge of the partitions and the selection by other clustering index. Here, PBM index is used to select the final solutions since the prior knowledge is usually absent. The definition of the tradeoff index PBM in kernel distance mappings can be described by the following equation [28]:(7)PBM(K)=1K×E1EK×DK2,EK=∑k=1K∑j=1nukj(1−ℵ(xj,zk)),DK=maxi,j=1K(1−ℵ(zi,zj))Speckle noise is a random multiplicative phenomenon that results from coherent imaging system. When radar illuminates the ground surface, the returned signals of radar waves reflected from many elementary scatterers within a resolution cell can be represented by the following formula (8):(8)A=∑k=1W|ak|eiϕkwhere A represents observed value, |ak| and ϕkare the amplitude and phase of returned signal of the kth scatterer, and W is the total number of scatterers. As it is known, under the assumption of fully developed speckle noise [1], the amplitude of L-look SAR image satisfies the generalized gamma distribution (also it can be called Nakagami Rayleigh distribution) and its definition is listed as follows [29].(9)px(X|R)=2Γ(L)LRLexp−LX2RX2L−1X is the observed SAR image or the pixel values in SAR images, L is the number of looks, and R is the unknown real reflection coefficient and is equal to S squared. The essential target of SAR image segmentation is to partition an SAR image into different homogeneous regions. The underlying reflectivity S for the amplitude SAR image is a constant within a homogeneous region ΦH. If there are H pixels in a local homogeneous region and their observed values are presented byXΦH(h),1≤h≤H. The maximum likelihood rule can be used to estimate the true signal RH within the local homogeneous region. The true reflection coefficient can be estimated by the following Eq. (10) by the condition of independent and identical distributions in local homogeneous region ΦH.(10)RΦH=1H∑h=1H[XΦH(h)]2The basic procedure of the SAR image segmentation framework is illustrated in Fig. 1. The proposed algorithm is designed into two stages. The first stage is the preprocessing operations, including speckle noise removing by a union filter, automatic clustering algorithm using the strategies and principals in AIS and the pixels statistics of image histogram. The second stage consists of a novel multi-objective clustering algorithm also in AIS and kernel induced mappings, which is used to implement the fine segmentation on the produced denoising images at the first stage.SAR images usually consist of two classes: homogeneous regions and heterogeneous regions. As a general rule, the heterogeneous regions consist of edges, textures or isolated point objects, which are usually the signals with high frequencies; on the contrary, the homogeneous regions are the same types of local land covers. The true backscatter or signal within a local homogeneous region is usually a constant. SAR images can be divided into many homogeneous regions which vary in sizes and shapes. Therefore, it is intuitive of the segmentation method to identify the homogeneous regions from heterogeneous regions.Algorithm 1Union filterInput: SAR image I={xi}, i=1, 2, …n, the size of ML filter w, the size of smoothing window in PNM filter u;Output: the filtered image I4;Step 1. maximum likelihood estimator (MLE)fori=1 to nRw(i)=1w∑h=1w[x(h)]2;xi=Rw(i);end-forI2={xi}, i=1, 2, …, n;Step 2. Histogram statistics and automatic clusteringnk=Histogram(I2);[ClusterCenters1]=Algorithm2(I2);Step 3. Find the pixels at heterogeneous regionsfori=1 to nSelect the neighboring pixels near xiwithin its localwindow with size of w rows and w columns;Calculate standard variation of neighboring pixels of each pixel and denote them by Vi;end-forc=length(ClusterCenters1)Classes_Labels=Segmentation(I2, ClusterCenters1);fori=1 to cL=find(Classes_Labels==i);V={Vj}, j∈L;Threshod=FindPrctile(V/2);if Vi>Thresholdxj=0, j∈L;end-ifend-forI3={xi}, i=1, 2, …, n;ClusterCenters2=MLEstimator(I3, ClusterCenters1);Step 4. Smooth pixels at heterogeneous regions by Nolocal mean (NM) filtersfori=1 to nifxi==0, xi∈I3[xi]=Perform_NM_Filter(xi,u, I);end-ifend-forI4={xi}, i=1, 2, …, nHomogeneous-region recognition is another difficult problem in current SAR image processing community. Until now, though some denoising methods using homogeneous regions recognition to suppress the multiplicative speckle in SAR images have been proposed [30] and local rectangular windows are used to segment the homogeneous regions by most of the current methods, they often bring extra artifacts, particularly for textures or edges in SAR image. Hence, it is required to rectify the edges in the filtered image to preserve their geometrical structures. The motivation of introducing ML estimator in this study is to smooth the speckle noise in the local windows by the hypothesis that the pixels in each local window are within the same local homogeneous region. Afterward, the second filter, partial nonlocal means, is utilized to estimate the pixels values in the heterogeneous regions by the singular values created by ML estimator. The procedure of union filter is listed in Algorithm 1.In fact, it has always been the target of image denoising algorithms to remove noise as little as possible and preserve actual real details as much as possible. A simple ML estimator induced by its distribution in Eq. (10) is directly utilized to smooth the speckle noise in the study though it is unknown of the local homogeneous regions. It can be seen that ML estimator will blur the discontinuous regions, i.e. the pixels with the high frequencies. However, the variation factor of each pixel, measured by standard deviation of its neighboring pixels, is used to assess its singularity and heterogeneity, as shown in Fig. 2(c). These abnormal pixels locating the heterogeneous regions are required to be further estimated by subsequent PNM filters. It is known that nonlocal means filter has obtained attractive performance by exploring the redundancy information of geometrical configuration of each pixel’ local neighborhood, whereas, it usually requires much more computational costs [30]. Here, PNM filter is a simplified version of nonlocal means filters since most pixels in homogeneous regions have been smoothed by ML estimator.An example of the impact of the strategies in the union filter is shown in Fig. 2. It can be seen that once the image in Fig. 2(a) is corrupted by the notorious speckle noise, the quality of images deteriorates seriously. The existence of noise has brought innumerable fake details, which will conceal important real image details and lead to the loss of interesting objectives. Fig. 2(c) shows the label image created by Step 3 in Algorithm 1. Visually, the pixels in black lie in the heterogeneous regions of the image, which consist of the real image edges (the black circle) and many artifacts (the black spots). Afterwards, these artifacts induced by speckle noise have been suppressed greatly by subsequent PNM filter in Step 4 in Algorithm 1 in Fig. 2(d).As a general rule, the number of clusters is usually supplied by a prior before segmentation. This paper aims to present a single-objective clustering algorithm in AIS (SOCA) and histogram statistic to automatically discover the true clustering numbers. Algorithm 2 demonstrates the procedure of the method.The main innovations of above SOCA can be summarized as two terms. Firstly, it is performed on the basis of the gray histogram of the smoothed image I2 by ML estimator in Algorithm 1, not on the whole pixels of the original SAR image. Therefore, it can produce fast partitioning for its dependence only on the number of the gray levels rather than the whole size of input image. The second innovation is its clustering methodology. As we know, the histogram statistics of an image follows Gaussians or Gaussian mixture models. Moreover, even if Gaussians mixture model turns out to be an acceptable choice, how to find the number of components in the mixture or the number of clusters is still an open and serious problem. Therefore, this paper demonstrates a novel way to automatically partition the gray-levels into different classes. The main innovations of the algorithm are further discussed in Algorithm 2.Algorithm 2Single-objective clustering algorithm (SOCA) in AIS and histogram statisticInput: The filtered image I2, the size of population is N1, mutation probability pm, L is maximum of gray level;Output: The discovered cluster centers;Step 1. Build the gray histogram statistics of I2S=∅;fork=1 to Lnk=|I2{xi}==k|, i=1, 2, …n;ifnk≠0S=S∪nk;end-ifend-forStep 2. Cluster gray-levels by histogram statistics in AISPt=rand(N1, S);Ft=FitnessCalculation(Pt, S);(BestPt, BestFt)=FindBestSolution(Ft, Pt);whilet<TvalueCt=N1×Ft/sum(Ft);Nt=ProportionalClone(Ct, Ft, Pt);Nt=Mutation(Nt, pm);Pt=GeneJump(Nt);Ft=FitnessCalculation(Nt, S);(BestPt+1, BestFt+1)=UpdateBests(Ft, Pt, BestPt, BestFt);if abs(BestFt+1−BestFt)<ɛt=t+1;end-ifend-whileClusterCenters1=BestPt;(1)Variable-length encoding scheme: The solutions are encoded by the coordinates of the centers with variable length. For example, if an initial solution a is denoted by Za1, Za2, …, ZaE, and E is calculated by E=rand()*(up-low)*sqrt(Ns). Here, rand() is a random function and it can produce an random number in the range [0,1]. low and up is two boundaries of the samples, and Ns is the total number of samples. Note that the input samples are the gray-levels of input SAR image. With the searching process evolving, the antibody with the proper value of number of clusters can be found.Proportional cloning by fitness: The proportional cloning is used to assign the computer resource for each solution, i.e. the solutions with greater fitness value will be reproduced more times. Therefore, there exist more chances for them to search in more promising regions of the feasible solution space and speed up the convergence of the searching algorithm. The definition of the strategy is represented in Eq. (12).(12)C(i)=N1×Ft(i)∑i=1N1Ft(i)denotes the rounded up operation. For example, suppose there are three solutions, their fitness are 1.5, 2.5, and 3.5. If N1 is 30, then C(1)=6, C(2)=10, and C(3)=14. The larger the fitness value of an antibody, the more times the antibody will be reproduced.Gene jumping strategy: Moreover, another remarkable characteristic of SOCA is the introduction of catastrophe theory of gene (also called gene jump), which can cause the change the length of DNA in the genome. It is shown in Fig. 3. It can be seen that if the current solution m is on gene-jumping operation, its randomly selected gene fragment, Zmi, …, Zmj, is required to undergo three types of variation with equal probability, which are deletion, replace, and addition. Besides, another randomly selected solution n is necessary to supply the reference gene fragment, Znp, …, Znq. Furthermore, the deletion operation is to cut off Zmi, …, Zmjfrom the solution m, the replace operation is to replace Zmi, …, Zmjby the reference gene fragment Znp, …, Znq, from the solution n, and if Znp, …, Znqare directly added into the solution m, it is the addition in the gene-jump. Using the gene turbulence, it can improve the diversity of SOCA and avoid premature phenomenon in the searching process.Algorithm 3Multiobjective SAR Image Segmentation with Kernel Distance MappingInput: The filtered image I4, the size of population is N2, and size of active population N3, the cluster centers created in Algorithm 1, crossover probability pc, mutation probability pm;Output: The segmented SAR image;Step 1. Watershed raw segmentation of I4L2=Watershed (I4);maxL=max(L2);I5=[];whilei<maxLLocation_Labels=find(L2==i);Region_Means=mean(I4(Location_Labels));I5=I5∪Region_Means;i=i+1;end-whileStep 2. Multiobjective clustering in AIS and kernel distance mappingPt=rand(N2, ClusterCenters2);Ft=FitnessCalculation(Pt,I5);(MPt, MFt, APt, AFt)=FindActiveSolutions(N3, Pt,Ft);(BestPt, BestFt)=FindBestSolution(Ft,Pt);whilet<TvalueCNt=ProportionalClone(ACt,AFt,N2);CNt=SBXCrossover(CNt,APt);CNt=Mutation(CNt);CFt=FitnessCalculationKernel(CNt,I5);NP=CNt∪MPt;NF=CFt∪MFt;MPt,MFt,APt,AFt=FindActiveSolutions(N3,NP,NF);BestPt+1,BestFt+1=UpdateBests(NP,NF,BestPtBestFt);if abs(BestFt+1−BestFt)<ɛt=t+1;end-ifend-whileStep 3. Find the best partition and output segmentation resultFinalClusterCenters=SelectbyPBMkernel(CNt,I5);[Output]=FinalPartition(FinalClusterCenters, I5);The procedure of multi-objective clustering is shown in Algorithm 3. There are two parts in the procedure of the algorithm, which are watershed transformation (WT) and the multi-objective clustering method in AIS. The remarkable characteristics of multi-objective clustering algorithm in AIS consists of proportional clone, diversity maintaining strategy by dynamic vicinity distance, and two clustering indices in Gaussian kernel mapping. Here, the motivation of using WT and the main strategies in multi-objective clustering are discussed (Fig. 4).(1)WT: another one significant difficulty for SAR image segmentation lies in its vast pixels with overlapping characteristic. Taking the typical small SAR image (512×512) as an example, it consists of 262,144 pixels, which is great amount of samples for the traditional clustering methodologies. To this end, the watershed transformation is utilized to preliminarily partition the smoothed image I4 into many local non-overlapping patches or super-pixels.It can be seen that WT merges great amount of local pixels with similar intensity. The union filter has brought great beneficiation to WT because many local minima are removed. Afterwards, the mean value of gray of each local region or patch is calculated, which is regarded as the input clustering samples of subsequent fine multi-objective clustering algorithm, as shown in Step 1 of Algorithm 3.Diversity maintaining strategy: the vicinity distance is defined in such a way that the distances to the k-nearest neighbors of each solution are multiplied together [21]. It can be described byVknn=∏i=1kL2NNiwhereL2NNiis the Euclidean distance to its ith nearest neighbor. Here, we also give an illustration of how the diversity maintaining strategy runs. It can be seen in Fig. 5that there are two types of deletion methods among the current diversity maintaining strategies: the static deletion and the dynamic deletion. It is clear that the vicinity-distances of eight solutions in Fig. 5 are calculated by only one time in static deletion. Thus, the four solutions 2, 3, 4, and 5 in the crowding regions are all thrown away. However, if we discard one solution among the tradeoff front, the crowding information of the remaining solutions has changed, i.e. the neighbors of deleted solutions are required to recalculate their vicinity distances. Therefore, we utilize the dynamic deletion to dynamically update the local vicinity distances among the current solutions, as shown in Step 1–Step 4 in Fig. 5Proportional cloning by vicinity-distance: since the vicinity distance of each solution is used to indicate its density information in multi-objective clustering, the proportional clone utilizes it to assign clone scale of each solution. Its definition is similar to Eq. (12) except that the fitness in that equation is replaced by the vicinity-distances of the current solution. Naturally, the solution with larger value of vicinity distance will be obtained more chances to search in less-crowded regions of the trade-off front. Thus, the current local un-researching areas in solution space can be fully exploited by the strategy.Kernel distance mapping: in addition, it has been outlined at above section that the notorious speckle noise can deteriorate the quality of SAR images though we have presented a union filter on the input image. Therefore, in order to enhance the robustness of the segmentation method to the residual noise (see in Fig. 2(d)), the kernel distance measures are introduced into the two clustering indices in this study, shown in Eq. (5). The widely used Gaussian kernel function is adopted in the kernel mappings for its popularity and effectiveness. The value of bandwidth σ in kernel mappings is calculated by the standard deviation of each category.The performance of the proposed algorithm will be shown in the experimental results section.In this section, the experimental results on three synthetic images and three real SAR images will be demonstrated. Furthermore, five state-of-the-art image partitioning algorithms are employed to investigate the performance of TSIS. The first three methods are FGFCM [8], FLICM [9] and KWFLICM [11]. They are the type of variations of FCM. Additionally, the next two algorithms are the current popular graph partitioning methods, called kernel graph cut (KGC) [25] and spectral clustering ensemble (SCE) [26].To the best of our knowledge, suitable parameter settings of the proposed algorithms are very crucial to implement suitable partitions. For ML estimator, the size of smoothing window is 7×7. In non-local means, the size of limited searching squared window is 15×15 and the running neighborhood window is 3×3. For watershed transformation, the size of mathematical morphology operator is 3×3. Though there are four above parameters involved, in fact, only the first parameter is newly introduced and the other three parameters have been investigated clearly. We can refer to the propositions and conclusions in the relative literatures and take some effective settings for the involved parameters [11,24]. For Algorithms 2 and 3, the involved parameters are the sizes of population in both of them, size of active population in both of them, the crossover probability and mutation probability same in both of them. Parameter settings for them are presented in Table 1. For the stop criterion for TSIS, the maximal number of iterating generation is achieved when there is not distinct improvement of the best solution for ten successive iterations, i.e., Tvalue in Alogrithms 2 and 3 is equal to 10.In order to convincingly present the experimental results of the six algorithms, 30 independent runs on each test image are performed. Two reliable clustering validity indices: accurate rate (AR) and adjusted rand index (ARI) [31] in the form of statistical means and standard deviations are utilized here. Moreover, a validity index designed in information theory, called entropy (E) [32] shortly, without the prior information of true class-labels, is used to evaluate the final segmentation results. Besides, visual inspection is another effective and direct way to discern the goodness of six algorithms, although it is a subjective method.To verify the applicability of the proposed algorithm to segment SAR images, the firstly three types of images corrupted by simulated speckle noise are adopted. The first experiment demonstrates the segmentation results of TSIS, KWFLICM, FLICM, FGFCM, KGC and PPB+SCE in partitioning three synthetic SAR images. All of the three artificial SAR images are corrupted by the complicated multiplicative speckle noise with three-looks, which follows the multiplicative speckle model [33]. The synthetic SAR images are called AI1, AI2 and AI3 for short, shown in Figs. 6(b), 7(b) and 8(b), respectively. 30 independent runs on the three synthetic images were performed to evaluate the statistical performance of the six algorithms. It is noteworthy that the real class-labels of the images are in hand; therefore, their statistical segmentation results can be evaluated by the statistical index, AR and ARI, which will be listed in Table 2.Figs. 6–8 show the segmentation results of the synthetic SAR images with two, four and eight categories using the six algorithms, respectively. In Figs. 6 and 7, TSIS, KGC and PPB+SCE have achieved the relatively better segmentation results than the three famous variations of FCM algorithm: KWFLICM, FLICM and FGFCM. It is clear that some local patches are misclassified as other categories in the homogeneous areas, especially for the segmenting results in Figs. 6(e) and 7(e). In Fig. 8, the synthetic SAR image consists of eight classes and the gray-levels of eight classes come closer to each other, which will bring great trouble for the accurate segmentation and recognition. It is clear that the speckle noise in the third synthetic SAR image cannot be suppressed by KWFLICM, FLICM and FGFCM in Fig. 8(d)–(f). The local regions in gray and in white of partitioning result are mixed together seriously, especially for the segmenting results in Fig. 8(e). For the segmenting results in Fig. 8(g) and (h), though these two algorithms achieve the relatively better partitioning results, some local regions are still not well identified. Taking the regions at the bottom right corner of the image in Fig. 8(g) as an example, the two white regions are mixed together. They cannot produce accurate and clear partition for the third synthetic SAR image. Fortunately and obviously, it is clear from Fig. 8(c) that the proposed method achieves much better segmenting result not only in regions uniformity, but also in boundaries separability.Table 2 lists the statistical mean and standard deviation of segmentation results over 30 independent runs. It can be seen that all the six algorithms can produce satisfying segmenting statistical results of the first synthetic image, AI1. However, for the third synthetic image, AI3, the five algorithms except TSIS demonstrate not-so-better segmenting results in terms of statistical means and standard deviations. The reason is that FCM and its variations make only local perturbation near the original partition. Thus, it may get stuck at local minimum when the number of categories is large or the tested samples are complicated. Similarly, KGC and SCE also employ FCM to implement the final graph cut.How about the clustering performances of the six algorithms in segmenting the real SAR images are? In this part of the experiment, three real SAR images are used to test the performance of the six algorithms. The first two SAR images are downloaded from the website of German Aerospace Center. These two images are provided by TerraSAR-X permitting studying microstructures in detail as well as analyzing surface formations and land use, and they locate in the middle of the Swabian Jura, Germany. The third image is from the Google earth, which is a remote sensing image of the two planes. It is interesting to note that all the three images consist of four types of land covers. The first SAR image has three types of crops and water regions, the second SAR image can be divided into three types of crops and a village, and the last image consists of two planes, two types of runway in light gray and dark gray, and laws between the runways.The segmentation results of the six algorithms on the three images are shown in Figs. 9–11, respectively. It can be seen that some local parts of experimental results in Figs. 9(c)–(e), 10(c)–(e) and 11(c)–(e) are contaminated by misclassified spots. The reason is that the similarity measures considering the local spatial constraint and local gray-level constraint in these algorithms cannot produce enough suppress of the speckle noise in the real SAR images. In addition, the main difficulty of the segmentation tasks lies in SAR1 is to distinguish the light gray crops, the dark gray crops and the black water clearly. It can be seen that the water regions and the dark gray crops in Fig. 9(g) have been mixed together. For the last image in Fig. 11, the most important object is to recognize the two planes from the runway corrupted by the notorious speckle in it. TSIS, KWFLICM and KGC have obtained the satisfying segmenting results among the six algorithms, whereas the plane at the upper right of the segmentation results in Fig. 11(d), (e) and (g) cannot be discriminated, i.e. the plane is covered by the runway in light gray.Table 3shows the statistical results of six algorithms in segmenting the real SAR images over 30 independent runs. SCE has obtained the best statistical means of the index, entropy, in partitioning the image SAR2 despite its relatively high value of standard deviations. Furthermore, TSIS achieved the best statistical results of entropy on the two tested images, SAR1 and SAR3. Additionally, NC denotes the number of discovered clustering numbers of the different images. It can be seen from Tables 2 and 3, TSIS can find the true number of categories in the nine test images automatically.Several parameters have been introduced in TSIS, such as the size of searching window in PNL filters, crossover probability, mutation probability, and population size. Most of them can be set by the existing experiences or the related fundamentally literatures on these technique [21,35,36]. We believe the size of smoothing window in ML estimator is required for further study. Fig. 12shows the statistical results of error-bar of index ARI in segmenting the three synthetic SAR images. Note that the numbers at the x axis indicate the half size of the smoothing window in ML estimator, i.e. ‘5′ at axis means that the size of that window is (2×5+1)×(2×5+1). It is clear from Fig. 12 that TSIS perform very stable when the half size of window is less than 5 and its performance declines gradually when the value is greater than 5. Furthermore, the standard deviations of ARI index also become large. The reason is that the heterogeneous regions will be over-smoothed once the size of the ML estimator becomes large. Thus, some of the details are lost under this circumstance. Over-considering the three graphs in Fig. 12, it can be expected that the appropriate value for the half size of ML estimator is three, i.e. a 7×7 local window is suitable for the filter.The major one difficulty of SAR image segmentation is the large amounts of unpredictable and inestimable speckle noise in this kind of image. To evaluate the robustness of the proposed algorithm under the effect of noise, the synthetic SAR image is contaminated by different number of looks of simulated speckle noise. In general, the larger number of looks is and the less amount of speckle noise is. The segmenting results of the synthetic SAR image with 1-look to 10-look results by six algorithms are shown in Fig. 13. The experimental results are presented by the average values of ARI index over 30 independent runs.The curves show that the mean segmentation accuracies of six algorithms ascend in a graceful style with different number of looks. Besides, the statistical results of six algorithms in segmenting the first two synthetic SAR images, AI1 and AI2, are greater than 80%, while, they have performed the relatively worse in partitioning the third synthetic SAR image. The reason is that the more number of different land-covers, and the more difficulties in segmenting them. Furthermore, it is obvious that all the mean values of partitioning accuracy of TSIS are greater than 90% and the proposed algorithm presented the relatively better performance in segmenting the three images with different amount of speckle noise.Since our previous study has presented three SAR image segmentation methods, called IMIS in [11], SISF in [37], MKCIS in [38], it is intuitive to study the comparison behaviors of TSIS and the three earlier works in the study. IMIS firstly utilized an artificial immune multi-objective algorithm to segment SAR images; besides a feature extraction technique was presented by combing the Gabor filter and the gray level co-occurrence probability. In IMIS, Three is no automatically ability of discovering clusters’ number in the test images and the speckle noise smoothing strategy. SISF proposed an efficient computing paradigm in AIS with variable length of chromosomes to search the optimal partitions of SAR images, which can find the optimal numbers of clusters automatically. The speckle suppressing method employed the original non-local means (NLM) filter to estimate the pixel by searching the non-local weighted average of its neighboring pixels. MKCIS is an endeavor to study ability of the nonlocal mean filter implemented in lower dimensional subspace and a multi-objective clustering algorithm in kernel-induced distance measures. Very recently, Ma and Zhong et al. has presented an adaptive multi-objective memetic fuzzy clustering algorithm for remote sensing imagery, called AFCMOMA. A new population update strategy and Gaussian local search (GLS) are used in the new multi-objective memetic clustering framework. Table 4shows the used strategies of TSIS, IMIS, SISF, MKCIS, and AFCMOMA.As we discussed in the above section, three crucial tough problems have not been solved in current SAR image community: (1) the automatic ability of discovering the true number of categories in different types of land covers; (2) to remove or suppress especial speckle noise in SAR imagery; (3) the better clustering performance in segmenting thousands of highly overlapped and contaminating pixels. IMIS, SISF and MKCIS can give partial answers to the three problems. In this study, TSIS is a brilliant comprehensive work, which can present the better solving performance to the three problems. Besides, in order to investigate the segmenting performance of the TSIS, IMIS, SISF, MKCIS, and AFCMOMA, we also perform the experimental study of them in partition the three synthetic images over 30 independent runs, which are shown in Table 4. Note that “Total Mean Times” in Table 4 means that the value outside the bracket is the mean value of the three mean values of running times of AI1, AI2, and AI3; the value inside the bracket is the mean value of the three standard deviations of them. Similarly, “Accuracy Rate” is same to “Total Mean Times” in Table 4. It can be seen the statistical values of CPU running times and accuracy rate are both the better than these of IMIS, SISF, MKCIS, and AFCMOMA.In order to compare the segmentation results of the four algorithms visually, we present an experiment by using them to segment the real SAR image, called SAR3, shown in Fig. 14(a). The segmentation result of IMIS, which is shown in Fig. 14(c), is mixed in some regions with different types of details, such as the plane and the runway at the upper right corner of the image. The similar segmentation results are shown in Fig. 14(e). Though the SISF can recognize the plane from its background, runway, the speckle noise at the upper right corner of the image is not suppressed completely. In MKCIS, the introduction of lower dimensional subspace of neighboring vectors combing with nonlocal mean (NLM) filter can save computational cost and performs more robust to noise than distances calculated in the full-dimensional space. However, the differences between the local details and their backgrounds are not been effectively preserved, which will bring about the fuzziness and uncertainty in the segmentation results. In AFCMOMA, the segmentation results are not very well from Table 4 and Fig. 14(f), because it is lack of filter smoothing strategy and fast clustering skill. Fortunately, it seems that TSIS performs relatively better than IMIS, SISF and MKCIS, for example, the boundaries of two planes are well defined, and two types of runways are consistently identified as corresponding regions.Table 5shows the average running times (in seconds) by TSIS, KWFLICM, FLICM, FGFCM, KGC and PPB+SCE in segmenting the five SAR images with larger value of image size respectively. It is noted that TSIS, KWFLICM and FGFCM are programmed in Matlab R2009b, and the other three algorithms are coded in C language for keeping their original performances. The experimentations are implemented at Lenovo workstation ThinkCentre M8400t (3.40GHZ, 4GB RAM; Inter (R) Core(TM) i7-3770CPU). From Table 5, FGFCM took the least computational time among the six algorithms in this study, closely followed by KGC (in C) and FLICM (in C). Though the two variants of FCM algorithms require less running times, they performs slightly poor among the six algorithms. Besides, KWFLICM takes the most computational time as authors declared in their original paper. The reasons are that the fuzzy factor proposed in the literature is required to be calculated at every iteration step and the stopping conditions cannot be satisfied for the corrupted pixels in SAR image. Fortunately and interestingly, TSIS takes not so much computational time in segmenting the nine images. Furthermore, what is encouraging is that TSIS has achieved the leading segmentation results in most of the nine images.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
