@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimization of magnetic field assisted EDM using the continuous ACO algorithm

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A rotary tool with rotary magnetic field has been used to better flushing of the debris from the machining zone in EDM.The process parameters are magnetic field intensity, rotational speed and product of current and pulse on-time.Two ANFIS models have been designed to correlate the process parameters to material removal rate (MRR) and surface roughness (SR).A continuous ant colony optimization (CACO) technique has been used to select the best process parameters for maximum MRR and specified SR.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
EDM,Optimization,ANFIS,CACO,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a rotary tool with rotary magnetic field has been used to better flushing of the debris from the machining zone in electrical discharge machining (EDM) process. Two adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) models have been designed to correlate the EDM parameters to material removal rate (MRR) and surface roughness (SR) using the data generated based on experimental observations. Then continuous ant colony optimization (CACO) technique has been used to select the best process parameters for maximum MRR and specified SR. Here, the process parameters are magnetic field intensity, rotational speed and product of current and pulse on-time. Also, ANFIS models of MRR and SR are the objective and constraint functions for CACO, respectively. Experimental trials divided into three main regimes of low energy, the middle energy and the high energy. Results showed that the CACO technique which used the ANFIS models as objective and constrain functions can successfully optimize the input conditions of the magnetic field assisted rotary EDM process.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Electrical discharge machining (EDM) is a non-traditional method which is used most commonly to machining of difficult-to-machine materials. Flushing the debris from the machining gap is one of the major challenges in EDM process. Accumulation of debris in gap space causes to inactive pulses such as short and open circuit and arc. These types of discharges do not remove any material from the workpiece and damage the surface integrity of machined specimen. By considering of these reasons researchers focus on the methods which improve the flushing in EDM. In order to improve the machining performance, methods such as rotary EDM, magnetic field assisted EDM and ultrasonic assisted EDM were introduced for better flashing of eroded particle from machining gap [1–10].Few researches have been investigated the effect of rotary tool on machining characteristics in EDM. Mohan et al. [1,2] conducted the experimental study on Al-SiC composite material. They showed that the rotary electrode improves the MRR and reduce the SR. Kuppan et al. [3] investigated the effects of various rotational speed of electrode on Inconel 718. Results show that the increasing of the rotational speed is effective factor in low discharge energy. Saha and Choudhury [4] applied the rotation of the electrode on dry EDM. They found that duty factor, air pressure and spindle speed have a significant effects on MRR and SR. Baseri et al. [5] studied the effects of the flushing types on rotary electro discharge machining (REDM) performance of X210Cr12. Results show that the flushing types have significant effects on REDM performance when the machining debris is coarse and the REDM performance is almost constant for fine debris machining condition.Although some researches associated the magnetic field with the manufacturing process, only a few work investigated the effects of magnetic force on EDM performance. Lin and Lee [6] used the magnetic field in EDM process and reported that the magnetic force run the debris away from machining gap and improve the characteristics of this operation. Chattopadhyay et al. [7] used the multi level intensity of magnetic field and rotary tool electrode with various speed in EDM process and indicated the effects of them on MRR and electrode wear rate (EWR). Teimouri and Baseri [8,9] studied the effects of tool rotation and various intensities of magnetic field on EDM performance of X210Cr12. Results indicated that the applying a rotational magnetic field around the machining gap improves the MRR and SR and increase the EWR and overcut. In another work, Teimouri and Baseri [10] studied the effects of rotary magnetic field and also ultrasonic vibration of workpiece on performance of dry EDM process. Results showed that magnetic field has positive effects on MRR and SR. Also, by application of ultrasonic vibration achieving to superior MRR was feasible.The soft computing technologies have been widely used for mapping input and output parameters of the EDM processes. Mandal et al. [11] attempted to model and optimize the complex EDM process using back propagation neural network (BPNN). Caydas et al. [12] developed an adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) model for prediction of the white layer thickness and SR in EDM process. Aliakbari and Baseri [13] determined the optimal setting of the process parameters of REDM using the Taguchi method. Results indicate that the model has an acceptable performance to optimize the REDM process. Teimouri and Baseri [14] used a predictive model based on BPNN to correlate the inputs and outputs of dry EDM process parameters and applied this model as an objective function to optimize the process parameters using the artificial bee colony algorithm.The ant colony optimization (ACO) algorithm inspired by the behavior of the natural ant society [15] has provided a powerful means for optimization the complex problems such as traveling salesman problem. The ACO algorithm cannot be used to optimize continuous optimization problems because the algorithm is only prescribed for discrete optimization problems. Numerous researchers proposed extensions of the ACO to continuous space problems. One such extension is called continuous ant colony optimization (CACO) which first envisioned by Bilchev and Parmee [16]. It involves the use of a simulated nest from which an ant moves in a certain calculated direction to a specified distance. In the original ACO routine, the ants wade through a network of connected nodes to find a solution. However, in the continuous case, there is no network of nodes, but just a continuous space instead [17]. The CACO method can be applied for optimization of process which has continuous machining parameters.In this paper, due to contribution of external parameters such as magnetic field intensity and rotary tool forecasting of process will become complex. So a powerful precise model such as ANFIS model can predict the process accurately. In the ANFIS model, the advantages of fuzzy learning and neural network are combined for adjusting the membership functions (MFs), the rule base and related parameters to fit the training data set. In other literature the external parameters were not contributed to EDM process. In this work, three parameters of magnetic field intensity (B), rotational speed of electrode (N) and product of discharge current and pulse on-time (Iav·ton) are considered as magnetic field assisted rotary EDM parameters. Two ANFIS models are developed to correlate the EDM parameters to MRR and SR. Then, CACO technique is used for optimization of EDM parameters.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper a new approach to optimization of the EDM process conditions has been presented. Objective of the optimization is achieving the maximum MRR subject to appropriate operating constraints on SR and domains of input parameters of magnetic field intensity, rotational speed of the tool and product of current and pulse on-time. First, two ANFIS models were developed to predict the MRR and SR in terms of three input parameters. In the ANFIS model, the advantages of fuzzy learning and neural network are combined for adjusting the MFs, the rule base and related parameters to fit the training data set. Then, CACO technique has been used to determine the optimum parameter in EDM process. Results show that the proposed ANFIS models have an acceptable performance to prediction of the MRR and SR in terms of three input parameters. Herein, the ability of the predictions can be more accurate by considering of the more number of experimental data. Also, the CACO technique which used the ANFIS models as objective and constrain functions can successfully optimize the input conditions of the magnetic field assisted rotary EDM process. The superiority of the integrated ANFIS-CACO system is noticeable when there is only experimental data which demonstrate the process behavior. Also it is remarkable when there is no explicit mathematical relationship based on the physics of the process to correlate the input and output parameters.