@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An ANFIS approach for evaluation of team-level service climate in GSD projects using Taguchi-genetic learning algorithm

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The GSD team-level service climate is one of the key determinants to achieve the outcome of global software development (GSD) projects.To evaluate the GSD team-level service climate and GSD project outcome relationship based on Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS) with the Hybrid Taguchi-Genetic Learning Algorithm (HTGLA).The applicability and capability of HTGLA-based ANFIS approach is investigated through the real data sets obtained from Indian software industries.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Service climate,Global software development,Adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system,Taguchi-genetic learning algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The GSD team-level service climate is one of the key determinants to achieve the outcome of global software development (GSD) projects from the software service outsourcing perspective. The main aim of this study is to evaluate the GSD team-level service climate and GSD project outcome relationship based on adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) with the genetic learning algorithm. For measuring the team-level service climate, the Hybrid Taguchi-Genetic Learning Algorithm (HTGLA) is adopted in the ANFIS, which is more appropriate to determine the optimal premise and consequent constructs by reducing the root-mean-square-error (RMSE) of service climate criteria. For measuring the GSD team-level service climate, synthesizing the literature reviews and consistent with the earlier studies on IT service climate which is classified into three main criterion: managerial practices (deliver quality of service), global service climate (measure overall perceptions), service leadership (goal setting, work planning, and coordination) which comprises 25 GSD team-level service climate attributes. The experimental results show that the optimal prediction error is obtained by the HTGLA-based ANFIS approach is 3.26%, which outperforms the earlier result that is the optimal prediction errors 4.41% and 5.75% determined, respectively, by ANFIS and statistical methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nowadays, the offshore/on-site teams’ service climate attributes have created a major impact on IT service quality with respect to the outcome of a GSD project. GSD is primarily an outsourcing technique in which on-site teams works in the client location, understand and audit the client requirements whereas offshore teams, operating from India, executes the requirement based on the inputs provided by the on-site teams [4]. Recently, there has been an interest to use learning and adapting approaches through a combination of other techniques (e.g., fuzzy system-neural networks, fuzzy system-genetic algorithms). As a result, our earlier studies [3–5] explored the IT service quality in the context of IT service climate and GSD project outcome relationship on the basis of fuzzy multi-criteria decision making (FMCDM) combined with genetic algorithm based learning approach and ANFIS approach. Moreover, the adaptive neuro fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) is an effective approach in dealing with the non-linear mapping based on both human knowledge (in the form of fuzzy if-then rules) and the specified input–output data pairs [6,7]. In addition, a number of studies [7,8] have investigated that the HTGLA-based ANFIS approach which outperforms prediction accuracy is obtained by ANFIS approach. Based on this context, this present study has applied HTGLA-based ANFIS approach to evaluate the offshore/on-site team-level service climate in GSD projects through the lens of IT service quality criteria and it is an extension our earlier works [1,2,3–5].The offshore/on-site teams’ service climate is one of the key predictors for evaluating the IT service quality and GSD project outcome relationship. Service climate refers to, IT professionals’ shared perceptions of the practices, and behaviors in their workplace that support the provision of IT service to business customers [9]. In addition, Schneider et al. (1993) describes that service climate refers to the employee behavior, which is influenced by the policies, practices, procedures, and routines facilitate the excellence of services that has been outlined by the organization to achieve goals or other organizational imperatives. In the service climate literature, the number of studies [9–12] has revealed various types of service climate dimensions: managerial practices (deliver quality of service), customer orientation, customer feedback, global service climate (measure overall perceptions), service leadership (goal setting, work planning, and coordination), service vision, client feedback and client communication, and have investigated that these aspects are likely to be relevant in the IT service context. As a result, our earlier work formulated the construct to measure the offshore/on-site teams’ service climate with respect to IT service quality criteria via three IT service climate dimensions: managerial practices, global service climate and service leadership on the basis two approaches: FMCDM with Genetic algorithm approach [4] and ANFIS with statistical method [5].On the other hand, ANFIS is a combination of neural networks and fuzzy inference system. Consequently, a number of researchers [5,25–27] have applied ANFIS to different areas of application. In addition, the number of studies [7,13] reports that the HTGLA produce better results when compared to an existing genetic algorithm. Furthermore, HTGLA based ANFIS approach yields better results than ANFIS which has been reported in the earlier studies [7,8]. Recently, a number of studies [22–24] have applied HTGLA for wide variety of applications. Therefore, consistent with earlier studies our intention is to capture the benefits of both Neuro-fuzzy approach (ANFIS), HTGLA approach and build a powerful framework for evaluating the team-level service climate in GSD projects. Here, it should be noted that, to the best of authors’ knowledge, there are no existing studies investigated the IT service climate on the basis of ANFIS approach, whereas a number of studies explored the IT service climate based on conventional statistical methodologies [9–11].Even though measuring the performance of ANFIS is evaluating the team-level service climate in GSD project, there are still few concerns, such as how to obtain the optimal premise and consequent constructs by reducing the root-mean-square-error of service climate criteria that need to be resolved. Therefore, the purpose of this research is, by using HTGLA-based ANFIS to simultaneously to obtain the optimal premise and consequent parameters and output parameter thereby reducing the RMSE of service climate attributes. In this paper, the experimental results are also shown to make the comparison of prediction accuracy with those obtained by our earlier work [5] on evaluating team-level service climate in GSD projects. In the following, Section 2 discusses HTGLA-based ANFIS architecture and HTGLA algorithm implementation for evaluating team-level service climate in GSD projects is presented in Section 3. In Section 4, a presentation of the study in service climate, and the results of HTGLA-based ANFIS model has been given and discussed. Finally, a conclusion of this study is drawn.ANFIS architecture represents first order Sugeno type fuzzy reasoning procedure (as depicted in Fig. 1). ANFIS is a class of adaptive networks that is functionally equivalent to fuzzy inference systems [14]. In this study, the fuzzy inference system under the consideration has three attributes: managerial practices (M), service leadership (S) and global service climate (G) which covers 25 offshore/on-site teams’ service climate attributes and one output attribute is the team service climate (TSC). The ANFIS architecture for a multi-input-single-output Sugeno fuzzy model is shown in Fig. 1. The typical Sugeno fuzzy model has 23 fuzzy if-then rules can be expressed as(1)Rl:IfMisA˜iANDSisA˜jANDGisA˜kTHENtl=tpHere Rl(l=1,2,…,23) denotes the lth implication,A˜i,A˜jandA˜k(i,j,k=1,2,3)are the linguistic scales of the premise part with membership functionsμA˜i(M),μA˜j(S)andμA˜k(G),tl, is the output variable and tpis the consequent parameter.The ANFIS architecture consists of five layers (Fig. 1), and a description of the model is as follows.Layer 1: Input node. In this fuzzy layer, where M, S, and G are the input nodes Ai, Bj, and Ck,(i,j,k=1,2…,n), respectively. Ai, Bj, and Ckare linguistic labels associated with the appropriate membership functionsμAi,μBiandμCk, respectively. The node function of this layer that determines the membership relations between the input and output functions can be denoted as(2)O1,i=μAi(M),O1,j=μBj(S),O1,k=μCk(G),Here O1,i, O1,j, and O1,krepresents the output functions (i.e., membership functions) of layer 1. Let the premise attributes ofμA˜i(M),μA˜j(S)andμA˜k(G)in the precondition part be, respectively{aAi,bAi},{aBj,bBi}and{aCk,bCk}, adaptive in the fuzzy layer. For example, Gaussian membership function is opted for theμA˜i(M), thenaAiand,bAiis the center and width of the Gaussian membership function.Layer 2: Rule node. In this layer, every node is fixed node. The output O2,iof this layer is the products of all the incoming signals from layer 1 that is shown in Eq. (3). In this layer calculation of wiis the product of all membership values of the particular inference rule.(3)O2,i=wi=μAi(M)⋅μBj(S)⋅μCk(G),i=1,2…,nLayer 3: Average node. The functionality of this layer computes the firing strength of each node of the inference rule. The firing strength is wiof one node divided by wiof all others.(4)O3,i=w¯i=wi∑i=1nwi,HereO3,i=w¯idenotes the layer 3 output.Layer 4: Consequent node. In this layer, calculation of normalized firing strength which is the product of output of each inference tlwith the firing strength calculated in the previous layer, i.e.,w¯iis shown in Eq. (4).(5)O4,i=w¯itl=w¯itpHere O4,iis the layer 4 output, and tlis the output attribute obtained by adaptive consequent parameter tpof the node.Layer 5: Output node. In this layer, the firing strength of the final objective is calculated. This layer contains the overall output which is the summation of all incoming signals as presented in Eq. (7)(6)O5=x(v)=0,ifv<h,1,ifv≥h,(7)v=∑i=1nw¯itl=∑inw¯itl∑inw¯itpO5=x(v) is the layer 5 output, in which the activation function x(v) is the discontinues function with the threshold value h being a total output layer parameter. Then, x(v)=1 denotes the predictable value of TSC and x(v)=0 denotes an unpredictable value of TSC in the ANFIS. Thus, the optimal values of premise parameters{aAi,bAi},{aBj,bBi}and{aCk,bCk}, (i,j,k=1,2,…,n).Consequent parameters (tp,p=1,2,3,…,23) and an overall output TSC can be obtained after the training by minimizing the following RMSE of service climate criterion e(p):The root mean square error should be minimized and thus defined as(8)minimizee(p)Here e(p) is the root-mean-square-error obtained by p. From the Eq. (8), it can be seen that the value of minimizing the root mean square of service climate criterion e(p) actually depends on set of parameters{aAi,bAi,aBj,bBi,aCk,bCk,tp,h}(i,j,k=1,2,…,n) and (p=1,2,3,…,23). Without the loss of generality, e(p) can be defined as:(9)e(p)=∑i=1m(BNPdi−BNPoi)2mAssume that oiis the fuzzy number (actual output) with respect to an n-dimensional non-fuzzy input vector{aAi,bAi,aBj,bBi,aCk,bCk,tp}in the given network. HereBNPdiandBNPoidenote the defuzzified values of diand oi. Here, di, m denotes the desired output for the ith input–output pattern.The single-objective genetic algorithm, which is the general-purpose optimization technique, can be applied to this by calculating the fitness function [15] as:(10)F(p)=11=e(p)From the Eqs. (9) and (10) shows the training accuracy of performance criterion G is actually dependent on set of premise parameters{aAi,bAi,aBj,bBi,aCk,bCk,tp}(i,j,k=1,2…,n)and (p=1,2,3,…,23) which denotes(11)G(aAi,bAi,aBj,bBi,aCk,bCk,tp)=max(i>j)(f1,f2,…,fn)This is equivalent to following optimization problem:(12)maximizeG(f1,f2,…,fn)Subject to∑i=1nGi=1where G(f1,f2,…,fn) is defined in Eq. (11)The fitness value of the set of connection weights is updated at each generation for the genetic algorithm. G(f1,f2,…,fn) as given in Eqs. (11) and (12) is obviously non-linear function in decision variables. Our objective is to find values of weights of set of parameters which will be maximizing their membership in corresponding fuzzy sets. Where F(p) is the fitness value of p. The fitness value of a set of connection weights is updated at each generation for the HTGLA. Then, the description of HTGLA, which is given below, can be employed to find a set of parameters p by minimizing the root-mean-square error.This section briefly describes the HTGLA approach for effectively evaluating the offshore/on-site team-level service climate in GSD projects by using three criteria (i.e., managerial practices, service leadership, and global service climate). The HTGLA approach is a combination of traditional genetic algorithm (TGA) with the Taguchi approach [16–19]. In the HTGLA, the Taguchi method is inserted between the crossover and mutation operations of a TGA [20]. The systematic reasoning ability of the Taguchi method is incorporated in the crossover operations to systematically select the better genes to achieve crossover operations, and consequently to enhance the genetic algorithms [7]. The steps of the HTGLA based on the existing studies [7,20] are given in detail. They are as follows:Step 1: Parameter setting.Input: Population size M, crossover rate pc, mutation rate pm, and number of generations.Step 2: Initialization.By using p in the Eqs. (8)–(10) which is the fitness values defined by HTGLA, the fitness values of the initial population are obtained. The initial population with the chromosomes of the form V={f1,f2,…,fn}, for the problem in Eq. (10) is randomly generated, and the types of membership functions are specified in advance.Step 3: Selection operation using the roulette wheel approach.Step 4: Crossover operation. The probability of the crossover is determined by the crossover rate pc. Generate random value of x. If x<pcperform crossover and evaluate the fitness value of new offspring, otherwise best chromosomes will replace two worst chromosomes.Step 5: Select a suitable two-level orthogonal arrayLy2y−1for the matrix experiments, where y denotes the number of experimental runs, and y−1 is the number of columns in the orthogonal array. The orthogonal arrayL1282127is used in the illustrative results given in the next section.Step 6: Choose randomly two chromosomes at a time to execute the matrix experiments.Step 7: Calculate the fitness values of the y experiments in the orthogonal arrayLy2y−1using Eqs. (9) and (10).Step 8: Calculate the effects of the various factors.Step 9: One optimal chromosome is generated based on the results from Step 8.Step 10: Repeat Steps 6 through 9 until the expected number x<pmis true. Generate random number y. If y<pcis true then perform mutation. That is add the value y to first gene of the offspring and normalize them otherwise perform again.Step 11: The population via the Taguchi method is generated.Step 12: Mutation operation. The probability of the mutation is determined by the mutation rate pm.Step 13: Offspring population is generated.Step 14: Sort the fitness values in increasing order among the parents and offspring populations.Step 15: Select the better M chromosomes feasible for the constraint as the parents of the next generation.Step 16: Has the stopping criterion been met? If yes, go to Step 17. Otherwise, return to Step 3 and continue till Step 16.Step 17: Compare the RMSE performance criteria and check if the specified stopping condition has been met. If yes, go to Step 18. Otherwise, specify other types of membership functions, return to Step 2, and continue till Step 17.Step 18: Display the optimal chromosome and the optimal fitness value.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
