@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Comprehensive fuzzy multi-objective multi-product multi-site aggregate production planning decisions in a supply chain under uncertainty

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Presenting a fuzzy multi-objective multi-period mixed-integer non-linear aggregate production planning model.Considering various sources of uncertainty in a multi-product multi-site multi-customer supply chain.Developing a fuzzy programming method to solve the presented model.Considering a real-world case study and using some comparing measures.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Aggregated production planning,Supply chain,Fuzzy optimization,Multi-objective mixed-integer linear programming,Uncertainty,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The main focus of this paper is to develop a model considering some significant aspects of real-world supply chain production planning approved by industries. To do so, we consider a supply chain (SC) model, which contains multiple suppliers, multiple manufactures and multiple customers. This model is formulated as a fuzzy multi objective mixed-integer nonlinear programming (FMOMINLP) to address a comprehensive multi-site, multi-period and multi-product aggregate production planning (APP) problem under uncertainty. Four conflicting objectives are considered in the presented model simultaneously, which are (i) to minimize the total cost of the SC (production costs, workforce wage, hiring/firing and training costs, transportation cost, inventory holding cost, raw material purchasing cost, and shortage cost), (ii) to improve customer satisfaction, (iii) to minimize the fluctuations in the rate of changes of workforce, and (iv) to maximize the total value of purchasing in order to consider the impact of qualitative performance criteria. This model is converted to multi-objective mixed-integer linear programming (MOMILP) through three steps of the developed method and then the MOMILP model is solved by two different methods. Additionally, comparison of these two methods is presented and the results are analyzed. Finally, the efficiency of the model is investigated by a real industry SC case study.number of time periods (t=1,…,T)number of products (i=1,…,I)number of production sites (j=1,…,J)number of suppliers (s=1,…,S)number of worker levels (k=1,…,K)number of consumers (c=1,…,C)number of raw materials (m=1,…,M)regular time production cost per unit at site j in period tovertime production cost per unit at site j in period tsubcontracting production cost per unit at site j in period tcost of raw material m provided by supplier s in period tshipping costs from the supplier s to site j in time taverage failure rate of raw material m supplied by supplier s to site j in period tacceptable failure rate of site j for incoming shipments of raw material maverage service level of supplier ssite j acceptable service levellabor cost of the k-levels (k=1,…,K) worker at site j in period tfiring cost of the k-levels worker at site j in period thiring cost of the k-levels worker at site j in period ttraining cost for the k-levels worker trained to level k′at site j in period tinventory holding cost of product i at site j in period ttransportation cost from site j to consumer c in period tinventory holding cost of raw material m at site j in period tcost of penalties associated with shortage of product i for consumer c in period tsale price of product i for consumer c in period tdemand of production i from consumer c in period tmaximum amount of subcontracting for product i at site j in period tmachine hour used for produce product i at site j in period tmaximum machine capacity available for product i at site j in period twarehouse space per unit for ith product at site j in period twarehouse space per unit for the mth raw material at site j in period tmaximum warehouse space available at site j in period tnumber of units of raw material m required for each unit of product ilead time required for shipping raw material from supplier s to site javailable regular time at site j in period tavailable over time at site j in period tavailable subcontracting time at site j in period tproduction time of product i at site jnumber of the k-level initial labor considered for primary planned period at site jfraction of the workforce variation allowed in period tlead time required for shipping raw material from site j to consumer craw material storage capacity at site jfinal production storage capacity at site jproductivity of k-level workers (0≤νk≤1)maximum number of raw material m supplier s could provide in period t1 if training from skill level k to skill level k′ is possible; 0, otherwisetotal score of supplier s considering qualitative performance factorsescalating factor for the regular production costescalating factor for the overtime production costescalating factor for subcontracting production costescalating factor for the raw material costescalating factor for the labor salary costescalating factor for the labor firing costescalating factor for the labor hiring costescalating factor for the labor training costescalating factor for the raw material inventory costescalating factor for the production inventory costescalating factor for suppliers to the site shipping costescalating factor for sites to the consumer transportation costescalating factor for the product shortage costquantity of production in regular time for product i produced at site j in period tquantity of production in overtime for product i produced at site j in period tsubcontracting quantity for product i produced at site j g in period tquantity of units of raw material m shipped from supplier s to site j in period tquantity of k-level workers at site j in period tquantity of k-level workers at site j fired in period tquantity of k-level workers at site j hired in period tquantity of k-level workers at site j trained to level k′ in period tinventory level of final product i at site j in period tnumber of units of final product i provided by site j for consumer c in period tinventory level of raw material m at site j at the end of period tshortage of product i in demand point c in period t

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Innovation, globalization of markets and the increasingly demanding customers do not allow manufacturers to have a slightest opportunity for any malpractice [1]. With the arrival of the 21st century, great changes of the industry occur, which can change the industrial and economic outlook of the world. Markets are truly universal and customers are demanded the smaller quantities of the commodities. Most companies produce a wider range of products and provide greater new products more quickly by focusing on market requirement. These changes have created inevitable challenges and new issues of logistics for all manufacturers. Owing to the rapid technological change and intense competition, companies are seeking the operational efficiency through supply chain management (SCM) [2].A supply chain (SC) includes raw materials suppliers, manufacturing plants, distribution centers and customers, and SCM is a tool for improving organizational performance and is the managing tool of these components and their relationships [3]. The SC is a complex business entity that has a high degree of uncertainty, which is based on its real world characteristics [4], so that uncertainty is the main factor, which can affect the configuration and coordination of SCs [5].Davis [5] introduced three different sources of uncertainty in SCs, which these sources are supply, process and demand uncertainty. Defective raw materials received from suppliers or delays in the supplying are the factors, which cause uncertainty in supply. Process uncertainty usually results from machine breakdowns and demand uncertainty, which is the most serious from other sources [5] and is resulted from withdrawing of demand or inaccurate predicting of demands.Having an appropriate planning to coordinate all mentioned SCs elements by considering these degrees of uncertainty seems necessary to achieve the organization's goals. According to Mirzapour Al-e-Hashem et al. [6], aggregate production planning (APP) is important tactical level planning in a production management system, which usually is considered based on some parameters with uncertain values in many manufacturing environments. Therefore, it can be considered an appropriate approach. APP is tactical medium-term capacity planning over a 3–18-months planning horizon which determines products, raw materials and final production inventory and workforce levels for each planning period by considering the given data of resources. Other forms of family disaggregation plans (e.g., master production schedule, capacity plan and material requirements) depend on APP in a hierarchical way [7].Mula et al. [8] reviewed some of the existing literature of production planning under uncertainty. Furthermore, there are several methods addressed the uncertainty. Among the existing methods, the fuzzy programming approach, especially in non-deterministic models consisting of several different objectives, are being increasingly applied. Measuring satisfaction degrees of each objective functions is explicitly its main advantage, which can help the decision maker to make her/his final decision by choosing a preferred efficient solution according to the satisfaction degree [9].The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 dedicates to a review of the literature. Moreover, notation, assumption and SC modeling formulation are presented in Section 3. Then, Section 4 develops four main strategies of the developed solution methodology for solving the fuzzy APP model. Section 5 presents the behavior of the model in a real-world industrial SC case study. Finally, the conclusions and directions for future research are drawn in Section 6.Current research focuses on APP and an application of fuzzy modeling optimization. Some other features (e.g., SC planning, supplier selection and order lot-sizing and procurement–production–distribution planning) are embedded in the proposed model. However, we present the literature review of two main features explicitly and introduce other features implicitly below.Holt et al. [10] proposed one of the first APP models. They suggested a model, called HMMS (Holt, Modigliani, Muth, and Simon), which minimizes the total production costs of regular payroll, overtime and layoffs, inventory, stock-outs, and machine setup through a series of quadratic cost curves. A comprehensive review on APP models from 140 journal articles and 14 books and methodologies was implemented by Nam and Logendran [11]. Due to existing uncertain data, several studies are done in a fuzzy environment. According to the Tang et al. [12], APP based on fuzzy logic and fuzzy linguistics was proposed by Rinks [13] for first time, who developed one production and one workforce algorithm with the use of a series of relational assignment rules. Tang et al. [12] proposed a novel approach to model multi-product APP problems with fuzzy demands and fuzzy capacities. The objective of the considered problem is to minimize the total costs of quadratic production costs and linear inventory holding costs.Wang and Liang [14] present a multi-product aggregate APP problem with uncertain forecast demand, related operating cost coefficients and capacity, and for solving the proposed model, they introduce a novel interactive possibilistic linear programming (PLP) approach. The proposed approach attempts to minimize total costs with reference to inventory levels, labor levels, overtime, subcontracting and backordering levels, machine and warehouse capacity. They solved the model proposed by Lai and Hwang method [15] and demonstrated their efficiency of their APP model by a real industrial case study. Jamalnia and Soukhakian [16] developed a hybrid fuzzy multi-objective nonlinear programming (H-FMONLP) model with different goal priorities, which contains qualitative and quantitative objectives, for the APP problem in a fuzzy environment. They proposed a quantitative objective minimizing the total production costs, costs of changes in workforce levels, transportation and back ordering costs, and a qualitative objective maximizing the total customer satisfaction. Two objectives are optimized regarding the inventory level, demand, labor level, machines capacity and warehouse space. They pointed out that traditional mathematical programming techniques are not suitable to solve real-world aggregate production planning problems. Genetic algorithm for numerical optimization of constrained problems (GENOCOP III) was applied to solve a final crisp nonlinear programming problem, and finally, they demonstrated the efficiency of the practical APP model by a real-world industrial case study.Torabi et al. [17] incorporated the fuzzy set theory into the hierarchical production planning (HPP) structure to handle the uncertainty and infeasibility issues. Then, they proposed a fuzzy HPP (FHPP) model consisting of two decision making levels. In the first level, an aggregate production plan is determined by solving a fuzzy linear programming model, and in the second level, a disaggregated production plan was determined by another fuzzy linear programming model to find a disaggregated production plan in the final products level. Silva and Marins [18] proposed a fuzzy goal programming model (FGP) for a real APP problem and its application was made in a Brazilian sugar and ethanol milling company. Integration of the agricultural, industrial, and logistics phases into a unique model, to support decision-makings during harvest seasons and periods between harvests is significant characteristics of the proposed research.Zadeh [19] presented the fuzzy set theory for the first time, which provides a highly effective tool of managing uncertain data. Introducing the fuzzy set theory into linear programming (LP) problems with fuzzy objective and constraints was first by Zimmermann [20]. Thereafter, Zimmermann [21] extended his fuzzy linear programming method in 1976 to a multi-objective linear programming (MOLP) problem, namely max–min operator. In the literature, there are some researchers who have claimed the optimal solution using a max–min operator, which may not be efficient [9,22–24].In recent years, many studies in the literature have been discussed the SC designing and planning, which based on mathematical programming techniques [25,26]. An interactive fuzzy multi-objective linear programming (i-FMOLP) method for solving the fuzzy multi-objective transportation problems with piecewise linear membership function was developed by Liang [27]. This i-FMOLP method aims to simultaneously minimize the total distribution cost and the total delivery time with a reference to fuzzy available supply and total budget at each source, and fuzzy forecast demand and maximum warehouse space at each destination. Kumar et al. [28] proposed a vendor selection problem (VSP) through a fuzzy multi-objective integer programming vendor selection problem (f-MIP_VSP) model, which contains three objective functions: (i) cost minimization, (ii) quality-maximization and (iii) maximization of on-time-delivery with the realistic constraints (e.g., meeting the buyers’ demand, vendors’ capacity and vendors’ quota flexibility). The model was formulated based on uncertainty, whose parameters were fuzzy type, and finally, the efficiency of the proposed model was tested on data taken from a case company.A new linear programming model for medium term production planning in a capacity constrained material requirements planning (MRP) was proposed by Mula et al. [29]. Formulation of the presented model was based on a multi-product, multi-level and multi-period manufacturing environment and the main aim of the model was to optimize the model via the master production schedule of the MRP and determine each raw material in each period, inventory levels, delayed demand, and capacity usage levels over a given planning horizon under uncertainty. To do so, they transformed the model into three fuzzy models with flexibility in the objective function, in the market demand and in the available capacity of resources. To show the efficiency their approach, they used real data taken from an automobile seat manufacturer. A multi-objective mixed-integer linear programming (MILP) model for collaborative production–distribution planning problem was developed by Selim et al. [30]. To solve the model, a fuzzy goal programming (FGP) approach was applied. Liang [31] presented a novel FMOLP model for solving integrated production–transportation planning decision (PTPD) problems in SCs in a fuzzy environment. Minimizing the total production and transportation costs, total number of rejected items and total delivery time is a main aim of the presented model with subject to available capacities, labor level, quota flexibility and budget constraints at each source, as well as forecast demand and warehouse space at each destination. Liang and Cheng [32] applied fuzzy sets to integrating manufacturing/distribution planning decision (MDPD) problems with multi-product and multi-time period in SCs. To do so, a fuzzy multi-objective linear programming (FMOLP) model was developed to simultaneously minimize the total costs and total delivery time in a SC with a reference to inventory levels, available machine capacity and labor levels at each source, as well as market demand and available warehouse space at each destination. They adopted a fuzzy goal programming method proposed by Hannan [33] to solve the presented model. Peidro et al. [34] proposed an FLP model to integrate procurement, production, and distribution planning activities into a multi-echelon, multi-product, multi-level and multi-period SC network. The model was tested on a real automobile industry case study.Torabi and Moghaddam [35] proposed a novel framework for preparing an optimal aggregate APP by interconnecting the manufacturing sites (MSs) through lateral transshipment. Maximizing the total profit and minimizing the manufacturing lead time are considered as two managerial objective functions. An FGP approach with imprecise goal hierarchy is developed for modeling the aggregate production–distribution planning (APDP) problem with transshipment. The proposed FGP model is then converted to an equivalent crisp one and a real-case study shows the feasibility of the APP model. Liu and Papageorgiou [36] proposed a multi-objective MILP model for a global process SC optimization problem. The production, distribution and capacity planning of a global process SC was proposed by cost, responsiveness, and customer service level as the objectives. The ɛ-constraint and lexicographic minimax methods were considered to solve the model, and the applicability of the presented model and these methods was investigated by a numerical example. Kannan et al. [37] proposed an approach to rank and select the best green suppliers according to economic and environmental criteria in a SC, and then to allocate the optimum order quantities among them. The proposed approach is an integration of the fuzzy multi-attribute utility theory and multi-objective programming. Maximizing the total value of purchasing and minimizing the total cost of purchasing simultaneously are the objectives of the model. Ariafar et al. [38] developed a production–distribution mathematical model to determine the production planning of the system and select the best contractors for dispatching the products to the distribution centers or retailers. The fuzzy set theory has been applied in this study for considering the imprecise relationships of SC components and a case study is tested to show the efficiency of the presented model.In this paper, the comprehensive fuzzy multi-objective mixed-integer nonlinear programming model (FMOMINLP) is presented for SC production planning, which originally suggested by Mirzapour Al-e-Hashem et al. [6] and adopted as the basis for a part of this work. The presented multi-echelon SC consists of S raw material suppliers which indexed by (s), J production sites (j) and C customer zones (c). The suppliers, production sites and the customer zones are geographically dispersed, but belong to an enterprise. For manufacturing intended products, production sites use raw materials supplied from a pre-determined set of qualified suppliers. Then, manufacturers assemble and produce I types of final products, which can be sold to a number of customer zones in order to satisfy their associated demands. In the modeling processes, in practical situations, most of the parameters are uncertain because of the complex and incompleteness nature of the required data as well as dynamic relationship among different actors of a SC [39]. In this work, developing an FMOMINLP model is proposed to optimize the APP in SC under the uncertain environment, in which the customers demand, costs coefficients and some other influential parameters maintaining uncertain model relationships are considered as imprecise parameters over the planning horizon. To embed these uncertainties in the mathematical model, uncertain parameters are considered as fuzzy numbers. According to this fact that in a concept of optimization, all the goals that a system tries to reach them are considered as objective function. To cover all the objectives considered for each enterprise, four conflicting objective functions are given simultaneously in this paper model. These objectives are to minimize the total SC cost, minimize the rate of changes of workforce, minimize the total maximum of product shortages, and maximize the total value of purchasing. In the first objective function, the time value of investment is considered. The third one is nonlinear, which is converted to linear one. Another feature of the presented model is to consider the fuzziness in equal or unequal signs that belong to the constraints involving fuzzy parameters that allows solution space to be flexible when the model contains some uncertain parameters. For SC optimization under uncertainty, APP looks for suitable outputs by considering some certain and uncertain data as pre-required inputs. These inputs are as follows:•Information about the resources and the available facilities including production equipment, available warehouse space, hours of using machine for manufacturing product, investment volume, number of workforce for the first period, etc.Medium-term forecasts of demand for the period, for which the planning has to be done.Firing, hiring and training of workforce costs, costs of production through various production alternatives, such as overtime, subcontracting and backordering costs, transportation costs and costs of holding inventory.Organizational policies related to the usage of above alternatives and inventory policies alternatives.Principal assumptions, which the fuzzy mathematical model considered here is based on them, are as follows:(1)Demand should be only for final products.Machine and storage capacity cannot exceed the maximum level in any case.Escalating factor in each category of the cost is considered.During the planning period, the demand backlog the final products is not accepted.A certain value of violation is allowed on the right hand site of fuzzy constraints (i.e., maximum violation of 5% and there is no restricted for the lower bound).There is no previous remaining demand for final products from prior periods before the beginning of planning.At the beginning of the first period, a primary labor is considered.Membership functions for all the fuzzy sets are defined a piecewise linear form.The pattern of a triangular fuzzy number is considered to represent the imprecise parameters.Some decision variables are considered integer and then the model is MINLP form.Assumption 1 emphasizes that the demand for semi-final products is not processed. The second assumption is related to restriction of the physical resource capacity of the production sites. The third assumption implies that the accuracy of applied ones must be technically satisfied to optimize the LP problem. Assumption 4 states that a distribution flow between the production sites and customer zones is unilateral from a mathematical perspective. Assumption 5 is considered to prevent giving false data and enhancing the solution space of the defined problem beyond what is existed and needed in the real world. Assumptions 6 and 7 imply that the considered initial conditions are taken to design the model. Assumption 8 relates to the fuzziness of the objective functions in practical APP problems. Assumption 9 concerns the simplicity and flexibility of the fuzzy arithmetic operations. Assumption 10 mentions using of integer variables in the model and the need to solve an MINLP model.The FMOMINLP model for SC production planning is formulated below.(1)MinTC˜=∑t∑j∑iPTij[RP˜CjtQPRijt(1+ea)t]+∑t∑j∑iPTij[OP˜CjtQPOijt(1+eb)t]+∑t∑j∑iPTij[SP˜CjtQPSijt(1+ec)t]+∑t∑j∑m∑sCR˜PsmtQRSSsmjt(1+ed)t+∑t∑j∑kLC˜kjtQWkjt(1+ee)t+∑t∑j∑kPF˜kjt.QWFkjt(1+ef)t+∑t∑j∑kPH˜kjt.QWHkjt(1+eg)t+∑t∑j∑k′∑kPT˜kk′jtQWTkk′jt(1+eh)t+∑t∑j∑mIH˜CMmjtIMmjt(1+ei)t+∑t∑j∑iIH˜CPijtIPijt(1+ej)t+∑t∑j∑m∑sSC˜SSsjtQRSSsmjt(1+ek)t+∑t∑c∑j∑iPT˜CjctNFSCijct(1+el)t+∑t∑c∑iSh˜CictNSHict(1+em)t−∑t∑c∑j∑iSP˜ictNFSCijct(2)minCS=∑tmax∑iNSHict(3)minWCR=∑t∑j∑k(QWHkjt−QWFkjt)(4)maxTVP=∑STOTSS∑t∑jQRSSsmjt(5)IPijt=IPij(t−1)+QPRijt+QPOijt+QPSijt−∑cNFSCijct∀i,j,t,(6)IMmjt=IMmj(t−1)+∑sQRSSsmj[t−LTsj]−∑i(QPRijt+QPOijt+QPSijt)⋅NURMim∀m,j,t(7)QWkjt=Lkj0∀k,j,t<2(8)QWkjt=QWkj(t−1)+QWHkjt−QWFkjt+∑k'QWTk′kjt−∑k'QWTkk′jt∀k,j,t>1(9)∑kQWkjt.νk(ARjt+AOjt)≥∑i(QPRijt+QPOijt)⋅PTij∀j,t(10)∑iQPSijt⋅PTPij≤ASjt∀j,t(11)QPSijt≤MASijt∀i,j,t(12)∑iMHUijt(QPRijt+QPOijt)≤MMCAijt∀j,t(13)NShict=˜NShic(t−1)+D˜ict−∑jNFSCijc[t−LTjc]∀i,c,t(14)∑iWSPijt⋅IPijt+∑mWSRmjt⋅IMmjt≤MWSAjt∀j,t(15)∑mIMmjt≤RMSCj∀j,t(16)∑iIPijt≤FPSCj∀j,t(17)∑k(QWFkjt+QWHkjt)≤α(t−1)∑kQWkj(t−1)∀j,t(18)QWFkjt+∑k′QWTkk′jt≤QWkj(t−1)∀k,j,t(19)∑k′QWTk′kjt⋅QWFkjt=0∀k,j,t(20)QWTkk′jt≤MUPkk′∀k,k′,j,t(21)∑jQRSSsmjt≤MNRMsmt∀s,m,t(22)∑jNURMim(QPRijt+QPOijt+QPSijt)≤∑s∑jQRSSsmjt∀i,m,t(23)NFSCijct=˜D˜ict⋅Binjc∀i,j,c,t(24)∑sAD˜RSsmjt⋅QRSSsmjt≤˜MA˜DRmj∑sQRSSsmjt∀m,j,t(25)∑m∑sAS˜Ls⋅QRSSsmjt≥˜MA˜SLj∑m∑sQRSSsmjt∀j,t(26)QWkjt,QWFkjt,QWHkjt,≥0and integer∀k,j,tQPRijt,QPOijt,QPSijt≥0∀h,j,tQRSSsmjt≥0∀s,m,j,t;IMmjt≥0∀m,j,t;NFSCijct≥0∀i,j,c,t;IPijt≥0∀i,j,t;NShict≥0∀i,c,t;BYkjt={0,1}Binjc={0,1}∀k,j,t;QWTkk′jt≥0and integer∀k,j,t,k′Eq. (1) shows the first objective function that is related to total cost of SC. The total cost includes production costs, costs related to the workforces encompass labor wage, hiring firing and training costs, transportation cost of the first and second echelons of the SC network, raw material inventory holding cost, raw material purchasing cost, final production inventory holding cost and shortage cost from, which the total sales are deducted. The second objective function shown in Eq. (2) is related to the customer satisfaction. To satisfy the consumers, the sum of the maximum shortages of product i in demand point c in all periods is minimized. The second objective function is the nonlinear one which is converted to a linear via an auxiliary variable. Minimizing the rate of changes in workforce through minimizing the difference between firing and hiring quantity of human resource is presented in Eq. (3). Eq. (4) shows the conflicted objective function with three previous objective functions. Based on Torabi and Hassini [9], this objective function maximizes the total value of purchasing in order to consider the impact of qualitative (intangible) performance criteria in purchasing decisions (such as after sale services, business structure and technical capabilities of the suppliers).Eq. (5) corresponds to the final product inventory balance of sites. The final product inventory of a site is equal to the quantity of products manufactured by that site minus the quantity of the final products delivered to the customer zone in addition to the quantity of final products remained from prior periods in warehouses. The raw material inventory balance constraint is considered in Eq. (6). This constraint considers the raw material inventory of sites, which is similar to what was mentioned in the description of the constraint (5), and can be used to describe Constraint (6) in the same way. Eq. (7) is related to Assumption 7 designates the initial workforce to the first period of programming (t<2). Eq. (8) is a balance equation for workforce level and ensures that the available k-skill level workers equals the workforce with the same skill level in the previous period in addition to the change of workforce level in the current period, that is consider for the second period planning to top (t>1). There are two production times that is considered in the proposed model for sites to manufacture their commodity and there is one opportunity for contractor to produces and provides number of needed goods of manufacturing sites which Constraints (9)–(11) are related to this issue.Constraint (9) limits the available production time of manufacturer sites to the available workforce regular and overtime by considering their productivity. This means, the available production time is assigned to proportional to the number and skill levels of workers in regular time as well as the number and skill levels of workers in overtime. It emphasizes this fact that the production time per period can never be higher than the available regular time plus the available overtime for a certain production. Eqs. (10) and (11) are related to the contractor. These equations imply the available limited time for the contractor to produce production i and it can also produce a considered production in a maximum size (i.e., it should produce this value in available time). Otherwise, there is no extra opportunity to produce the productions. Eq. (12) shows the machine capacity for each production manufacturing at each site in each period which restricted production producing to the available machine capacity.Constraint (13) is a balance equation for shortage in demand point c. In this constraint the symbol‘=˜’represents the fuzzy version of ‘=’, which refers to the fact that the equal sign are not absolutely established. Because of using fuzzy parameters in some constraint, fuzziness is applied in their equal or unequal signs; and in constraint that have unequal signs, symbol≤˜is used instead of≤and symbol≥˜is used instead of ≥. Eq. (14) corresponds to the limitation for warehouse space includes the final production and raw materials. Constraints (15) and (16) are related in limiting the raw material and final production inventory levels to the related inventory storage capacities. It should be noted that the nature of capacity expressed in Constraints (15) and (16) is different from what is applied in Constraint (14). The capacity of available space for existing warehouses in production sites is the cause of using Eq. (7) in the model; while, considering Constraints (15) and (16) is adapted from the alternative policy related to the inventory control which is based on financial goals of organization. Constraint (17) ensures that in according to the proportion of workforces in each period, the change of workforce level cannot exceed of this in the previous period. There is a fraction parameter used in this constraint, in which the value of this fraction is determined by a labor department. The change of workforce levels derived from firing and hiring labor should be less than the previous quantity of the labor multiplied by the fraction of the workforce variation allowed in the previous period.To avoid shortages of labor with particular skills (e.g., level k), Eq. (18) ensures that the number of the k-level workers, who are fired or trained for upper skill levels in the current period, cannot exceed the available the k-level workforce in the previous period. In fact, this constraint seeks to balance and integrity of workforce levels in all of the planning periods. Constraint (19) emphasizes that those workers who are trained and reached the upper skill levels should not be fired at the same period. This constraint is a nonlinear, in which linear transformation of it will be presented in Section 4. Constraint (20) guarantees that training workers from skill level k to level k′ is possible, once this training program has been existed. To write this constraint in a mathematical form, the use of the binary parameter (not using the binary variable) is inevitable. This means that the workers upgrading only exists for workers with lower skill levels. To model this concept, it should be considered that the training of the higher skill level of a worker to lower skill levels should not be accomplished, which this issue will be occurred with the help of the binary parameter to determine the available training.Eq. (21) ensures that the amount of shipments from supplier s cannot exceed the supplier capacity. Constraint (22) guarantees the maintaining raw material flow between the suppliers and manufacturing sites of the SC. Constraint (23) ensures that the quantity of final productions sent to customer zones is adapted to their demands. According to Torabi and Hassini [9], the minimum acceptable levels of quality and on time delivery (or service level) provided by each supplier are two important quantitative factors imposed by the manufacturer on the supplier selection and order lot-sizing sub-problem shown in Constraints (24) and (25). Eq. (26) shows the limitations of variables, as some of them are non-negative and some of them are integer and binary.According to the proposed FMOMINLP model in this paper, all the constituent elements of it consisting of cost coefficients, right-hand-side, technological coefficients and even equality and inequality signs used in the model are considered as vague and imprecise data that finally these data are modeled through fuzzy numbers. This comprehensive full-fuzzy model is as follows:(27)MaxZ=C˜Xs.t.∑j=1na˜ijxj≤˜b˜ixj≥0,i∈M,j∈NwhereC˜=(c˜1,c˜2,…,c˜j)is a fuzzy j-dimensional vector and Z contains various objective functions. Therefore, to solve model (27), proposing a method that considers all the above mentioned items simultaneously is required. In addition, it must be able to offer right solution for encountering conflicting objective functions. Therefore, in this section, we develop a method to solve the presented FMOMINLP model. The proposed method converts the FMOMINLP to a crisp MOMLP model, and then it solves the MOMLP model. To do so, four steps are considered in this method.(1)Offering the method for converting the existing fuzziness in equality and inequality signs to crisp sign according to the lack of knowledge in right-hand-side and technological coefficients.Presenting the method that considers the lack of knowledge in model data in cost coefficients and gives the crisp form of it as a result.Converting the nonlinear objective function and constraint to linear one.Proposing a method considering the conflicting objective functions simultaneously and solving the model.In the following, the developed method and the suggested approaches associated with mentioned steps are presented below.As been explained above, according to the structure of the constraints, the fuzziness is applied in equality and inequality signs for those constraints, which contain the ambiguous parameters. For convenience, in order to propose an appropriate method for this step, model (27) is reduced to model (28):(28)Maxz=∑j=1ncjxjs.t.∑j=1na˜ijxj≤˜b˜ixj≥0,xj∈N,i∈M,j∈Nwhich model (28) is the simplified form of (29) so that contains only one objective function and all of the cost coefficients are certain. To transform the soft and flexible constraints to a certain form, we adopt the method proposed by Herrera and Verdegay [40] and Cadenas and Verdegay [41] that this method has been studied by researchers [40,42–44].In the model (28), j is index of column vector, i is index of the raw vector and it is supposed that there are M raw (i.e., number of constraints) and j column, and there are three following membership functions in a theoretical view:I.For each row, related to the constraints,∃μi∈F(R)⇒μi:R→[0,1],i∈Mwhich defines each resource (right-hand-side fuzzy parameter).Considering the each row and each column simultaneously(i∈M,j∈N),∃μij∈F(R)⇒μij:R→[0,1]to define the fuzzy number in a technological matrix.For each row∃μi∈F[F(R)]⇒μi:F(R)→[0,1],i∈M,which provides the accomplishment degree of the fuzzy number∀x∈Rn.a˜i1x1+a˜i2x2+⋯+a˜inxn,i∈MWith respect to the ith constraint, that is the adequacy between this fuzzy number and the oneb˜iwith regarded to the ith constraint.As mentioned before, the symbol≤˜is the fuzzy version of ≤, which means the decision maker tends to permit certain amount of defects in the accomplishment of these flexible constraints. To be more tangible, constraints are allowed to violate up to somewhat which this flaw will be shown witht˜i.Therefore, the degree of accomplishment of the ith flexible constraint in model (28) is as follows.(29)μi(x)=1a˜ix≤gb˜mia˜ixb˜i≤ga˜ix≤gb˜i(+)t˜i0a˜ix≥gb˜i(+)t˜iwheret˜iis a fuzzy number giving the maximum violation of the ith constraint and the symbol ≤grefers to comparison of fuzzy numbers. To do so, some relations that are related to compare fuzzy numbers are needed. In addition, it is usually supposed thatmi(.)∈[0,1]that the lower the value of miis the higher the violation of the constraints. Let g be a fuzzy number linear ranking function and consider a fuzzy functionφthatφ:F(R)×F(R)→F(R)and is as follows:(30)φ(a˜ix,b˜i)=t˜ia˜ix≤gb˜it˜i(−)a˜ix(+)b˜ib˜i≤ga˜ix≤gb˜i(+)t˜i0a˜ix≥gb˜i(+)t˜iwheret˜i∈F(R)is included in R+. By considering [40], the membership function associated with the fuzzy constrainta˜ix≤gb˜iis as follows:(31)μi:F(R)→[0,1]/μi(a˜ix≤gb˜i)=g(φ(a˜ix,b˜i))g(t˜i)Let,Xi={x∈Rn|aix≤˜bi,xj≥0,xj∈N},i∈M.Then, by getting intersection on the solution space,X=∩i∈MXi,model (28) can be rewritten by:max{z=cx|x∈X}Based of mathematical knowledge, it is obvious that∀α∈(0,1],an α-cut of the constraint set will be the classical setXα={x∈Rn|μx(x)≥α}where∀x∈Rn,μx(x)=inf{μi(x),i∈M}.Therefore, if α-cut of the ith constraint is considered, it is indicated by Xi(α). However, by applying the member function (31) to model (28) and considering set X(α) simultaneously, the following is obtained:(32)μi(a˜ix≤gb˜i)≥α⇔g(φ(a˜ix,b˜i))g(t˜i)≥α⇔g(t˜i(−)a˜ix(+)b˜i)g(t˜i)≥α⇔g(t˜i)−g(a˜ix)+g(b˜i)≥g(t˜i)α⇔g(a˜ix)≤g(t˜i)+g(b˜i)−g(t˜i)α⇔g(a˜ix)≤g(b˜i(+)t˜i(1−α))⇔a˜ix≤gb˜i(+)t˜i(1−α)Therefore, after applying Eq. (32) in model (28), the new model is attained by:(33)Maxz=∑j=1nc˜jxjs.t.∑j=1na˜ijxj≤gb˜i+t˜i(1−α)xj≥0,xj∈N,i∈M,j∈N,α∈[0,1]Now, converting the fuzzy parameters of model (33) to the crisp form is the next stage. To do so, according to the [44], the different fuzzy number ranking method can be used in constraints. Here, a linear ranking function proposed by Yager [45] is used to transforms all the fuzzy data to precise coefficients in soft constraints. Although there are several indices which can be used, and the method could be easily conformed to the use of these indices, the first index of Yager is applied in this paper and imprecise data are considered as triangular fuzzy numbers. Briefly, given what has been said in relation to the set X(α) and level set of μx(x), and in considering this issue that the α level of X is the fuzzy subset, for simplicity suppose L: X(α), then, M(L) can be considered to be the mean value of L, and ifL={a≤x≤b},thenM(L)=a+b2and if0≤a1≤b1≤a2≤b2≤a3≤b3≤⋯≤an≤bn≤1,and ifL=∪{ai≤x≤bi}then:M(L)=∑i=1nai+bi2(bi−ai)∑i=1n(bi−ai)It should be noted that, each of these M(L) (and some others defined in Yager [45]) will be applied in accordance with the terms of the problem. Now, by considering the fuzzy set X with maximum membership grade αmax, the linear ranking function F is as follows:(34)F(L)=∫0αmaxM(L)dαHence, based on the described above and using the linear ranking function F, the model (34) is obtained by:(35)Maxz=∑j=1nc˜jxjs.t.∑j=1naij+daij−daij′3xj≤bi+dbi−dbi′3+ti+dti−dti′3(1−α)xj≥0,xj∈N,i∈M,j∈N,α∈[0,1]As mentioned before, the imprecise data are modeled through triangular fuzzy numbers. For instance,b˜i=(bip,bim,bio),wherebipis the most pessimistic value that has a very low likelihood of belonging to the set of available values (degree of association=0),bimis the most possible value that certainly belongs to the set of available values (degree of association=1 if normalized) andbiois the most optimistic value ofb˜ithat likebiphas a very low likelihood of belonging to the set of available values (degree of association=0), in which these values are estimated by the decision maker. In model (35),dbi=bio−bimanddbi′=bim−bipare shown in Fig. 1.According to the step 1 solution and by applying it into the soft constraints in the major model, the following equations are obtained:I.Constraint (13) is converted to these two following constraints.(36)NShict−NShic(t−1)+∑jNFSCijc[t−LTjc]≤D2ict+dD−dD′3+t1+dt1−dt1′3)(1−α)∀i,c,t,(37)NShict−NShic(t−1)+∑jNFSCijc[t−LTjc]≥D2ict+dD−dD′3−t2+dt2−dt2′3(1−α)∀i,c,t,Constraint (23) is converted to these two following constraints.(38)NFSCijct≤D2ict+dD−dD′3⋅Binjc+t3+dt3−dt3′3(1−α)∀m,j,t(39)NFSCijct≥D2ict+dD−dD′3⋅Binjc−t4+dt4−dt4′3(1−α)∀m,j,tConstraint (24) is converted to the following constraint:(40)∑sADRS2smjt+dADRS−dADRS′3⋅QRSSsmjt≤MADR2mj+dMADR−dMADR′3⋅∑sQRSSsmjt+t5+dt5−dt5′3(1−α)∀m,j,tConstraint (25) is converted to the following constraint:(41)∑m∑sASL2s+dASL−dASL′3⋅QRSSsmjt≥MASL2j+dMASL−dMASL′3⋅∑m∑sQRSSsmjt−t6+dt6−dt6′3(1−α)∀j,tAccording to the [9], due to using fuzzy coefficients in the objective function,TC˜,obtaining an ideal solution is not guaranteed for this model. There have been several methods for obtaining a compromise solution in the literature, such as Lai and Hwang [15] Luhandjula [46], Sakawa and Yano [47], Tanaka and Asai [48], and Tanaka et al. [49]. We use the method proposed by Lai and Hwang [15]. To transform the objective function,TC˜,to the precise form, the last four methods [47–49] have restrictive assumptions and been often difficult to implement in practice, as stated in [9] and Hwang and Yoon [50]. Let us return to the model (27) and consider a simpler form of model (27), like the previous step as follows:(42)MinTC˜=∑j=1nc˜jxjs.t.∑j=1naijxj≤bixj≥0,xj∈N,i∈M,j∈Nwhere due to more accurate compliance with the model presented in this paper and to describe the more complete description, minimizing the objective function is considered.Model (42) is simplified form of model (27) that all the constraints have precise parameters and only the objective function encompasses fuzzy data as well as the model (42) only has one objective function. To convert the imprecise objective function to precise one, an auxiliary MOLP model with three objective functions will be provided in this step. These objectives are to maximize the possibility of spending lower cost, minimize the most possibility of cost, and minimize the possibility of spending higher cost.Since all the given parameters of the objective function are supposed to be fuzzy with triangular possibility distributions, objective function,TC˜,also have a triangular possibility distribution. Geometrically, this imprecise function can be fully defined by three prominent points;(TCp,0),(TCm,1)and(TCo,0).Therefore, minimizing the uncertain objective function can be obtained by pushing these critical points toward the left. Since the vertical coordinates of the critical points are fixed at either 0 or 1, the only item that should be considered is the horizontal coordinates. Consequently, to minimize imprecise objective function with three points TCp, TCmand TCoshould be minimized simultaneously, in which there may exist a conflict in the simultaneous minimization of these crisp objectives [9]. The method [15] developed in this paper minimizes TCm, maximizes (TCm−TCp) and minimizes (TCo−TCm) rather than minimizing TCp, TCmand TCosimultaneously. With these three functions, pushing the three objective points to the left will be accomplished. Fig. 2shows the process of minimizing the imprecise objective function. After applying the presented method in the total cost of the SC presented here, three objective functions are obtained as follows:(43)MinZ1=TCm=∑t∑j∑iPTij[RPCjtmQPRijt(1+ea)t]+∑t∑j∑iPTij[OPCjtmQPOijt(1+eb)t]+∑t∑j∑iPTij[SPCjtmQPSijt(1+ec)t]+∑t∑j∑m∑sCRPsmtmQRSSsmjt(1+ed)t+∑t∑j∑kLCkjtmQWkjt(1+ee)t+∑t∑j∑kPFkjtmQWFkjt(1+ef)t+∑t∑j∑kPHkjtmQWHkjt(1+eg)t+∑t∑j∑k′∑kPTkk′jtmQWTkk′jt(1+eh)t+∑t∑j∑mIHCMmjtmIMmjt(1+ei)t+∑t∑j∑iIHCPijtmIPijt(1+ej)t+∑t∑j∑m∑mSCSSsjtmQRSSsmjt(1+ek)t+∑t∑c∑j∑iPTCjctmNFSCijct(1+el)t+∑t∑c∑iShCictmNSHict(1+em)t−∑t∑c∑j∑iSPictmNFSCijct(44)MaxZ2=(TCm−TCp)=∑t∑j∑iPTij[(RPCjtm−RPCjtp)QPRijt(1+ea)t]+∑t∑j∑iPTij[(OPCjtm−OPCjtp)QPOijt(1+eb)t]+∑t∑j∑iPTij[(SPCjtm−SPCjtp)QPSijt(1+ec)t]+∑t∑j∑m∑s(CRPsmtm−CRPsmtp)QRSSsmjt(1+ed)t+∑t∑j∑k(LCkjtm−LCkjtp)QWkjt(1+ee)t+∑t∑j∑k(PFkjtm−PFkjtp)QWFkjt(1+ef)t+∑t∑j∑k(PHkjtm−PHkjtp)QWHkjt(1+eg)t+∑t∑j∑k′∑k(PTkk′jtm−PTkk′jtp)QWTkk′jt(1+eh)t+∑t∑j∑m(IHCMmjtm−IHCMmjtp)IMmjt(1+ei)t+∑t∑j∑i(IHCPijtm−IHCPijtp)IPijt(1+ej)t+∑t∑j∑m∑s(SCSSsjtm−SCSSsjtp)QRSSsmjt(1+ek)t+∑t∑c∑j∑i(PTCjctm−PTCjctp)NFSCijct(1+el)t+∑t∑c∑i(ShCictm−ShCictp)NSHict(1+em)t−∑t∑c∑j∑i(SPictm−SPictp)NFSCijct(45)MinZ3=(TCo−TCm)=∑t∑j∑iPTij[(RPCjto−RPCjtm)QPRijt(1+ea)t]+∑t∑j∑iPTij[(OPCjto−OPCjtm)QPOijt(1+eb)t]+∑t∑j∑iPTij[(SPCjto−SPCjtm)QPSijt(1+ec)t]+∑t∑j∑m∑s(CRPsmto−CRPsmtm)QRSSsmjt(1+ed)t+∑t∑j∑k(LCkjto−LCkjtm)QWkjt(1+ee)t+∑t∑j∑k(PFkjto−PFkjtm)QWFkjt(1+ef)t+∑t∑j∑k(PHkjto−PHkjtm)QWHkjt(1+eg)t+∑t∑j∑k′∑k(PTkk′jto−PTkk′jtm)QWTkk′jt(1+eh)t+∑t∑j∑m(IHCMmjto−IHCMmjtm)IMmjt(1+ei)t+∑t∑j∑i(IHCPijto−IHCPijtm)IPijt(1+ej)t+∑t∑j∑m∑s(SCSSsjto−SCSSsjtm)QRSSsmjt(1+ek)t+∑t∑c∑j∑i(PTCjcto−PTCjctm)NFSCijct(1+el)t+∑t∑c∑i(ShCicto−ShCictm)NSHict(1+em)t−∑t∑c∑j∑i(SPicto−SPictm)NFSCijctIt should be reminded that the other objective functions proposed in this paper are precise and will remain in their form.As mentioned earlier, in this paper, an FMOMINLP model is presented that contains two nonlinear equations. These equations are (2) and (19).At first, converting Eq. (2) to its linear form is considered. This transformation can be accomplished with the help of an auxiliary variable. Suppose thatmax∑iNSHict=δ,then∑iNSHict≤δ.Hence, the linear programming model is obtained by:(46)minCS=∑tδts.t.∑iNSHict≤δt∀c,tδt≥0Eq. (19) is clearly a nonlinear form that can be transformed to a linear one with the help of a binary variable as follows:(47)∑k′QWTk′kjt≤MBYkjt∀k,j,t(48)QWFkjt≤M(1−BYkjt)∀k,j,tConstraints (47) and (48) are derived from a nonlinear constraint (19). As it clear, converting to a linear constraint is accomplished through a binary variable. In these equations, M is an arbitrary big number. Now, by considering equations (3)–(12), (14)–(22), (26), (36)–(41), (43)–(48), we are going to the last step of solution method.To solve auxiliary MOMILP model obtained from equations (3)–(12), (14)–(22), (26), (36)–(41), (43)–(48), several methods can be used, such as utility theory, goal programming, fuzzy programming or interactive approaches. In this paper, for solving MOLP model obtained in the previous steps, we can use the Zimmermann max–min approach [21]; however, it is well-known that the optimal solution yielded by max–min operator may not be efficient [9,22,26,51]. Therefore, we use the approach proposed by Torabi and Hassini [9] (namely TH) and another approach proposed by Li et al. [23] (namely LZL) to solve the model. Then, we compare the results of applying these approaches. Furthermore, some other methods existed to solving the model like Lai and Hwang [22] and Selim and Ozkarahan [24]. However, these methods sometimes generate inefficient or unbalanced and poorly compromised solution [9].First, we obtain the corresponding positive ideal solutions (PIS) and negative ideal solutions (NIS) of all the crisp objective functions of the auxiliary MOLP problem, which proposed by Hwang and Yoon [50] as follows:(49.1)Z1PIS=minTCm,Z1NIS=maxTCm(49.2)Z2PIS=max(TCm−TCp),Z2NIS=min(TCm−TCp)(49.3)Z3PIS=min(TCo−TCm),Z3NIS=max(TCo−TCm)(49.4)Z4PIS=minCS,Z4NIS=maxCS(49.5)Z5PIS=minWCR,Z5NIS=maxWCR(49.6)Z6PIS=maxTVP,Z6NIS=minTVPwhere the concept of using the category of Eqs. (49) is related to this fact that PIS is the optimum objective value over the solution space composed the given set of constraints when all the other objectives are overlooked, and NIS is the optimum value of its dual over the solution space composed the given set of constraints. In addition, the related linear membership function for each of these objective functions can be computed by:(50)μz1=1Z1<Z1PISZ1NIS−Z1Z1NIS−Z1PISZ1PIS<Z1<Z1NIS0Z1>Z1NIS(51)μz2=1Z2>Z2PISZ2−Z2NISZ2PIS−Z2NISZ2PIS<Z2<Z2NIS0Z2<Z2NIS(52)μz3=1Z3<Z3PISZ3NIS−Z3Z3NIS−Z3PISZ3PIS<Z3<Z3NIS0Z3>Z3PIS(53)μz4=1Z4<Z4PISZ4NIS−Z4Z4NIS−Z4PISZ4PIS<Z4<Z4NIS0Z4>Z4NIS(54)μz5=1Z5<Z5PISZ5NIS−Z5Z5NIS−Z5PISZ5PIS<Z5<Z5NIS0Z5>Z5NIS(55)μz6=1Z6>Z6PISZ6−Z6NISZ6PIS−Z6NISZ6PIS<Z6<Z6NIS0Z6<Z6NISSpecifying the imprecise objective value interval asking by the DM can be an agent to determine each linear membership function. Figs. 3 and 4show the graph of the linear membership function defined in Eqs. (50) and (51), respectively. Other graphs related to Eqs. (52)–(55) are similar to Fig. 3 according to their goals (i.e., minimizing or maximizing).Consider the following Zimmermann's max–min operator approach:(56)maxλs.t.λ≤μk(x)k=1,…,N,λ∈[0.1]x∈XAs mentioned above, the efficiency of the solution obtained by the max–min operator is not guaranteed. Therefore, for overcoming the existing inefficiencies, two following approaches are applied among the proposed methods to solve the auxiliary MOMILP model.In this approach, we convert Eq. (56) to the following equation.(57)maxλ=∑h=1Nwhλhs.t.λhl≤λh≤uh(x),h=1,…,N∑h=1Nwh=1,x∈Xwh>0whereλhl(0≤λhl≤1)is the minimum satisfaction degree of the hth objective function chosen by the decision maker. However, in the LZL approachλhlis adjusted in this manner, in which they takeλhlin a compromise approach (57) equal to the solution of the max–min operator approach (56). Briefly, a two-phase approach for solving the auxiliary MOMILP is generated, in which in the first phase, model (56) is solved to get a solution x0. Then, by placing it into the relative membership functionsuh(x0)(0≤h≤1),each objective value's satisfaction degree is calculated. Then, in the second phase,λhlis equal to theuh(x0)and the model (57) is solved in order to get the optimal solution x*of the two-phase approach. In fact, by solving the following model, we get x*:(58)maxλ=∑h=1Nwhλhs.t.uh(x0)≤λh≤uh(x),h=1,…,Nx∈X,∑h=1Nwh=1wh>0Finally, the optimal solution x* is substituted by the objective functions of the main model.The TH approach is actually a hybridization of the two methods Lai and Hwang [17], in which these methods sometimes generate inefficient or unbalanced and poorly compromised solution [9]. We convert the auxiliary MOMILP model into an equivalent single objective MILP using the following auxiliary crisp formulation:(59)maxλ(x)=δλ0+(1−δ)∑hwhuh(x)s.t.λ0≤uh(x)k=1,…,Nx∈X,∑h=1Nwh=1,wh>0,λ0,δ∈[0,1]where in this formulation, uh(x),λ0=minh{uh(x)},whand δ indicate the satisfaction degree of hth objective function, the minimum satisfaction degree of objectives, the relative importance of the hth objective function and the coefficient of compensation, respectively. After solving the model by Eq. (59), the optimal solution x* is obtained, and then the final objective values are calculated by placement x* into the objective functions of the main model. The graphical abstract is shown in Fig. 5.CHOUKA corporation data provided by Mirzapour Al-e-Hashem et al. [6] was used as a case study to demonstrate the practicality of the proposed model and method and to illustrate the potential savings, which can be attained by using fuzzy models in a fuzzy environment. It should be noted that adding some of the data is required. These data, which are related to a SC of the wood and paper sector, are presented from three sites. They produce five major products in 12 periods in the planning horizon to meet the demand at the end of each time period and there are four consumer point, four suppliers, five workforce levels and 10 raw materials.Table 1shows the maximum allowable amount of producing the products by subcontracting and the machine hour used for each product in each site for each period. Table 2presents the maximum machine capacity available in each site for each product, in all period time. Table 3shows the warehouse space limitations for both products and raw materials.Table 4shows the inventory holding cost related to both raw materials and final product for each site. It also shows the production time for each product type. The workforce related cost is presented in Tables 5 and 6. In Table 6, data are related to the workforce training cost of site 1. These values for sites 2 and 3 are about 10% and 20% more expensive, respectively. The forecasted market demand is reported in Table 7that is related to the pessimistic data. These data for possible and optimistic values are multiplied by 1.1 and 1.3, respectively. The initial workforce level, the allowable workforce change rate and storage capacity for each site are given in Table 8.Table 9shows available regular time, overtime and subcontracting in terms of time unit. The consumption rate of raw materials is presented in Table 10. The transportation cost and lead time between suppliers and sites and between sites and customers’ zones are presented in Tables 11 and 12, respectively. Table 13presents the shortage cost and the sales price of products for each customer's zone. The cost and capacity of raw materials provided by suppliers are stated in Tables 14 and 15, respectively. Table 16shows some data related to quality and on-time delivery by suppliers to sites.In Tables 14–16, all the data are related to the period 1. It is assumed that all data for period 2 up to 12 are fixed. Finally, the escalating factor in each cost category is considered 0.01.With respect to that, membership functions of objectives (50)–(55) contain ideal solutions related to category of Eq. (49), we should first solve these equations over the all constraints of model. On the other hand, according to Sections 4.1–4.3, the fuzzy model is transformed to the crisp model. This crisp model is the parametric linear programming with parameter α that the range of α is considered 0–0.9. By assigning these range of numbers to the α with steps 0.1 and applying it to the model, solutions of the APP will be obtained. Therefore, to solve the model, 10 loops will be obtained; each loop includes 5113 independent variables and 1632 discrete variables that for the whole 10 loops are 51,130 and totally this value is about 67,450. These values are stated only for one objective function. It means that to solve each membership functions of objectives (50)–(55) which contain ideal solutions related to category of Eq. (49), these 10 loops should frequently be solved for each above equation. Therefore, in according to the high volume variables in the model, providing the all values for α is disregarded and only the results of model for solving the model to α=0 is presented in the following tables. All items in this paper that need to be solved are performed by solver CPLEX via GAMS software. As mentioned in Section 4.4, the model proposed in this paper is solved through two different approaches, in which the LZL method needs to solve the Zimmerman approach (Eq. (56)) to reach primary satisfaction degrees. Table 17shows the ideal solutions resulted from solving category Eq. (49) over the model constraints.Eqs. (50)–(55) are composed by values proposed in Table 17. After applying these values in membership functions, model (56) can be formed. Table 18shows the satisfaction degrees resulted from solving model (56).After placement of the variables obtained from Eq. (56) into membership functions (50)–(55), each satisfaction degree of the objective value is calculated that these values are shown in Table 19.Some main variables values obtained from solving the proposed model through the LZL approach are presented in Tables 20–22and the related values to the TH approach are shown in Tables 23–25.In this section, at first, evaluation of the fuzzy model behavior about the total cost of SC is presented with regard to α variation. It means, by solving the model with only the cost objectives through the proposed method in Section 4.2, the results are shown in Table 26. The aim of this work is to find the best solution according to the different degrees of possibility or α, for the presented model.As it is clear from the figures, the total cost of the SC for the α close to zero are better than values of α close to 1.•For a better comparison of the results of the TH and LZL approaches, the coefficient of compensation in the TH approach (δ) is considered equal to 0.5.All weights in the TH approach are equal, but two different procedures are investigated in the LZL approach. At first, all weights are equal and some results obtained from this procedure. Then, according to this fact which shortage of delivering of products in consumer zones has a big penalty which is considered in cost objective, the weight related to Z4 is considered bigger than other objectives to reach better satisfaction degrees. This comparison is shown in Table 27.These values for α=0.6–1 are equal. Therefore, according to the better satisfaction degrees obtained by procedure 2, the results of this procedure is considered to final comparison between the TH and LZL methods for solving this paper model.A certain value of violation is considered on the right hand side of fuzzy constraints. Maximum violation is equal to 5%, which obtained from averaging the data from the proposed example.Calculations of the LZL method are much more than of calculation of the TH method. As for the LZL method, combinations of the model are solved about 30 times in GAMS.Table 28shows the main comparison between the TH and LZL methods. This is the comparison between the objective function, which are achieved through the placement of variables derived from these two methods. As mentioned above, these values are presented only for α=0.As shown in Table 28, the results obtained by the TH approach are totally better than the LZL approach for this case study.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
