@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Neural network and fuzzy logic statistical downscaling of atmospheric circulation-type specific weather pattern for rainfall forecasting

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Fuzzy statistical downscaling (FSD) intertwines fuzzy system and statistical downscaling.FSD models the meteorological and thermo-dynamical to the daily rainfall mapping.FSD enhance severe rain prevention over neural statistical downscaling (NSD) and Multinear Regression ETA model.FSD and NSD support rainfall predication concerning the SACZ-ULCV weather pattern.FSD and NSD forecast quantitative daily rainfall to prevent natural disasters.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Natural disaster,Fuzzy logic,Neural network,Statistical downscaling,Rainfall forecasting,Time-spatial series,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The weather natural disaster prevention for quantitative daily rainfall forecasting derived from the SACZ-ULCV weather pattern is proposed in this paper by using intertwined statistical downscaling (SD) and soft computing (SC) approaches. The fuzzy statistical downscaling (FSD) is first introduced and, then, employed for dealing with the SACZ-ULCV atmospheric circulation-type specific weather pattern for supporting daily precipitation (rainfall) forecasting. This paper also addresses the performance comparison of the FSD and the neural statistical downscaling (NSD) approaches when taking into account 12 major urban centers all over the state of São Paulo, Brazil, for the summer period. The SACZ-ULCV summer pattern is identified in meteorological satellite images when the cloudiness of the Brazilian Northeast upper level cyclonic vortices (ULCV) meets the South Atlantic convergence zone (SACZ). Increasing the convection and the cloudiness over the Southeast region of Brazil, the SACZ-ULCV causes severe rainfalls and thunderstorms with impact on the population. Finding a manner to anticipate these extreme rainfall events is of vital importance for minimizing or avoiding disasters, and saving lives. Daily rainfall forecasting had their performance improved either by using the proposed FSD or NSD in comparison to the Multilinear Regression ETA model. Results demonstrate the FSD and the NSD become feasible alternatives for achieving a correspondence from meteorological and thermo-dynamical variables to the daily rainfall variable.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Natural disasters occur all over the world so far. Tsunamis, earthquakes, Vulcan eruptions, hurricanes, tornados, thunderstorms and severe rainfalls, only to mention few, are dangerous events for the civilization. They are examples of destruction and death that strike the civilization. Finding a manner to anticipate the impact concerning these natural phenomena is of vital importance for alerting, minimizing, or avoiding disasters and saving lives. This paper focus on extreme rainfall events due to its relevance for minimizing the impact on the population, by using fuzzy system or artificial neural network in synergy with statistical downscaling methods (SD).Statistical downscaling methods are used by many numerical weather prediction centers (NWPC) for producing local or regional weather information, aiming at a better weather or climate prediction [21]. The SD encompasses both experimental observations, relative to a specific location, or simulations, computed either by a large scale general circulation model (GCM) or a regional circulation model (RCM), as shown in Fig. 1. Such an approach is, further, conceived to deal with either continuous or discrete time series. Discrete-time interval series can be associated, but not limited to, general periodic weather conditions such as seasonal periods, dry (rainy) periods.Aiming at achieving more accurate weather forecasting, however, new approaches came out to use SD by taking into account more specific period of times within the discrete, periodic intervals. Such a shorter period of time is determined according to the interest in working with a specific weather pattern. After selecting a certain pattern within a time series, there is a discrete and periodic weather pattern, as illustrated in Fig. 2. One of the most known statistical downscaling approaches for specific weather pattern concerns weather pattern methods (WPM) [51]. The WPM associates a given weather pattern classification to an observational station data. Such an observational weather pattern classification can be subjective when concerning synoptic, qualitative information, based on expertise and heuristic [37], or objective when related to quantitative data, automatically obtained by using, for instance, clustering and/or classification algorithms [7,10,39]. A WPM-SD approach which relates weather cold front frequencies, a sort of atmospheric circulation-type specific weather pattern, and the rainfall forecasting is found in [50]. Such a relationship is carried out by stratifying daily rainfall occurrences according to the presence or absence of weather front systems. The importance of frontal information in statistical downscaling models concerns the improvement of rainfall predictions.Regardless the sort of the time series employed, the weather conditions are influenced by the variability in the dynamics of time and space scales. The inherent complex, nonlinear behavior and the high variability on space and time of any weather pattern characterizes, however, such a forecasting activity as a hard task [35]. The estimation of future dynamical behavior for systems that are usually nonlinear mostly requires nonlinear identification methods [5]. Nonlinear models derived of the field of soft computing area (SC) emerge as alternative approaches.The artificial neural network, for short neural network (NN), is one of the most prominent approaches for meteorological signal prediction and simulation [36]. Brain-inspired neural model, the NN was first employed in synergy with statistical downscaling technique in [46,47] for Brazilian southeast synoptic weather predictions. In such an application, the output of the ETA meteorological model is used as input to a NN to improve the local daily rainfall prediction. While most of the rainfall predictions have been used for annual, seasonal, and monthly scales, few address daily scale forecasting. Examples of the neural network when employed for daily meteorological signal prediction also encompass a local winter rainfall in northeastern Mexico [11], a precipitation forecast for specific middle Atlantic region of the United States [25], a meteorological daily numerical weather prediction and its effect on the accuracy of spring flow forecast [13], a seasonal precipitation for the continental United States [18], a forecasting synoptic conditions and the associated weather covering the Europe, the Middle East, and the northern African Coast [31], a rainfall prediction in Yazd meteorological station in central Iran [14], and a downscaling daily precipitation from numerical weather prediction model output in northeastern Canada [33].Nevertheless, uncertainty and imprecision in system identification are a permanent fashion in meteorology. Weather conditions and their related phenomena – such as atmospheric pattern and precipitation occurrence – inherently possess a nature of imperfect information derived of (i) incomplete knowledge of thermo-dynamical mechanisms, (ii) imprecise measurements, (iii) uncertainties about modeling, and (iv) the simultaneous presence of more than one of these conditions.A nonlinear modeling alternative for dealing with such an imperfect information within soft computing field that has been employed in many other forecasting applications is fuzzy systems [2,3,5,6,15,19,32]. The fuzzy set theory allows representing uncertainty, imprecision, and vagueness of natural phenomena, in general, and weather characteristics, in particular, as well as the inherent subjectivity therein. In turn, the fuzzy logic is able to recognize, represent, manage and interpret such a lack of precision and uncertainty through simple IF–THEN rules [37,49]. Examples of fuzzy set theory and fuzzy logic for meteorological signal prediction comprise a multi-objective fuzzy-rule-based classification method for identification and classification of large-scale circulations patterns [7], a fuzzy rule-based modeling for predicting regional droughts in Great Plain of Nebraska, developed by using two forcing inputs: El Niño/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and large scale atmospheric circulation pattern [40], a fuzzy rule-based classification for dealing with the monsoon rainfall in North West India [54], and a multi-objective fuzzy-rule-based classification in southeastern Sweden [44].This paper first aims at introducing the fuzzy statistical downscaling approach (FSD) as well as evaluating its performance for weather pattern analysis and forecasting to support severe rainfall predictions. The statistical downscaling approach is composed by the GCM (RCM) carried out by an ETA model and an auxiliary mechanism employed to obtain better meteorological predictions (Fig. 3). The proposed approach differs from the classic SD, which is mostly based on the multiple linear regression scheme (Fig. 3(a)), by employing a fuzzy system as the auxiliary mechanism (Fig. 3(b)). This paper also addresses the performance comparison of the FSD and the neural statistical downscaling (NSD) approaches (Fig. 3(c)) by taking into account the multiple linear regression ETA model as the reference, when dealing with the synoptic study of weather pattern identification. The WPM is herein driven to describe the relation between the SACZ-ULCV (South Atlantic convergence zone – upper level cyclonic vortices) atmospheric circulation-type specific weather pattern and the daily rainfall precipitation (event). The proposed FSD and the NSD are used to model the relationship between the SACZ-ULCV meteorological and thermo-dynamical parameters and the daily rainfall in 12 major urban centers in the state of São Paulo, Brazil.The rainfall in the Brazilian Southeast region has a seasonal cycle. The largest precipitation mostly occurs during the summer period, corresponding to the discrete, periodic interval of December, January, and February. Such a rainfall specific weather pattern is boosted when the SACZ-ULCV summer weather pattern is present due to the cloudiness of the Brazilian Northeast upper level cyclonic vortices meeting the South Atlantic Convergence Zone (Fig. 4). Observed in meteorological satellite images, this weather pattern is identified according to a qualitative approach based on (i) synoptic climatologist or meteorologist expertise and from the (ii) SACZ-ULCV weather pattern data analysis [16,45], according to pos-processed streamlined and vorticity field from the ETA model.From the interaction between the SACZ and the ULCV meteorological systems results moist and warm air, vertical speed, and instability conditions, which enhances the cloudiness condition and the convection over the Brazilian Southeast region [45]. The resulting SACZ-ULCV weather pattern is deeply related to its respective meteorological and thermo-dynamical components causing severe (heavy) rainfalls and thunderstorms over the Southeast of Brazil [45].Although related to the whole southeast region of Brazil encompassing the states of Espírito Santo (ES), Minas Gerais (MG), Rio de Janeiro (RJ), and São Paulo (SP) as detached in Fig. 4, the proposed approach addresses daily rainfall precipitation forecasting on the state of São Paulo. The quantitative daily rainfall forecasting concerning the SACZ-ULCV weather pattern is carried out by taking into account 12 major urban centers all over the state of São Paulo as emphasized in Fig. 5. They are identified according to their latitude, longitude, and altitude in Table 1. The daily precipitation data at the stations are supplied by the INFRAERO – Empresa Brasileira de Infra-Estrutura Aeroportuária, the INMet – Instituto Nacional the Meteorologia (National Institute of Meteorology), and the IAG-USP (Instituto de Astronomia, Geofísicas e Ciências Atmosféricas – IAG {Institute of Astronomy, Geophysics and Atmospheric Sciences} of the Universidade de São Paulo – USP).On the other hand, GOES-8 satellite images are employed to recognize SACZ-ULCV weather pattern, meanwhile the output of an ETA regional model is employed for rainfall prediction [30]. Both data set are provided by the CPTEC – Centro de Previsão de Tempo e Estudos Climáticos (Center for Weather Forecasts and Climate Studies) at the INPE – Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais (National Institute for Space Research), Brazil. The weather pattern recognition utilizes two distinct set of data from December-1999 to February-2002 and from December-1999 to February-2006.The CPTEC/INPE employs the multiple linear regression ETA model since 1996. The initial conditions are fixed by the National Centers for Environmental Prediction (NCEP), and the lateral boundary conditions are setup by the CPTEC/INPE ETA global model. The space domain comprises the region defined from 25°W to 90°W longitude and from 12°N to 45°S latitude. Such a meteorological regional model is carried out twice a day, with initial conditions at 12h00 UTC and 00h00 UTC. A period of 5 days is routinely predicted for the majority of the South America territory when a 40km×40km structured grid of horizontal spatial resolution of the CPTEC/INPE ETA model is performed (Fig. 1). Nine grid boxes compounding a RCM are close to each specific site being computed four times a day, 06h00, 12h00, 18h00, and 00h00 UTC. The surface rainfall is obtained in rain gauges disposed upon the southeast region; the meteorological variables are supplied by an ETA meteorological regional model, which simulates the large scale meteorological and thermo-dynamical behavior of the SACZ-ULCV weather pattern. Such an ETA model uses the modified Betts–Miller approach to parameterize the convection [8,12], whilst stratiform rain is generated via a cloud forecasting scheme [56].The output vector of the CPTEC/INPE ETA model corresponds to the input vector,x=[x1,x2,…,x8]T∈Rn, of the multiple linear regression SD block for the SCAZ-ULCV atmospheric circulation weather pattern. The input vector is related to the meteorological variables of specific moisture at 700hPa, x1; moisture convergence at 850hPa, x2, and 500hPa, x3; moisture divergence at 300hPa, x4; and air temperature at 850hPa, x5; as well as to the thermo-dynamical variables of equivalent potential temperature at 500hPa, x6; precipitable water, x7; and vertical speed at 850hPa, x8. The output is the daily rain variable, caused by the cloudiness SCAZ-ULCV weather pattern, representing the daily predicted precipitation at each specific site [16].Classical statistical downscaling methods are mostly based on the multiple linear regression associated to either the large scale general circulation model or the regional circulation model.The SD advantages in reducing the scale of the spatial meteorological forecasting to a local, specific point within a grid resolution area, i.e., a computational cell, from a GCM or a RCM. When dealing with a huge area for weather pattern analysis, the large scale general circulation (regional circulation) model allows assembling observational irregularly distributed measures into an array of regularly distributed nodes all over this area in a matrix structure composing a grid. Each node is related to a Lkm×Lkm spatial resolution sub-area (grade), where there are weather stations (gauges) that may be distributed in a randomly or equally spaced manner according to each problem of interest. In so doing, the GCM (RCM) works as a tool for either reducing or amplifying the spatial scale (data) into a single value for a square-lined area.Each variable encompassing all the station within the node is associate to an ETA meteorological model that outcomes a single value for each L×L grade, causing a reduction in the scale, i.e., achieving a downscaling approach. The ETA Meteorological Regional model, for short, ETA model is derived from the Hydrometeorological Institute and Belgrade University (HIBU) model developed in the 70's in the former Yugoslavia [27]. The code program is modified to fit the Arakawa-style horizontal advection scheme presented in 1984 [22], then, being rewritten to use the eta, η, vertical coordinate [28]. The η vertical coordinate yields a quasi-horizontal coordinate surfaces, thus preventing from pressure-gradient force errors due to steep topography that can occur with terrain-following coordinates. The η coordinate is proper for using near to the ground since such a pressure based system does not intersect to the ground by allowing the bottom atmospheric layer to be represented within each grid box. Such a model is, then, embodied with an advanced physics package at the NCEP [23,29], where became officially operational in 1993 [9]. Model variables are distributed on the Arakawa E-grid. A 9km×9km grid ETA model-based GCM (RCM) is illustrated in Fig. 1.The predictor (input) variables are usually chosen based on knowledge of what normally precludes a particular predictand (output). Predictors are selected based on synoptic study associated the weather pattern [48]. The ETA model prognostic variables concern both dynamical meteorological and thermo-dynamic variables. While the dynamical meteorological variables encompass (i) air temperature, (ii) horizontal (zonal and meridional) wind components, (iii) specific humidity (moisture), and (iv) surface pressure; thermo-dynamical variables comprise (v) turbulent kinetic energy and (vi) cloud hydrometeors. There is for each of the meteorological and thermo-dynamical variables a weather matrix of data generated by the ETA model (Figs. 1 and 7). Moreover, there are as much ETA models as the number of weather matrix input data. In this paper, the meteorological and thermo-dynamical variables are the input variables meanwhile the daily surface rainfall is the output variable obtained by irregularly distributed rain gauges disposed upon the southeast, as described in previous section. The dynamical meteorological variables are supplied by an ETA meteorological regional model, which simulates the dynamical synoptic scale and thermo-dynamical behavior of the SACZ-ULCV weather pattern. When the station takes into account rain data as dynamical variable it is particularly named rain-gauge.Meteorological predictions for local, specific dynamical behavior surrounded by certain environmental conditions may present poor weather forecasting. Rivers, mountains, woods, pollution, urban or rural area are examples of elements that affect meteorological and thermo-dynamical variables and interfere into local prediction (Fig. 6). Meteorological forecasting accomplished by employing the ijth ETA-GCM/RCM models, ηij, uses data from, mostly, irregularly distributed weather stations,vw,w=1,2,…. The outcome refers to a centered punctual location representing estimated values,Mˆη. Such a meteorological weather models advantages in allowing the weather prediction for large local regions by estimating the weather dynamics from one grid point to another. Representing an average condition over a certain terrain, however, these models present the disadvantage of being unable to have a full representation over certain places with specific geographical and environmental characteristics. When interested in local prediction for specific on demand sites, sl, l=1, 2, …, these local environmental conditions should be taken into account in the meteorological models.In order to improve meteorological local prediction, auxiliary mechanisms are employed in synergy with the ETA model. The multiple linear regression scheme is the standard auxiliary mechanism employed to compose the SD. Nevertheless, most of the real-life physical systems are, actually, nonlinear in nature [5]. The question that comes up is if SD can be designed with the support of softcomputing techniques, keeping the benefits of the classical SD simultaneously that would be able to improve the quantitative forecasting. In this paper, either a fuzzy or a neural network transfer function is feedforwarded just after the ETA model-based GCM (RCM) stage for dealing with the nonlinear characteristics of weather patterns. In so doing, the modified statistical downscaling method employs the ETA model as input supplier to a fuzzy system or to a NN to enhance the weather local predictions. The fuzzy statistical downscaling and the neural statistical downscaling diagrams when dealing with weather pattern forecasting are depicted in Fig. 7. Their structure and internal mechanisms are described onwards.Observations of the universe are uncertain but equally approximate and vague and, thus, fuzzy set theory and fuzzy logic also become alternatives to be employed to describe weather condition and their natural phenomena. Fuzzy modeling is an alternative for nonlinear forecasting, compounding, thus, the proposed fuzzy statistical downscaling method.The concept underlying fuzzy sets allows the gradual and not absolute membership from an element to a class, contrary to the classical sets based on the excluded mean principle, as presented by Aristotle, in which an element belongs to a class, or not. The collection of objects, {u}, distributed into a space of points assigned universe of discourse, U, is denominated subset (or set, for simplicity), M. A classic set, M, of an universe of discourse, X={x}, is defined by a characteristic function (mapping), μM(x), that assumes a null for all elements of X that not belongs to the set M, μM(x)=0 if x∉M, and a unitary value for those values that belong to it, μM(x)=1 if x∈M, i.e., μM(x):X↦{0, 1}. Distinctly, a fuzzy set, M, of a universe of discourse, X={x}, is defined by a membership function, μM(x):X↦[0, 1] mapping each element, value or point, x, in the dominion, X, to a number (degree) in the interval between the real numbers [0, 1]. The fuzzy set, M, represents the possibility, similarity, or conformity of an element, x, to belong to a set, M=x∈X, according to a degree, μM(x), in the interval, μM(x)↦[0, 1]. The null membership degree denotes that such an element is not in the set, being completely not compatible to M at all. Otherwise, the unitary membership degree states that an element is fully represented in the set, being completely compatible to M. The membership function 0<μM(x)<1 is partially compatible [38].In turn, the fuzzy logic is based on fuzzy set theory and syllogism. When the values of μM(x) are associate to a degree of truthiness, this is equivalent to the multivalued logic in which the truth is assigned to continuous values in [0, 1] [53]. Fuzzy logic allows accomplishing a reasoning that is neither exact nor inexact, i.e., an approximate reasoning in the form of conditional proposition (fuzzy IF–THEN rules). Concerned to knowledge or cognitive model, it is also named deductive model [15], representing a nonlinear mapping from input space vectors, Xn, to a scalar output space, Y, in the form, f:Xn→Y, such that Xnand Y are universe of discourses that define the input–output space, Xn×Y, and an associated fuzzy inference mechanism.The fuzzy system architecture employed is the Takagi–Sugeno fuzzy system (TS) that assumes an important role when aiming at representing dynamical systems, in general, and dynamical weather characteristics, in particular. The Takagi–Sugeno fuzzy model is an alternative when interested in dealing with data for finding a nonlinear mapping [43]. It is able to approximate highly nonlinear functions and exhibits simple structure reducing the problem complexity by restricting the number of rules [42,43].The TS fuzzy model is characterized as the consequent part of the IF–THEN rule being linear submodels describing distinct dynamic behaviors meanwhile the antecedent part is in charge of interpolating these sub-systems:(1)Rj:IF〈x1isM1j(x1)〉AND〈x2isM2j(x2)〉AND…AND〈xmisMmj(xm)〉THENyj=f(·).The elements Mij(xi) are fuzzy sets and designated as linguistic terms partitioning the respective universe of discourses. The fuzzy sets pertaining to a rule form fuzzy regions (clusters) within the input space of the premises, M11×⋯×Mij×⋯×Mmj. The input vector of the premise is given by x=[x1, …, xm]T. The consequent part is characterized, but not limited to, as a linear polynomial,yj=b0j+b1ju1j+…+bqjjuqjj. The resulting global model is obtained by the interpolation between these various jth local models:(2)y=∑j=1Nμj(x)∑j=1Mμj(x)yj(uj)where Nrdenotes the maximal number of rules andμj(x)/∑j=1mμj(x)is the normalized firing strength of Rjwithμj(x)=μM1j(x1)μM2j(x2)…μMmj(xm). Linguistic labels Mijare mostly determined by Gaussian membership functionsμM1j(xi)=exp[−(xi−mij)2/2σij2]where mijand σijare the cores (mean value) and the support (standard deviations) of the Gaussian function.The TS modeling first comprises the structure identification by extracting the number of rules and determining the premise space partition as well as the structure (parameters) of the output equations in the consequent of the production rules. Second, there is the parameter identification computing the parameters of the membership functions so that the output errors are minimized.Techniques that may be employed in the structure and parameter identification process encompass diverse learning or clustering approaches. Clusters of different shapes can be obtained when adjusting the TS model by using appropriate cluster distance measures [17]. Fuzzy clustering is a tool that has been quite extensively used to obtain the antecedent membership functions in an input–output Cartesian product space [4]. The subtractive clustering is the learning algorithm for TS modeling employed in this paper for adjusting the number of fuzzy clusters and cluster centers, as explained onwards.Each of the n data points, {x1, …, xn}, is a potential cluster center. A density measure for each data point, xi:(3)Di=∑j=1ne−xi−xj2ra22represents a function of its distance to all other data points, such that rais a positive constant defining the radius of neighborhood (cluster radius). Points outside this radius have little effect on the density measure. On the other hand, a data point that has many neighboring points will have a high potential of being a cluster center. The number of clusters is consequently determined by ra, i.e., small (large) values of ra, means a large (less) number of clusters will be identified. The first cluster center is chosen to be the data point that has the highest density measure. The density measure for each data point is, then, obtained according to:(4)Di=Di−Dc1e−xi−xj2ra22where xc1 is the point selected as the first cluster center, Dc1 is its density measure, and rbis a positive constant defining the radius of neighborhood within which the reduction in density will be measurable. Data points close to the cluster center will have significantly reduced density measure so that they are not likely to be selected as the next cluster center. The constant rbis usually greater than rato avoid having closely spaced centers being set, in general, as rb=1.5 ra. The next cluster center is chosen and the density measure is reduced again. This process is repeated until a stopping criterion is achieved.The output of the ETA model composes the input space premise of the fuzzy system meanwhile the observed daily precipitation is compared to the output of the FSD during the training process, i.e., there is an (ETA-output, daily precipitation) pair. The estimate output is associated to rainfall predictions.The basic assumptions of SD for forecasting meteorological conditions are that the predictors (output) are reliable and that the derived transfer functions are stable. The neural network approach is characterized as a stable mapping allowing, thus, the neural statistical downscaling (Fig. 3(c)).The NN advantages by learning through experience, adapting to adverse conditions, and being tolerant to noise [24,34,52]. Such a biologically inspired technique maps input–output data sets by means of a nonlinear transfer function, encompassing a large number of interconnected neuron-based processing elements in a massively parallel structure. Connecting each neuron, there are weights that compose the knowledge associate to intelligence that emerges from the collective behavior of the whole neural system.The neural network architecture employed in this paper is the multilayer perceptron (MLP) characterized by a feedforward architecture and a supervised learning approach that uses a pre-determined set of continuous input, xi, and target output, y, data. The MLP consists of input data supplied to the input layer, being propagated in a forward manner for achieving a neural activation level output value, yj, to both the hidden and output layer, yj=f(∑Wjixi−θj), where Wjiis the weight matrix from the ith input, xi, to the jth neuron, xj; and θjis the node threshold. In the activation phase, the feedforward architecture supplies an output value,yˆo, from an input data, [x1, …, xN]. A nonlinear activation function, f(.), modifies the weighted summation of the inputs to achieve a nonlinear neuron output. In this paper, it is chosen to be the Logistic function, f(x)=1/(1+ex). The target output and the computed output are compared,e=y−yˆo, to change the weights inside the network in an adaptive behavior by using a supervised learning. Stable neural networks yield smaller output changes after successive iterations. The convergence of the NN is determined by the best adjusting of the connection matrix W. The training (learning, adjusting) phase computes update weights,wji, of a connection from the ith to the jth neuron as,wji(k+1)=wij(k)+Δwij(k), by using an error minimization algorithm for reducing the square error,(y−yoˆ)2, at each iteration. Pattern misclassifications are detected in the training activity by using the error, e, as a feedback to themselves.Although the most employed approach for training MLP is the backpropagation learning algorithm (BKPROP). Such a gradient descent search disadvantages in requiring a long training period, weighting the parameter adaptation based on partial derivative, presenting no information about the complete error function, as well as being characterized by error trapped in local minima, plateaus, or oscillation, and so on. Alternatives for improving the learning algorithm are Adaptive Learning Rate, Vogl Method, Delta-Bar-Delta, Resilient Propagation (RPROP) [41,55].The supervised training algorithm employed in this paper is the RPROP because it overwhelms most of BKPROP disadvantages and speed up the learning process, achieving a convergence rate 4–5 faster than BKPROP [41,55]. RPROP uses only the sign of the derivative to indicate the direction of the update weight:(5)Δwji=−sign∂E∂wijΔijcontrary to the BKPROP that uses the value achieved by the partial derivative to modify the weights as function only of∂E/∂wij:(6)Δwji=−γ∂E∂wijsince the size of this differential does not really represent the size of the necessary modification of the weight changes. The learning rate, γ, corresponds to the step size and may assumes a high or small value. A trade-off exists between the neural behavior stability and its convergence ratio both related to the convergence (divergence). When high, the learning process may, for one side, achieve a fast convergence but, for the other side, may diverge, as well. Nevertheless, if the learning rate is really small, the convergence is guaranteed but being absolutely and unnecessarily slow. The update value, Δij, that evolves during the learning process based on its local sight on the error function, E, is obtained by using:(7)Δij(t)γ+Δij(t−1),if∂E∂wij(t)∂E∂wij(t−1)>0γ−Δij(t−1),if∂E∂wij(t)∂E∂wij(t−1)<0Δij(t−1),if elsefor 0<γ−<1<γ+. Each weight is updated as:(8)wij(t)−Δij(t−1),if∂E∂wij(t)>0,error increases+Δij(t−1),if∂E∂wij(t)<0,error decreasesΔij(t−1),if elsewhere Δij=Δ0=0.1, Δmin=10−6, Δmax=1050. Thus, the RPROP learning algorithm adjusts the learning rate, γ, and weight changes,Δw, just according to the signal of the gradient terms, and not as function of their amplitude to eliminate the negative influence of the partial derivate. Desired values close to 0 or 1 achieves derivative around zero, ≈0, in spite of the error may be high.The error in this paper is computed by the difference between the desired, observed output value and the simulated output supplied by the NN:(9)E(W)=∑k[tk−fk(wij)2+10−α∑i,jwij2],where the regularization parameter, 10−α, corresponds to the Frobenius norm of the weight matrix. The stop criteria is the error E≤10−4.The output of the ETA model is the NN input data whereas its output data corresponds to observed daily precipitation during the training process, i.e., there is an ETA-output, daily precipitation pair. The estimate output is associated to rainfall predictions. Actually, this generalization skill is a remarkable feature of an NN, even in a situation out of the learning phase data [20].Similar to the FSD, the output of the ETA model is the NN input data whereas its output data corresponds to observed daily precipitation during the training process. This generalization skill is a remarkable feature of an NN, even in a situation out of the learning phase data [20].Five statistical parameters are used for performance evaluation when interested in the relative accuracy of a forecasting model to predict 24h rainfall accumulation. First, the correlation coefficient, ρ, measures the degree of linear relation between the forecasting,yˆ, and the observed, y, values:(10)ρ=∑i=1N(yˆi−yˆ¯)(yi−y¯)∑i=1N(yˆi−yˆ¯)2∑i=1N(yi−y¯)2.Although it is still possible for a forecasting with large errors to have a good correlation coefficient with the observations, it does not take the forecasting bias into account. For this reason, another statistic criterion must also be employed. For instance, the BIAS criterion corresponds to the ratio of the total number of forecasting and observed events:(11)BIAS=1N∑i=1n(yˆi−y),giving the tendency to overforecasting (BIAS>0) or underforecasting (BIAS<0). The closer the null value, the lower is the overforecasting. In turn, the mean absolute error, MAE, is a usual statistical measure (quantity) of forecasting error in time series analysis:(12)MAE=1N∑i=1n|yˆi−y|,Employed to represent how forecasting (predictions) are close to the actual outcomes, the MAE measures the average magnitude of the error, being also used to compute the Skill Score parameter [26]. The Skill Score, SS, is computed by:(13)SS=EETA−ESMEETA×100%,where ESMestimates the computed error of the statistical downscaling method in comparison to the experimental observation, whereas EETAis the error of the ETA model also related to the observation. In this paper, a positive SS denotes a better prediction of the statistical downscaling model related to the ETA model. The Score Index, Ind, quantifies the ability of the prediction model in reproducing rain occurrence:(14)Ind=1−mw+m−jd+j×100,wherewand d stand for, respectively, wet and dry days related to both forecasting and observation, and m and j concerns to, respectively, wet and dry days missed by the forecasting. A dry day is understood as a day with no rain. The higher is the result, the closer of the actual value is the model. Ind equivalent to 100% indicates a perfect forecasting.Consider the SACZ-ULCV weather pattern related to the GOES-8 satellite image in January, 4th 2000, at 15h00 UTB, as depicted in Fig. 8(a). Such a satellite infrared image shows the cloud covering concerning the SACZ weather pattern when interacting to the ULCV cloudiness that reaches almost the whole meridional extension. The corresponding streamline and vorticity fields at 200hPa derived from the ETA model are shown in Fig. 8(b). In a glimpse, observe that the streamline field detaches both the ULCV (cyclonic circulation, clockwise in the South Hemisphere) close to the northeast coast and a pronounced ridge associated to the anticyclonic circulation (AC) located southward to ULCV [16,48]. In turn, the vorticity field confirms the intensity for both ULCV cyclonic vorticity and SACZ anticyclonic vorticity systems. Although the Bolivian High (BH) is also present, its influence is neglected. Two SACZ-ULCV satellite images are, further, used in the experimental analysis, corresponding to the period of 16–29, February 2002 and 9–13, February 2006 (Fig. 9).Experimental results obtained with the NSD and FSD models comprise three comparative analyses concerning two data sets. The first experimental analysis includes only SACZ-ULCV specific weather data series (P) during training stage, yielding the NSD-P and FSD-P analysis. The second experimental analysis concerns a distinct weather data series, encompassing the full summer period (S) with different weather systems. Besides the SACZ-ULCV pattern data there is the frontal system and the mesoscale convective complex system, corresponding to the precipitation NSD-S analysis. The data set comprises 12 SACZ-ULCV summer circulation-type weather data within the four summer periods within 1999–2002, and the summer period of 2006. While 10 SACZ-ULCV cases are used for training the forecasting model; the validation stage for the resulting NSD-P, NSD-S, and FSD-P is carried out with two other SACZ-ULCV weather patterns in February 2002 and 2006.The statistical parameters detach the better performance, in general, of the NSD-P and the NSD-S for daily rainfall forecasting when compared to the ETA, for the period of 16–29 in February, 2002 (Table 2). While NSD-S prevails at Catanduva (CAT) and São Carlos (SC) stations, the NSD-P succeeds in Bauru (JTC), Franca (FR), Guarulhos (GRU), IAG, Campinas (CPQ), Ribeirão Preto (RAO), and São José dos Campos (SJK) stations. Although the NSD-S presents better ρ performance than NSD-P at the Votuporanga (VOT) station, the result reverts when other BIAS, MAE and SS criteria are employed at the analysis. The NSD-P and NSD-S rainfall prediction performances are worse than the ETA result only in the Presidente Prudente (PPB) station. In turn, successful NSD-P correlation coefficients are, in general, around ρ>0.8. Due to that, the NSD-P, NSD-S, and ETA present lower performance indices when interested in predicting the daily rainfall result at Franca, Ubatuba, and Ribeirão Preto stations. A feasible explanation for such a performance and the difficulties to capture such a rainfall behavior concerns the existence of other factors that could drive the rainfall in some stations: (i) the process governing summer precipitation is driven by regional or local forces, instead of a synoptic, more general weather patterns; (ii) dominant small-scale features, such as microclimate, local convection, and particular vegetation land covering affects the occurrence of rainfall on these stations, but that are not included as predictors in the statistical downscaling methods; (iii) since these stations are also placed on elevated position, topographic effect must be taken into account, as well. It is worth mentioning that the topographic factor is not included in the NSD learning algorithm, but it is for the ETA in its parameterization. The ETA, even using such information, presents low performance than those obtained by the NSD-P and NSD-S with reduced modeling information.Additional evaluation includes predicted and observed rainfall values for comparative analysis, as illustrative example, at São José dos Campos, Guarulhos, and Campinas stations (Fig. 10). NSD-P rainfall prediction is close to the observed values at São José dos Campos and Campinas Stations in a comparative analysis with NSD-S and ETA. Further, the NSD-P is able to completely predict the rainfall days during the period of 16–29 in February 2002. On the other hand, only the NSD-S is unavailable to predict on February 08, 2002 for Campinas station. In addition, the ETA has a stronger bias to indicate the absence of rainfall.The SCAZ-ULCV weather pattern occurred in the period of 8–14 February 2006, has seven stations available to validate the NSD-P. This case is associated with heavy floods and heavy rainfall over the states of São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, and Minas Gerais. In particular, the city of São José dos Campos, over the Paraíba river valley, in the state of São Paulo witnessed severe storms with hail on February 13, 2006 [1]. The statistical analysis revealed better performance for NSD-P model in Catanduva, Presidente Prudente, São José dos Campos, Ubatuba, and Votuporanga stations when compared to ETA (Table 3). The performance for NSD-P and ETA at the Franca station achieves low estimated values meanwhile in São Carlos the forecasting values with the ETA accomplishes better results than the one obtained by employing the NSD-P. The observed and the predicted rainfall value at Presidente Prudente, Catanduva, and Ubatuba stations for NSD-P and ETA for comparative analysis is shown in Fig. 11. The SS and MAE parameters found in Tables 2 and 3 point out that for both experimental SCAZ-ULCV weather patterns the predicted rainfall value with NSD-P model indicates an error reduction in most of the stations when compared to ETA. Error reduction is 71.97% at Campinas station on February 2002, (Fig. 10) and 64.36% at Presidente Prudente station in February 2006, periods.Aiming at assessing the performance of the fuzzy statistical downscaling, a comparative analysis with the NSD-P is carried out. Likewise such an approach, the fuzzy-based regional-to-local predicting model is assigned FSD-P. Its predicting performance are available in Table 4for specific SACZ-ULCV data set related to nine stations in the period of 16–29 Februar, 2002.The FSD-P achieves better performance at the IAG and Ribeirão Preto stations when compared to the NSD-P, not only referring to ρ but mainly due to the error reduction, respectively, SSIAG=60.96% and SSRAO=51.34%. The FSD-P also overwhelm the NSD-P in the Bauru station in despite of achieving a higher error reduction, ρFSD−P<ρNSD−P, since ρ concerns only the degree of linear association between the forecast and observed values, but not the absolute or conditional bias also employed for integral performance evaluation. The NSD-P suppress the FSD-P in the other stations, mainly at Campinas, São José dos Campos, and Votuporanga ones. The observed and the NSD-P or FSD-P predicted values at IAG, Ribeirão Preto, and Bauru stations are depicted in Fig. 12. The occurrence and the most of the quantitative daily rainfall prediction are best captured by the FSD-P with estimate values very close to the observed ones. The NSD-P prevails in São José dos Campos and Votuporanga stations, although the NSD-P and FSD-P overestimate the rainfall measured data at São José dos Campos station (Fig. 13(a) and Table 4). On the counterclock direction, the FSD-P and NSD-P not exceed the performance for Presidente Prudente station.The index score, Ind, quantifies the capacity of the prediction model to reproduce the rain occurrence, i.e. if the model captures the measured rainfall periods. Since the Ind does not take into account the amount of the forecasting precipitation, it must be analyzed along with other scores. In this paper, the index score is employed in synergy with ρ for performance analysis such that their corresponding values in Figs. 10–13 are, respectively, merged in Fig. 14(a–(b).Concerning the ability to capture the periods of rains (Ind>0), the NSD-S and the NSD-P present, in general, better prediction values than those obtained when employing the ETA model (IndNSD-S>IndETA and IndNSD-P>IndETA) (Fig. 14(a) and (b)). The IndETA achieves good results but inferior than those obtained by the NSD approaches. In particular, the ETA presents a better value than those obtained by the NSD-P in the Ubatuba and Catanduva stations (Fig. 14(b)). A feasible explanation concerns the fact that the NSD-P fails in capturing some daily rainfall while the ETA succeed in, despite overestimating (underestimating) their rainfall prediction values, as pointed out by BIAS in Tables 2–4. Note, that it can be important because this rainfall from the model jointly with its dynamical variables can be downscaled to a specific site. Actually, this is the reason for the development of statistical downscaling methods, i.e., to adjust the forecasting from a meteorological model for specific points (meteorological stations). On the counterclock direction, although the NSD-S and NSD-P are not able to forecast all rainfall days during the SACZ event, the rainfall is better predicted than those obtained by the ETA.Afterwards, the NSD and FSD trade-off is carried out once the NSD provides better rainfall prediction than the ETA (Fig. 14(c)). The FSD-P approach captures more days with rainfall than NSD-P, in Bauru (JTC), Presidente Prudente (PPB), São José dos Campos (SJK), and Ribeirão Preto (RAO). It is worth mentioning that mostly the FSD-P performance overwhelm both NSD-P and ETA, as presented in Table 4, i.e., IndFSD-P>IndNSD-P>IndETA.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The softcomputing-based statistical downscaling models are proposed in this paper for forecasting daily rainfall over the state of São Paulo, Brazil. Named neural statistical downscaling (NSD) and fuzzy statistical downscaling (FSD), they are compared when dealing with a specific atmospheric circulation type assigned South Atlantic convergence zone – upper level cyclonic vortice (SACZ-ULCV) weather pattern. The importance of the SACZ-ULCV resides in its strong influence upon the summer precipitation in such a region, generating heavy thunderstorms and severe rainfall, causing disasters and catastrophes.Results demonstrate that the proposed FSD and NSD are feasible alternatives for achieving a correspondence between dynamical meteorological and thermo-dynamical variables and the daily rainfall variable. The proposed FSD and NSD approaches become suitable tools for supporting quantitative daily rainfall forecasting to prevent natural disasters. In particular, it is relevant when dealing with severe rain events strongly concerned to the SACZ-ULCV weather pattern during the summer season. Although the NSD-P accomplished a greater number of stations with satisfactory performance, the proposed FSD-P overwhelm those results by achieving better predicting performance. Moreover, the FSD demonstrates to be a potential tool that can be exploited to use for weather forecasting activity.According to the NSD-P and NSD-S trade-off, results demonstrate that the NSD-P achieves better forecasting performance for daily rainfall at seven stations than the NSD-S, due to the nature of data set employed, as discussed herein. This result is expected, since the dynamical variables used to training are associated to SACZ-ULCV pattern that driven the dynamical process that cause the rainfall.Additionally, the NSD and FSD prognostic tools can be used to obtain daily rainfall prediction at the site of interest when facing other SACZ-ULCV patterns. Designed to anticipate severe rainfall and thunderstorms, the NSD and FSD can also help in anticipating environmental conditions that could favor epidemiological diseases and healthcare conditions that propitiate disease transmission. In this sense, the neural downscaling and fuzzy downscaling methods are useful tools for saving lives by alerting, minimizing, and avoiding disasters and improving healthcare conditions, as well.