@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Privacy preserving sub-feature selection in distributed data mining

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
It selects sub-feature data from data miner database.It preserves the privacy of each individual party's data during collaborative computation.The model collects the correct number of sub-feature data from different data set.Fuzzy random variables help to select sub-feature data for generating special class.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Privacy,Distributed data mining,Feature selection,Fuzzy probability,Fuzzy random variable,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper addresses the selection of sub-feature from each feature using fuzzy methodologies maintaining the privacy during collection of data from participating parties in distributed environment. Based on fuzzy random variables conditional expectation is used in which two fuzzy sets are generated using Borel set that helps to determine sub-feature within certain interval. The privacy and selection of sub-feature leading to a distinguished class is the main objective of this research work. These two problems are directly related to data mining problems of classification and characterization of feature. In many cases traditional techniques are not suitable for complex databases. However our methodology provides better way for selection of sub-features under different situations. The proposed model and techniques both presents extensive theoretical analysis and experimental results. The experiments show the effectiveness and performance based on real world data set.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The feature selection has been issued in several application areas such as several active research areas, industries, hospitals, etc. for individual requirements. Many authors have proposed several data mining techniques to select best features. Some of the techniques are feature wrappers and filters method for novel feature selection [1], fuzzy support vector machines (SVM) for feature selection [2], fuzzy rough sets for attribute selection [3], high performing feature selection for text classification [4], fuzzy feature selection [5], mutual information for selecting features in supervised neural net learning [6]. Traditional method is somehow made for feature selection to find the importance of the feature for own task. But for new classification of data, the role of feature selection bears less importance than sub-feature selection. Since the sub-feature is the part of feature data, sometimes, it is difficult to create specific class or new class which is identified in this paper. The detailed concept of sub-feature is derived in next part of this section. Specifically in biological data, the sub-feature data is always uncertain in each feature or in each database for new class or specific class. For example, a person is suffering from fever. The type of fever can be detected by common symptoms based on the perception of physicians. But in many cases it fails to detect the exactness and patient may continue with such fever. Under this circumstances physician suggests to carry out other blood tests. Entire data set of tests may not help to indentify the disease. In such case if the physician minutely observes the sub features of the data set can help to classify the disease. So our focus is to sort out the sub feature that leads to new class/specific class. In this situation we have considered three categories of sub-feature data based on frequency. For example sub features are of less frequent, medium frequent and very large frequent data as shown in Table 1.It is evident that all sub-feature data may or may not be present in particular class and it is very natural in case of biological data. The particular sub-feature data may not be involved in particular categories of frequency of data. So randomness occurs by considering the non-existence of sub-feature data in particular class for which there is still uncertainty of data in precise meaning of frequency. Thus the uncertainty of data is always characterized by fuzziness and the category of data is represented by fuzzy set. Data randomness is caused by some perception of uncertainties whereas fuzziness is brought about by dimness of perception. Since the data randomness is taken into consideration on the basis of dimness of perception, the random variable measures the data frequency under fuzziness of data which is determined by fuzzy random variable. The fuzzy random variables are random variables whose values are fuzzy number defined vaguely with degree of acceptability which are handled by rules of fuzzy logic. It is assumed that the three categories of data frequency (LF, MF, VLF) are characterized by fuzzy numbers with membership functions as in Table 1.Different fuzzy methods have been used for classification, regression, feature selection and data mining model which are applied on several databases by different researchers. But there is very few awareness about privacy preserving sub-feature selection using fuzzy model. Thus the new idea of considering sub-feature selection with privacy based on fuzzy random variables comes into picture in this paper. The concept of sub-feature data is described as follows for better understanding.We consider each feature values as sub-feature (fi), if frequency of feature value is more than zero, i.e., |fj|>0. Each unique feature value is also recognized as sub-feature. Thus a feature may have many sub-features and it varies from one feature to another. To clarify the concept of sub-feature data, we consider an example as follows. Let two features F1={7, 20, 43, 24, 20, 22, 20, 24} and F2={0.3, 1.4, 1.8, 1.4, 0.5, 2.2, 1.1, 0.5} with feature values are considered for feature ‘Age’ and ‘Bilirubin’ of Hepatitis data set from UCI machine learning repository. The sub-features are recognized as {f1(7, 1), f2(22, 1), f3(43, 1), f4(20, 3), f5(24, 2)} for feature ‘Age’ and {f1(0.3, 1), f2(1.1, 1), f3(1.8, 1), f4(2.2, 1), f5(0.5, 2), f6(1.4, 2)} for feature ‘Bilirubin’. The first and second arguments of each set are taken as feature values and its frequency, respectively, where each feature values are sub-feature data like {7, 22, 43, 24, 20} from F1 and {0.3, 1.1, 1.8, 2.2, 1.4, 0.5} from F2, respectively.To solve the data mining task data are collected from different parties using fuzzy model. And data privacy is maintained at both data miner and data provider level. Fuzzy probabilities are applied on collecting data from each party to securely unify the perturbation with satisfactory data privacy. Some important fuzzy factors are impacted on the quality of sub-feature selection data model like frequency of sub-feature data, fuzziness for privacy of data etc. These factors help to developing the model as well as algorithm for sub-feature selection with privacy. The analytical and experimental results of fuzzy model show the effectiveness of sub-feature selection with privacy within expected intervals.In many databases few data may not be present, even if it is present; it is beyond certain range with respect to our expectation for which when we consider the database for computation purpose to extract the knowledge, it fails to provide the exact solution statistically. UCI machine learning repository has such type of problem in some databases and we have been using such type of incomplete database for our purpose. Our contribution is to collect all data in a network without any ambiguity from different parties. The algorithm has been developed in such a way that all parties would be forced to provide complete information. Data are being processed to generate different sub features. But all sub features must have different data values and no common data present in all sub features. Practically certain cases are there in which single data leads another class out of other data values in same sub feature. Since database contains huge data, it is difficult manually to find such data values. So we need to extract such data value statistically for solving our purpose.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper explains the use of theoretical and practical application of fuzzy model for proposed work. Prior to the conditional expectation has been used to determine sub-feature based on two fuzzy random variables for which two fuzzy sets have been generated using Borel set that helps to determine sub-feature within certain interval. In particular, the algorithms have been developed to determine fuzzy interval using fuzzy random variables for sub-feature data selection. Although in the present context, the fuzzy approach leads a consistent theory and develops the required algorithm for proposed model, it is fact that this theory will provide a prototype model. However generalization for all aspects of reality is a big challenge for researchers and explores avenues for different problems of sub-feature selection. The experimental results demonstrate that this model can be successfully applied to different kinds of data mining tasks. From the result analysis, it proves that the sub-feature with less frequencies leads to new class or distinguished class whereas the sub-feature with more frequencies involves with almost all classes in many datasets and generating ambiguity for unique class. However the proposed model provides expected fuzzy interval through which sub-feature selection becomes easier.Again the privacy of original data is still well maintained for each party without disclosing the exact private data values because of perturbation and fuzzification. Since sub-feature selection based on fuzzy model is a new concept of data mining task, the unique cluster of sub-features offers another interesting direction of classification.Tables A1–A3.