@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An approach for selecting seed URLs of focused crawler based on user-interest ontology

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The user-interest ontology construction is proposed by using user log profile. We describe three steps of ontology construction approach: concept selection, the generation of optimized concept lattice, the process of translating concept lattice into user-interest ontology. It is worth to be mentioned that we can revise and update the user-interest ontology using the optimized concept lattice by FCA. The more time the user uses search engine, the richer knowledge the user-interest ontology contains.Based on user-interest ontology, we propose the seed URLs selection approach. The user feature concept vectors, the semantic Web pages, the base set of HITS, bipartite directed graph, and the complete bipartite directed graph are discussed for the seed URLs selection based on user-interest ontology. The advantage of the approach is combing the semantic content and link information of Web pages.We complete our experiments on simulating Web environment and real Web environment, it prove that our proposed seed URLs selection approach outperform HITS approach and random approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Seed URLs,Formal concept analysis,User-interest ontology,Bipartite graph,Web crawler,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Seed URLs selection for focused Web crawler intends to guide related and valuable information that meets a user's personal information requirement and provide more effective information retrieval. In this paper, we propose a seed URLs selection approach based on user-interest ontology. In order to enrich semantic query, we first intend to apply Formal Concept Analysis to construct user-interest concept lattice with user log profile. By using concept lattice merger, we construct the user-interest ontology which can describe the implicit concepts and relationships between them more appropriately for semantic representation and query match. On the other hand, we make full use of the user-interest ontology for extracting the user interest topic area and expanding user queries to receive the most related pages as seed URLs, which is an entrance of the focused crawler. In particular, we focus on how to refine the user topic area using the bipartite directed graph. The experiment proves that the user-interest ontology can be achieved effectively by merging concept lattices and that our proposed approach can select high quality seed URLs collection and improve the average precision of focused Web crawler.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the increasing number of accessible web pages on Internet, it has become gradually difficult for users to find the web pages that are relevant to their particular needs. The more and more people depend on search engines to retrieve and discovery useful information from the Web. Web crawler, an important component of the search engines, is an application program which can load down the web page along their hyperlinks when given a seed URL set. We usually abstract the Web as graph which its nodes represent the web page and edges represent the URLs. To assure higher recall of general web crawler, the web pages corresponding the seed URLs connect as possible as many to other web pages; to assure higher precision of focused crawlers, ones corresponding the seed URLs as possible as connect to the web pages related to the query topics. Some researches [29,27] prove that seed URLs are more important to improve the web crawlers’ performance. Such as, Bedi and Thukral [29] considered that the seed URLs can help focused crawler to crawl a topic area on the Web and affect its crawling results. The seed URLs related to the Special domain is extracted from a famous search engine-Open Directory Project [27]. Patel and Schmidt [4] considered that seeds hand initially to the web crawler in order to load down the web pages, the seed URLs with topic of user queries are the main configuration parameter of a focused web crawler. Researches of Harth and Umbrich [3] show that the seed URLs of the web crawlers are an important factor of the high-level index building in search engine.Up to now, researchers of the web crawlers paid notice to the visiting order of URL to satisfy user's query requirements and aimed at improving the comprehension on the web pages and downloading the most valuable information. such as, Gao and Du [47] employed a model named concept context graph based on Formal Concept Analysis (FCA [8]) to get more relevant Web pages. However the rarer researchers focus on the seed URLs to improve search engine's performance. We have an interest simulating experiment about the seed URLs and the web structure on data set-SogouTlink.mini on which includes 11,271 URLs and 10,000 hyperlinks. It demonstrates that the seed URLs play important on finding other URLs related to them. In our experiment, we labeled these URLs (No. 01–No. 11271) by their order appearing on data set, and statistically computed the number of out-degree (these URLs belong to the same web sits do not be considered in computing out-degree) of every URLs, and selected some URLs with higher out-degree to be listed in Table 1from different topics. The experiment demonstrates the role of the seed URLs.•First, we draw all out-link URLs in Fig. 1(a) for No. 7224 and No. 7347 URLs respectively. A result demonstrates that their out-link URLs almost overlap mutually. It can explains this phenomenon that No. 7224 and No. 7347 URLs belong to the same topic travel. It indicates that a URL or serval URLs usually have paths to their out-link URLs.Second, mark all out-links of No. 7099 URL in Fig. 1(b), a phenomenon that the part out-links of No. 7099 URL overlap the out-links of No. 7224 and No. 7347 URLs can be explained: the topic entertainment of No. 7099 URL partly overlap topic travel of No. 7224 and No. 7347 URLs.Third, delete out-links of No. 7099 URL and mark out-links of No. 6495 URL in Fig. 1(c). We discovery that the out-links of No. 6495 do not almost cover the out-links of No. 7224 and No. 7347 URLs. It can prove that the topic finance of No. 6495 URL is different from topic travel of No. 7224 and No. 7347 URLs.At last, delete out-links of No. 7099 URL and mark all out-links of No. 997 and No. 816 URL in Fig. 1(d), these result is the same as the out-links of No. 6495 URL.It clearly tells me that the good URLs can induce the good search result in search engine. It verifies that selecting seed URLs according to the user's query topic plays an important role in traversing the Web for the focused web crawler.In this paper, we proposed a novel approach for selecting seed URLs of the web focused crawler based on the user-interest ontology and FCA). The main ideal of our proposed approach is described in Fig. 2. It mainly includes five parts as follows:•Constructing user-interest ontology: In the search engine, it collects an amount of history behaviors which the user visited the search result and forms user log profile. Every record in user log profile contains user query topics and the corresponding clicked URLs. These history information of the records hide rich knowledge reflecting word-to-word and concept-to-concept in user interest domain. We mine these user knowledge to construct user-interest ontology.Extracting semantic web page: When an user submits his query topics to our Personalized Intelligence Search Engine (PISE [43,44]), the PISE expands user query topics by user-interest ontology and calls other general search engines, such as Google, Yahoo and AltaVista, etc. Some web pages and their URLs are returned. These web pages can be vectored by using TF-IDF method. We fully consider the semantic relationship (ISA, Partof, Hyponym, Hypernym, Similar) of words (or concepts) in user-interest ontology to optimize these vectors. The items in vectors express the web page's semantic meanings. At last, we generate the semantic vectors Tifor every web pages.Forming user-interest feature vector: All web pages are considered to construct user-interest vector in user log profile. We select their common words with the high TF-IDF value to describe the user-interest vector.Computing similarity: We use cosine similarity [39] to compute the similarity between the semantic vector Tiand the user-interest feature vector K. Then, some web pages which its similarity are more than the given threshold are selected as base set of HITS algorithm [22].Selecting seed URLs of the focused web crawler: We expand the base set. Some web pages, which have URLs point to the web pages of the base set and the web pages of the base set link out with five levels, are added into the base set. The Hub Web pages and authority web pages are adopted to discovery user topic area by bipartite directed graph. Then we construct its complete bipartite directed graph and extract the seed URLs of the focused web crawler.This paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 reviews the related literatures on ontology construction, FCA, and the related approach of seed URLs selection. Section 3 discusses the user-interest ontology construction method. How to extract the user-interest topic area and the seed URL generation based on the user-interest ontology is presented. The experimental procedure and results are presented in Section 4. The final section is the conclusion and future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
