@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Parametric identification of seismic isolators using differential evolution and particle swarm optimization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper is concerned with the parametric identification of seismic isolators.The Bouc–Wen model is considered to simulate the hysteretic response.Parametric identification is performed using two soft computing techniques.Experimental data are carried out from standardized qualification tests.Good agreement is found between experimental data and numerical simulations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Bouc–Wen model,Differential evolution,Hysteresis,Parametric identification,Particle swarm optimization,Seismic isolator,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The objective of a base isolation system is to decouple the building from the damaging components of the earthquake by placing isolators between the superstructure and the foundation. The correct identification of these devices is, therefore, a critical step towards reliable simulations of base-isolated systems subjected to dynamic ground motion. In this perspective, the parametric identification of seismic isolators from experimental dynamic tests is here addressed. In doing so, the focus is on identifying Bouc–Wen model parameters by means of particle swarm optimization and differential evolution. This paper is especially concerned with the assessment of these non-classical parametric identification techniques using a standardized experimental protocol to set out the dynamic loading conditions. A critical review of the obtained outputs demonstrates that particle swarm optimization and differential evolution can be effectively exploited for the parametric identification of seismic isolators.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The use of base-isolators for protecting buildings, bridges, liquid storage tanks, oil pipelines, and nuclear reactor plants against the damaging effects of seismic loadings has become very frequent in recent decades [1,2]. The advantage of base isolation systems lies in avoiding that the damaging effects of the earthquakes reach the structures by placing particular devices (isolators) between the protected system and the foundation. In most of the seismic isolators, thin reinforcing steel plates are alternated with thick rubber pads. Conventional isolators are basically produced in two phases: first, the compounded rubber sheets with the interleaved steel plates are put into a mold, and heating under pressure for several hours (the so-called vulcanization) is then performed to complete the manufacturing process. The performance of a seismic isolator depends on many factors, such as the rubber typology, the compound, the thickness and the process of vulcanization of the pads. So far, the Bouc–Wen hysteretic model is considered the most appropriate to simulate the nonlinear behavior of seismic isolators. However, because of the lack of settled relationships between mechanical model and properties of the isolator (i.e., the degree of vulcanization or the precise compound used to build the device), the correctness of the structural simulations requires a reliable identification of the model parameters from experimental tests.Among the available numerical techniques, non-classical approaches based on soft computing methods are attracting growing interests in system identification and damage detection, see for instance Refs. [3,4]. Within this framework, the parametric identification problem for multi-degree-of-freedom structural linear systems was resolved using genetic algorithm (GA) [5], Big Bang–Big Crunch optimization [6], particle swarm optimization (PSO) and differential evolution (DE) [7]. Soft computing-inspired techniques are also exploited for the parametric identification of nonlinear dynamic systems. An overview about the most recent applications in this field [8] revealed that GAs are frequently employed in the parametric identification of hysteresis models, such as the Bouc–Wen model, the Jiles–Atherton model, and the Preisach model. On the other hand, PSO and DE were considered in the parametric identification of hysteresis models [9,10], viscous damping [11,12], and Van der Pol-Duffing oscillators [13].The use of non-classical methods for the parametric identification of Bouc–Wen-type models has been continuously gaining increased attention in literature. For instance, a multi-species GA was proposed in Ref. [14] to identify Bouc–Wen models from noisy data. A Bouc–Wen model was identified by means of DE in Ref. [15], where the authors presented some results for experimental data obtained from a nuclear power plant. Kwok and co-authors [16] used a GA to identify a non-symmetrical Bouc–Wen model proposed to represent the hysteretic behavior of magnetorheological fluid dampers. A memetic GA and a PSO algorithm were adopted in Refs. [17,18], respectively, to reproduce the cyclic response of a bolted–welded steel connection through a Bouc–Wen model. A generalized Bouc–Wen model was considered in Ref. [19] for predicting the cyclic response of a T-connection consisting of two wood members joined by plywood gusset plates, and the parametric identification problem was solved by using a DE algorithm. Recently, Worden and Manson [20] investigated the effectiveness of a self-adaptive DE algorithm for the parametric identification of the Bouc–Wen model using simulated noisy data.In this paper, the focus is on identifying Bouc–Wen parameters for seismic isolation devices by means of non-classical methods, a problem which has received very few attention. A recent article by Sireteanu and co-authors [21] on this topic addressed the GA-based parametric identification of an extended Bouc–Wen model for elastomeric bearings. Differently from that paper, the parametric identification of seismic isolators is here performed for the first time by means of PSO and DE. Such techniques have a simple structure and require few control parameters, whose optimal values lie within a rather small interval. These characteristics, together with the numerical robustness, are especially important for industrial applications. The feasibility of these soft computing techniques is critically reviewed with reference to experimental data. In this sense, other significant contributions are concerned with the experimental protocol and the completeness of the final results. The examined device was subjected to loading conditions imposed by standardized qualification tests for seismic isolators (the current Italian building code [22] is taken into account in this study). This is to ensure the objectivity of the results with respect to the current state-of-the-practice about the experimental qualification of seismic isolators. In doing so, this study also benefits of a larger experimental database than the considered one in previous researches [21]. Moreover, although identification methods for nonlinear systems are usually examined by considering the displacement-force curves only (as in Ref. [21]), this paper also evaluates the quality of the whole procedure with reference to the velocity-force curves. This complete analysis turns out to be very important for assessing the real effectiveness of such techniques for industrial applications. Final results demonstrate that PSO and DE can be viable tools for the parametric identification of seismic isolators, and that the DE algorithm is significantly better than PSO.The seismic isolator is modeled as nonlinear single-degree-of-freedom system:(1)my¨(t)+ϕ(t)=g(t),where m is the mass, y(t) is the displacement (overdots denote the time-derivative), ϕ(t) is the restoring force and g(t) is the excitation dynamic load. As usual in nonlinear modeling of isolators [23], damping is represented by taking into account the inelastic (hysteretic) response of the isolators whereas viscous damping is not included. So doing, by assuming a Bouc–Wen hysteresis model, the restoring force ϕ(t) is:(2)ϕ(t)=αkiy(t)+(1−α)kiz(t),where α=(kf/ki) is the ratio of the post-yield kfto pre-yield ki(elastic) stiffness whereas z(t) is the hysteretic parameter given by the following nonlinear differential equation:(3)z˙(t)=Ay˙(t)−β|y˙(t)||z(t)|(η−1)z(t)−γy˙(t)|z(t)|η.Parameters β and γ control the shape of hysteretic loops, and do not have precise physical meaning. For what concerns the parameter η, it controls the sharpness of the transition from initial slope to the slope of the asymptote. For increasing values of η, the loading path of a softening hysteresis approaches the ideal bilinear model.The identification problem can be simplified accounting for some parameter constraints, i.e. A=1 in order to remove the intrinsic redundancy of the Bouc–Wen model [18]. On considering the aforementioned constraint, the Bouc–Wen hysteresis model is fully described if the parameters kf, α, β, γ and η are identified (the mass m is assumed as given parameter).The parametric identification of the considered Bouc–Wen model is formulated as minimization problem:(4)min{f(x)}s.t.xl≤x≤xu,wheref:ℝn→ℝis the objective (or cost) function andx∈ℝ1×nis the vector which collects the n unknown model parameters (lower-bounded by xland upper-bounded by xu).In this study, the objective function f(x) is defined as a normalized mean-square error between the experimental response and that predicted using a given parameter estimate x[20], that is:(5)f(x)=100Sσy2∑a=1S(y(ta)−yˆ(ta|x))2,where taindicate the sampling instant time (being S the total number of samples),σy2is the variance of the measured sequence of displacements y(ta) andyˆ(ta|x)is the predicted sequence of displacements when the parameter estimate isx={kfαβγη}. The best parameter estimation x* is the global minimum of the objective function in Eq. (5).The ith particle (with i=1, …, m) at the kth iteration has two attributes, a velocityvki={vki1⋯vkij⋯vkin}∈ℝ1×nand a positionxki={xki1⋯xkij⋯xkin}∈ℝ1×n. In order to protect the cohesion of the swarm, the absolute value of the velocityvkijis assumed to be less than a maximum velocityvjmax, withvmax={v1max⋯vjmax⋯vnmax}. It is assumed vmax=γ(xu−xl)/Δτ, with γ=0.50 [13]. The internal time variable Δτ=1 is introduced to provide a physically consistent formalism. The initial set of candidate solutionsx0iis obtained by generating m pseudo-random samples within the assigned search space. Similarly, the particle's velocitiesv0iare obtained by generating m pseudo-random samples between −vmaxand vmax. When k≥1, the ith particle velocityvkiand the ith particle positionxkiare computed as follows:(6a)vki=ωk(k−1)vi+ck1rk1i×(xkiPb−x(k−1)i)+ck2rk2i×(xkiGb−x(k−1)i),(6b)xki=x(k−1)i+Δτvki.The control parameters in Eq. (3.1) are the inertia weightωk, the cognitive parameterck1and the social parameterck2. Moreover,rk1iandrk2iare vectors whose n terms are pseudo-random numbers uniformly distributed between zero and one. The symbol × denotes the term-by-term product. The particle's movement depends onxkiPb, which is the best previous position of the ith particle (pbest):(7)xkiPb=x(k−1)iPbiff(x(k−1)iPb)≤f(x(k−1)i)x(k−1)iotherwise,withx0iPb=x0iby assumption. If all particles share information with each other about the best particle of the swarm (gbest),xkiGbis obtained as follows:(8)xkiGb=argmini=1,…,mfxkiPb.The magnitude of the updated particle's velocity must be less than the maximum admissible velocity in order to preserve the swarm cohesion, and thus:(9)vkij=sign(vkij)vjmaxif|vij|>vjmaxvkijotherwise.The so-called craziness operator is also introduced to increase the exploration capability of the swarm. Let rcrbe a pseudo-random number and Pcrthe assigned probability of craziness, this operator works as follows:(10)rcr≤Pcr→vkij∼U(−vjmax,vjmax),where U(·) is the uniform probability density function. Therefore, if rcr≤Pcr, then the result in Eq. (10) is used to update the particle's position. High value for Pcrresults in (ineffective) pure random search, therefore its value should be less than 0.20 (0.05 in this study).Once the velocity is updated, the particle can move outside the bounds, i.e.xkij<xjlorxkij>xju. As usual in PSO, the design variable is reset to the closest bound (xkij=xjlorxkij=xju) and, to avoid considering any points outside the assigned design space, the corresponding velocity componentvkijis reset to zero for the next iteration.Following iteratively this simple set of instructions, the swarm is expected to move toward the global optimum of the problem until one or more stopping criteria are met. In this study, the algorithm stops once a maximum number of iterations p is completed.The global convergence is affected by the degree of local/global exploration provided byck1andck2whereas the relative rate of convergence is affected by the inertia weight parameterωk. Studies have shown that for a fixed inertia valueωk=ωthere is a significant reduction in the algorithm convergence rate as iterations progress. As a consequence, several dynamic models were proposed for inertia weight parameter and acceleration factors, ranging from deterministic rules to chaotic map based approaches [13]. In this study, a linearly decreasing model is assumed for the inertia weight parameter:(11)ωk=(ω0−ωp)p−kp+ωp,whereω0andωpare the initial and the final inertia weight value, respectively. In this paper,ω0=0.90andωp=0.40. Similarly, a linear model can be adopted for both acceleration factors:(12)ck1=(c01−cp1)p−kp+cp1,(13)ck2=(c02−cp2)p−kp+cp2.In doing so, it is here assumed thatck1varies from 2.00 to 0.50 whereasck2ranges from 0.50 to 2.00.In DE algorithms, the difference between selected individuals is used to perturb a third individual (called target vector), thus obtaining a new trial solution. This process, dubbed mutation operator, can be performed by choosing one among many alternatives. In this study, the following mutation operator is considered:(14)zki=x(k−1)best+Fx(k−1)r1−x(k−1)r2,where r1 and r2 denote two integer numbers selected pseudo-randomly within the sequence 1, …, m, such that r1≠r2. Moreover,x(k−1)bestdenotes the best individual at the iteration (k−1) whereas F is the so-called mutation coefficient or scale factor. Its value usually ranges from 0.40 to 1.00 (0.50 in this study). A projection scheme is used in order to ensure the feasibility of the trial solution. This consists in considering the projection on the prescribed interval of each out-of-bound trial vector.Once the trial solutionzkiis calculated, the crossover operator is performed to define the offspringuki:(15)ukij=zkijifrxover>Pxoverorj=randint(1,n)x(k−1)ijotherwise,where rxoveris a pseudo-random number between 0 and 1 whereas Pxoveris the probability of crossover, whose value here adopted is 0.50. Moreover, randint(1, n) is an integer number selected pseudo-randomly within the sequence 1, …, m. This condition is introduced to ensure that at least one parameter of the trial solution is taken into account to construct the offspringuki. Subsequently, a one-to-one competition scheme is adopted as selection operator:(16)xki=ukiiff(uki)<f(x(k−1)i)x(k−1)iotherwise.Therefore, the winnerxkiis the best individual betweenx(k−1)ianduki. The output of this selection operator is a new population for the next generation. The evolutionary search is stopped once a maximum number p of iterations is achieved.The testing machine (see Fig. 1) basically consists of a high resistance steel frame to withstand horizontal loads (in both directions) up to 2200kN and vertical loads of compression up to 10,000kN. The maximum allowable horizontal displacement is ±260mm. A LABVIEW based platform allows for the real-time system control, data acquisition and visualization.Experimental data for parametric identification are carried out from standardized experimental tests. In detail, this paper considers the experimental protocol about dynamic qualification tests of seismic isolators prescribed by the current Italian building code [22]. This is to obtain unbiased conclusions with reference to the loading conditions (since it may influence the identification procedure of highly nonlinear systems) and, as a consequence, to test the reliability of the presented methodologies with respect to standardized experimental testing procedures. With these premises, a seismic isolator was tested under three constant vertical loads V (equal to 440kN, 840kN and 1120kN). Under the prescribed vertical (static) loading condition V, the seismic isolator was subjected to horizontal harmonic-type dynamic loads. Three horizontal dynamic loading conditions were imposed, each of them corresponding to a maximum horizontal displacement response ymaxof the seismic isolator. Loading histories and displacements experienced by the seismic isolator are recorded during the test.The tested device is a high damping rubber bearing with circular cross section having the external diameter equal to 300mm. The technical datasheet of this device indicates an expected rubber shear modulus equal to 0.80MPa and a rubber layer thickness equal to 52mm. Experiments on this device were conducted with constant environmental conditions (average air temperature equal to 20°C).Although non-classical methods can be performed without preliminary signal processing, it is decided to prefilter the recorded time histories for noise reduction. Denoising can lead to improved identification results, and it is somewhat important to retrieve the unmeasured response of the seismic isolator by derivation (velocity time histories are useful for this study in order to assess the accuracy in terms of velocity-force relationship). In this paper, a wavelet-based signal denoising has been performed by using a fixed form threshold with a single level estimation of noise standard deviation, and derivation is performed using a third order algorithm. The identification methodology is implemented in a fully automatic fashion, thus simplifying the whole numerical procedure. PSO and DE are performed without tuning of control parameters, with the exception of preliminary runs to select population size N (equal to 100) and number of iterations p (equal to 250).PSO and DE are performed one hundred times for each dynamic loading history (in what follows, forces and lengths are expressed in [kN] and [mm], respectively). The lower bound of the search space isxl={000−10.1}while the upper bound isxu={101105.0}. The bounds are selected according to available information (i.e. literature review, personal experiences and device's datasheet). Best and worst objective function values obtained by means of DE and PSO are listed in Table 1. Statistical parameters (mean and standard deviation values) are presented in Table 2.According to Ref. [20], both PSO and DE provide a good parameter estimate, since the objective function resulted always less than 5. The best and the worst objective function values are rather close each other, which implies that both algorithms are stable enough. It seems that DE behaves slightly better than PSO. Best, mean and worst objective function values obtained by means of DE are slightly lower than those computed using PSO. The DE algorithm also exhibits a superior robustness, as its standard deviation values are lower than those computed by PSO.The comparison between the experimental response and the identified one is shown in Fig. 2(for V=440kN), Fig. 3(for V=840kN) and Fig. 4(for V=1120kN). For sake of conciseness, only the best results are presented. The comparison with experimental data confirms that a very good parameter estimate is obtained by using DE. With the possible exception of the initial elastic response, the dynamic response is simulated properly. More importantly, hysteretic loops are very well identified. Both force–displacement and force–velocity relationships are correctly simulated using the identified Bouc–Wen model, thus confirming the effectiveness of the investigated non-classical numerical strategy.Identified Bouc–Wen model parameters are listed in Table 3(forces and lengths are expressed in [kN] and [mm], respectively). The post-yield stiffness kfdoes not vary too much, and it results in very good agreement with the range reported in the device's datasheet (which is 1.05–1.20kN/mm). The post-yield stiffness to pre-yield stiffness ratio α is subjected to larger fluctuations. This basically depends on the pre-yield stiffness ki, which has not been identified exactly (see Figs. 2–4). Parameters β and γ also exhibit significant variations, but the final dynamic response is known to be weakly sensitive to their absolute values. The identification of β and γ in Table 3 also confirms that γ≈−β (β>0) is acceptable for modeling seismic isolators. Finally, Table 3 shown that numerical values of η fall within a rather narrow interval.Overall, it should be remarked that the variations of the model parameters also depend on the loading conditions, i.e. the response characteristics of rubber bearings were observed to be influenced by the axial load they carried. In this perspective, this study also provides useful information for more refined simulations of seismic isolators using Bouc–Wen models.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper addressed the parametric identification of seismic isolators by means of non-classical (soft computing based) methods. A Bouc–Wen model has been considered in order to simulate the hysteretic response of the seismic isolators, and the parametric identification is posed as minimization problem. Subsequently, model parameters are identified solving this optimization problem by means of particle swarm optimization algorithm and differential evolution algorithm. These identification methodologies have been tested with reference to experimental data from standardized qualification dynamic tests. Differential evolution algorithm has been found to be superior over particle swarm optimization. Identified displacement–force and velocity–force relationships well match experimental data. Finally, this study has provided significant data for the refinement of numerical simulations of seismic isolators using classical Bouc–Wen models.