@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The generation of qualitative descriptions of multivariate time series using fuzzy logic

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An approach to generating qualitative descriptions of multivariate time series using the “Temporal Fuzzy Model” as an intermediate representation is presented.We present a formal description of the temporal fuzzy models, the induction and inference algorithms associated with them, and a process that acquires text from them.We present a set of experiments in order to establish a measure of how valid a representation is the model of the multivariate system, and also a second set of experiments that validate the qualitative description process.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Qualitative description of data,Multivariate time series,Temporal knowledge acquisition,Knowledge representation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
An approach to generating qualitative descriptions of multivariate time series using the ‘Temporal Fuzzy Model’ as an intermediate representation is presented. This model, based on fuzzy logic, allows of representing in a linguistic way, the information contained in multivariate time series. The extraction of qualitative descriptions can then be carried out directly. We present a formal description of the temporal fuzzy models, the induction and inference algorithms associated with them, and a process that acquires text from them. Finally, we present a set of experiments in order to establish a measure of how valid a representation is the model of the multivariate system, and also a second set of experiments that validate the qualitative description process.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Qualitatively describing data is an attempt to generate a text from some numeric input, for example, from a multivariate time series (MTS). In this kind of problem, a knowledge acquisition process (KA) is needed to extract the relevant knowledge from the numerical series. Such acquisition processes are able to use a wide range of techniques, for example, automatic induction of rule-based systems [18,39]. The KA represents knowledge from data as a model and in order to represent these models in a comprehensible way, in this work, we use fuzzy logic and more concretely our work goes around the concept of linguistic variable.Zadeh [67] proposed the use of linguistic variables [64–66] to express the domain knowledge in a way that is quite similar to how knowledge is represented in the human mind. Then, using fuzzy logic, understandable models can be obtained that will allow experts to make a better use of the knowledge. In general, these models are composed of a collection of fuzzy rules (Mandani rules [35] or TSK rules [58]) and some of them are based on the fuzzy inductive reasoning methodology [9], which is considered an appropriate methodology for modeling qualitative behaviour and for simulating physical systems.In order to establish a classification of the techniques that study and interpret MTS, we distinguish between global and local techniques. Global techniques generate a single model representing the entirety of the input data, whereas in local techniques, the time series is preprocessed and is divided into segments or independent parts. Then a model for each segment is created [30]. Local techniques use time frames established by the user [19,20,42]. In this paper, we propose the use of a new local technique that employs a fuzzy model to acquire temporal knowledge from the MTS. This model is called the Temporal Fuzzy Model (TFM). After that, a qualitative description is generated from this TFM. In this paper, TFMs are used as an intermediate structure to represent the knowledge of a MTS in an appropriate way. The main aim of this paper is to generate qualitative descriptions of multivariate time series.The contributions of this paper are concerned with the definition of a new local technique for obtaining models from MTS, called the Temporal Fuzzy Model: the capability of representing the knowledge of this model, the particular characteristics of the induction algorithm, and the generation of qualitative descriptions from the fuzzy rules in the MTS.More concretely, the induction algorithm generates the TFMs without establishing a priori the number of rules. It studies the MTS data only in a single run, determines the values of the membership functions of the variables before execution. One important contribution is the definition of the membership functions of the variables in design time: this allows an expert to determine them, while most induction techniques can obtain these functions only during execution time. The induction algorithm uses only the output variable to find the rule that represents a consecutive set of examples. The value of each input variable is obtained using the union of intervals. TFMs need as input a MTS with at least one input variable and a single output variable. For this reason, the induction algorithm is not applicable to univariate time series since our proposal needs at least two input variables. A preliminary version of this induction algorithm was presented in [40].Regarding the knowledge representation in the TFM, the concept of fuzzy rule is used but, unlike other fuzzy models, the rules in the TFMs are temporally ordered. Then, each fuzzy rule in the model expresses what is happening in the MTS in a specific period of time and this fact allows representing spatio-temporal information. The time component is represented by grouping consecutive data in the MTS with the same output value in a unique rule, while the spatial information is synthesised by means of the concept of a linguistic interval that represents fuzzy subsets in the domain of variables.The knowledge acquisition is done from TFMs and not directly from the data, it is based on fuzzy logic and uses basic operations defined directly over labels and intervals, for example, interval differences and interval intersections. These operations are mathematically simple enough to be executed efficiently. Then a text that represents two consecutive rules is generated: this text reflects the cause–effect relation relative to time.This paper is organised as follows. Section 2 exposits the background, Section 3 describes the formal representation of the TFMs, the induction method is given in detail in Section 4, and Section 5 treats the generation of the qualitative descriptions. Finally, Section 6 tests the proposed method and Section 7 presents some conclusions and prospects for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, a method of automatically generating qualitative descriptions of an MTS was presented. A knowledge representation, the ‘Temporal Fuzzy Model’ (TFM) that takes into account the temporal information was presented. Subsequently, the temporal knowledge was acquired from this representation. The temporal knowledge acquisition is carried out from the TFMs, and not directly from the data. Moreover, we created an algorithm to induce our models. Furthermore, the TFMs were tested and the test results were presented. The obtained results confirm that the errors made by the new methodology are acceptable, and that TFMs are a good approach to representing an MTS.The acquisition process of the temporal knowledge is based on fuzzy logic basic operations: the interval difference and interval intersection are used for this purpose. These operations are quickly executed on a computer. How to generate the qualitative description from a TFM was presented. The obtained text reflects the cause–effect relation related to time and explains what happens in a time period. As future research, we want to create techniques to generate more varied and entertaining texts. One option would be to use a dictionary and more templates. We will also work on investigating how to obtain a summary of the set of texts obtained from a TFM, and how to create text representing two non-consecutive TFRs.