@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Routing of barge container ships by mixed-integer programming heuristics

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Mixed-integer programming formulation for barge container ships routing is given.CPLEX commercial solver is used to optimally solve small instances.MIP meta-heuristics are proposed for tackling larger instances.The experimental evaluation confirm practical usefulness of meta-heuristics.Variable Neighborhood Branching is identified as the best performing method for this problem.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Routing,Barge container ships,Empty containers,0–1 mixed integer programming,Meta-heuristics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We investigate the optimization of transport routes of barge container ships with the objective to maximize the profit of a shipping company. This problem consists of determining the upstream and downstream calling sequence and the number of loaded and empty containers transported between any two ports. We present a mixed integer linear programming (MILP) formulation for this problem. The problem is tackled by the commercial CPLEX MIP solver and improved variants of the existing MIP heuristics: Local Branching, Variable Neighborhood Branching and Variable Neighborhood Decomposition Search. It appears that our implementation of Variable Neighborhood Branching outperforms CPLEX MIP solver both regarding the solution quality and the computational time. All other studied heuristics provide results competitive with CPLEX MIP solver within a significantly shorter amount of time. Moreover, we present a detailed case study transportation analysis which illustrates how the proposed approach can be used by managers of barge shipping companies to make appropriate decisions and solve real life problems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
This paper addresses the issue of liner barge container transport routes, connected to maritime container services. More precisely, we investigate the hinterland barge transport of containers arrived to or departing from a transshipment port (the sea port located at river mouth) on a sea or mainline container ships. One of the most important parts of this problem is adjusting the barge and sea container ships arrival times in the transshipment port. This clearly indicates that considered container barge transport acts as a typical feeder service.Barge transport has recently proved to be a well-developed mode for container transport, particularly in Northwest Europe. Characteristics of barge container transport that have increased the importance of this transport mode are reliability of barge container services and low cost of barge transport operations. Therefore, container-on-barge transport is becoming even more competitive than its alternative mode, i.e. road transport for specific kind of transport activities. Following these trends, significant efforts have also been done in promoting barge transport of containers on the Danube and region of Southeast Europe. Over the last decade, container-on-barge transport has shown annual growth figures of 10–15% [1].On the other hand, service network design in barge container transport has not been investigated enough. To the best of our knowledge, there are only a few researches dealing with these issues [1–4], even though there are many service network design problems in barge container transport that need further research attention. Therefore, this paper is intended to contribute to the successful design and development of service networks in container-on-barge transport, as this transport mode is expected to gain much more interest in years to come.Determining transport routes of barge container ships has recently received a lot of attention (see, for example [4–7]). For these problems optimality may be defined in accordance with various factors: maximization of shipping company profit [8–11], minimization of system costs [12,13], minimization of operating costs [14], etc. Obtaining an optimal solution by any factor is very important for doing successful transport business. Unfortunately, like in many other practical cases, the complexity of real life problems exceeds the capacity of the present computation systems. Therefore, the efficient algorithms for finding good suboptimal solutions are required. Meta-heuristic methods are the most natural choice, as they were already widely used in recent literature [11,15].In this paper we consider the barge container ship routing problem with the aim of maximizing the shipping company profit while picking up and delivering containers (both loaded and empty) along the inland waterway. The problem has been studied for the first time in [4,16]. Here, the mixed integer programming formulation for this problem is presented and used within CPLEX MIP solver to obtain optimal solutions of small size instances. For larger instances, MIP heuristic methods are used to obtain good suboptimal solutions. We apply three state-of-the-art heuristics for 0–1 MIP problem: Local Branching (LB) [17], Variable Neighborhood Branching (VNB) [18] and Variable Neighborhood Decomposition Search for 0–1 MIP problems (VNDS-MIP) [19]. In addition, we propose an extension of the original VNDS-MIP method, called LS-VNDS, which considers not only binary but also general integer variables. Detailed experimental results confirm the superiority of heuristic methods over the commercial exact solver. At the end, for a small representative test instance we present detailed transportation analysis describing obtained optimal route and container flows along it.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section we present a brief literature review. The description of the considered problem: optimization of transport routes of barge container ships is given in Section 3. Intuitive description as well as mathematical formulation is given and the problem complexity is discussed. Section 4 contains an overview of the MIP-based heuristic methods that we used for this problem (to obtain good suboptimal solutions in reasonable computation time). Experimental evaluations are described in Section 5, while Section 6 contains concluding remarks.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
