@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A computational intelligence approach to efficiently predicting review ratings in e-commerce

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A computational intelligence architecture for customers’ reviews prediction.Addressing crucial issues in the field of reviews prediction as dimensionality of data and accuracy.This synergetic approach yields better performance than state-of-the-art rating predictors.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Customer review ratings prediction,Data mining,Imprecision in customer reviews,Fuzzy approach,Machine learning,Computational intelligence,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Sentiment analysis, also called opinion mining, is currently one of the most studied research fields which aims to analyse people's opinions. E-commerce websites allow users to share opinions about a product/service by providing textual reviews along with numerical ratings. These opinions greatly influence future consumer purchasing decisions. This paper introduces an innovative computational intelligence framework for efficiently predicting customer review ratings. The framework has been designed to deal with the dimensionality and noise which is typically apparent in large datasets containing customer reviews. The proposed framework integrates the techniques of Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) and dimensionality reduction, Fuzzy C-Means (FCM) and the Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS). The performance of the proposed approach returned high accuracy and the results revealed that when large datasets are concerned, only a fraction of the data is needed for creating a system to predict the review ratings of textual reviews. Results from the experiments suggest that the proposed approach yields better prediction performance than other state-of-the-art rating predictors which are based on the conventional Artificial Neural Network, Fuzzy C-Means, and Support Vector Machine approaches. In addition, the proposed framework can be utilised for other classification and prediction tasks, and its neuro-fuzzy predictor module can be replaced by other classifiers.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
E-commerce companies reach out and gain customers via their electronic commerce websites. Customers consider information about products and services, available on company websites, for making informed decisions about purchases. Customers prefer to gather product information online than from in-store due to the richness of the information available to them over the Internet [1–6]. To facilitate this preference, e-commerce websites and online product review websites allow users to share opinions about a product/service by providing textual reviews along with numerical ratings. These opinions greatly influence future consumer purchasing decisions, because many consumers take into consideration reviews as a reliable resource when deciding whether to buy a product.Online product reviews are also a potentially valuable source of information for companies, since companies use this information to monitor customer attitudes towards their products/services. Based on this information, companies can adapt their manufacturing, distribution, and marketing strategies accordingly. For these reasons, e-commerce companies consider reviews and review ratings as important and influential information to potential buyers, and thus encourage users to provide informative and accurate reviews. In order to encourage reviewers to provide useful and informative reviews, some companies (e.g. http://epinion.com) reward those reviewers who provide useful reviews by giving them a status and/or financial rewards. These approaches are adopted by companies to reduce the occurrence of incorrect/inconsistent data recorded about products, since this data can affect the derived statistics about a product.It is important that textual reviews match their corresponding numerical ratings in order to have a consistent system. By automatically predicting the numerical rating of each textual review, the accuracy of the data recorded can be improved. The fast growing number of online product review forums has attracted research into approaches for mining these new sources of information for decision support. Machine learning approaches (ML), and supervised learning approaches in particular, have been applied to review rating prediction [7–9] and opinion mining classification, and such techniques can achieve a level of accuracy comparable to that achieved by human experts [10]. Most recent predictors are mainly based on Artificial Neural Network (ANN) approaches, and are not capable of dealing with the dimensionality and imprecision which is typically apparent in textual review datasets.This paper proposes an innovative computational intelligence framework that comprises an integration of different intelligent methodologies, which together are able to efficiently reduce the size of textual review datasets and to analyse the ‘imprecise’ human sentiments hidden in the reviews. In particular, the proposed framework utilises the statistical Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) and dimensionality reduction techniques to extract the important and semantic features from each review and to consequently reduce the size and complexity of the entire reviews dataset. Then the Fuzzy C-Means (FCM) clustering algorithm classifies the refined reviews into fuzzy clusters and creates an initial collection of review rating prediction rules. Finally, these preliminary set of rules are used by the Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS), to optimise the reviews rating prediction system.The paper is organised as follows: Section 2 describes the most relevant literature, Section 3 describes the proposed computational intelligence predictor framework, Section 4 discusses the experiment methodology. Section 5 discusses the experiment results and compares the performance of the proposed system against other approaches. A conclusion and outline of future work is provided in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
