@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel approach to signal classification with an application to identifying the alcoholic brain

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Evolving temporal pattern detectors for signal classification.We make no assumptions regarding the spectral characteristics of the data.The classification accuracies are comparable to the conventional techniques.Located EEG-sensors that showed abnormal electrical behavior for the alcoholics.Evolutionary learning paradigm unified feature extraction and classification steps.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Evolutionary computation,EEG,Signal processing,Temporal pattern detectors,Evoked response potentials,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We introduce a novel approach to signal classification based on evolving temporal pattern detectors (TPDs) that can find the occurrences of embedded temporal structures in discrete time signals and illustrate its application to characterizing the alcoholic brain using visually evoked response potentials. In contrast to conventional techniques used for most signal classification tasks, this approach unifies the feature extraction and classification steps. It makes no prior assumptions regarding the spectral characteristics of the data; it merely assumes that some temporal patterns exist that distinguish two classes of signals and therefore could be applied to new signal classification tasks where a body of prior work identifying important features does not exist. Evolutionary computation (EC) discovers a classifier by simply learning from the time series samples.The alcoholic classification (AC) problem consists of 2 sub-tasks, one spatial and one temporal: choosing a subset of electroencephalogram leads used to create a composite signal (the spatial task), and detecting temporal patterns in this signal that are more prevalent in the alcoholics than the controls (the temporal task). To accomplish this, a novel representation and crossover operator were devised that enable multiple feature subset tasks to be solved concurrently. Three TPD techniques are presented that differ in the mechanism by which partial credit is assigned to temporal patterns that deviate from the specified pattern. An EC approach is used for evolving a subset of sensors and the TPD specifications. We found evidence that partial credit does help evolutionary discovery. Regions on the skull of an alcoholic subject that produced abnormal electrical activity compared to the controls were located. These regions were consistent with prior findings in the literature. The classification accuracy was measured as the area under the receiver operator characteristic curve (ROC); the ROC area for the training set varied from 90.32% to 98.83% and for the testing set it varied from 87.17% to 95.9%.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
There is much work devoted to machine learning approaches to discriminating time series data. The traditional approaches involve considerable effort to discover and extract features from samples of the signals of interest, often spectral energies of certain frequency bands. For short duration signals (e.g. evoked response potentials), it becomes challenging to obtain a good estimate of the spectral energy of a given band [1–4]. Therefore, there would be considerable value in a method that characterizes a class of signals directly in the time domain by detecting embedded temporal patterns.Here we introduce a novel approach to signal classification based on evolving temporal pattern detectors (TPDs) that can find the occurrences of hidden temporal structures in a discrete time (DT) signal (see Fig. 1). This involves discovering (using evolutionary search) the specification of the pattern to be detected (a set of samples with the desired amplitude differences among them and allowed tolerances). This pattern should be more prevalent in a given class of signals than the others and is embodied in a detector (TPD). To accomplish this task we introduce three TPD techniques; IFnet, augmented IFnet (AIFnet), and plasticity-based AIFnet (PAIFnet). Both, IFnet and AIFnet behave like a sequence11We call this sequence of if-statements as network.of temporal if-statements, however, they differ in their tolerances for the temporal patterns that deviate from the desired pattern; the IFnet imposes a rigid tolerance boundary, whereas, the AIFnet assigns partial credit to a deviant pattern. The PAIFnet is a learning procedure that allows the AIFnet to adjust its parameters by interacting with the data. The primary reasons for developing these three TPD variantes were:1.To empirically test if a partial credit mechanism improves evolutionary search.To learn if a learning classifier adds any additional benefit.To empirically test the basic approach and these variants, we applied them to a task of characterizing the alcoholic brain using visually evoked response potentials (VERPs); thus the test problem could be seen as developing an alcoholic diagnostic system. Most approaches for the AC task are based on the assumption that the information in a VERP is in the Gamma-band (30–50Hz) [1–4]. We do not make such specific assumptions regarding the spectral characteristics of the data to demonstrate that the above technique may be effective for signal classification problems where a body of prior work identifying important signal features may not exist. However, the success of this approach does depend on the assumptions that at least one characteristic temporal pattern exists, and the fitness landscape imposed by the problem is conducive to effective evolutionary search.We have chosen to cast the AC task as a simultaneous feature selection (FS) problem where multiple feature subsets have to be evolved, the features will have numeric attributes, and the subset sizes are not predefined. For this application, there is a spatial task and a temporal task. The objective of the spatial FS task is to choose a subset of electroencephalogram (EEG) leads (the spatial features) along with the lead-weighs (numeric attributes22Weights may be positive or negative for adding or subtracting the constituent signals to get the composite.) using which a composite signal can be created (see Fig. 2). The temporal FS task involves detecting temporal patterns that are more prevalent in the alcoholic composite signals than the controls. To solve such simultaneous FS tasks, we devised a special genetic representation and the mix-match-blend (MMX-BLX) crossover operator [5,6].An IFnet based TPD is composed of an ordered set of offset pointers (ΓIF) with respect to a head-pointer (xhead), desired amplitude differences between the signal values at two consecutive pointer locations (see Fig. 3: left), and a set of allowable tolerances on these amplitude differences. The tolerance window for the desired amplitude pattern composed of ζIF+1 points will be defined by a ζIF-dimensional boxcar function as follows:(1)ΨIF(xhead)=∏j=1toζIFψjIF(χf,xhead,jIF)ψjIF=1ifdjIF−τjIF2≤χf,xhead,jIF≤djIF+τjIF20otherwisewhereχf,xhead,jIF=f(xhead−Γj+1IF)−f(xhead−ΓjIF),{djIF∈ℝ}, and{τjIF∈ℝ|τjIF>0}.•f(x) represents a finite length (f(x)) discrete time-series,{x∈ℤ|x>0}, and{f(x)∈ℝ}.ΓIFrepresents an ordered set of offsets relative to xheadusing which a set of distinct pointers on the time-series can be derived; j indexes an element,ΓjIF, of the set. Also,ΓIF=ζIF+1,{ΓjIF∈ℤ|ΓjIF>Γj+1IF,ΓζIF+1IF=0}, and{ζIF∈ℤ|ζIF>0}.xheadrepresents the lead pointer to a position on f(x), such that{xhead∈ℤ|max(ΓjIF)ΓjIF∈ΓIF<xhead≤f(x)}.IFnet: an intuitive explanationThe functionψjIFis a tolerance function for the amplitude difference between the points,xhead−Γj+1IFandxhead−ΓjIF, where,djIFrepresents the desired amplitude difference (a part of the desired pattern) andτjIFrepresents the tolerance. The product,∏j=1toζIFψjIF(f(xhead−Γj+1IF)−f(xhead−ΓjIF))is a mechanism by which we test if any individual amplitude differences between the points,xhead−Γj+1IFand xhead−Γj, has met the specifications; the product will be 1 only if the amplitude pattern satisfy the specification. Thus,ψjIFbehaves like an if-statement. The occurrences of the desired temporal pattern in a discrete signal f(x) can be located by moving the pointer xheadsequentially over the discrete-signal (see Fig. 3: left). This can be formally stated as follows:(2)ΦIF=∑xhead=1+max(ΓjIF)ΓjIF∈ΓIFf(x)ΨIF(xhead)The IFnet parameters are encoded in the chromosome (See §5.3.3 and Appendix A).An AIFnet based TPD is composed of an set of offset pointers (ΓAIF) with respect to a head-pointer (xhead), desired amplitude differences between the signal value at the head-pointer and the remaining pointers (see Fig. 3: right), and a set of allowable tolerances on these amplitude differences. The tolerance window for the desired amplitude pattern composed of ζAIF+1 points will be defined by a ζAIF-dimensional continuous function as follows:(3)ΨAIF(xhead)=∏ΓjAIF∈ΓAIFψjAIF(χf,xhead,jAIF)(4)ψjAIF=amplitudejAIF1+χf,xhead,jAIF−djAIFcutoffjAIF2*orderjAIFwhereχf,xhead,jAIF=f(xhead)−f(xhead−ΓjAIF),{amplitudejAIF,djAIF∈ℝ},{cutoffjAIF∈ℝ|cutoffjAIF>0}, and{orderjAIF∈ℤ|orderjAIF≥1}.•f(x) represents a finite length (f(x)) discrete time-series,{x∈ℤ|x>0}, and{f(x)∈ℝ}.ΓAIFrepresents a set of offsets relative to xheadusing which a set of distinct pointers on the time-series can be derived; j indexes an element,ΓjAIF, of the set. Also,ΓAIF=ζAIF,{ΓjAIF∈ℤ|ΓjAIF>0}, and{ζAIF∈ℤ|ζAIF>0}.xheadrepresents the lead pointer to a position on f(x), such that{xhead∈ℤ|max(ΓjAIF)ΓjAIF∈ΓAIF<xhead≤f(x)}.AIFnet: an intuitive explanationThe functionψjAIFis a tolerance function for the amplitude difference between the points, xheadandΓjAIF, where,djAIFrepresents the desired amplitude difference (a part of the desired pattern). It reaches its maximum value,amplitudejAIF, when(f(xhead)−f(xhead−ΓjAIF))=djAIF. The parameterscutoffjAIFandorderjAIFare used for controlling the width and the manner in whichψjAIFdecays, respectively (see Fig. 4). Thus by controlling the shape of the functionψjAIFwe can implement a wide range of partial credit assignment schemes for the temporal patterns that deviate from the specification. Based on this flexibility, we call it an augmented-IFnet.33It allows us to implement rigid as well as fuzzy if-statements.The product,∏ΓjAIF∈ΓAIFψjAIF(f(xhead)−f(xhead−ΓjAIF))is a mechanism by which we can evaluate to what degree the individual amplitude differences between the points, xheadandΓjAIF, have deviated from the desired set of amplitude differences (the desired temporal pattern). The occurrences of the desired temporal pattern in a discrete signal f(x) can be evaluated by moving the pointer xheadsequentially over the discrete-signal (see Fig. 3: right). This can be formally stated as follows:(5)ΦAIF=∑xhead=1+max(ΓjAIF)ΓjAIF∈ΓAIFf(x)ΨAIF(xhead)The AIFnet parameters are encoded in the chromosome (see §5.3.3 and Appendix A).In reference to the current classification task, the objective of the evolutionary-learning is to design a TPD (IFnet or AIFnet) that can find temporal patterns that are more prevalent in the alcoholic composite signals than the controls. To accomplish this task the evolutionary algorithm (EA) has to define the following:1.The set of offsets, ΓIFor ΓAIF.The shape of the tolerance function,ψjIForψjAIF.The desired temporal pattern,djIFordjAIF.In order to keep the search manageable (shorter chromosome), we will only evolve symmetric ΨIF/AIF(xhead)44IF/AIF should be read as, IF or AIF.; all the tolerance functions (ψjIF/AIF) will have identical shapes but their support points (djIF/AIF) may vary. By allowing ΨIF/AIF(xhead) to conform to asymmetric shapes more complex tolerance boundaries can be obtained. Clearly, there is a trade-off between manageable search and the ability of the classifier to create a complex tolerance-boundary.By allowing the chromosomes to encode a classifier that can learn by interacting with the environment (selected samples of the data), we can create a complex tolerance-boundary, yet keep the search manageable. The PAIFnet learning procedure is an implementation of this idea; it only requires an alcoholic and a control training signal for adjusting the AIFnet parameters using a gradient based procedure. The objective of the PAIFnet learning task is to maximize the following function by appropriately shaping the AIFnet tolerance functions (ψjAIF).(6)ΦdiffAIF=ΦalcAIF−ΦconAIFwhere,ΦalcAIFandΦconAIFare the outputs of the AIFnet for an alcoholic and a control teacher (see §5.3.3) composite signal, respectively. An alcoholic and a control teacher signal is an instance of the alcoholic and the control training cases; the teacher signals are encoded in the chromosome (see §5.3.3 and Appendix A). The assumption is that such teacher cases exist that can guide evolution by shaping the partial credit function so that it works well for the whole class. Using the PAIFnet learning procedure, the AIFnet parameters,djAIFandcutoffjAIF, are iteratively updated as follows [5]:(7)djAIFnew=djAIFold+ηPAIF*∂ΦdiffAIF∂djAIF(8)cutoffjAIFnew=cutoffjAIFold+ηPAIF*∂ΦdiffAIF∂cutoffjAIFIf the learning rate (ηPAIF) is too small, the PAIFnet procedure will require more steps to converge to a maximum, thus increasing the overall computational time. On the other hand, a large learning rate may cause the PAIFnet learning procedure to oscillate near maxima. Based on some initial experiments, we set the learning rate to 0.1 (performance seemed not to be very sensitive to the precise value). The number of steps for the PAIFnet learning, and the initial values ofcutoffjAIFanddjAIFrule are encoded in the chromosome (see §5.3.3 and Appendix A).The FS literature contains a wide variety of approaches designed to extract a subset of features from a pool P, that optimizes a given objective function. The standard statistical approach to feature subset selection (FSS) for decades has been stepwise linear regression [7]. This is often today classed as a wrapper approach. A wrapper approach [8] involves some procedure to select a feature subset and evaluating the predictive power of it by building a predictive model using some training cases and testing the resulting model on some test set (often in cross-validation fashion). Other approaches, often called filter methods [8] apply some criterion such as mutual information, or feature correlations to first select only one feature set and then validate that. Wrapper approaches are more computationally costly, but usually provide better predictive models. Similar to stepwise regression (itself a wrapper method), are the methods that add or subtract one, or a few, features at a time (e.g. recursive feature elimination [9]), but these approaches being simple greedy algorithms, have a high probability of becoming stuck on local minima. Evolutionary computation [10], has been applied to the FSS problem in an attempt to overcome the local minimum problem, while constraining the combinatorial explosion of the number of possible subsets as P increases. Some empirical studies have reported that genetic algorithm (GA) based FS outperforms sequential search techniques for problems that involve a considerable number of features (typically >50) [11,8].The most common genetic representation for a subset is a bit string of length P where 1 at locus i represents including feature i in the subset [8,12–15]. Let us call this selection-bits representation. There is also the issue of how to create selection pressure for minimum subset size (SSS) while primarily striving for maximum predictive accuracy. Mathias et al. [16] reported a method that empirical evidence had shown superior to selection-bits, an index representation [17], (each gene is the index of a feature), and a crossover operator (MMX), that guaranteed “respect” [18] (i.e., features common to two parents were guaranteed to be present in the offspring). MMX required a fixed subset size. Later, Schaffer et al. [19] extended the crossover (MMX-BLX) to allow for the optimization also of SSS. The approach was hierarchical selection: the SSS criterion was only invoked when accuracy was the same between two chromosomes.Since, for the AC task the number of spatial and temporal features are more than 50, we decided to use an evolutionary algorithm (EA). Also, the current task requires us to simultaneously solve multiple FS problems. Hence, we developed an extension of the MMX-BLX crossover operator [5,6] primarily designed for solving such simultaneous FS problems. Here, a chromosome is composed of several sub-chromosomes (SCs) each encoding a particular FS problem; the size of a particular SC may vary in a population. For a parental chromosome pair, the MMX-BLX produces an offspring. Therefore, in our experiments per parental pair we execute the MMX-BLX operation twice to produce two offspring. Below, we have briefly discussed the basic mechanism of the MMX-BLX crossover operation.The offspring SC-i length (Lichild) is derived using the parental SC-i lengths (LiP1andLiP2) and a predefined parameter αcross(where{αcross∈ℤ|αcross≥0}) by generating a random integer in the range (Min(LiP1,LiP2)−αcross) and (Max(LiP1,LiP2)+αcross). This operation is also called 1-dimensional (1-D) integer-type blend crossover (BLX) [18,20]; the BLX operation for a nBLX-D problem would generate a random value in a nBLX-D hyper-rectangle whose diagonal vertices’ are defined by the parental allele values [20]. Since, the SC-i length cannot be greater/less than a predefined upper/lower boundLimax/Limin:IfLichild>LimaxthenLichild=LimaxIfLichild<LiminthenLichild=LiminIn our experiments αcross= 1.The parental features are inherited based on the principles of positive and negative respect introduced by Mathias et al. [16]. For a given parental SC-i pair, positive respect requires that the child must inherit the common features between the parents and in order that negative respect be maintained, the child should not contain features that are absent in both the parents; inheriting an absent feature is also called a mutation event. As a consequence of maintaining respect during the crossover, the above operators implement convergence controlled variation (CCV) [21]; there is less variation among the offspring as the population converges. Here, we investigate if the current problem requires more exploitive or exploratory search. Hence, we implemented 2 versions of the MMX-BLX operator: the MMX-BLXexploitand the MMX-BLXexplore. The MMX-BLXexploitprioritizes positive respect but allows for mutation to occur with a predefined probability by sacrificing negative respect; the possibility of mutation only exists if the positive respect criterion is fulfilled. Thus, it exhibits a convergence controlled mutation (CCM)55As the population converges there are more commons and hence the effective mutation rate goes down.; we have set the initial mutation rate to 15%.Unlike MMX-BLXexploitwhere the mutation event competes with negative respect given the positive respect criterion is fulfilled, in MMX-BLXexplorethe mutation event directly competes with the positive respect criterion and then with the negative respect criterion. Thus, MMX-BLXexplore, sacrifices respect (both positive and negative) in order to allow for more exploration to occur and hence exhibits a quasi-constant mutation rate [5,6]. In our experiments we have set the quasi-constant mutation rate to 15%. The above crossover operation is performed for each parental SC-i pair sequentially.66Parent-1 SC-i is crossed over with Parent-2 SC-i.The procedure for defining the attributes of the inherited features is discussed below.The attribute vector of an inherited common feature is defined by performing BLX operation [18,20] in a region defined by the parental attribute vectors. For an inherited unique77Feature that existed in only one of the parents.feature the attribute vector is defined by performing BLX operation in a symmetric region (hyper-rectangle) surrounding the parental attribute vector. The dimensions of the hyper-rectangle are defined using the predefined allowable range of the attribute vector [5]. Finally, for an inherited absent88Feature that was absent from both parents.feature the attribute vector is randomly set within the predefined range.The dataset [22] consisted of VERPs from two groups of subjects: 77 alcoholics and 45 controls. Each subject was exposed to a visual stimulus (a picture) for 300ms99Pictures were chosen from 1980 Snodgrass and Vanderwart picture set.. The VERPs were recorded at 256Hz for 1s (256 samples) from 62 EEG leads (see Fig. 2) starting at the exposure to the picture. The leads were arranged according to the international 10/10 system for electrode placement. The pictures were presented on a white background at the center of a computer monitor at a distance of 1m from the subject. The width/height of the pictures were approximately 5–10cm. For a given subject, multiple such trials were performed; the number of trials per subject varied from 7 to 60. The EEG Cz lead was used as the reference and a nose electrode was used as the ground.Since, no electrooculogram or electromyogram reference signals were provided, we were unable to remove eye movement and muscle movement artifacts. Instead, we discarded a trial (1 picture) for containing blink artifacts if any of the leads generated a signal that exceeded 100μV; each trial consists of 62 signals (sampling frequency: 256Hz, duration: 1s) representing 62 EEG leads. Subjects with fewer than 40 trials were not included in this study; 47 alcoholics and 31 controls were eligible. For each subject, 36 randomly chosen trials were used to calculate an average signal for each lead101062 average signals (representing 62 EEG leads) each composed of 256 points.for training the classifier. For testing purposes, 50 sets of 36 randomly chosen trials per subject were generated. Each set was then independently used for evaluating an average signal for each lead; per subject we generated 50 files where each file consisted of 62 averaged signals. For training we had 47 alcoholic and 31 control files and for testing we had 2350 alcoholic (47×50) and 1550 control (31×50) files.Clearly, there will be many instances of overlapping trails. In order to reduce the extent of overlap, we could have used fewer trials for averaging, however, the signals would have been too noisy for the classification task. VERPs are much weaker than the background EEG activity and typically at least 100 trails [23] (with no artifacts) are required to generate an averaged signal with a respectable signal to noise ratio. Hence, we expect our training files to be noisy and therefore, we believe it is an interesting challenge for evolution to find a robust temporal pattern with an appropriate tolerance level that can characterize the alcoholic VERPs.In order to characterize the behavior of MMX-BLXexploreand MMX-BLXexploit, as well as to test the repeatability of the learning paradigm, we conducted multiple independent experiments for each pair of crossover operator and TPD technology. For all experiments, the EA was run in a parallel mode on a 12 CPU machine. Typically, IFnet and AIFnet experiments took about a week to finish running. The PAIFnet experiments were computationally more intensive and took about 3 weeks to finish executing. Hence, we decided to conduct only 3 independent experiments for each pair of crossover operator and TPD. Since, we developed 3 TPD techniques (IFnet, AIFnet, and PAIFnet) and 2 crossover operators, in all we ran 18 experiments (3 replications×3 TPDs×2 crossovers). The population size for each experiment was set to 50. In order to unbiasedly compare the evolvability of the classifiers, the stopping criterion was chosen to be independent of the classification technology; each experiment was run for 5000 generations.The objective of the evolutionary process was to find a TPD whose output (ΦAIF/IF/PAIF)1111IF/AIF/PAIF should be read as, IF or AIF or PAIF.would be much larger for the alcoholic composite signals than the control composite signals. In order to assign a penalty value to a chromosome, the output of the TPD (that it encodes) for all the training cases (47 alcoholic+31 control cases) was stored as two distributions:Φalc:distributionAIF/IF/PAIFandΦcon:distributionAIF/IF/PAIF. Using these distributions, the area under the receiver operator characteristic curve (AUC) was evaluated. The penalty was then determined as follows:(9)penalty=1−AUCIf penalty = 0 then there exists no overlap betweenΦalc:distributionAIF/IF/PAIFandΦcon:distributionAIF/IF/PAIFdistributions; discrimination is perfect.We have generally followed Eshelman's CHC algorithm [24] for the major operations of mating and selection. Every surviving parent has one opportunity to produce two offspring with a randomly selected mate and, cross-generational elitist selection has the parents and the offspring first sorted by penalty (in ascending order), and only the fittest chromosomes survive.1212Since, the subset sizes for the current application were modest, no selection pressure to evolve smaller subsets was deemed necessary.A major advantage of the CHC approach is that algorithm performance is not so sensitive to the GA parameters.Since, there are only 62 EEG leads, a sub-chromosome is assigned to directly encode the leads along with the weights (the genotype is the phenotype); an EEG lead is considered a feature and the corresponding weight is its numeric (real number) attribute (see Tables A1–A3). In contrast, the space of possible temporal patterns is overwhelmingly large. As a consequence, the IFnet and the AIFnet design specifications are indirectly encoded into 3 sub-chromosomes (see Tables A1 and A2); the sub-chromosomes will encode a teacher-id (a pointer to an alcoholic training signal), a reference pointer to a position on the teacher composite signal and a set of offset-pointers (along with the tolerance function,ψjIF/AIF, parameters) w.r.t. the reference pointer.1313We add an additional constraint that all 3 sub-chromosomes encoding the temporal task must have a common length.The teacher signal amplitudes at these positions define the temporal pattern the TPD is designed to detect; this guarantees that the temporal pattern of interest exists in at least one alcoholic composite signal and may qualify as a candidate solution for the classification task. This approach of using teacher signals significantly reduces the search burden on evolution. In order to accommodate the possibility of class heterogeneity, we allow a chromosome to encode at most 2 teacher signals using which 2 TPDs can be created. This decision was based on the outcome of a preliminary investigation, where the objective was to establish a sense of the minimum number of TPDs required1414A classifier composed of too many TPDs may over-fit the training set.in order for the classifier to function with an acceptable precision and accuracy.The PAIFnet learning algorithm requires an alcoholic and a control teacher signal [5]. Therefore, an additional sub-chromosome is allocated to encode a pointer to a teacher control signal (see Table A3). The alcoholic teacher signal is first used for defining an AIFnet based TPD specification (initial values for AIFnet), as discussed above. The TPD parameters are then updated using the PAIFnet learning rule which uses both the teacher signals. The number of steps for the learning procedure is defined by the chromosome. The penalty value for the chromosome is then evaluated based on the performance of the updated TPD on the training cases.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
