@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Robust and fuzzy goal programming optimization approaches for a novel multi-objective hub location-allocation problem: A supply chain overview

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Developing a novel multi-objective p-hub covering mathematical model (supply chain overview).Considering new features namely, production facilities, opening and reopening modes, greenhouse gas and transportation modes.Using a recent fuzzy-robust tool to solve the resulting multi-objective model.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fuzzy goal programming,Multi-objective hub location,Supply chain network,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a novel multi-objective mathematical model is developed to solve a capacitated single-allocation hub location problem with a supply chain overview. Three mathematical models with various objective functions are developed. The objective functions are to minimize: (a) total transportation and installation costs, (b) weighted sum of service times in the hubs to produce and transfer commodities and the tardiness and earliness times of the flows including raw materials and finished goods, and (c) total greenhouse gas emitted by transportation modes and plants located in the hubs. To come closer to reality, some of the parameters of the proposed mathematical model are regarded as uncertain parameters, and a robust approach is used to solve the given problem. Furthermore, two methods, namely fuzzy multi-objective goal programming (FMOGP) and the Torabi and Hassini's (TH) method are used to solve the multi-objective mathematical model. Finally, the concluding part presents the comparison of the obtained results.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, location and allocation problems have attracted the interests of many researchers. The hub location problem can be considered as a particular “network design” problem. In a hub location allocation problem, a given network with n nodes (consisting of origins, destinations, and potential hub locations) is taken into account. The flows between origin–destination pairs, characteristic of flows in the network (e.g., cost, time and distance), and the hub-to-hub shipping discount factor are all crucial factors to be taken into consideration. In this kind of the problem, locating hub services on a plane rather than on the nodes of the network is focused on. For further studies, the reader may refer to [1–9].There are different types of hub location problems. In a p-hub covering problem, the hub delivers services within a certain radius. The p-hub median problem minimizes the transport cost from the point of the origin to the destination through the hub nodes. The fixed cost hub problem minimizes the total cost of installing hubs. However, the p-hub center problem minimizes the maximum cost or time in the communication lines.In this paper, four types of hub location problems are examined. The necessities to include other engineering fields (e.g., supply chain management) are inevitable. In real world, an Industrial Township which includes several production plants receives raw materials from different suppliers. Afterward, the raw materials are processed, and the final commodities are shipped to the markets. This is an obvious case, in that the hub location-allocation and the supply chain should be both taken into consideration. It means that a hub can be considered as an Industrial Township, which receives flow and dispatches the finished goods to numerous destinations. To the best of our knowledge, there is no other research work to take both concepts into consideration.Actually some researchers have taken advantage of the unique characteristic of hub location-allocation problem to examine the practical problem. It means that they have built the production plants into some optimum locations regarded as hubs. Additionally, to come closer to reality, they have considered numerous features related to these concepts as follows:•Some nodes of the proposed network deal with some specific raw materials, and some others are regarded as customers, which require commodities, including raw materials and finished goods.To reduce the total costs and manage the network properly, production centers are only located within the hubs.Plants can be active or inactive over the planning horizon.The researchers have considered different transportation modes to ship raw materials and final commodities from origins to destinations.The researchers have examined a green supply chain.After all, the researchers aimed to minimize three objective functions as follows:•Total cost including the summation of the maximum covering cost, cost of using different vehicles, opening, reopening, and activating costs of plants located in the hubs.Total waiting time in the hubs and the total earliness and tardiness times of receiving final commodities by customers.Total emitted greenhouse gas by vehicles and plants.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the motives for doing this research. In Section 3, the related literature review is presented. In Section 4, some novel hub location-allocation models are developed. The solution methodology is given in Section 5. Section 6 is devoted to the computational experiments, and finally some conclusions are drawn in Section 7.In this paper, a novel multi-objective hub location-allocation model is developed. In the afore-mentioned model, numerous features and perspectives are incorporated along with the basic and common mathematical model existing in the literature. Firstly, the researchers account for hub nodes as optimum and proficient locations to install plants (e.g., Industrial Township). Secondly, spoke or client nodes are considered as the source and demand nodes for raw materials and final commodities, respectively. At this moment, the flow conveyed through arcs or links is regarded as both raw materials and commodity. Plants located within the hub nodes process raw materials originated in the source nodes. Afterwards, the processed goods are dispatched to their destination nodes. Each product should be processed at a specific type of the plant. Moreover, the plants can be active or inactive over the time horizon. To reduce the total cost, the plants can be reopened more than once over the time horizon. Fig. 1illustrates the main features considered in this paper.Various vehicles are used to ship raw materials and ultimate goods. These vehicles pass through the links backward and forward. Fig. 2shows these features. In this figure, different transportation modes are shown as different lines from origin node i to node j passing through the hubs. Moreover, different vehicles are shown as yellow and red arrows.Three different objective functions and four mathematical models are taken into consideration. The first objective function is to minimize the total cost consisting of two segments. The first one includes the total transportation, installation, and vehicle costs and in the second segment, the costs are related to the plants including opening and reopening costs. In the second objective function, the total waiting times in the hubs for the final commodities are minimized. Moreover, the total weighted tardiness and earliness times of finished commodities for any of the origin and destination pairs are minimized as well. In the third objective function, the total greenhouse gas emitted by vehicles and plants are minimized. Furthermore, an uncertain environment is considered for some of the parameters. To solve the proposed mathematical models under uncertainty, a robust optimization approach is applied. Then, two methods, which are namely fuzzy goal programming (FGP) and the method developed by Torabi and Hassini (TH) [10], are used to solve the multi-objective mathematical model (i.e., final one) with uncertain parameters after converting it into an equivalent auxiliary crisp model. Finally, a wide sensitivity analysis is performed to compare the foregoing methods.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
