@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Simulated annealing variants for self-organized resource allocation in small cell networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Small cell networks can be effectively modeled using planar graphs.Distributed graph coloring can enable self-organized orthogonal resource allocation.Simulated annealing variants are important metaheuristics for distributed coloring of planar graphs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Simulated annealing,Self-organization,Resource allocation,Small cell networks,Distributed graph coloring,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper discusses the application of simulated annealing (SA) based meta-heuristics to self-organized orthogonal resource allocation problems in small cell networks (SCN)s, for static and dynamic topologies. We consider the graph coloring formulation of the orthogonal resource allocation problem, where a planar graph is used to model interference relations in a SCN comprising of randomly deployed mutually interfering cells. The aim is to color the underlying conflict graph in a distributed way, for which different variants of SA such as SA with focusing heuristic (i.e., limiting the local moves only to the cells that are in conflict), and fixed temperature, are investigated. For static topologies, distributed algorithms are used, in which no dedicated message-passing is required between the cells, except for the symmetrization of conflict graph. To enable distributed SA in dynamic topologies, a distributed temperature control protocol based on message-passing is considered. Different aspects relevant to self-organizing cellular networks are analyzed using simulations. These include the number of cells with resource conflicts, number of resource reconfigurations required by the cells to resolve the conflicts, requirements on dedicated message-passing between the cells, and sensitivity to the temperature parameter that guides the stochastic search process. Simulation results indicate that the considered algorithms are inherently suitable for SCNs, thereby enabling efficient resource allocation in a self-organized way. Furthermore, the underlying concepts and the key conclusions are general, and relevant to other problems that can be solved by distributed graph coloring.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Self-organization in wireless networking entails functionalities that ensure ubiquitous network connectivity and scalability, whilst guaranteeing the desired quality of service to the served users [1]. In the context of contemporary cellular systems such as Long Term Evolution (LTE)/LTE-Advanced (LTE-A), the self-organizing networking (SON) paradigm encompasses mechanisms for self-configuration, self-healing, and self-optimization [2]. As the cellular networks are becoming increasingly complex due to massive deployments of small cells, a multitude of challenges related to network resource allocation, management, and operation have emerged. SON mechanisms address these challenges by enabling automated optimization of network parameters and reduction in capital/operational expenditure.The importance of SON in future networks is underscored by the fact that the vision for 5G entails diverse use-cases, involving both cooperative and non-cooperative scenarios. For fully cooperative scenarios, virtualization of network resources is under consideration, which involves abstraction of multiple network management functions to network graphs for software-based control [3]. On the other hand, resource allocation problems in non-cooperative scenarios, such as multiple-operators sharing spectrum in authorized shared access and multiple technologies sharing unlicensed spectrum are inherently more challenging, and will require SON algorithms which do not involve any dedicated message-passing between the nodes. Moreover, in large-scale networks, computation of an optimal resource allocation is prohibitively complex, especially under dynamically changing topologies, as it requires the availability of complete information regarding the network state at every node. Local decisions based on limited information, computation capabilities, and inter-cell signaling are thus inevitable, and motivate the application of self-organizing algorithms.A number of existing SON mechanisms in cellular networks involve self-organized allocation of orthogonal resources among cells. Notable examples include primary component carrier (PCC) selection [4,5], physical cell ID (PCI) assignment [5,6], and the classical frequency assignment problem [7]. These can be modeled as graph coloring problems, where vertices represent the cells and colors are the available resources. The aim is to color the underlying interference graph such that no two adjacent cells use the same resource. Thus, resource allocation problems are of due importance for both contemporary and future cellular networks, and mandate the study of new self-organizing algorithms, tailored to the requirements of SCNs. Generally, self-organized resource allocation in wireless networks involves computing a solution to an underlying network optimization problem, using distributed algorithms [8,9]. For discrete problems such as orthogonal resource allocation on an interference graph, combinatorial optimization methods involving metaheuristics are an attractive option. Accordingly, distributed algorithms based on metaheuristics can pave the way for engineering self-organizing solutions to discrete resource allocation problems in SCNs.In this paper, we study different variants of the Simulated Annealing (SA) metaheuristic for self-organized resource allocation in SCN, under static as well as dynamic topologies. To this end, different parameters and performance indicators important from a perspective of SCNs are taken into account, in the design and analysis of algorithms. It is assumed that the resources are orthogonal, which leads to a generic system model applicable to a number of SON problems. The algorithms investigated are SA with focused search enhancements [10], which focuses uphill and/or plateau moves only on the cells which are in conflict with their respective neighbors. Furthermore, the overall concept can be considered as a generic framework for distributed resource allocation under limited information and dynamic topology. In the remaining part of this section, we give a brief description of the state-of-the-art of SA based methods in wireless networks, followed by a summary of the contributions of this work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We investigate different variants of simulated annealing (SA) algorithm for graph coloring based self-organized resource allocation, in static and dynamic small cell networks (SCN)s. These include focused search enhancement for SA, which involves constraining uphill/plateau moves only to the cells that are in conflict with the neighbors. This appears to be a more effective approach than standard SA, for minimizing the number of conflicts, as well as the resource reconfigurations, which is of key importance for an efficient operation of SCNs. It is also less sensitive to variation in temperature parameter. To find the optimal parameters for resource allocation, different strategies such as fixed temperature and cooling have been studied. The results suggest that for static networks, SA with an optimal fixed temperature outperforms its cooling counterpart. A similar trend ensues for other variants as well. In SCNs with dynamic topologies, standard SA with cooling can be enabled via distributed temperature control protocols. However, for dynamic networks with partially colored conflict graphs, raising the temperature of the whole network by standard SA type mechanisms is counter-productive, and leads to large numbers of unresolved conflicts. An effective way to mitigate such conflicts is to use the focused search variants, and the temperature control protocols which limit the uphill moves to a sub-graph comprising of only those cells that detect a change in network topology.