@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Biogeography and geo-sciences based land cover feature extraction

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Major assumption-entropy is the driving force similar to the convection forces.Outperforms the hybrid ACO2/PSO/BBO classifier.Classifies homogeneous regions more efficiently than others developed till date.Proves to be the best known classifier developed till date.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Remote sensing,Geo-sciences,Biogeography,Entropy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This work proposes a biogeography and geo-sciences based soft computing technique which is an extension of original biogeography based feature extraction algorithm using the concept of entropy inspired from the geo-sciences phenomenon of mantle convection and dynamics of the earth. This algorithm uses surface entropy in the relevant band of multi-spectral images as the basis of calculating the habitat suitability index which in turn forms the basis of identifying different terrain features in the satellite image. The proposed work has been primarily developed for the purpose of finding the applications of geo-sciences in developing computationally intelligent models. This may lead to another concept of process randomization, generation of virtual scenarios, etc. which are important ingredients in battlefield assessment. The proposed feature extractor algorithm has been applied on the datasets of Alwar region in Rajasthan and Patalganga area in Shivalik ranges. The results indicate that our proposed geo-sciences based classifier is highly efficient in extracting land cover features. Further when integrated with hybrid bio-inspired intelligent classifier proposed in our previous work, it improves its classification efficiency and outperforms the earlier probabilistic classifiers, recent soft computing classifiers such as membrane computing, hybrid FPAB/BBO, extended non-linear BBO, etc. and the very recent hybrid ACO2/PSO/BBO classifier proposed by us [16,21]. Our results conclude that the classifier based on our proposed model is the best known classifier developed till date. The proposed model is flexible and can adapt itself to suit to a large number of classification problems including mixed pixel resolution, face recognition, pattern recognition, etc. whereby entropy can be simply calculated in any other band or according to its standard definition and hence feature extraction can be made.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Currently, many soft computing techniques like fuzzy sets, artificial neural network, rough set theory, ant colony optimization, particle swarm optimization, genetic algorithms, membrane computing and biogeography based optimization are being used for feature extraction or image classification, ground water detection, etc. [33,34] for which satellite remote sensing has been recognized as a valuable tool that views, analyzes, characterizes and makes decisions about the environment [44,48]. Artificial neural networks can handle non-convex decisions. The use of textural features in ANN helps to resolve misclassification [2]. The rough sets were basically designed for synthesis of approximation of concepts from the acquired data [42,43]. The genetic algorithm searches a space of image processing operations for a set that can produce suitable feature planes, and a more conventional classifier which uses those feature planes to output a final classification. Fuzzy measures show the detection of textures by analyzing the image by stochastic properties. The fundamental stochastic properties of the image are isolated by different kinds of stochastic methods, by non-linear filtering and by non-parametric methods [39]. The swarm intelligence techniques of ACO [12,13], PSO [8,14] and BBO [9,45] and membrane computing [23] are based on the concepts of image clustering and heuristic method implementation and are more accurate when working with low spatial resolution images. Enhanced versions of these techniques have also been used for solving various engineering problems such as the improved PSO called as the immunity enhanced particle swarm optimization (IEPSO) for damage detection [28] wherein a damage detection method based on combined data of static and modal tests using particle swarm optimization (PSO) is discussed. To improve the performance of PSO, some immune properties such as selection, receptor editing and vaccination are introduced into the basic PSO and an improved PSO algorithm is formed. The BBO technique has been adapted and modified for economic load dispatch analysis [6] to solve both convex and non-convex economic load dispatch (ELD) problems of thermal plants involving constraints such as transmission losses, ramp rate limits, valve point loading, multi-fuel options and prohibited operating zones. The GA has been modified in the form of the real coded genetic algorithm for target sensing [41] wherein an evolutionary soft-computing technique of real coded genetic algorithm is applied to solve the system of linear equations. This paper demonstrates the evolution of a new soft computing paradigm for satellite image classification using the concept of entropy inspired from the geo-sciences phenomenon of mantle convection and dynamics of the earth thereby presenting the modified version of the original biogeography based land cover feature extraction technique [40].Our motivation is the absence of geo-sciences based approaches as contributory domains to computational intelligence. Till now, the domains like philosophy, psychology, cognition, logic and bio-sciences all have been used as contributory domains for the development of computational intelligence techniques, however, geo-sciences have never been used as applied sciences for developing a computational model. Also, the computational intelligence techniques [2] can be divided into techniques based on modelization of human mind and nature inspired intelligent techniques as the techniques that have been used till date for solving the problem of land cover feature extraction. However, it has been observed that geo-sciences which fall under the category of nature inspired intelligent techniques have never been used for the purpose. Hence, we propose a computational model inspired from the earth's dynamics as a geo-sciences based nature inspired intelligent technique which can be used to improve the original BBO technique [45] and develop an enhanced algorithm for land cover feature extraction. The proposed model is flexible to be applicable to a large number of classification problems wherein entropy can be calculated in any other band in case of applications where the dataset is terrain multi-spectral images for example, mixed pixel resolution, design of hybrid classifiers, etc. or simply formulating the entropy function according to its standard definition and evaluating the fitness function for applications where the dataset are normal images, for example, in case of face recognition application, pattern recognition, etc. Below, we summarize the main contributions of the paper:[1]The proposed biogeography and geo-sciences based hybrid intelligent classifier, the hybrid (BBO-GS)/ACO2/PSO, extends the taxonomy of soft computing feature extraction techniques and improves the intelligent hybrid bio-inspired classifier, the hybrid ACO2/PSO/BBO classifier, demonstrated in our previous paper [19,21] wherein the strengths of the ACO2/PSO technique were combined with the characteristic strengths of BBO.Our proposed model uses surface entropy in DEM band as the measure for designing the fitness function. This entropy is the driving force leading to the formation of heterogeneous regions called as plates (texture analysis), similar to the convection forces in the mantle of the Earth. Hence, our classifier is able to classify the homogeneous regions (the regions with the lower entropy), more efficiently than the other hybrid classifiers presented in our previous works [17,21].This also validates the theory established in our paper [19] which states that the classification efficiency of biogeography based extractor on a given land cover feature is proportional to the degree of entropy for that feature.The paper is organized into six sections, the section following the introduction illustrates the concepts of biogeography and geo-sciences. The third section describes the parameter settings, the hypotheses development and the proposed methodology of the biogeography and geo-sciences based feature extraction algorithm. The fourth section presents the implementation results and discussion for two different datasets. The fifth section presents the classification comparison of the results of the other recent soft computing classifiers with the proposed classifier on a standard dataset to prove its effectiveness. The last section concludes and summarizes the future work.This section presents the concepts of geo-sciences which can be adaptively applied for building the modified version of the original BBO for solving the problem of land cover feature extraction more efficiently [7,40].BBO is a population based algorithm motivated by the migration mechanisms of ecosystems. It is based on the mathematics of biogeography. In BBO, problem solutions are represented as islands, and the sharing of features between solutions is represented as emigration and immigration [45]. In BBO, each individual is considered as a habitat with a HSI [45], which is analogous to the fitness function of other conventional algorithms, to measure the individual fitness. Also, an SIV which characterizes the habitability of an island is used. A good solution is analogous to an island with a high HSI, and a poor solution indicates an island with a low HSI. High HSI solutions tend to share their features with low HSI solutions. Low HSI solutions accept a lot of new features from high HSI solutions [9,45]. Thus, BBO is a swarm intelligence technique based on the concept of information sharing as discussed in our paper [20]. From our paper, we know that the concepts of sharing information in BBO can be adapted to suit to the problem of land cover feature extraction where it has been mentioned that BBO is well suited for natural terrain feature elicitation application and hence we modify the original BBO and adapt it to the problem of feature extraction. Fig. 1presents the algorithm for biogeography based land cover feature extraction [40].There are two underlying concepts which form the base of the geo-sciences phenomenon, the first being the dynamics of the movement of earth's plates and the second is the crust formation [9,22,35]. We consider that it is the entropy or the degree of disorder of the earth's mantle convection which is the driving force of the mechanism of plate dynamics. Fig. 2shows that the plate dynamics is considered as analogous to the clustering of similar pixels which is accomplished through texture analysis using rough sets in our proposed algorithm and resulting crust formation is considered as analogous to the presence of mixed pixels in an input plate. Hence, the underlying concepts of geo-sciences can be adapted to integrate with the original BBO technique for feature extraction in the satellite image. This paper is an attempt to modify the original biogeography based feature extraction technique using an analogy between biogeography and geo-sciences phenomenon of earth's dynamics as shown in Fig. 3and some of the ideas of which were first presented in our paper [18].This section discusses the parameter settings, our proposed methodology and the framework of biogeography based feature extraction technique inspired from the geo-sciences concepts.We in this section identify some important parameter settings and procedures adopted [27,29,30] which comprise the preprocessing steps of the biogeography and geo-sciences based land cover feature extraction algorithm [4,21]. For a better understanding of the definitions discussed, we discuss these with reference to the dataset of Alwar image for demonstration and include pointers to the corresponding settings for the second dataset of Patalganga region.a.Plates plate(j) refer to the image I consisting of a set of plates which correspond to the image pixels. A 7-band satellite image of Alwar region of size 472×546 is taken as an input image for biogeography and geo-sciences based feature extraction. The image has 257,712 pixels and each pixel is of 25m by 25m spatial resolution. For Patalganga image, a 4-band image of size 508×744 is taken as input which has about 3,77,952 pixels.An eco-system is comprised of a universal habitat which hosts all the individual plates generated through texture analysis. The plates in the feature habitat are nothing but the labeled dataset/training dataset generated by the expert. Five types of feature plates are considered here for Alwar region, namely: water, vegetation, rocky, urban and barren. For Patalganga dataset, we consider only 3 feature plates that of vegetation, snow and rocky. Therefore, the ecosystem H6 is a group of 6 habitats (one universal habitat and five Feature habitats). In case of Patalganga, the ecosystem H4 will be a group of 4 habitats.Each of the multispectral bands of the image represents one SIV of the habitat. Further, image in each band is a gray image; therefore, SIV∈C is an integer and C⊆[0,255].A habitat H∈SIVmwhere, m is 7=total image bands. For Patalganga image, m=4 bands.The image is subjected to unsupervised clustering using the concept of rough sets thus generating equivalence classes or plates [37]. The preference to the rough sets is given because the equivalence classes generate clusters based on the criteria of indiscernibility and also, we do not need to know the number of clusters required beforehand [37,42,43]. In the resulting data, digital number value of each pixel is replaced by the discretized interval. Each row in the resulting data represents the x, y coordinates and the digital number values in the red, green, NIR, MIR, RS1, RS2 and DEM bands respectively of each pixel in the image (for patalganga image, the bands are red, green, NIR and MIR bands). This discretized data is further partitioned on the basis of NIR and MIR band which contain a good amount of geo-spatial information [33,39] to obtain the final classes.Inspired from the concepts of geo-sciences, we use the surface entropy of the plates calculated in the DEM band as the habitat suitability index. For the calculation of entropy (φ), we follow the procedure below [19]. We copy the pixels of the input plate in Hufor which the entropy has to be calculated, in an excel sheet and then divide the digital number values in the DEM band into ‘m’ intervals. Next, we calculate the no. of pixels of the entire plate plate(j) falling in each of the ‘m’ ranges obtained above and hence, calculate the entropy of the particular plate, φ(plate(j)) by using the equation below.Entropy(φ(plate(j)))=−∑k=1mPklog(Pk)where, Pk=mk/N where mkis the no. of pixels in the kth interval and N is the total no. of pixels in the input plate plate(j). For both the datasets of Alwar and Patalganga, we calculated the entropy values deciding upon a uniform interval count of 10 for all features after testing with smaller/greater interval counts both in order to maintain the tradeoff between the preciseness in entropy provided and the computational complexity of the entropy calculation module for the given dataset.Number of similarity classes ‘c’ formed are equal to the no. of land cover feature plates feature(k) for each dataset. Since the maximum value of k=5 and 3 for Alwar and Patalganga datasets respectively, c is assigned the values of 5 and 3. Thus, if ‘count(sim(k))’ is the no. of elements in the similarity class corresponding to feature k, and n is the total number of plates in Hu, then, the following equation holds,⋃k=1d⋃l=1count(sim(k))plate(l)=⋃j=1nplate(j)We assign a significance level (Sl) of 0.1, i.e. −0.05≤Sl≤+0.05. This is the value within which the plate similarity factor should lie so that the two plates can be categorized as similar plates leading to the formation of similarity classes. After careful observations, this value was chosen as the measure based upon which we can optimally categorize two plates as similar.The heuristic function makes use of a specific threshold value. A standard threshold value δ, where δ ranges from −0.05 to +0.05, is assigned for classification of the plates in each similarity class. The classification is done by comparing the HSI (plate similarity factor with the feature plates) with this value defined for classifying an input plate into the feature ‘k’. This number can be increased or decreased depending upon the precision in the classification results required. If we decrease the threshold value, a larger number of iterations will be required to completely classify the image, however, the results will be more accurate.This section presents the proposed hypotheses for classification based on biogeography and geo-sciences [11,36,49]. Alwar area in Rajasthan, illustrated in Fig. 4, is taken as a case study to develop the hypothesis, that may be generalized in future developments. The area is selected as it contains hilly track, water, agriculture land, urban zone, barren lands.Step I. Remote Sensing images, the actual data we have to work on, is reflectance values of solar radiation of the surface objects [1,44,47]. This phenomena may be represented through Texture analysis.Step II. Generate heterogeneous regions called plates through texture analysis of the region under consideration. We use rough sets theory for texture analysis (unsupervised clustering).Step III. In the initial state of the ecosystem required to initialize our geo-sciences based biogeographical classifier, we consider each of the individual plates obtained through texture analysis as a member of the Universal habitat.Step IV. The surface topography well represents visible perceptions of the plate concepts. Surface Topography is an indirect manifestation of the plate tectonic mechanism. This may be represented nicely through Digital Elevation Model (DEM) or slope map or hill shading.Step V. Based on this, different areas may be delineated. DEM & Hill Shading of Alwar region are shown in Fig. 5.Step VI. Our major assumption is that it is the entropy which is the driving force of these regions, similar to the convection force in the mantle of the Earth.Step VII. Hence, we use the surface entropy in the DEM band of each of the plates of the Universal habitat to generate the clusters of similar plates. For the purpose, we compare the differences in the surface entropies in DEM band of each of the plates in the Universal habitat with the feature habitat plates by migration. This value is called the plate similarity factor. The feature habitat contains the plates representing the training data set of Human Expert's knowledge used for supervised clustering for each of the land cover features that need to be extracted. Hence, we categorize the input plate as similar to a feature habitat plate or homogeneous if their plate similarity factor lies below the significance level ‘Sf’ else they are considered as heterogeneous plates. The significance level marks a threshold for identifying two plates as similar. Hence, we obtain a similarity class ‘c’ (where ‘c’ ranges from 1 to ‘d’) containing the group of similar plates for each of the land cover feature plates ‘k’ where ‘k’ ranges from 1 to ‘d’.For verification, the average entropy in the DEM band for the similarity class ‘c’ corresponding to the land cover feature plate ‘k’ containing the group of similar plates is calculated. Also, the entropy of the training data set in DEM band for each of the land cover feature plates ‘k’ is calculated. Next, we calculate the difference in the average entropy of the similarity class ‘c’ with the entropy of each of the land cover feature plates ranging from 1 to ‘d’. This difference in entropy will be the minimum and within the significance level for the feature ‘k’ to which the class ‘c’ corresponds to.Step VIII. Once we have similarity classes ‘c’ for each of the land cover features ‘k’, we proceed for the classification of the plates by taking into account the standard threshold ‘δ’ defined for classifying an input plate into the feature ‘k’.We classify each of the input plates in the similarity class ‘c’ by migrating the input plate from the universal habitat to the feature habitat and calculating the HSI[1,4] after migration. We take HSI as the plate similarity factor calculated by finding the difference in the entropy of the input plate and the entropy of the feature habitat or the land cover feature plate ‘k’. If the HSI calculated is within the threshold ‘δ’, then, the input plate in the similarity class ‘c’ is classified into the feature ‘k’ otherwise, we further split the input plate which remained in the Universal habitat (since it could not be classified) through texture analysis. It can also be noted that using entropy as the basis of the HSI function will improve the classification accuracy of the original biogeography based land cover feature extractor which uses standard deviation as the HSI function as was demonstrated in the analytical study of the performance governing factors of biogeography based feature extractor that we carried out in our paper [19].Step IX. Also, we then initialize a new ecosystem which follows a similar procedure for a more refined classification of the remaining unclassified plates in the universal habitat. The above framework for biogeography and geo-sciences inspired feature extraction is summarized in Fig. 6.The proposed functional framework for our biogeography and geo-sciences based feature extractor is presented in the form of algorithm in Fig. 7below and explained next. The input to the algorithm is the multi-spectral satellite image.a.The algorithm begins by the initialization of the ecosystem which generates the input plates to initialize our biogeography and geo-sciences based classifier. The input plates are generated by means of texture analysis wherein we use the rough sets part of the biogeography based land cover feature extraction algorithm [40]. The rough sets generator uses multiple bands of the image (which represent the texture of each of the land cover features in the image clearly, hence, clustering is based on texture analysis) during the discretization and partitioning step [21,40] to generate the unsupervised clusters called the equivalence classes.In the initial state of the ecosystem required to initialize our biogeography and geo-sciences based classifier, we consider each of these equivalence classes as individual plates, plate(j), each of which is considered as a member of the Universal habitat, Hu, where j ranges from 1 to n where n is the total no. of members in Hu. Depending on our application, in other words depending on which feature we want to extract from the image most efficiently, we can choose the band for partitioning as described in [38–40]. For our illustration, we have chosen the NIR and MIR band of the 7-band image since we want to extract the water pixels effectively and clearly identify the water body in the image and these are the bands in which the water feature is particularly more highlighted and best viewed. Therefore, we use the NIR and the MIR bands for discretization and partitioning step in the semi-naïve algorithm used for creating rough set equivalence classes for each of the clusters. Each of these resultant classes are put in the universal habitat.Since we know that the surface topography is an indirect manifestation of the geo-sciences phenomenon of plate tectonics, we can represent it nicely through the Digital Elevation Model (DEM) or slope map or hill shading model. Using entropy as the basis of the HSI function will improve the classification accuracy of the original biogeography based land cover feature extractor as was demonstrated in the analytical study of the performance governing factors of biogeography based feature extractor that we carried out in our paper [19].For the calculation of entropy, we follow the procedure described in 3.1 (f) above. The procedure followed for calculation of the entropies of each of the land cover features is the same. Based on the results, we delineate each of the input plates of Huinto homogeneous and heterogeneous plates using the concept of entropy(φ), similar to the convection forces in the mantle of the earth.Next, we generate the set of similarity classes c where c ranges from 1 to d and d is the no. of similarity classes obtained (equal to the no. of land cover features).i.All the input plates are kept in the universal habitat where the no. of species (or input plates) in the universal habitat is n. Let φ(plate(j)) represent entropy of each of the input plates, plate(j), of Huin the DEM band.We assign a plate similarity factor, Sfto each plate based on the difference between the entropy in the DEM band of the input plate plate(j) in the universal habitat Huand the entropy in DEM band of the land cover feature plate feature(k) in the feature habitat Hfto which the input plate is migrated to.Feature habitat Hfis the training data set representing human expert's knowledge and used for supervised clustering of these plates. We consider k land cover features where k ranges from 1 to d which are considered as the feature habitat. Here, we have 5 feature habitats each for water, urban, rocky, barren and vegetation features, having members produced by experts.Hence, plate similarity factor, ‘Sf’=|φ(plate(j))−φ(feature(k)|. We assign a significance level in order to infer if two plates are similar or different. We assign a significance level (Sl) of 0.1, i.e. −0.05≤Sl≤+0.05.Next, we generate the clusters of similar plates called the similarity classes c⋃l=1count(sim(k))plate(l)where sim(k) is the set of plates similar to feature(k) by comparing the plate similarity factor Sf, with the significance level Slfor each plate in Hu. For each plate(j) in Hu, we migrate the plate(j) to each of the feature plates feature(k) in Hfwhere k ranges from 1 to d. Now, we calculate the plate similarity factor value after migration of plate(j) to feature(k). If Sfor surface entropy |φ(plate(j))−φ(feature(k))|≤Sl, it represents an insignificant difference and thus a homogeneous region (similar plate) else a heterogeneous region (different plate).Here, we group all the similar plates to feature(k) in one similarity class and thus obtain a similarity class, leading to a set of similarity classes c.We verify the similarity classes formed.i.For the purpose, we start by taking the average of the entropies in the DEM band for each of the similarity classes c corresponding to the land cover feature plate k containing the group of similar plates, according toAvgc=dk=11count(sim(k))∑l=2count(sim(k))φ(plate(l))where ‘count(sim(k))’ is the no. of elements in the similarity class corresponding to feature k.Next, we calculate the difference in the average entropy of the similarity class c corresponding to feature k with the entropy of each of the land cover feature plates k, i.e.dk=1∑i=1count(sim(k))1count(sim(k))(φ(plate(l))−(φ(feature(k))<Sffor each c corresponding to feature k.If this difference in entropy is the minimum and within the significance level for the feature k, the plate is verified to belong to the class c to which it corresponds to.Next, we proceed with the final classification step taking into account the standard threshold value δ for classifying an input plate into the feature(k).i.We classify each of the input plates in the similarity class c by migrating the input plate from the universal habitat to the feature habitat and calculating the HSI[9,45] after migration. δ is the standard value against which the HSI of all the input plates will be compared. HSI is taken as the plate similarity factor. For each of the input plates in the similarity class c corresponding to feature k, we calculate the difference HSI=dk=1count(sim(k))l=1(φ(plate(l))−(φ(feature(k))where k is the feature to which the similarity class c is mapped to, and c is the similarity class to which plate(l) belongs to.If (HSI<δ), then we classify the input plate plate(j) in the similarity class c into the feature(k), else we further split the input plate plate(j) (which remained in the Universal habitat since it could not be classified) through texture analysis as described above and repeat the above procedure for the input plate l left in the Universal habitat.Initialize a new ecosystem for the classification of the remaining unclassified plates in the universal habitat Huand repeat the above procedure.Therefore, the working of our proposed algorithm can be summarized in the form of the following equation based on HSI which is analogous to the fitness function in other conventional algorithms (Fig. 8).where,sim(k)={sim(k),plate(j)},If |(Sf(plate(j)), feature(k))≤Sl| and j ranges from 1 to the number of plates n in Hu.For our biogeography and geo-sciences based feature extractor, we proceed in the following manner, i.e. for the DEM band, we calculate the difference in the surface entropy of each input plate of the similarity class of the Universal Habitat and each feature plate of the Feature Habitat containing the expert generated training set of each land cover feature of the image. If this difference is the minimum for the feature ‘k’ and also less than the pre-specified threshold value of −0.05<t<+0.05, then that particular plate is classified as the feature ‘k’ else it is left as unclassified. The process is repeated for each feature's similarity class plate until there is no similarity class left in the universal habitat and the whole process is iterated till there is no unclassified plate left. The detailed internal architecture of our biogeography and geo-sciences based feature extractor is demonstrated by means of a flowchart in Fig. 9.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
