@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fuzzy based sliding surface for shape memory alloy wire actuated classical super-articulated control system

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Analysis of stress–strain–temperature effect of antagonistic SMA wire actuators.Improving bandwidth of operation of SMA.Underactuated robotic system.Design of fuzzy-sliding surface.Real time stabilization problem.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fuzzy logic,Sliding mode control,Shape memory alloy,Antagonism,Ball and beam,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents the experimental study on a system which is an interesting crossover between a standard benchmark control problem and a smart material. The study represents the effect of stress, strain and temperature over bandwidth of antagonistic shape memory alloy (SMA) and its relative performance in influencing the stability of the system. The experiment is implicated on an underactuated open loop unstable ball and beam system, designed and developed to be driven by SMA. A proportional derivative controller cascaded with sliding mode controller (SMC) based on simplified fuzzy adaptive sliding surface is considered to study the dynamics of the system. The designed simplified fuzzy based sliding surface controller is able to balance the ball and beam system around its equilibrium state, which as a control perspective shows that performance of this controller is better than the conventional SMC. Furthermore from smart material perspective decisive results are arrived to handle the issues like stability, speed of operation and performance of antagonistic SMA.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Modern technology is in need of common requirements for actuators-designed for robotic, auto-motive, bio medical, aeronautic, and spatial applications. They are small size and weight, high performance, low cost and integration compatibility. Compared with traditional electrical or pneumatic other advanced piezoelectric, magnetostrictive, or electrostrictive actuators and innovative actuators based on the shape memory alloy (SMA) technology are now considered for various applications [1]. Among these SMA posses the advantages of high strain and the highest power density [2]. Other advantages offered by the SMA devices are their compliance with harsh environments, the simplicity of their actuation mechanisms, their silent and smooth motion, and their autosensing ability [3]. These factors make SMA a promising candidate among the actuators [4]. Especially SMA actuators are consisdered as interesting candidates for aeronautic applications, particularly for airfoil profile control systems [5].There are hand full literatures avalible in application of SMA for aerospace applications. Robust control approach for a flap positioning based shape memory alloy actuator is addressed by Feng et al. [6]. New flap morphing mechanism that can change the wing shape smoothly devised to prevent aerodynamic losses was proposed by Kang et al. [5]. Tharayil and Alleyne [7] proposed modeling and control for smart mesoflap aeroelastic control. Wing shape control through an SMA-based device is discussed in [8]. Barbarino et al. [9] proposes a novel SMA based concept for airfoil structural morphing. Henry [10] discuss about the posiibility of using SMA for roll control for UAV of a variable span morphing wing. Morphing characteristics of a fiber metal laminate based on shape memory alloy skin and a carbon fiber reinforced epoxy composite is studied by Kuang et al. [11]. Wing morphing control with shape memory alloy actuators is discussed in [12]. Similarly many researchers have proposed the use of SMA for aerospace guidance control applications [13]. All the above work discuss the results of performance of the system in simulation or a prototype of the section alone. During a flight control operation, the real dynamics is much more complicated because of some attention grabbing nature of the system like issues regarding stability, non linear dynamics and more over an aerospace system behaves like an underactuated system. It is necessary to study the behaviour of SMA under these perceptions. Hannen et al. [32] introduces an indirect intelligent sliding mode controller (IISMC) for shape memory alloy (SMA) actuators.Likewise other systems that have similar dynamics are tasks such as transporting objects using robotic arms, walking of legged robots and vertical take off of rocket, choppers etc. These systems are unstable, under actuated and nonlinear and need some special techniques and complicated mathematical derivation in conventional control methods. The vital problem that arises in the study of stability of such real, unstable systems, is that they cannot be analysed dynamically in the laboratory. In this case a simple analogical system is usually considered that has simplistic design and dynamic characteristics that could replicate the real dynamics of such systems. The ball and beam system is one such system and also a famous control problem. The system is known to be the benchmark for both classical and modem control techniques.This paper proposes the same old ball and beam system but with a new face i.e., it is completely driven and controlled by shape memory alloy wire actuators. This system is widely used because of its simplicity to understand as a system and provides the opportunity to analyze the control techniques. The ball and beam system is also called ‘balancing a ball on a beam’. It can usually be found in most university control labs. It is generally linked to real control problems such as horizontally stabilizing an airplane during landing and in turbulent airflow. There are two degrees of freedom in this system. One is the ball rolling up and down the beam, and the other is beam rotating through its central axis. The aim of the system is to control the position of the ball to a desired reference point. This is a complex task because the ball does not stay in one place on the beam but moves all the way with an acceleration that is proportional to the tilt of the beam. Ball balancing beam seems to be an ideal model for complex, non-linear con-rol methods. This system is open loop unstable as the system output (ball position) is unbounded to a bounded input (beam angle). Therefore, a feedback control must be employed to maintain the ball in a desired position on the beam. There are other diffcult issues in this system – the jumping ball phenomenon brings sensor uncertainty and real plant problems such as the sensor noise and actuator saturation and additionally in this case the non linearity of shape memory alloy by itself. These features provide this system two different perspectives, a complete synchronisation between the control system and the smart material and a chance to experiment both the fields.The control methods that deal with this kind of processes should be sufficiently robust to non linearity, tolerate existing uncertainties like modelling errors, unmodelled process dynamics, and interferences or noise. This paper uses sliding mode control (SMC) which is appropriate for such purpose [14]. Sliding mode control is a technique derived from variable structure control (VSC) which was studied originally by Utkin [15,16]. This kind of control is particularly appealing due to its ability to deal with nonlinear and time-varying systems, as well as uncertainties and disturbances in a direct manner. This paper proposes and uses a modified sliding mode control proposed by Camacho and Smith [25] in which an adaptive sliding surface is designed with the addition of a term determined using fuzzy rules, based on the error and the change of the error of the controlled variable. Then the two input fuzzy logic controller is converted to single input fuzzy logic by using signed distance method. Comparison of the results with that of original sliding mode controller reveals that the designed controller shows effective performance in stabilizing the system. Based on the results, certain design criteria are derived for improving the performance of shape memory alloy wire actuators.An experimental setup is designed and developed to carry out the experimental study– the schematic is shown in Fig. 1(a) and (b) is its photograph. A horizontal beam is centrally hinged to a rotating shaft on a vertical structure at a required height. SMA wire actuator is configured to actuate (rotate) the shaft for bidirectional angular movement. Two pulleys are fixed diagonally apart on a disc which is attached to one end of the shaft. This arrangement houses two SMA wires to provide antagonistic actuation. Torque developed and angle of rotation of the shaft depends on the dimension of the SMA under test. The beam angle θ is sensed by a laser displacement sensor. Ball position is sensed by a linear potentiometer consisting of two parallel nichrome wires. These wires are stretched along the top of the beam such that the steel ball may roll along the length of the beam, supported by the wires. One of the wires is connected to a voltage source. When the ball rests between the wires it allows a fraction of the source voltage to be measured at the other wire using potentiometer techniques. The output signal is proportional to the ball position x on the beam. The SMA wires are excited by self-designed amplifier circuits. Current transducer measures the current through the SMA. Temperatures of the SMA wires are measured using high precision thermo graphic camera. The system, sensors and actuators are interfaced with a PC installed with Matlab/Simulink with Real Time Toolbox to model and control, via a data acquisition system. The complete design of the system is given in [4]. Table 1gives the specifications of ball, beam and SMA wires used for experimentation.The ball and beam control system is a multi-loop system which comprises of the ball on a beam and an actuation system. In this case antagonistic SMA wires acts as the driving actuator.The complete description of the ball rolling on the beam is quite complicated. For control system design a simplified derivation is used to give a model that is suitable for controller design [17]. The model shown in Fig. 2shows the main components involved in the system which includes moments and forces acting on the ball.Starting with the ball along the beam, it experiences a force due to the rolling constraint along the beam and a downward component due to gravity that depends on the angle of the beam θ.The nonlinear representation of the system can be simplified by deriving a transfer function of the linearized equations of the system. The transfer function describing the dynamics of the ball and the beam can be derived as follows. The system encounters two forces. One is a translational force (Fb) acting along the x-direction which is due to gravity. Another one is a rotational force (Fr) resulting from the torque produced by the rotational acceleration of the ball. The translational force is given in Eq. (1).(1)Fb=mgsinθThe torque produced by the ball's rotational motion is equal to the radius of the ball multiplied by the rotational force (opposing the direction of travel). Using Newton's second equation of motion, we also know that the torque is equal to the ball's moment of inertia multiplied by its angular acceleration, which then can be written as its moment of inertia multiplied by the double-derivative of its translational motion (x) divided by its radius yielding the expression Eq. (2).(2)∑τb=FrR=Jbdwbdt=Jbd(vb/R)dt=Jbd2(x/R)dt2=Jbx¨Rwhere wbis the angular velocity of the ball, vbis the speed of the ball along x axis, Jbis the moment of inertia of the ball. For solid spherical ball it is defined by Jb=(2)/(5)mR2 and rearranging the equations to arrive at rotational force.(3)Fr=(2)/(5)mR2R2x¨=25mx¨In virtue of the Newton's second law of motion(4)∑Fball=Fb−Fr=mgsinθ−Fr=mx¨Rearranging forx¨gives(5)x¨=57gsinθLinearising the above equation for small angle we get sinθ=θ and taking Laplace transform, the model of ball rolling on beam is obtained as(6)X(s)θ(s)=5g7s2Since the system mostly works under partial transformation strain with varying frequency, mathematical modelling of SMA is difficult. The existing constitutive models demonstrating partial transformation has shortcomings to be successfully applied to complex dynamic engineering applications [18]. Hence the system model is estimated through system identification technique, based on prediction error method (PEM). System identification based on experimental approaches represents the dynamic characteristics of the system, and avoid the tangled mathematic or physical models. It deals with the problem of building mathematical models of dynamical systems based on observed data from the system [19]. Identification of parametric model involves selection of model structure, a numerical method for computing a model estimate and model validation. Process modelling based on prediction error estimate method is selected for system identification as its estimation accuracy is good comparable with other similar methods. Dynamic input signal is given to the actuator and angle of the beam is measured as output. In order to estimate the system model, the data is divided into two parts; the first part to determine the model and the second part is applied to validate the model. Fig. 3depicts the validation curve for the estimated model. In this case of antagonism each SMA is modelled individually. I1(s) and I2(s) are respective current inputs to the SMAs and Y(s) is the beam displacement. The estimated model for one loop of SMA actuator is(7.a)G1(s)=Y(s)I1(s)=4.60511+0.732se−0.1sHere the loss function=0.0133578 and final prediction error (FPE)=0.0133861. The fit percentage is found to be 90.4%. Increasing the order does not improve the fit percentage, so the lowest order model with best fit is selected. Similarly the model estimated for the other SMA is(7.b)G2(s)=Y(s)I2(s)=−3.9511+0.8125se−0.1sFig. 5 shows the block diagram of the whole control system. It consists of two loops: (1) Inner beam position control loop and (2) outer ball position loop. The design strategy is to first stabilize the inner loop followed by the outer loop control. The inner loop controls the beam angle actuated by SMA.Sliding mode control is a procedure to design robust controllers. Controllers designed using this technique have the capacity to handle nonlinear and time-varying systems [20]. The ball and beam system consists of cascade loops, inner beam control loop and outer ball control loop. To handle such a system usually higher order sliding mode control (HSC) are preferred since they are robust without the effect of chattering [21]. But the controllers are usually complex and have many parameters to be tuned it brings in additional complexity to the cascade control system. Camacho and Smith [20] have proved that it is possible to develop SMC using simple first order model with reduced chattering. Hence such a simple first order structure is chosen for this system.But the experiments show that this controller exhibits slow rise time and erratic output for sudden variation of set point, it is also reported in [22]. In the ball and beam system the effect is significant and it affects the performance of the system. Nevertheless Camacho and Smith [25] further proposed a modified sliding mode. The paper involves modification of the sliding surface with additional term determined using single input fuzzy rules, based on the error and the change of the error of the controlled variable.The basic sliding surface s(t) selected is an integro-differential equation acting on tracking error e(t) Slotine and Li [24]. The sliding mode controller designed for this system is based on Camacho et al., 2000, 2007 [25] is given in Eq. (8).(8)s(t)=ddt+λn∫0te(t)dtwhere e(t) is the tracking error, λ is the tuning parameter and n is the order of the system. The objective is to force the state (error) to move on switching surface s(t)=0. Once the reference value is reached, s(t) reaches a constant value. To maintain s(t) at this constant value meaning that e(t) is zero at all times; it is desired to make(9)dsdt=0From [26] sliding surface defined for the current system will be given based on Eq. (8) and is given by(10)s(t)=sign(k)−ddtc(t)+λ1e(t)+λ0∫0te(t)dtThe complete SMC control law, u(t) is given by Eq. (11).(11)u(t)=uc(t)+uD(t)where uc(t) is the continuous signal, uD(t) incorporates a nonlinear element that includes the switching element of control law given by Eq. (12).(12)uD(t)=KDS(t)S(t)+δwhere KDis the tuning parameter responsible for the reaching mode, δ is the tuning parameter used to reduce chattering. The complete control law is given by Eq. (13).(13)u(t)=t0τKλ2e(t)+x(t)t0τ+KDS(t)S(t)+δTo improve the performance of the controller a fuzzy element is introduced in S(t). Fuzzy element, ΔSFis added to the original surface equation. The proposed fuzzy element is a discrete character; its value is a function of the sample time used to calculate it. The new sliding fuzzy surface is given by(14)SH(t)=sign(k)−ddtc(n)+λ1e(n)+λ0∫0te(n,t)dt+ΔSF(e(n),Δe(n))Eq. (14) expresses that the surface is a combination of two terms, the classical expression for the SMC, plus a term whose value is determined by means of fuzzy rules. This new term is a function of the error, e(n), and the variation of the error Δe(n), of the controlled variable. The equation for new modified switching element of the Fuzzy-Sliding Mode Controller is(15)uD(t)=KDSH(t)SH(t)+δThe addition of ΔSFto the controller equation adds the intelligence, robustness and faster performance as desired. Typically, a fuzzy logic controller (FLC) has two controlled inputs, namely error (e) and the change of error Δe[19]. Its rule table can be created on a two-dimensional space of the phase-plane (e, Δe) as shown in Table 2.The system uses larger set of rules which yields more accurate control but at the expense of longer computational time. Therefore it may not be practical, because there are many implementation aspects that must be addressed, namely real-time response, communication bandwidth, computational capacity and on board battery. They require substantial computational power because of complex decision making processes [22,23]. FLC has to deal with fuzzification, rule base storage, inference mechanism and defuzzification operations. As a result, FLC implementation requires fast and high performance processors.Based on the [26,27] rule table of a two-input FLC can be formed into a Single Input Fuzzy Logic Controller (SIFLC), which can be easily implemented. The main advantage of SIFLC is the significant reduction of the rules that needs to be inferred. In conventional FLC, two inputs are fuzzified and depending on the level of fuzzification p, the number of rules to be inferred is p2, while the distinguishing features of SIFLC is that, it requires only p rules. The reduction in the number of rules results in faster calculation in SIFLC. In this case it is possible to take full advantages of FLC along with property of SMC. The SIFLC is a simplification of the conventional Fuzzy Controller. It is achieved by applying the signed distance method [28]. This is in contrast to the FLC which requires an error and the derivative (change) of the error as its inputs. As seen from Table 2. It is common in FLC for the rule table to have the same output membership in a diagonal direction. Additionally, each point on the particular diagonal lines has a magnitude that is proportional to the distance from its main diagonal line LZ. This is known as the Toeplitz structure. The Toeplitz property is true for all FLC types which use the error e and its derivative terms, Δe as input variables [28].The main diagonal line can be represented by(16)Δe+Te=0where, variableTis the slope magnitude of the main diagonal line LZ. The distance Z can be written as in Eq. (17) based on [28].(17)Z=Δe+Te1+T2the corresponding reduced table is shown in Table 3.The reduction in the number of inputs simplifies the rule table to one dimensional, allowing it to be treated as a single input single output (SISO) controller. The proposed SIFLC structure is depicted in Fig. 4. The ΔSFvalue found is defuzzyfied between scaled values of 1 to −1 and multiplied by a scaling factor μ before being used in Eq. (15). This scaling factor is another tuning parameter. Tuning parameter that scales the output fuzzy variables to ΔSFdepends on the importance given to the error or to the change in the error.The ball rolling on beam is a double integrating process. In order to stabilize the ball position a PD controller is essential [29]. A mathematical description of the PD control is(18)GPD(s)=Kpe(t)+Tdde(t)dtOnce the beam control loop is tuned to perfection, the ball control loop is tuned based on Ziegler–Nichols tuning method and fine-tuned manually online. Constraints are fixed such that settling time <3s and peak overshoot <5% which is commonly used for controller design in conventional ball and beam system [30]. This will validate the performance of this system to that of a regular system.The system is optimally fine-tuned to obtain the desired specifications. The tuning parameters are shown in Table 4.A closed loop control system was developed using Matlab/Simulink software and interconnected with ADAMS Controls in order to conduct a real-time dynamic simulation. In this approach, a virtual model of the system is created within Automatic Dynamic Analysis Mechanical Systems (ADAMS) software in order to run an initial dynamic analysis. The virtual model is then controlled through control system developed using Matlab/Simulink software. This results in co-simulation, allowing for concurrent mechanical and control system simulation. Using this simulation modelling method the performance of both the mechanical and the control system can be attained close to real dynamics. The results are shown in Fig. 6.The real time results of the system are presented in this section. The two ends of the beam are marked at 0 and 60cm, respectively, hence its center is at 30cm. Fig. 7shows the step response of the system. The ball is at one end of the beam, about 1.7s step input is applied with the reference position being at centre of the beam (30cm) as shown in Fig. 7(a). The results of the fuzzy sliding surface based SMC and SMC controls are compared. Fig. 7(b) and (c) shows the corresponding angle of the beam and sliding surface. Phase portrait between beam position and velocity of the beam is potrayed in Fig. 7(d). The main difference between SMC and Fuzzy SMC is that the velocity of the beam is much higher for fuzzy SMC which makes the system to respond faster.Also, response of the ball and beam system is tested under cyclic operation. The response for a square wave tracking at 1Hz is shown in Fig. 8. Corresponding current, differential force, angle of the beam and temperature are shown in Fig. 8(b)–(e) respectively. The experimental response is validated from the simulation result shown in Fig. 6(c).The time domain specification shows a wide difference between the step and cyclic square wave operation of SMC. The step response shows a rise time of about 1s for the ball to reach from one end of the beam to the centre of the beam, correspondingly the angle of the beam varies from 30° to 0° with a net movement of 30° as seen in Fig. 7(b). During cyclic operation for a square wave, the ball reaches the reference position within a rise time of about 0.3s, corresponding to the beam's oscillation between −18° and +18° as seen in Fig. 8(b) which corresponds to about 3% (2.5cm) of phase transformation strain of SMA. That is, during complete transformation SMA wire of 85cm contracts about 3.4cm (4% strain), but during square wave tracking SMA wire contracts to about 2.5cm only. Interestingly, though the net beam movement is about 36° which is higher than net beam displacement (30°) for a step input change, the system responds much faster during cyclic operation.The exceptional increase in speed of response is due to the thermo dynamic nature of the system. Fig. 8(e) shows that the temperature of SMA does not fall below 60°C during the square wave operation. But during experimentation of step response, SMA is initially in room temperature; hence the time taken to respond during initial heating stage is much longer resulting in a slow rise time of the system.Also, the system behaviour was experimented at higher frequency. At 1.5Hz after few initial cycles the system tends to go unstable i.e., the ball rolls to an end of the beam. The experiment was repeated with the magnitude of reference square wave decreased from 20cm (i.e., reference positions were 20–40cm – Fig. 8(a)) to 10cm (i.e., respective reference positions were 25–35cm on the beam – Fig. 9(a)). In this case the system shows a stable response. The corresponding beam angle deflection is shown in Fig. 9(b).Compared to Fig. 8(b), the beam angle reduces to about −12° to 12° as a consequence of reduction in % strain of SMA to about 2.1% (1.9cm). This leads to the conclusion that the system responds faster and exhibits stable operation as the % strain decreases. This is an attractive fact from the perspective of energy input. During experimentation and also from the data sheet, the temperature requirement for 3% and 2.1% strain have only marginal difference i.e., to obtain a strain of about 2.1% the temperature should be raised to 94°C and for 3% strain it is 97°C [31]. Hence it is expected to have almost same heating and cooling time and correspondingly same bandwidth.In this context the temperature profile remains to be same for both cases of 2.1% and 3% strain of SMA. Hence the system should be unstable for both cases. But amusingly the system remains stable for tracking control, where 2.1% strain is utilized. Hence it is concluded that thermo dynamic effect of heating and cooling alone does not influence the bandwidth.The reason for the improved bandwidth is because of the stress acting between the antagonistic wires which becomes significant as strain in percentage reduces. To understand this effect an experiment is conducted on individual SMA strand. Fig. 10shows the effect of stress acting on reverse transformation of SMA. It is found that under complete strain the effect of force shows a decrease in reverse transformation time and under partial transformation the effect is much more significant. In antagonism there are forces acting on both the wires alternatively during actuation and hence both the wires are subjected to stress throughout the operation. Stiffness of SMA decreases with decrease in strain; consequently stress becomes significant during reverse transformation. Effect of these forces significantly increases speed of response of SMA under partial transformation.Hence from the results the following conclusions are arrived to improve the bandwidth of SMA(i)Maintaining a constant temperature just above martensite start temperatureUtilizing partial transformation strain in antagonistically connected SMAIt is an encouraging fact to observe improvement of bandwidth as % strain decreases. In any application it can be chosen as one of the design criteria, apart from diameter of wire. By designing the operating displacement of the system utilizing only partial strain of SMA, the bandwidth of the system can be improved. But this method would not use full potential of SMA there will reduction in utilization of force and displacement capability of SMA. Hence it is designer choice to compensate between bandwidth, strain and force.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
