@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Congestion management by determining optimal location of series FACTS devices using hybrid bacterial foraging and Nelder–Mead algorithm

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
BF-NM algorithm is used to solve TCSC placement problem for congestion management.The size of the TCSC is obtained to minimize both operating and investment cost.Non-smooth cost function and emission cost are considered in the operating cost function.Simulation results on IEEE 30-bus system confirm the efficiency of the proposed method.BF-NM has better performance in comparison with PSO, GA, DE, BF algorithms.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Congestion management,OPF,LMP,BF-NM algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, the Thyristor-Controlled Series-Compensated (TCSC) devices are located for congestion management in the power system by considering the non-smooth fuel cost function and penalty cost of emission. For this purpose, it is considered that the objective function of the proposed optimal power flow (OPF) problem is minimizing fuel and emission penalty cost of generators. A hybrid method that is the combination of the bacterial foraging (BF) algorithm with Nelder–Mead (NM) method (BF-NM) is employed to solve the OPF problems. The optimal location of the TCSC devices are then determined for congestion management. The size of the TCSC is obtained by using of the BF-NM algorithm to minimize the cost of generation, cost of emission, and cost of TCSC. The simulation results on IEEE 30-bus, modified IEEE 30-bus and IEEE 118-bus test system confirm the efficiency of the proposed method for finding the optimal location of the TCSC with non-smooth non-convex cost function and emission for congestion management in the power system. In addition, the results clearly show that a better solution can be achieved by using the proposed OPF problem in comparison with other intelligence methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The restructuring of electric power systems has presented a new venue for Power system operation studies. The operation of power system which was handled previously by vertically integrated utilities is delegated to the ISO and conceivably monitored by self-interested power companies (i.e., GENCOs). So, in this framework, GENCOs interact with the ISO to meet the energy demand, power system constraints. The ISO has the authority to commit and dispatch some or all system resources and to curtail loads for maintaining the system security. In general, there are two possible structures for an ISO, and the choice of structure depends on the ISO's objectives and authority. The first structure is mainly concerned with maintaining transmission security in the operations of the power market to the extent that the ISO is able to schedule transfers in a constrained transmission system. This ISO has no market role [1].The second structure for an ISO is an independent and non-profit. It calculates the market-clearing price (MCP) based on the highest price bid in the market. Market participants must provide extensive data, such as cost data for every generator, and daily demand for every consumer or load. In addition, since MaxISO runes auctions for electricity trades the emission is its concern. With these extensive data, the ISO obtains the unit commitment and dispatch that maximizes social welfare, and sets transmission congestion prices. This situation leads to an unexpected amount, direction and length of power flow through some transmission corridors. However, present transmission networks are not built to accommodate such trade. Consequently, congestion occurs when transmission lines reaches their thermal limits. In the congested power system, the prices increase. Again, ISO is responsible for congestion management problem. For this purpose, Benders’ decomposition method, multi-objective particle swarm optimization (PSO), mixed integer nonlinear programming and neural network methods [1–5] are used to study the congestion management problem.Recently, flexible AC transmission system (FACTS) devices have also been used for congestion management [6–9]. The thyristor-controlled series-compensated (TCSC) devices change the line impedance and, consequently, change the power transfer of each line. It is also possible to reduce locational marginal price (LMP) values by choosing an optimal location for these devices. In this regard, the sequential quadratic programming (SQP) methods [7], maximum loadability [8] and multi-objective differential evolutionary (MODE) [9] have been used for the optimal placement of these devices.LMP values can also be used for the optimal placement of TCSC devices. Therefore, the optimal power flow (OPF) problem should be solved to calculate the LMP values. The objective function of the OPF problem is to minimize the generation cost of power plants by considering practical and security constraints [10]. The outputs of the OPF problem are the output power of generators and their voltages [11]. Different methods have previously been studied for the solution of the OPF problem. Among these, linear programming, sequential quadratic programming, the Newton method [12,13], and the nonlinear interior point method [11,14] can be used to solve the OPF problem. In all of these methods, it is assumed that the objective function and the constraints are convex and differentiable. However, if the objective function or the constraints are non-smooth, the classical methods can no longer be used for solving the OPF problem. To overcome this problem, the OPF problem can be solved by intelligence-based algorithms, such as genetic algorithm (GA) [15], differential evolutionary (DE) [16] multi-agent based differential evolution [17].In this paper, in order to congestion management, TCSC devices are located by considering the non-smooth non-convex fuel cost function and emission. For this purpose, the congestion rent contribution method is employed for locating the TCSC. The congestion rent contribution method uses LMP values in its mechanism. Thus, it is necessary to determine the nodal price of each bus (LMP of each bus). The LMP values are determined by a new linearization method. In addition, the OPF problem is solved by using a hybrid Bacterial Foraging and Nelder–Mead (BF-NM) algorithm for a non-smooth non-convex function to obtain the LMP values (conventional method). To express the specifications of the new linearization method, its operation is compared with the conventional method for the determination of LMP. In addition, to prove the efficiency of the BF-NM algorithm, its performance is compared with BFA, PSO, GA and DE algorithms. The simulation results validate the proposed method performance and accuracy for the optimal location of the TCSC devices.In this regards, the reminded part of the paper is organized as follows: in Section 2 the proposed OPF problem is introduced. It should be noted that the objective function of the proposed OPF problem consists of generation cost, and emission penalty cost. In Section 3, the effect of TCSC on the objective function and constraints of the proposed OPF problem is studied. The structure of the BF-NM method which is used to solve proposed OPF problem is reviewed in Section 4 of the paper. A method for determining LMP of different busses is described in Section 5 of the paper. The understudied TCSC placement problem for congestion management is introduced in Section 6 of the paper. Simulation results and comparative analysis are presented in Section 7 for IEEE 30-bus and IEEE 118-bus test systems. Finally, some concluding remarks are provided in Section 8 of the paper.ISO is an independent, non-government and non-profit entity that ensure a competitive marketplace by running an auction for electricity trades. It calculates the market-clearing price (MCP) based on the highest price bid in the market. The structure of ISO is based on an optimal power flow dispatch model. Market participants must provide extensive data, such as cost and emission data for every generator, and daily demand for every consumer or load. With these extensive data, the ISO obtains the unit commitment and dispatch that maximizes social welfare, and sets transmission congestion prices. In this study, it is considered that ISO runes auctions for electricity trades. Therefore it should be noted that in this study ISO is responsible to use the proposed framework, so congestion management is its responsibility. In addition, since MaxISO runes auctions for electricity trades the emission is its concern.In order to describe under studied congestion management problem, it is necessary to express proposed OPF problem, LMP determining method and TCSC placement method. Therefore in this section, proposed OPF problem is expressed. The OPF problem is an optimization problem with the goal of optimizing an objective function F(x, u) subject to several equality g(x, u)=0 and inequality h(x, u) constraints. Thus,(1)minF(x,u)subjectto:g(x,u)=0hmin≤h(x,u)≤hmaxIn this problem, the vector x denotes the state variables of the power system, including the slack bus active power (PG1), voltage magnitude of the load buses and phase angle of the load buses (|VLi|, θLi) and the reactive power of the generators (QGi). The vector u also denotes both the continuous and discrete control variables, including active power of the generators (PGi), voltage magnitude of generators (|VGi|), transformer tap setting (Ti), and the value of the reactive power injection (QCi) due to compensators (VAR devices).The understudy objective function is the sum of the fuel cost and the emission cost penalty of the plants.If the power output of a generator with multi-valve steam turbines is increased to meet the increased demand, various steam valves should be opened in sequence. The valve-point effects introduce ripples in the generation cost curve and make the objective function non-convex with multiple minima. The valve-point effect can be considered by adding the absolute value of a sinusoidal function with a quadratic cost function [18]. Therefore,(2)FFuel=∑i=1N[ai+biPGi+ciPGi2+|disin(fi(PGimin−PGi))|]$/hwhere a, b, c, d and f are the power plant cost coefficients. Fig. 1is shown the variation of the fuel cost function along with the valve point-loading effect.Fossil-based thermal plants are one of the main players of the emission crisis. The emission can be calculated as follows:(3)FE=∑i=1N[αi+βiPGi+γiPGi2]ton/hwhere α, β and γ are the power plant emission coefficients.Because the minimum generation cost and minimum emission do not occur at a single point (they are in conflict with each other), there should be a compromise between the two objectives. Multi-objective optimization problem methods can be used to solve the problem. To generate the non-inferior solutions of a multi-objective optimization problem, the weighting method can be used [19]. This approach aggregates all objective functions in a weighted combination, producing a single one [19]. For this purpose, a function comprising the sum of the generation cost and the emission cost penalty is employed for optimization. It should be noted that in this study, it is considered that each generator should pay its emission cost penalty the same as fuel cost. Emission cost penalty is in terms of “$/h”, which can be determined by multiplying emission by coefficient Q[20]. In this condition, the proposed objective function (FTotal) is considered as follows:(4)FTotal=FFuel+Q.FEThe coefficient Q is for the conversion of the emission value at the scale of the generation cost function. The Q parameter is considered to be the ratio between the maximum fuel cost of thermal units and the maximum emission of the corresponding unit, as follows:(5)Q=ai+biPGimax+ciPGimax2αi+βiPGimax+γiPGimax2$/hwherePGimaxis the maximum limit of the active power for i-th generator.In the understudy problem, two types of equality and inequality constraints are considered.The constraints satisfying the active and reactive powers of each bus are expressed as the following nonlinear power flow equations [21].(6)PGi−PDi−Pi(V,δ)=0(7)QGi−QDi−Qi(V,δ)=0where PDiand QDiare the active and reactive powers of the load at bus i; δ represents voltage angles vector of all busses. Pi(V, δ) and Qi(V, δ) are the injection active and reactive powers at bus i determined as:(8)Pi(V,δ)=∑j=1nViVjYijcos(θij−δi+δj)Qi(V,δ)=−∑j=1nViVjYijsin(θij−δi+δj)where, δi, δjrepresents voltage angles of the i-th and j-th busses, respectively. Also,Yijand θijare the element i–j of the admittance matrix,These constraints satisfy the security and operational limits of the power system and are expressed as follows:(a)Active and reactive power limits of generators(9)PGimin≤PGi≤PGimaxi=1,...,GN(10)QGimin≤QGi≤QGimaxi=1,...,GNwherePGimaxandQGimax(PGiminandQGimin) are, respectively, the maximum (minimum) limits of the active and reactive powers for each generator.Voltage magnitude limits(11)Vimin≤Vi≤Vimaxi=1,...,Nwhere Vimax and Vimin are the maximum and minimum voltage of generators, respectively.Transformer tap settings(12)Timin≤Ti≤Timaxi=1,...,TNwhere Timin and Timax are the minimum and maximum transformer tap settings, respectively. Tap changing transformer affects the active and reactive power flows from bus i to bus j (Eq. (8)). Therefore, if there is a tap changing transformer in the i-th bus, the value of the active and reactive power flows from bus i to bus j can be written as:Pij=−Vi2Ti2Gij+ViVjTi{Gijcosδij+Bijsinδij},Qij=Vi.TiVjYijsin(θij−δi+δj).Reactive power injection(13)Qcimin≤Qci≤Qcimaxi=1,...,CNIn the above constraints, PGi, QGiand Viare the continuous variables; Tiand Qciare the discrete ones.Power factor of power plants(14)−arccos(0.95)≤φi≤arccos(0.9)i=1,...,GNwhere, φiis the phase of power factor of the i-th power plants. This constraint is a fractional non-linear constraint, and from a mathematical perspective, it is related to the fractional programming problem. When fractional constraints are considered and a non-convex objective function is employed, it is not possible to use classical methods such nonlinear programming to solve this problem.Transmission line loading(15)SLi≤SLimaxi=1,...LNwhere SLimax is the thermal limit of the transmission lines and LNis the number of the transmission lines.TCSC devices are one of the main members of the FACTS family, operating as series compensators with minimum losses and minimum harmonic distortions. These devices comprise a capacitor bank in parallel with a thyristor-controlled reactor (TCR). They continuously change transmission line impedance [7]. In this section, the effect of the TCSC on objective function and constraints of the proposed OPF problem is studied. For this purpose, modeling of TCSC is presented in the first subsection. In the second subsection, the effect of the TCSC on the power flow equations is studied. Finally, in the third subsection, the proposed OPF problem by considering effect of the TCSC on the constraints and objective function of proposed OPF problem is presented.The FACTS devices can be modeled by the power injection model (PIM) for static applications [7,22–24]. It should be noted that in the typical model of TCSC, the TCSC is modeled by a variable capacitance which decreases the reactance of line. In power injection model, the FACT is modeled as an element that injects a certain amount of active or reactive powers, so that the FACTS device is represented as PQ elements. The π model of the transmission line, as well as the TCSC between buses i and j, is depicted in Fig. 2a. In addition, the power injection model of the TCSC between the two buses i and j, is shown in Fig. 2b. The presence of the TCSC between the two buses i and j results in a change in the active and reactive power transmitted between the buses i and j[7]. These changes for i-th bus are shown withPiFandQiFexpressed as follows:(16)PiF=Vi2ΔGij−ViVj[ΔGijcos(δi−δj)+ΔBijsin(δi−δj)](17)QiF=−Vi2ΔBij−ViVj[ΔGijsin(δi−δj)−ΔBijcos(δi−δj)]where,ΔGij=xcrij(xc−2xij)(rij2+xij2){rij2+(xij−xc)2},ΔBij=−xc(rij2−xij2+xcxij)(rij2+xij2){rij2+(xij−xc)2}More details about PIM are available in [7,22,23]. Furthermore, in Ref. [7] it is explained that how Eqs. (16) and (17) are determined.If the power injection model of TCSC devices is considered, the OPF equations for bus i can be rewritten as follows:(18)PGi−PDi−Pi(V,δ)−PiF=0(19)QGi+QDi−Qi(V,δ)+QiF=0where Pi(V, δ) and Qi(V, δ) are defined in Section 2.2.The range of cost of major FACTS devices is presented in Siemens AG Database [25]. This cost depends on the operating range of TCSC. A polynomial cost function of FACTS devices can be derived and used for FACTs placement study as used in [26]. The cost function of TCSC can be calculated as follows [25](20)CTCSC=0.0015S2−0.7130S+153.75where CTCSC is the cost of TCSC in “$/kVar” and S is the operating range of TCSC in “MVar”. It should be noted thatS=XTCSC×|Ii,jmax|2=Xc×|Ii,jmax|2. In order to compare the cost of FACTS against the generation cost, they have to be converted to a common unit. In this paper, the comparison is made by converting the cost of TCSC, as well as the generation cost into (“$/h”). For this purpose, annual and hourly capital cost of TCSC should be computed. To compute the annual capital cost of FACTS, it is considered that project lifetime (n), discount rate (r), and average utilization (u) are 5 years, 10% and 40%, respectively. It should be noted that the operational cost of FACTS device is neglected. Therefore, the annual capital cost of FACTs in “$/year” can be determined as follows:(21)CTCSCAnnual=CTCSC×S×1000r×(1+n)n(1+n)n−1Annual capital cost of FACTs in “$/year” can be converted to hourly capital cost in “$/h” as follows:(22)CTCSCAnnual=CTCSChour×8760×uBy the application of the TCSC, the proposed OPF problem is changed as follows:(23)MinFTotal=FFuel+QFE+CTCSChourSubjectto:EqualityConstraints:Eqs.(6)−(7)InequalityConstraints:Eqs.(8)−(14)TCSCConstraint:−Xcmin≤Xc≤Xcmaxwhere FTotalis the total objective function with TCSC devices,CTCSChouris the hourly capital cost of the TCSC and Xcis the value of the TCSC capacitor [27].There are different kinds of hybrid algorithms to solve optimization problems especially for optimal power flow problem. In this paper, in order to solve the proposed OPF problem, the hybrid bacterial foraging (BF) algorithm and the Nelder–Mead (NM) method are employed. The BF algorithm is a stochastic optimization algorithm. It covers a wide search region, but it has low convergence speed. In this respect, the BF algorithm and the NM method can be combined. By combining these two methods, the search power of the intelligent methods and the precision of conventional methods are simultaneously exploited [19]. In this regards, in this section, the BF algorithm and the NM method are first introduced. The BF-NM combinational algorithm is then presented to solve the OPF problem.The foraging process of a bacterium, E. coli, living in the intestine, is modeled through four steps of chemotactic, swarming, reproduction, and elimination and dispersal [27,28].E. coli bacterium can decide to move in two different ways with regard to its environment. The rotation of flagella shows the type of the movement. A bacterium can swim (swim for a short time) or tumble, and shifts between these two positions during its life-span [27,28].In BFA, one moving unit length with random directions represents “tumble”, and one moving unit length with the same direction relative to the latest step represents “swimming”. The chemotactic step consists of one “tumble” along with another “tumble”, or one “tumble” along with one “swimming”. These movements are shown as follow:(24)Swimming:θi(j+1,k,l)=θi(j,k,l)+C(i)Δ(i)Δ(i)TΔ(i),i=1,2,...,S(25)Tumble:θi(j+1,k,l)=θi(j+1,k,l)+C(i)Δ(i)Δ(i)TΔ(i),i=1,2,...,Swhere θi(j, k, l) represents the position of i-th bacterium at j-th chemotaxis, k-th reproduction, and l-th elimination and dispersal, respectively. S represents number of bacteria. Also, C(i) and Δ(i) are the movement length and direction random vector, respectively.Previous subsection explained the cases when bacteria behaved individually (without producing signal for other bacteria). However, there is an exchange of signals between the bacteria through absorbing food materials. Consequently, the group movement for every bacterium (Jcci) is defined as follows:(26)Jcci(θgm(j,k,l),θi(j,k,l))=[−dattractexp(−ωattract∑m=1P(θmgm−θmi)2)]+[hrepellantexp(−ωrepellant∑m=1P(θmgm−θmi)2)],i=1,2,...,Swhere θgm(j, k, l) is the location of the global minimum bacterium till the j-th chemotactic, k-th reproduction, and l-th elimination stage. In addition, dattract, hrepellant,wattractandwrepellantare the depth of attractant, width of attractant, height of repellent and width of repellent parameters, respectively. These parameters should be selected appropriately. In this regard, it is appropriate that dattract=hrepellant.Based on Eq. (26), the group movement for all bacteria (Jcc) is calculated as follows:(27)Jcc(θgm(j,k,l),θ(j,k,l))=∑i=1sjcci(θgm(j,k,l),θi(j,k,l))Theθmgmis the m-th parameter of the global minimum bacteria.After Ncchemotactic steps, a reproduction step is taken. Let Nrebe the number of reproduction steps. It is also assumed that S shows the number of all bacteria and is divided into two parts, Sr=S/2. Each part (Sr) represents the number of population members with sufficient nutrients and with lowest health respectively. The ones with the lowest health dies and the rest with enough nutrients will be reproduced (like their parents at the same location) such that the number of the bacteria is always S.In BF algorithm, the dispersal event takes place after a definite number of reproduction processes. First, a Ped(the probability of elimination and dispersal) is chosen for each bacterium and then based on the selected probability Ped, it moves to another position in the environment. These events can effectively prevent from trapping in local optimal points. Also, Nedis the number of elimination and dispersal [27].A simplex method has been developed for finding a local minimum point from a function of several variables by Nelder and Mead [29]. The Nelder–Mead method is used to compare the objective function values in n+1 of the vertex for the solution of the n-dimensional optimization problem. At each stage, one new vertex is generated. Then, if the new vertex has less objective function value relative to the previous vertices, this new vertex is replaced with the worst vertex of the previous level. As an example, the NM method, which is a pattern search for a problem with 2 variables, compares the values of the objective function at the 3 vertices of a triangle. The Nelder–Mead direct search method is shown in Fig. 3for the minimization of a nonlinear function in a two-dimensional space. By moving toward the minimum point in this method, the size of the triangle becomes increasingly small. The process of the NM direct search method is expressed in the following section.(a)Determination of the initial triangle BGW: It is assumed that f(x, y) is the under study function that must be minimized. In the NM method, the algorithm starts with three initial points. These three initial points Vk=(xk, yk)k=1, 2, 3 form a triangle. Then, Zk=f(xk, yk) shows the objective function at each of these vertices of the triangle. Now, if Z1<Z2<Z3, then B=V1=(x1, y1), G=V2=(x2, y2), and W=V3=(x3, y3) are named. In this case, B, G and W show best, good and worst values of the objective function, respectively.Determination of the midpoint of the good side: In this stage, the midpoint (M) is obtained from the midpoint of the line between G and B, where(28)M=B+G2=x1+x22,y1+y22Reflection using the pointR: Point R is obtained according to the following equation using reflection on sideBG¯.(29)R=M+(M−W)=2M−WExpansion using point E: if f(xR, yR) is smaller than f(xW, yW), a correct direction is obtained for minimization. So, the BGE-expanded triangle is used, and point E is obtained by the following equation.(30)E=M+η(M−W)where η is the expansion coefficient with a value greater than one. If f(xE, yE) is smaller than f(xR, yR), then the objective function f at point E is better than point R.Contraction using point C: If f(xR, yR)=f(xW, yW), then another point should be obtained. For this purpose, middle points between M and W and middle points between M and R (C1 and C2) are considered, and the function value is obtained at these two points.(31)C1,C2=M±k(M−W)where k is the contraction coefficient with a value smaller than one. Each of the C1 and C2 points with smaller function value is named C.Shrink toward B: If f(xC, yC) is not smaller than f(xW, yW), then points W and G should be shrunk toward B. Then, point G is replaced with point M, and W is replaced with S. Thus,(32)S=B+W2=x1+x32,y1+y32The proposed algorithm flowchart for solving the proposed problem is presented in Fig. 4. In the BF-NM algorithm, the initial values of the algorithm parameters are first determined. These parameters are the number of bacteria (S), number of variables (P), swimming length (Ns), number of chemotactic steps (Nc), number of reproduction steps (Nre), number of elimination and dispersal steps (Ned), probability of elimination and dispersal (Ped), initial position of bacteria, C(i) vector for each bacterium, values of dattract, ωattract, hrepellent, and ωrepellent.The loops of elimination and dispersal, reproduction, and chemotactic are performed, and the cost function value is obtained for all bacteria. Next, tumbling and swimming of the BF algorithm are performed. The NM algorithm is then called to compare the best value obtained from the BF algorithm with the answer obtained from the Nelder–Mead algorithm. If the value obtained from the Nelder–Mead algorithm is less than the value obtained from the BF algorithm, the value obtained from the Nelder–Mead is saved as the best value. Subsequently, if the chemotactic loop is finished, the obtained value enters the reproduction loop; otherwise, the chemotactic loop is continued. After the termination of the chemotactic and reproduction loops, bacteria enter the elimination and dispersal loop, which is the last loop of the combined algorithm. Thus, after the termination of the elimination and dispersal loop, the converged answer is achieved.As described before, in the proposed congestion management problem, it is necessary to solve the OPF problem first. Considering emission penalty cost leads to an unexpected amount, direction and length of power flow through some transmission corridors. Therefore, congestion occurs when transmission lines reaches their thermal limits. Thereafter, in order to solve proposed congestion management problem, it is necessary to determine values of the LMP of different busses. For this purpose, in this section a method for determining LMP is presented. Because the cost function of the unit is not a differentiable function, the LMP of different buses cannot be determined using the dual variable of node's power balance equation of the OPF problem.The LMP of a bus is the cost of supplying the next MW of load in that bus [30]. In these circumstances, in order to determine LMP, the value of the marginal cost (MC) of every power plant should be used. Marginal cost of a generator is the change in total cost of a generator when 1MW changes in its generation. Because the cost function of the unit is not a differentiable function, it is not easy to determine the MC in this case. Therefore, in this section, a simple method is used for the determination of the MC. For this purpose, the OPF problem is first solved on the basis of Eq. (23). After determining the values of active power of generators, the sign of the absolute term of Eq. (2) is determined. For this purpose, the term of the sinusoidal function (inside the absolute term of the objective function) is first differentiated relative to PG. Then, with regard to the problem operating point (PGo), the value of resulted function f is determined as follows:f=∂sin(fi(PGmin−PG))∂PGPGoAfter the determination of the sign of value f, the marginal cost for all the power plants is easily obtained.To obtain the LMP at each bus, the cost of supplying the next MW of load should be determined. In this state, the LMP for each bus is obtained according to the following algorithm.1.If there is no congestion, the marginal generator determines the next MW cost at each bus.If there is congestion, the power flow is solved to determine which line is overloaded.The two marginal l and k cheapest generators are selected to generate the next MW of each bus.The sensitivity matrix of the system is obtained by the following equation:(33)αij=Vi−VjXijwhere αijshows the element i−j of the sensitivity matrix.The power generation changes for marginal generators (ΔPi) can be calculated as follows:(34)ΔPi=ΔSijαlkwhere ΔSijshows the line overload value of line between buses i and j.When ΔPiis determined for marginal generators are specified. By the use of the ΔPivalue, the generation value of the two marginal generators is changed in such a way that the value of ΔPiis reduced from generator l and added to generator k and vice versa.In this stage, the transmission power of each line is calculated to investigate congestion constraints.If all possible combinations of generators are not considered, then7.1.If a line is congested and this congestion cannot be removed by these marginal generators, then another combination of generators is selected as marginal plants, and we return to stage 5.If congestion is not removed by the use of all combination of two plants, a combination of three or more plants is used to solve the congestion problem, and we return to stage 5.After obtaining the generation of the plants, the LMP of the intended bus is obtained as follows:(35)LMPi=min∑i=1NG(MCi⋅ΔPi)where∑i=1NG(ΔPi)=1+ΔPloss,andSLl≤SLlmaxl=1,...,NBy the use of this algorithm, the LMP values are determined for all the buses.In this section, the proposed congestion management problem is performed by solving optimal TCSC placement problem. For this purpose, an overview of the stages of the proposed TCSC placement problem is presented in the first subsection. In the second subsection, the congestion rent contribution is defined. This parameter is used in the structure of the optimal TCSC placement method. Finally, in the last subsection of this section, stages and algorithm of the proposed congestion management problem are presented.When a system becomes congested, the effects are reflected in the prices and LMP increases. The difference in LMP across an interface gives a measure of degree of congestion across the link. Increase in the LMP differences between two busses is a sign that represents the link is congested more. Either the congested link or the neighborhood lines are the potential locations for installing series FACTS devices to reduce the level of congestion. This matter is the main idea for TCSCs placement.In this paper, TCSC devices are located such that they decrease the LMP of buses and the generation cost. For this purpose, the congestion rent contribution method is used to determine the optimal location of TCSC devices. The congestion rent contribution method uses LMP differences in its mechanism. Thus, it is necessary to determine LMP values. These values are determined according to the methods presented in the previous section. In order to study TCSC placement, the congestion rent contribution method is presented and then used for locating the TCSCs.The active power price at ith bus (ρi) is determined as follows:(36)ρi=λ+λC,iwhere λ is the marginal energy component of the slack bus (equal for all buses), λC,iis the congestion component. Therefore, the LMP difference between different buses depends on the congestion component at those buses. If there is congestion, it affects the MC of all buses. Therefore, with regard to the fixed value of λ, the nodal price (or LMP) difference between the two buses i and j will be as follows:(37)Δρij=(λC,i−λC,j)This equation defines LMP difference between two buses, which it is known as the congestion rent. Therefore, the total congestion rent (TCC) is calculated as follows:(38)TCC=∑ij=1NLΔρijPijwhere NL is the number of the transmission lines. The congestion rent corresponding to each transmission line (CCij) is equal to:(39)CCij=ΔρijPijwhile the congestion rent contribution of each transmission line (CCCij) is calculated as follows:(40)CCCij=CCijTCCThe congestion rent contribution method can be used to locate TCSC devices. Using the above definitions, TCSC placement is determined according to the following stages:Stage 1:Solving the OPF problem, the transfer power of each line is determined.The LMP of all the buses is determined based on the method presented in Section 5.The LMP difference between each two buses is calculated.The congestion rent contribution of each line (CCCij) is calculated by Eqs (38)–(40) and is arranged in descending order in a priority list.For each line in the priority list with the TCSC in that line, the OPF is solved and the total congestion rent and the value of the objective function is obtained.The optimal location for the TCSC is the one where the minimum congestion cost or the minimum value of the objective function is obtained. If the optimal location for the TCSC is between two generator buses, the next-highest location in the proposed priority list is selected for the installation of the TCSC.Fig. 5illustrates the flowchart of the proposed TCSC-locating problemTo evaluate the proposed algorithm, the above method is used on an IEEE 30-bus, and IEEE 118 bus standard systems. In this regard, the OPF problem is first solved by the BF-NM algorithm. LMP values for all the buses are then determined by the method presented in Section 5. After determining the optimal location of the TCSC devices, the OPF problem is again solved to determine TCSC size. Therefore, the advantages of the understudy method are expressed by determining the system specifications.In this section, simulation results on two different IEEE 30 bus systems and IEEE 118 bus system are studied. The program of the congestion management problem has been written in Matlab using the MATLAB 7.0 software and executed on a P-IV, 320-GB, Core 2 Duo 2.53-GHz personal computer with 4-GB RAM. Accordingly, the performance of the proposed method is studied on Modified IEEE 30 bus system firstly. Then, the performance of the proposed method is compared with the results of previous studies presented in [9] on IEEE 30 bus system. Finally, the proposed method is used to IEEE 118 bus system. It should be noted that the parameters of BF-NM algorithm are presented in Table 1. In this study, trial and error method is used to determine parameter settings of the algorithm.The IEEE 30-bus system has six generating units and 41 transmission lines. The total active and reactive powers of the system are 189.2MW and 107.2Mvar, respectively. Considering emission cost penalty leads to change direction and length of power flow through some transmission corridors. Therefore, this system is used to study the performance of the proposed congestion management method because, considering emission cost penalty leads to congestion in this system. The single-line diagram of the system is depicted in Fig. 6. The complete data of this system are found in Ref. [10].The complete data of this system are found in Ref. [9]. In this system, two TCSCs are installed on two lines, between busses (3, 4) and (19, 20). In addition two thyristor controlled phase shifters (TCPS) are installed on two lines, between busses (5, 7) and between busses (10, 22).The data of this system can be found in Ref. [31]. This system consists of 54 generators, 186 (line+transformer) and 99 loads. The base power system load is 3766.07MW and base MVA is 100MVA. In this model, there are 54 generators. It is important to notice that the base power system load has been increased by 20% to attain congestion in the power system.In this section, the OPF problem (with the objective function of Eq. (4)) is solved on modified IEEE 30-bus system without the TCSC (case study 1) by using of BF-NM algorithm. The OPF results are provided in Table 2. The control variables of this problem are presented in Table 2 for the two cases with and without considering emission. To evaluate the performance of the BF-NM method, its results are compared with the GA, PSO and DE algorithms. Since a new variant of OPF is proposed in this paper, there are not existent published data on the proposed OPF. To evaluate the performance of BF-NM algorithm on solving proposed OPF problem, existing algorithms, like GA, DE, etc. are performed by the authors. As shown in this table, by the use of the proposed BF-NM algorithm, the generation cost is equal to 1051.37$/h. However, the values of the generating costs for GA and the DE, PSO and BFA methods are equal to 1070.6$/h, 1073.55$/h, 1065.7$/h and 1075.4$/h, respectively. Therefore, it can be concluded that the BF-NM algorithm has better performance when compared with other methods.The transfer power obtained by using the OPF (by considering emission) shows that line 6–8 has reached its congestion limit (32MVA).In order to illustrate the advantages of the Nelder–Mead algorithm in the BF-NM algorithm, results of BF-NM method should be compared by the results of the BF algorithm. As shown in Table 2, by the use of the BF-NM algorithm, the generation cost is equal to 1051.37$/h. The values of the generating costs for BFA method is equal to 1075.4$/h. Therefore, it can be concluded that Nelder–Mead algorithm decreases the cost of BFA method about 24.03$.In this case, the LMP values are determined using the method presented in Section 5 on modified IEEE 30-bus system. Since the cost function of the generators is not smooth, the LMP values cannot be determined by the direct method (Lagrange multiplier method). Consequently, the conventional LMP values must thus be determined by resolving the OPF problem using intelligent methods. For this purpose, the value of the active power of load at each bus is increased by 1MW, and the OPF is again solved. Table 3shows the LMP values in two cases with and without emission obtained by the understudy and conventional methods. The bold value in Table 3 shows the LMP values of the bus which is connected to congested line. It is inferred from this table that bus 8 has more LMP value (10.10$/MW) compared with other buses when line 6–8 reaches its congestion limit (32MW).In this section, after the determination of the LMP values of modified IEEE 30-bus system, the optimal location of the TCSC devices is determined such that congestion is removed. For this purpose, it is necessary to determine a priority list for locating TCSC devices. In this regards, the LMP differences and the congestion rent contribution of lines (CCCij) considering emission are shown in Table 4. Results of this table represents that, line 6–8 is the first suggestion for placing the TCSC when emission cost is considered (CCC6–8=50.40).In this section, simulation results on IEEE 30-bus system, Modified IEEE 30-bus system and IEEE 118-bus system are studied. In the first one, the performance of proposed method is studied on the modified IEEE 30-bus system (case study 1). In the second one, the performance of the proposed method is compared with the performance of the previous studies presented in [9] on IEEE 30-bus system (case study 2). Finally, the performance of the proposed method is studied on the IEEE 118-bus system (case study 3).The optimal location of the TCSC devices can be determined in a way that congestion is removed. This optimization is performed by running the algorithm presented in Section 6 and determining the priority list for locating TCSC devices.In this subsection, the OPF is solved by considering the TCSC equations to determine the size of the TCSC devices so that the transfer power of the lines and the effect of TCSC on congestion management are determined. In this case, the TCSC investment cost is added to the objective function of the problem [25].As can be seen in the previous subsection, the congestion rent contribution method is initially used to determine the candidate lines for the TCSC. Therefore, two locations for TCSC are studied; the first TCSC is located in line 6–8 and the second is located in line 8–28. By positioning the TCSC, the OPF problem is again solved to determine the TCSC size. The control variables of the OPF problem are shown in Table 5, and the LMP values of the buses corresponding to the two lines with TCSC are presented in Table 6. According to Table 6, TCSC reduces the congestion rent in line 6–8 (CC(6−8)). Therefore, the value of the LMP at bus 8 is reduced.The generation cost and the total congestion rent (TCC) for the two cases of TCSC location are shown in Table 7. For example, as shown in Table 2, the system cost without the installation of TCSC is 1051.37$/h, and as shown in Table 7, the system cost with the TCSC in line 6–8 is equal to 1048.8$/h. In addition, the TCSC hourly capital cost (CTCSChour) is equal to 0.2152$/h. Therefore, the profit value resulting from the installation of the TCSC is equal to 2.57$/h. The TCC value resulting from TCSC installation in line 6–8 is less than the case of the TCSC installation in line 8–28. Therefore, with regard to the TCSC values and the profit values resulting from the installation of the TCSC in these two cases, we determine that the optimal location for the installation of the TCSC devices is in line 6–8. This result validates the priority list that has been determined for this system.In order to verify the effectiveness of the proposed TCSC placement method, the results are compared with the results of the Multi-Objective EA (MOEA) methods (multi-objective differential evolution (MODE), non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm-II (NSGA-II), pareto differential evolution (PDE) and differential evolution (DE) methods provided in [9]). In [9], it is considered that two TCSCs are installed on the T6–28 and T27–30 transmission lines. In this case, to compare results of proposed method with results presented in [9], the values of all variables of OPF problem in addition to parameters of two TCSCs and TCPS should be determined by BF-NM method. These values are illustrated in Table 8. In the table, the values of TCSCs are illustrated by the XTCSC(6–28) and XTCSC(27–30). It should be noted that the impedance of TCSC (XTCSC) is considered as the parameter of TCSC and the phase angle of TCPS is considered as the parameter of TCPS.Table 8 shows the comparative results related to IEEE 30-bus system (case study 2). In [9], results of multi-objective optimization problem are used to determine the value of single objective function to evaluate the performance of different multi-objective optimization methods. In this regards, this method is used to compare the results of OPF problem solved by BF-NM method and results of OPF problem solved by Multi-Objective EA (MOEA) methods, which are presented in [9]. As shown in Table 8, the total cost of the system in the proposed method is 885.7057 $, which shows a significant reduction in comparison with other methods. Furthermore, the total emission cost of the system in the proposed BF-NM method is 1467.7800 $, which shows a significant reduction in comparison with NSGA-II, PDE and DE methods.In addition, calculation speed of the BF-NM method and cited previous methods are illustrated in Table 8. As shown in the table, the CPU time of the BF-NM method is less than that of the cited previous multi-objective optimization methods presented in [9]. In this case, more CPU time is required for multi-objective optimization methods than to single objective optimization, because more computations are needed for multi-objective optimization methods than single objective optimization methods.Therefore, it can be concluded that although MOEA methods could determine good results for multi-objective optimization problems, but these results are not as good as results which are determined for a weighting method solved by BF-NM method.To investigate the performance of the proposed congestion management method for larger systems, it was implemented and tested on the IEEE 118-bus system. Simulation results are shown in Table 9for two states: OPF without TCSC and OPF with TCSC. As shown in the table, there is congestion in four transmission lines of the IEEE 118 bus system without TCSC. In this condition, the value of the fuel cost in the OPF without TCSC is equal 72,079.3775$/h. By the use of the proposed congestion management method, congestion of the transmission lines is removed and total cost of the system (fuel cost and TCSC cost) became 71,764.8906$/h+15.5974$/h. For this purpose, two TCSCs should be installed in the IEEE 118 bus system.Table 10represents the value of the LMP of the selected buses of the IEEE 118 bus system which transmission lines connected to them had been congested. As shown in the table, the value of the LMP of these buses decreases effectively.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
