@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Sudden cardiac death (SCD) prediction based on nonlinear heart rate variability features and SCD index

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
SCD is predicated using SVM classifier and sudden cardiac death index (SCDI).Nonlinear features are extracted from HRV signals.SVM predicts SCD with 94.7% accuracy four minutes before its onset.SCDI predicts SCD accurately.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sudden cardiac death,Ventricular fibrillation,ECG,Heart rate,Nonlinear methods,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In our previous work, we have developed a sudden cardiac death index (SCDI) using electrocardiogram (ECG) signals that could effectively predict the occurrence of SCD four minutes before the onset. Thus, the prediction of SCD before its onset by using heart rate variability (HRV) signals is a worthwhile task for further investigation. Therefore, in this paper, a new novel methodology to automatically classify the HRV signals of normal and subjects at risk of SCD by using nonlinear techniques has been presented. In this study, we have predicted SCD by analyzing four-minutes of HRV signals (separately for each one-minute interval) prior to SCD occurrence by using nonlinear features such as Renyi entropy (REnt), fuzzy entropy (FE), Hjorth's parameters (activity, mobility and complexity), Tsallis entropy (TEnt), and energy features of discrete wavelet transform (DWT) coefficients. All the clinically significant features obtained are ranked using their t-value and fed to classifiers such as K-nearest neighbor (KNN), decision tree (DT), and support vector machine (SVM). In this work, we have achieved an accuracy of 97.3%, 89.4%, 89.4%, and 94.7% for prediction of SCD one, two, three, and four minutes prior to the SCD onset respectively using SVM classifier. Furthermore, we have also developed a novel SCD Index (SCDI) by using nonlinear HRV signal features to classify the normal and SCD prone HRV signals. Our proposed technique is able to identify the person at risk of developing SCD four minutes earlier, thereby providing sufficient time for the clinicians to respond with treatment in Intensive Care Units (ICU). Thus, this proposed technique can thus serve as a valuable tool for increasing the survival rate of many cardiac patients.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
An unexpected sudden death of a person with or without primary cardiovascular abnormalities [1,2] and known or unknown history of cardiac diseases is categorized as sudden cardiac death (SCD) [1,3–5]. The overall annual incidence of SCD based on extrapolation of data from the United States is approximately 1 in 1000 adults over the age of 35 years [6]. SCD is the most common and generally the primary indication of coronary heart disease and is accountable for most of the cardiac death in the US and other developed countries [7,8]. These estimates differ following differences in SCD definitions and observation techniques for case ascertainment [8,9]. Although, the principal cause of SCD is unknown, ventricular fibrillation (VF) is presumed to be the mechanism underlying approximately 20% SCD episodes [10–12]. VF can lead to the heart's inability to effectively pump blood and therefore can result in death within minutes. Therefore, early prediction of an unexpected SCD risk in a person experiencing VF is highly significant for timely treatment and increased survival rate.Researchers worldwide are experimenting with ECG or HRV signal features in order to pick up the fine changes occurring within signals and to identify the unique features which can forewarn the risk of SCD onset. In a study with ECG, calculation of QTc (QT interval corrected for heart rate) prolongation is shown to be an independent risk factor to predict SCD due to cardiac arrest [13]. In addition, it has been shown that linear prediction methods can be used for analysis of HRV signals, QT dispersion, signal-averaged ECG (SAECG) and QRS duration, which can effectively be used as risk measures for predicting the occurrence of SCD after Acute Myocardial Infarction (AMI) [14] in Type 2 diabetic patients [15]. The linear time domain and frequency domain methods have been used to extract HRV signal features and identify reduced short-term Low Frequency Power (LFP) [16] in heart failure subjects. Authors have found HRV mean, ratio of low frequency and high frequency, very high frequency, and SD are the strong predictors of SCD in patients [17]. Researchers [18–20] have experimented with linear methods on ECG signals to identify various features (HRV, QT dispersion) for predicting the occurrence of risk leading to SCD. Many time domain, frequency domain and nonlinear methods have been proposed to analyze the ECG and HRV signals [21–23,59]. However, these time domain methods provide inadequate representation of data, while the frequency domain methods fail to provide good time resolution. However, it fails to indicate the frequency component present at a particular instant.Analyses of the nonlinear and complex ECG signals using linear methods might not yield complete information necessary for predicting SCD onset risk. Hence, nonlinear methods are used to overcome these drawbacks and analyze ECG and HRV signals [29] to obtain information associated with phenomena of heart attack, heart failure and SCD. Poincare maps and renormalized entropy calculated from HRV signals are able to identify SCD from normal classes with 96% accuracy [24]. The use of time-frequency domain features extracted from the HRV signal in a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) classifier resulted in a detection accuracy of 91.23% in two minutes before SCD onset [25].The nonlinear interrelationships in HRV signals provide vital information due to the nonlinear data source characteristics [26]. Several nonlinear methods have been used to predict SCD using HRV signals. A summary of research work using linear and nonlinear methods in identifying the significant predictors of SCD before its onset using ECG and HRV signals is provided in Table 1. The nonlinear features can help decipher the hidden complexities in the HRV signals. The detrended fluctuation analysis (DFA), Poincare plot, approximate entropy (ApproxEnt) and Hurst's exponent (H) measures of HRV signal analysis are efficiently used to differentiate normal and SCD risk signals by using SVM [27]. Poincare plot and DFA parameters from HRV signals combined with KNN and MLP classifiers have also been used to predict SCD one, two, three and four minutes before its onset [28]. Further, FD, H, DFA, CD, ApproxEnt, sample entropy (SampEnt) measures of discrete wavelet coefficients were used to classify normal and SCD one to four minutes before ECG signals successfully [29]. Thus, it is evident that nonlinear methods are better suited compared to linear methods for analysis of the nonlinear and non-stationary HRV signals. Simple, adaptive and local structure based, nonlinear measures can provide intuitive understanding of the data [26].Our present work focuses on extraction of different nonlinear features which are efficient in identifying the subtle changes within HRV for the prediction of SCD risk. The nonlinear features using HRV signals are developed for automated prediction of persons at risk of SCD one, two, three and four minutes earlier to its onset.Many automated system have been proposed for biomedical applications [30–37,59–67]. The block diagram of our proposed method is shown in Fig. 1. Nonlinear features (REnt, FE, Hjorth's parameters (activity, mobility and complexity), TEnt, and energy features from DWT coefficients) are extracted from the four one-minute interval normal and SCD prone HRV signals. Then, the features with significant information (obtained by using t-test and ranking process) are used for classification of normal and SCD risk groups by employing classifiers such as DT, KNN and SVM. The whole procedure is applied to HRV signals of one to four-minutes interval segments separately for normal subjects and patients with SCD.The MIT-BIH SCD Holter open access database and the Normal Sinus Rhythm database were used to obtain the SCD and normal ECG signals [38]. A total of 41 ECG signals of 23 SCD patients (age: 18–89 years) and 18 normal subjects (20–50 years) were acquired from the database. Among the 23 SCD patients, only 20 were used further for analysis, as they did not exhibit any episodes of VF. The sampling rate of SCD and normal ECG signals were 256Hz and 128Hz, respectively. The ECG signals were sampled at 128Hz in order to maintain consistency between SCD and normal groups in this work.For this work, from the 24h of SCD patients’ ECG recordings, only the ECG signals four minutes before the SCD occurrence (onset) are used. The ECG signals obtained are then subjected to wavelet based denoising using daubechies 6 (db6) mother wavelet [39]. From the 24h ECG recordings, HRV signals of 10min are extracted by using Pan-Tompkins algorithm [40] and only the four minutes duration HRV is used for further analysis. The obtained HRV signals of four minutes duration are further divided into four one-minute intervals. The details of this process used for ECG signal is discussed in our previous paper [29].Fig. 2shows a typical normal and SCD HRV signal of four one-minutes’ intervals. It can be noted that the HRV (RR interval) signal of a typical SCD patient is crowded with cardiac arrhythmias (due to ventricular fibrillation) in comparison with that of the normal subject.In this important step of an automated SCD prediction algorithm development process, nonlinear methods are used to extract the features from HRV signals. Twelve features are extracted from each one-minute intervals HRV signals, namely REnt, FE, Hjorth's parameters (activity, mobility and complexity), TEnt, and energy features from three level DWT coefficients. A brief explanation of the feature parameters extracted is provided in this section.It measures the unpredictability present in the signals and is developed based on the concept of fuzzy sets whose elements have different degrees of membership. Membership functions vary in the unit interval of 0 and 1. Fuzzy entropy measures ambiguous uncertainties from the highly irregular signals [41].It is a generalized form of Shannon's entropy. This parameter is useful in time series signal for estimating the spectral complexity [42,43].It is used to quantify the statistical properties of time-series nonlinear signal. Different Hjorth's parameters namely activity, mobility and complexity are used [44]. The three parameters (activity, mobility and complexity) used represent the signal power, mean frequency and change in frequency respectively [45].It is used to predict the sudden changes and long-term memory effects in a time-series HRV signal. This entropy provides more information compared to Shannon's entropy about the rhythmicity of nonlinear HRV signal [46].In this work, DWT is performed up to three levels on the HRV signals and energy features are extracted from coefficients of each sub-band. DWT helps to capture both frequency and time information from HRV signals [47]. Energy which provides the uniformity information present in the signal are computed from the DWT coefficients. In this work, we have used daubechies 8 (db8) mother wavelet function [48]. We have computed energies of each coefficients (A – approximation, D – detailed) from three levels namely A1_Energy, A2_Energy, A3_Energy, D1_Energy, D2_Energy, and D3_Energy.The useful significant details required for the identification of SCD may not be conveyed by all the features extracted from the HRV signals. For the purpose of identifying the features with significant information for SCD identification, the feature ranking method is used. Using the feature ranking method, all the features extracted are ranked according to their significance. In this work, the Students’ t-test is used as the ranking method to rank the extracted nonlinear features. The t-value obtained is used to rank the features; higher t-values indicate better ranking [49].The features are ranked based on the t-value and used as input to the classifiers to find the minimum number of features needed to obtain the highest performance. In this study, three different classifiers, namely KNN, DT, and SVM are explored with the goal of determining the best classifier [49].SVM consists of a single or a set of hyperplanes in a high-dimensional space. These hyperplanes perform the task of classification [49]. In this study, to distinguish between the normal and SCD HRV signals, SVMs with different kernel functions are explored: Radial Basis Function (RBF) and polynomials of order 1 (Poly1), order 2 (Poly2), order 3 (Poly3).The DT classifier divides the complicated process of decision-making into a simpler one by generating a binary tree-like structure as an output that can be analyzed easily [49]. A decision tree recursively divides the training set until each part is composed of dominant samples from one class.KNN is an instance based classifier and one of the simplest of classification algorithms. By relating the unknown to a known sample, an unknown sample classification is performed [49]. A majority vote by neighbors discriminates the test sample. The most common among its k nearest neighbors are used to assign the class to the test sample. In this experiment, k=5 and 10 are used.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
