@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimizing groups of colluding strong attackers in mobile urban communication networks with evolutionary algorithms

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We used cooperative co-evolutionary to analyse routing in Delay-Tolerant Networks.We applied the method to two urban-scale network scenarios: Venice and San Francisco.We ran extensive experiments on large networks running First Contact protocol.We found groups of strong colluding attackers able to reduce the data delivery rate.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cooperative co-evolution,Delay-Tolerant Network,Evolutionary algorithms,Network security,Routing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In novel forms of the Social Internet of Things, any mobile user within communication range may help routing messages for another user in the network. The resulting message delivery rate depends both on the users’ mobility patterns and the message load in the network. This new type of configuration, however, poses new challenges to security, amongst them, assessing the effect that a group of colluding malicious participants can have on the global message delivery rate in such a network is far from trivial. In this work, after modeling such a question as an optimization problem, we are able to find quite interesting results by coupling a network simulator with an evolutionary algorithm. The chosen algorithm is specifically designed to solve problems whose solutions can be decomposed into parts sharing the same structure. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach on two medium-sized Delay-Tolerant Networks, realistically simulated in the urban contexts of two cities with very different route topology: Venice and San Francisco. In all experiments, our methodology produces attack patterns that greatly lower network performance with respect to previous studies on the subject, as the evolutionary core is able to exploit the specific weaknesses of each target configuration.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The so-called Social Internet of Things calls for nearly ubiquitous communicating devices. There is today a need to integrate low-cost, low-power devices to support networking services in more effective and efficient ways. In such a scenario, new solutions are continuously developed and deployed, while approaches that just a few decades ago were used only in highly complex, niche applications are now literally brought down to earth—Delay-Tolerant Networks (DTNs) are a technology originally developed for space communications that, over the years, made its way down to quite mundane applications  [1]. Emerging technologies and applications are posing serious problems to designers. In most cases there is not enough time to thoroughly validate them, or even to simply analyze their possible failures and problems. Engineers are forced to resort to their experience to choose heuristics that look reasonable, and then observe the actual outcome from real applications. Security in DTNs is a paradigmatic case: such networks need to remain open to all willing participants, and few malicious participants may try to disrupt communications, for instance, routing no messages to other nodes or injecting large number of messages into the network. While such a risk is plausible, precisely assessing DTNs’ vulnerabilities is hard.This paper focuses precisely on evaluating the amount of damage that can be caused to a DTN by a group of synchronized attackers with deep knowledge about the network. Given a scenario, we propose to optimize attackers for minimizing the performances of the network using a heuristic methodology. It is important to note that the adoption of such methodology is more a necessity than a choice: determining the most effective attack for a given network was proven to be NP-hard  [2], the complexity and number of variables involved in the problem preclude the use of formal techniques and the size of the scenarios prevent exhaustive analyses.The idea of using heuristic methods to disprove a property of a system when formally proving it is not possible, is not a novelty in itself. The simplest approach, namely random sampling of the parameter space, is often used under the assumption that the effort employed failing to find a counter example may be sensibly linked to the degree of confidence that a counter example does not actually exist.Repeated random sampling has also be used as a means to estimate numerical quantities when complexity and dimensionality of a problem impedes the application of analytic analyses. In the specific case of DTNs performance, it has been considered in  [3], although limited only to small networks and attackers with no information about the environment. However, random sampling is unlikely to provide any interesting result when the goal is to detect a very specific corner-case scenario, such as the damage caused by specialized attackers that are fully aware of the network characteristics. Finally, when the search space is too vast, even the effort required to get a significant sampling could be excessive.In this work, we move forward from random sampling by using an evolutionary algorithm (EA) to optimize the attackers’ parameters in order to inflict the maximum possible damage to the network. We overcome the limitations of random sampling by using the capability of the EA to drive random search towards specific regions of large search spaces. Furthermore, we extend the features of a classical evolutionary algorithm to enable it to find a team of colluding attackers. As the members of such a team cooperate in order to maximize the cumulative damage, even at the expense of the damage caused by each single attacker, the approach is a form of cooperative co-evolution, an open area of research for which very few successful strategies have been found so far.We tested the proposed methodology on medium-sized networks describing urban scenarios with different topologies, where a number of agents, i.e., the network nodes, move realistically. The results clearly demonstrate the efficacy of the approach: we found scenarios where even few (up to 10% of the total network size), highly optimized attackers can reduce the global data delivery in the network by over 90%, when compared to the network with no attackers. We also observed that the composition of the attacker team obtained by evolution changed when cooperative co-evolution is used, demonstrating that such scheme leads to synergistic solutions not found by classical evolutionary algorithm.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: the next section summarizes the research background; Section 4 details the proposed methodology; Section 5 reports the experimental evaluation; Section 3 surveys the related work; finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we proposed a heuristic methodology to assess the robustness of First Contact, one of the main routing protocols used in Delay-Tolerant Networks. To exploit possible weaknesses of the network, we considered the worst-case scenario of an attack carried out by a coordinated group of agents with full network knowledge. The methodology is based on an evolutionary algorithm using a cooperative co-evolution scheme called Group Evolution recently introduced in the literature and here extended for our purposes. The method is able to optimize groups (either homogeneous or not) of malicious nodes whose behaviour does not comply with the legitimate routing protocol used by honest nodes in the network.We performed an extensive experimental campaign over medium-sized (i.e., 200 nodes) realistic urban networks running on two different cities with radically different map topologies (San Francisco and Venice). We assessed the scalability of the approach by evaluating single attackers as well as groups of up to 10% malicious nodes. Moreover, we compared results obtained with random sampling and a more classical evolutionary algorithm.In all our experiments, the two evolutionary methods clearly outperformed random sampling, consistently finding groups of attackers that produced a larger network damage (reduced data delivery rate and increased latency). The additional advantage brought by Group Evolution resulted in an improved attack effect, optimized group compositions, and more effective movement models.Overall, the contribution of this work is twofold: on one hand, we proposed an efficient alternative to random sampling, that is currently one of the most used approaches for assessing network robustness; on the other hand, we showed an example problem that can be naturally described in terms of cooperative co-evolution and for which such an evolutionary scheme is clearly beneficial.This work represents then one of the few attempts at finding applications of cooperative co-evolution beyond the typical domain of swarm robotics. In future research, we will seek to extend this approach to different networking applications and, possibly, new unexplored domains.