@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Superior foetal electrocardiogram signal elicitation using a novel artificial intelligent Bayesian methodology

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
BANFIS – a novel hybrid methodology.Faster convergence rate within 10s.Above par SNR evaluation methodology – towards efficiency of the algorithm.State of art performance evaluation – towards extorted signal quality.Premier quality of foetal signals elicitated – precious for STAN.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Foetal electrocardiogram (fECG),BANFIS (Bayesian adaptive neuro fuzzy inference system),Kalman filtering framework,Adaptive neuro fuzzy filter,Foetal hypoxia,STAN (ST analysis),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Innumerable casualties due to intrauterine hypoxia are a major worry during prenatal phase besides advanced patient monitoring with latest science and technology. Hence, the analysis of foetal electrocardiogram (fECG) signals is very vital in order to evaluate the foetal heart status for timely recognition of cardiac abnormalities. Regrettably, the latest technology in the cutting edge field of biomedical signal processing does not seem to yield the desired quality of fECG signals required by physicians, which is the major cause for the pathetic condition. The focus of this work is to extort non-invasive fECG signal with highest possible quality with a motive to support physicians in utilizing the methodology for the latest intrapartum monitoring technique called STAN (ST analysis) for forecasting intrapartum foetal hypoxia. However, the critical quandary is that the non-invasive fECG signals recorded from the maternal abdomen are affected by several interferences like power line interference, baseline drift interference, electrode motion interference, muscle movement interference and the maternal electrocardiogram (mECG) being the dominant interference. A novel hybrid methodology called BANFIS (Bayesian adaptive neuro fuzzy inference system) is proposed. The BANFIS includes a Bayesian filter and an adaptive neuro fuzzy filter for mECG elimination and non-linear artefacts removal to yield high quality fECG signal. Kalman filtering frame work has been utilized to estimate the nonlinear transformed mECG component in the abdominal electrocardiogram (aECG). The adaptive neuro fuzzy filter is employed to discover the nonlinearity of the nonlinear transformed version of mECG and to align the estimated mECG signal with the maternal component in the aECG signal for annulment. The outcomes of the investigation by the proposed BANFIS system proved valuable for STAN system for efficient prediction of foetal hypoxia.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Despite the fact that Cremer [1] made the first observation of foetal electrocardiogram (fECG), the signal elicitation still remains to be a challenging assignment for physiologists and engineers in the cutting-edge field of biomedical signal processing [2]. The fECG signal shown in Fig. 1emphasizes the foetal heart activity, which is very vital to determine the foetal heart rate, foetal development, foetal maturity, and existence of foetal distress or, analyze multiple births, to prevent the neonatal disease and to perform parametric analysis of the foetal heart. It is the primary source for latest intrapartum monitoring systems. Continuous monitoring of foetal reactions and activities by cardiac analysis is necessary to forecast foetal hypoxia [3], which is revealed by the changes in the ST segment of the fECG signal as depicted in Fig. 2. The ST segment represents the period of fECG just after depolarization, the QRS complex, and just before re-polarization, the T wave. Changes in the ST segment may indicate a deficiency in blood supply to the foetal heart and may lead to brain damage. The modern technique utilized presently for detecting foetal ST segment changes is called the STAN system (the ST segment analysis) of the fECG signal [4]. The STAN system has the ability to directly diagnose the foetus under threat with hypoxia, which enables the physicians for pathological conclusions and suspicions by ST segment analysis. Hence there is a need for high quality fECG signals to enable such analysis. There have been several techniques developed over the decades, but the hunt for high quality fECG signals is still on the move. A detailed report on these existing techniques can be learned from [2].The fECG signal can be acquired by two methodologies, the foetal scalp electrode (invasive) as shown in Fig. 3and maternal abdomen skin electrode (non-invasive) as shown in Fig. 4. Foetal scalp electrode method will yield a high quality signal but it is death-defying to the foetal. The scalp electrode has to be placed on foetus's head after passing through the mother's womb, which is a harmful practice; it is hazardous for both the mother and the foetus. In contrast, the non-invasive maternal abdomen skin electrode is convenient, and can be used during labour also. This procedure has greater vision for foetal safety and more significantly, long-term monitoring of the foetal heart rate (FHR) can be achieved using innumerable signal-processing techniques. It is completely non-invasive, low power consumption, and can be used over continuous periods of time. However, there exist several tribulations with the non-invasive abdominal recordings. The recorded abdominal electrocardiogram signal (aECG) contains three types of signals: maternal ECG signal (mECG), foetal ECG signal (fECG) and other interference signals (noise). Some of the important noise sources are muscular (EMG) interference, base lines interference, electrodes noise, power line interference, background noise and other interferences [2]. Hence, accurate non-invasive elicitation and analysis of fECG is more challenging since the fECG is a very weak signal and superimposed with a strong maternal ECG (mECG) of mother, power line interference, baseline wander, background noise and other interferences. There exist other difficulties too. Appearance of noise whose amplitude is usually larger than amplitude of fECG signal, appearance of mECG signal with an amplitude of 10–30 times bigger than fECG, low signal to noise ratio (SNR) roughly less than unity, the complex 3-D form of mECG, the fECG is estimated with the electrodes attached on the mother's abdomen and not directly attached to the foetus itself, due to the foetal movement in the womb, signals on each electrode frequently change, location of electrodes on the mother's abdomen, mother's breathing effects, mother's motions effects, appearance of eliminated noise due to improper processing etc.Hence, the search for an effective high quality non-invasive fECG signal elicitation and processing technique is considerably crucial. In the perspective of the problem, it is not possible to use traditional filtering methodologies due to the time varying nature of the spectrum of both the interfering and the useful fECG signals. In this work we propose a novel methodology called BANFIS (Bayesian adaptive neuro fuzzy inference system) for mECG elimination and non-linear artefacts removal to yield high quality fECG signal which offers solution to the problems of Physicians dealing with fECG signals. Kalman filtering frameworks have been utilized to estimate the nonlinear transformed mECG component in the abdominal electrocardiogram (aECG). An adaptive neuro fuzzy filter is used to determine the nonlinear relationship of the nonlinear transformed version of mECG and to align the estimated mECG signal with the maternal component in the aECG signal for elimination. The BANFIS is capable of adapting itself to dissimilar spectral and temporal properties of the signal. The outcomes of the investigation yielded high quality fECG signals and proved worth for Physician analysis and moreover indicated that the proposed system may be integrated with the STAN system for efficient prediction of foetal hypoxia.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
