@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An empirical comparison of market efficiency: Electronic marketplaces vs. traditional retail formats

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Integrating product and channel preference factors to analyze differences of efficiency in electronic and traditional markets.Applying Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) to calculate market efficiency for single-channel and multi-channel shoppers.Price dispersion and market inefficiency exist in electronic marketplaces.Market efficiencies vary across consumer segments and products.Incorporation of behavioral segmentation and product characteristics enhances the understanding of market efficiency.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Electronic markets,Market efficiency,Data Envelopment Analysis,Consumer behavioral segmentation,Retailing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Researchers have found that price dispersion and market inefficiency exists in electronic marketplaces. Little attention has been bestowed to explore difference in market efficiency between traditional and electronic marketplaces. This study integrates both product and channel preference factors to analyze differences in market efficiency between electronic and traditional shopping environments. Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) is applied to calculate market efficiency for single-channel and multi-channel shoppers. Results show that market efficiencies vary across consumer segments and products. In summary, this paper enhances understanding of market efficiency by incorporating behavioral segment and product characteristics into the explanatory framework.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The last decade has seen an exponential increase in commercial use (buying and selling) of Internet. Between 2002 and 2012, retail e-commerce grew at 15–25% per year, following a fairly typical adoption pattern that transformed more mainstream consumers into online shoppers. In 2012, around 150 million Americans made at least one online purchase, and an additional 35 million used the Web to gather information about products (eMarketer Inc. 2012, National Retail Foundation 2012). By far, marketing activities accounted for most of the growth in online traffic. Overall, Internet has evolved into a well-established electronic marketplace. B2C retail e-commerce (both actual purchases and purchases influenced by Web shopping but actually bought from a brick-and-mortar a store) is estimated at $1.2 trillion in 2012, or over 40% of total retail sales in the United States (Forrester Research 2011).Electronic marketplaces have the potential to fundamentally change how people shop. They can disrupt the structure of well established industries such as retail and consumer goods (Alba et al. 1997). An early, and popular notion among economists posited greater transparency and efficiency in digital markets. For example, online shopping was expected to diminish information asymmetries. The transparency characteristic was expected to include price, quality, and availability of most product. This grand vision of web-based information and product access was labeled “frictionless commerce” and sharply contrasted with the unpredictability and opaqueness that often characterize real-world markets (Smith et al. 2000). A related hypothesis predicted that electronic markets will reduce consumers’ information search costs to produce efficiency gains, while the greater transparency was expected to increase the quality of information about price, leading to price convergence (Bakos 1997) and better market efficiency. However, early studies failed to support this notion of perfect, friction-free commerce. Several researchers (Bailey 1998, Brynjolfsson and Smith 2000, Erevelles et al. 2001, Lee and Gosain 2002, Clemons et al. 2002) found significant price dispersion on the Internet. Baylis and Perloff (2002) cited price discrimination as a likely cause of this unexpected finding. Some pointed to seller differentiation as a driver of price dispersion (Baye et al. 2004a,b, Pan et al. 2003). Others proposed that multichannel retailers have higher prices than Internet-only retailers (Pan et al. 2002, Ancarani and Shankar 2004). Finally, market level forces were considered by some as the chief cause of price dispersion online (Venkatesan et al. 2007, Pan et al. 2009).While the preceding explanations of price dispersion in the electronic marketplace are interesting, they also raise a fundamental question: how is consumer welfare impacted if electronic marketplaces dominate the future of retailing? Unfortunately, this research question remains unexplored. There is a lack of research that compares market efficiency metrics between traditional and electronic marketplaces. In addition, no study of price dispersion or market efficiency has explicitly incorporated behavioral segmentation based on consumers’ single or multi-channel shopping preference. Furthermore, despite evidence (Walter et al. 2006) that price variance attributable to a variable may differ across products, the price dispersion literature has not fully examined differences across products. Therefore, the main objectives of our study are as follows:(1)Integrate both product and channel preference factors to explain differences in market efficiency when electronic and traditional shopping environments coexist.Compare market efficiency across online-only shoppers, offline-only shoppers, and multichannel shoppers; investigate if differences in market efficiency across these three groups also vary by product. In particular, how do product factors influence market efficiency when comparing traditional and electronic marketplaces?Explore how the electronic marketplace affects the competition structure among brands within an industry, i.e., how the efficiency frontiers for brands change when a new electronic marketplace option coexists with the traditional retail format.Our study contributes to the literature on market efficiency in the electronic marketplace by adding new knowledge or extending existing knowledge. We introduce behavioral segmentation into marketing efficiency calculations. In addition, we explore efficiency changes by consumer segments for different products along a set of key product characteristics. We also discuss changes in efficiency frontiers.Our study is structured as follows. We begin with a review of the literature on market efficiency in the context of price dispersion in traditional (offline) and electronic (online) marketplaces. We then present an exploratory framework that incorporates behavioral segmentation. The next section describes the research method, followed by our analysis. We discuss findings, their managerial implications, summarize our conclusions and limitations, and provide guidance for future research.The market efficiency of traditional retail formats has been called into question in the price–quality relationship literature. Kamakura et al. (1988) provide a comprehensive overview. They examine the determinants of market efficiency with an application of Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) to multiple product categories and conclude that a significant amount of inefficiency exists. A vast literature that explains inefficiency and price dispersion as an outcome of costly information can be traced back to Stigler’s (1961) “Economics of Information” (EOI) theory, which posits that consumers will continue search until the marginal expected cost equals the marginal expected return. Nagle (1984) provides an excellent overview of economics literature on pricing, with a particular focus on asymmetric information. An exchange involves asymmetric information when one party has more information than the other party. Many pricing issues are associated with asymmetric information, such as the presence of “inefficient brands” in a consumer market. Nagle also finds that consumer information acquisition is closely related to price elasticity. The fewer the brands about which buyers are informed, the less sensitive they will be to the price of any one brand. The cost of consumer information acquisition is dependent on product attributes. As one moves from the search attributes to experience attributes and onto credence attributes, information about a brand’s differentiating attributes becomes more costly.A ramification from EOI is that some inefficient brands might continue to exist, because information is costly and therefore imperfect. By examining the previous price–quality literature, Kamakura et al. attribute market inefficiency and the survival of inefficient brands to several factors. First, since the actual product space is not continuous but contains only discrete offerings, and since consumers cannot buy mixtures of product offerings (especially for durable goods), these gaps may give each brand a monopoly over those consumers whose equilibrium lie in the vicinity of the brand (Rosen 1974). Second, ignorance of available offerings or of their characteristics may increase consumers willingness to pay more than the efficient price (Maynes and Assum 1982, Rosen 1974). Finally, consumers’ buying strategies may involve a trade-off between the benefits of finding an efficient brand and the costs involved in this search (Pratt et al. 1979, Ratchford 1980, Stigler 1961). Overall, since the benefits of searching to find the most efficient brand may fail to exceed the costs of doing so, the optimal decision may be to purchase an inefficient brand—one whose price is above the minimum for its characteristics.Though many factors influence market efficiency, there are three factors that are most salient in the market efficiency literature. These factors are: information acquisition, continuous product offering, and symmetric information. Bakos (1997) showed that reduced search costs in electronic marketplaces increased allocational efficiency and price competition among sellers. As a result, electronic marketplaces reduce buyer search costs to improve market efficiency. In addition, Internet agents that access and evaluate online information represent intelligent systems with the potential to substantially increase market efficiency (Palopoli et al. 2006). Overall, in electronic marketplaces, technology has changed how these factors drive market efficiency, as summarized in Table 1.Aside from the positive factors that improve market efficiency, there are complex problems facing consumers in the electronic marketplace that have an adverse impact. First, prior to any purchase, consumers have to search a large number of websites to compare brands, products and merchants. This information acquisition and decision making process often entails significant time and search costs. Because of these costs, consumers may find it rather difficult to identify products that satisfy their needs. Fortunately, some of this difficulty is mitigated if consumers are assisted by Internet agents (Pivk and Gams 2000; Guttman and Maes 1999; Rosaci 2004, 2005). Hostler et al. (2005) assessed the impact of Internet agent in a retail online shopping environment.Palopoli et al. (2006) explored the role of agents in various phases of the consumer decision-making process. Internet agent systems, such as intelligent agents, mobile agents, or collaborative agents, help customers to examine and evaluate product alternatives efficiently (Sarwar et al. 2000, Schafer et al. 2001). The contribution of Internet agents to market efficiency mainly stems from assisting and simplifying the interaction between users and computers. For instance, a feature-based filtering system may allow consumers to select products at a website based on featured keywords. Similarly, a collaborative filtering system may recommend products based on a consumer’s similarity with other unknown consumers, as determined through a real time comparison of products searched and other information stored in his/her profile. A constraint-based filtering system may facilitate the specification of shopping constraints for the desired product (e.g., price range, delivery time) and return information on only those that meet these constraints. Finally, price comparison sites, such as shopping.com, pricegrabber.com, nextag.com, compare the price of several sellers with respect to the same product.According to Nelson (1970), in traditional markets, information on product quality is often more difficult to obtain than price information. In sharp contrast, the electronic marketplace (e-commerce) allows consumers to easily access information on product quality.Bakos (1997) developed models that considered search costs and market efficiency in a differentiated market with heterogeneous buyer tastes and seller product offerings (Varian 1980, Salop and Stiglitz 1982). A key difference in market efficiency arises when we compare buyers with access to an electronic marketplace (who have access to no-cost or low-cost information about seller prices and product offerings), and buyers those who use traditional retail formats (thereby facing higher search costs). Our study extends Bakos (1997) by focusing on the heterogeneity in buyers’ ability or preference to obtain information within online and offline settings.There is well-established marketing literature that models how consumers find and buy goods and services. According to Guttman et al. (1998), such models of Consumer Buying Behavior (CBB), such as the Nicosia Model (Nicosia 1966), the Howard–Sheth Model (Howard and Sheth 1969), the Engel–Blackwell Model (Engel and Blackwell 1982), the Bettmann Information Processing Model (Bettman 1979), the Andreasen Model (Andreasen 1965), The Extended CBB model (E-CBB) (He et al. 2003), and the Bohm, Felt and Uellner Model (2000), share significant descriptive steps. Typically, a consumer searches the marketplace for products or services that may satisfy his/her identified need. This is followed by careful evaluations and comparisons of product alternatives based on key purchase decision criteria. This step concludes with a consideration set, a set of products capable of satisfying the consumer’s needs. The final step is the product purchase. We adapt these common steps into an exploratory framework to demonstrate how behavioral segmentation is used to assess and compare market efficiency (Fig. 1).Modern economic theory suggests that a competitive market with perfect information is characterized by efficient brands. Improving consumers’ access to product and brand information is an effective approach to eliminate market inefficiencies (Kamakura et al. 1988, Dardis and Gieser 1980, Maynes and Assum 1982, Sproles 1986).Consumers may differ in how they perceive the marketplace structure as it relates to a purchase decision process. Some consumers may place all the available online and offline brands into their consideration set, thereby invoking a decision-making process that accommodates multichannel shopping. However, others may restrict search and/or purchase to either the online or offline setting. By explicitly choosing one of these settings, such consumers act as if the other market/setting does not exist. Overall, all consumers generally fall into one of three groups: online-only shoppers, offline-only shoppers, and multichannel shoppers. Our framework in Fig. 1 delineates these three behavioral segments in terms of both search and purchase phases.Using the Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) approach, our study measures market efficiency for each of these three segments. Stated differently, market efficiency may vary across these segments, given that they differ on how information is obtained on price or quality, or where the purchases are made. For example, compared with traditional retail formats, the electronic marketplace is generally more convenient and less expensive for consumers in terms of accessing and comparing information. We therefore hypothesize that the online market is more efficient than offline market.H1aOverall, the electronic marketplace for online-only shoppers is more efficient than traditional retail formats that serve offline-only shoppers.Overall, for multichannel shoppers, online brands are more efficient than offline brands.Various studies show that involvement has an important moderating effect on consumer information processing (Cacioppo et al. 1986, Petty et al. 1983, Chaiken 1980) and that the same information can be processed in different ways depending on consumer involvement. For instance, consumers are likely to scrutinize the attributes of a high-involvement product; they are also less likely to engage in attributional processing of a low-involvement product. When a market is characterized by a high level of price dispersion for a high-involvement product, consumers may become suspicious. In other words, a wide price range for the same product is bound to raise questions and concerns that prompt attributional processing, whereby consumers ascribe a cause for the price dispersion (Winer 1985, Kelley 1973, Heider 1958). To the extent that consumers are highly motivated to evaluate a product’s quality, the greater information access in the pre-purchase phase is a major component of the value that consumers perceive from the electronic marketplace. For example, it would be difficult for the consumer to examine a complex product in all its possible attribute combinations within a brick-and-mortar retail store. In contrast, it is possible to gather information on even unusual product attribute combinations in the electronic marketplace. Consider the offline purchase process for a car with a particular paint job plus other options where the consumer may not be sure about the product’s appearance if some of these options were changed. In an online context, however, automakers may develop websites where all color combinations, wheel types, door configurations, and so on, can be selected, whereby customized cyber-representations are generated immediately.Nevertheless, for certain experiential products, consumption benefits are predicted more reliably from information searchable within traditional stores than from surrogate information searchable through e-commerce. For instance, consumers may be unwilling to purchase paper towels online without touching the real product. In this sense, in-store shopping will provide more objective quality information. Online shopping will make less improvement in regarding to the market efficiency within this product category.Next, we examine two different product categories, candy bars and personal computers. In the case of candy bars, the importance of externalities, signaling, and psychological status associated with either exclusivity or popularity is low. For personal computers, positive network externalities (availability of software, as well as after-sale service) are very relevant. Moreover, consumers are likely to rely on an attribute-by-attribute examination of quality in order to judge the overall quality of a computer. The quality information for personal computers is easy to standardize and compare; this product is also expensive and purchased infrequently. For these reasons, the pre-purchase information search is likely to be important in this product category. Therefore, we expect that consumers will gain more benefit by purchasing computers in the electronic marketplace, compared to say, the purchase of candy bars.To consumers, the appropriateness of online marketing depends to a large extent on the characteristics of the product or service considered for purchase. It is therefore necessary to explicitly consider these characteristics when evaluating the impact of the electronic marketplace, relative to traditional retail formats. This can be done by formally incorporating a product or service classification into the analysis. In this research, we classify products or services as being either high-involvement or low-involvement. The market efficiency of the electronic marketplace may vary by product involvement. We predict lower market efficiency for product categories characterized by a low purchase price and low product involvement. For products with a high purchase price and high-involvement, consumers may be more likely to use online information resources, thereby increasing online market efficiency. Thus, for routinely purchased low-involvement product categories such as Laundry detergents, Butter, Margarines, Cleaners, and Battery investigated in our research where consumers are likely to possess considerable prior personal experience, the online marketplace may not be very efficient.H2For high-involvement products, the online shopping format will result in higher market efficiency when compared to the traditional retail format.The change of market efficiency is sensitive to the nature of the products and services being marketed. If the product value is intangible or informational, the Internet marketer can improve market efficiency through increased use of digital assets. For example, software can be sampled, purchased, and distributed electronically. For large physical products, the online delivery cost may be significant, so the traditional brick-and-mortar retail format tends to dominate the online channel with respect to transaction and distribution functions, primarily because these functions do not offer economies of scale to the Internet marketer (unless there is a substantial delivery charge and/or several products are purchased and delivered together). An Internet marketer is less likely to carry such a product, given the cost disadvantage on transaction/distribution (relative to traditional retailers) that reduces market inefficiency. For expensive and infrequently purchased products, the delivery cost is a smaller proportion of the cost of the product. Although this suggests that an online retailer is likely to carry such products, we also recognize that, if consumers insist on inspecting (or physically experiencing) an expensive product prior to purchase, they are more likely to prefer the traditional retail channel over online shopping.H3Product categories where shipping and handling represents a small proportion of total price may have higher efficiency compared to products where shipping and handling is a large proportion of total price.Another key dimension to be considered is the degree to which a given product or service is differentiable. This takes into account whether a seller is able to create a sustainable competitive advantage through product or service differentiation. If products or services are differentiated, effective segmentation can guide buyers toward their ideal product or service. Consequently, sellers may have the opportunity to charge a higher price, by providing opportunities to enhance fit between buyer requirements and product characteristics.A brand has more opportunity to differentiate if more attributes are employed by consumers to evaluate its product category. We use the number of salient attributes as a proxy to measure a brand’s ability to differentiate within a category. Higher the number of salient characteristics, higher the brand’s ability to moderate price competition. We expect higher market efficiency for such product categories.H4Product categories with more salient attributes may reflect higher market efficiency, when compared to product categories with fewer salient attributes.This study adopts the Kamakura et al. methodology to define and measure market efficiency. Kamakura et al. employ Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) to assess the degree of inefficiency of each brand within a product category. They define the measure of price efficiency in the “characteristics-space.” This measure compares the price of each brand with the best possible price under the available technology at its particular combination of characteristics. This approach also identifies the set of efficient brands used as the standard of comparison. Finally, this measure provides guidance on steps needed to render any given brand price-efficient. A brand is defined as efficient if it provides the highest value per dollar spent for that set of characteristics, where an efficient brand would be assigned a value of 1 on a price efficiency scale. Efficiency of any particular brand is measured as the ratio between the “efficient” price and the actual price paid.The DEA approach described above can generate useful information to consumers, such as lists of inefficient brands, or price ranges in which specific brands may become efficient. In this study, we apply this methodology to a number of product categories in online and offline shopping contexts to estimate gains or losses to consumers when they purchase goods in the electronic marketplace. Nevertheless, our research purpose differs from Kamakura et al. in that their study focuses on determining if a given brand is efficient, while our study also compares market efficiency across two different retailing formats.Since the majority of consumers are multichannel shoppers, it is useful to develop an efficiency map for this group. Therefore, we determine the efficiency scores for multichannel shoppers and subsequently analyze an integrative regression model. Fare and Grosskopf (1994), among others, have formalized input-oriented DEA models. A detailed description of a DEA model can be found in Banker and Morey (1986) that extends the original model to empirical data involving ordinal or nominal characteristics. Our study determines efficiency by mathematically solving the following problem (adapted from Banker et al. 1984).(1)(Max)hj,sr+,si-Zk+ξ∑r=1gsi++∑i=1msi-(2)Subject to:Prkzk-∑j=1nprjhj+sr+=0(r=1,2,…,g)(3)∑j=1nxijhj+si-=xik(i=1,2,…,m)(4)∑j=1nhj=1(5)hj,sr+,si-⩾0(j=1,2,…,n)where n is the number of brands for each category, m the number of inputs, g the number of outputs, xijthe level of i-type input for brand j, prjthe level of r-type output (product characteristic) for brand j, Zkis the efficiency ratio for the brand under consideration, ξ is a very small constant,sr+andsi-are slack variables for output r and input i, and hjis the weight for brand j. The slack measure, in addition to the price reduction, focuses on additional attributes that should be offered by inefficient brands to make them efficient (Kamakura et al. 1988). To improve inefficient brands, the objective is to reduce the eventual slack in inputs (costs) without reducing the optimal output (technical performance). If, for instance, the input slack is equal to unity, the observed brand is efficient. If, on the other hand, the input slack is less than unity, the brand under investigation is inefficient. A computer program is utilized to solve the above Data Envelopment Analyses (DEA) models for each product category.We employ the same definition of efficiency as Hjorth-Anderson (1984) and Kamakura et al. (1988). A given brand is inefficient if there is some other brand with a lower price and equivalent or higher quality. The price reduction needed to make this brand efficient provides a measure of the loss incurred by choosing an inefficient brand.For brands estimated to be lower in quality but higher in price than at least one other alternative, efficiencies were calculated according to multichannel shoppers as per Eqs. (1)–(5) of the DEA model.Price and quality data on several brands/models sold in traditional retail formats were gathered from Consumer Reports. Online price data were collected for the same brands/models from websites for e-tailers, and comparison shopping/manufacturers’ web sites, which include: shopping.yahoo.com, www.shopping.com, www.bizrate.com, www.mysimon.com, www.nextag.com, www.amazon.com, www.dell.com, www.pricegrabber.com, www.become.com, and www.pronto.com. The same set of quality indicators are used to compute efficiency in both offline and online settings.To render offline and online prices comparable, online prices are collected over the same time period as the offline data obtained from Consumer Reports. Thirty-one product categories are included in the study (Table 2). Online stores provided a comprehensive price range, so we employed average price as a surrogate for online price. Another consideration is that online price is artificially reduced because shipping cost is excluded, while offline price is also reduced because sales tax is excluded. Our analyses assume that these two reductions are comparable. For example, in Illinois State, sales tax paid in offline stores for electronic products is 7%, very close to the average shipping cost for goods delivered by online stores. Since prices reported by Consumer Reports did not include sales tax, the online price used in our analyses did not include shipping costs either.To test hypotheses H1–H4, price efficiency analysis was applied to both offline (Consumer Reports) and online data for 31 product categories. Most product categories include high-involvement goods, such as electronics and computers, gardening, home appliances, and sporting goods. Alkaline battery, Laundry detergents, Butter, Cleaners, and Margarines were chosen as representative low-involvement products emphasizing experience attributes. A summary of the results and of the descriptors of each product category is presented in Table 2.In Table 2, the two mean efficiency columns for single channel shoppers provide approximate measures of the average price efficiency for all brands in each product category. Average efficiency online does not represent a significant improvement for all product categories studied. Generally, the degree of improvement (11 out of 31 cases) ranges from 0.6% (Answer machines) to 9% (Laundry detergents). The observed exception is Alkaline battery, where the market efficiency is 0.41 under traditional retail format but 0.72 in the electronic marketplace. Interestingly, for both 35mm camera and digital camera, market efficiency is 1.0 on both offline and online formats.With respect to single-channel shoppers, another aspect to compare is the number of inefficient brands in online and offline settings. For 17 out of the 31 product categories considered, the number of inefficient brands is not lower in online settings when compared to offline settings. To summarize, the evidence suggests that the online setting does not decrease the number of inefficient brands nor does it improve the overall efficiency. The latter finding suggests that the inefficient brands are not closer to efficient brands despite the greater accessibility/transparency of information in the online setting. For the remaining 14 product categories, the online setting yielded a lower number of inefficient brands. The exceptions included CD player and Margarine product categories.Overall, the above results suggest that the online marketplace is not more efficient than the traditional retail setting. We conducted a Paired Sample T-test to test the significance of the efficiency difference between these two marketplaces. The analysis is run on the efficiency data from Table 2, and results are shown in Table 3.1. Those differences are not significant at alpha=0.05. Therefore, H1a is not supported.The two mean efficiency columns for multichannel shoppers in Table 2 show that average efficiency of online brands is higher than that of offline brands for 21 out of the 31 product categories studied. Ten more product categories show more efficiency improvement from offline to online for multichannel shoppers than for single-channel shoppers. The improvement ranges from 0.4% (Dishwashers) to 33.7% (Printers). Another observation involves Alkaline battery, where the market efficiency is 0.35 under traditional retail format but 0.27 in the electronic marketplace. This result is directionally opposite to findings for single-channel shoppers. For multichannel shoppers, both 35mm and digital camera products yield market efficiency that is higher for online than offline formats. It appears that, more product categories gain efficiency online for multichannel shoppers than for single-channel shoppers. However, the Paired Sample T-test of the efficiency difference between offline and online brands for multichannel shoppers is not statistically significant at alpha=0.05 (see Table 3.2). In this case, H1b is not supported.We have reported separate sets of efficiency scores for multichannel shoppers and single-channel shoppers (Table 2). The Paired Sample T-tests of the variation in efficiency across products between these two types of shoppers for online brands is statistically significant at alpha=0.05 (see Table 3.3). The results show that multichannel shoppers see significantly lower efficiency for online brands when compared to online-only shoppers. Similarly, multichannel shoppers also encounter lower efficiency for offline brands when compared to offline-only shoppers (see Table 3.4).In order to simultaneously test our hypotheses about the impact on market efficiency of factors such as online/offline format, high/low product involvement, number of salient attributes, and shipping and handling costs as a proportion of the total product price, we ran a multiple regression model with dependent and independent variables as described below. The model parameters were estimated for multichannel shoppers as they have grown into a dominant shopping segment, and are likely to remain so in the foreseeable future.This variable represents the average efficiency scores for each of the 31 product categories for offline format, and an additional set of 31 average efficiency scores for the same 31 product categories extracted with data from online shopping sources.(1)FACTOR_T (dummy variable, with a 0 value for offline format, and 1 for online format).HI_LO_IN (dummy variable, with a 0 value for high-involvement products or less frequently purchased products, and 1 for low-involvement products or more frequently purchased products).SALIENT (number of attributes for a particular product category).SHIPPING (shipping & handling costs as a proportion of total product price).This regression model is acceptable, with a R Square value of 0.525, and F=17.828, p value=.000. The parameter estimates for this model are shown in Table 4.1. The average efficiency scores (as measured by DEA) do not vary between offline and online formats (Beta=.091, p value=0.306). We note that this result is not aligned with the prediction in H1b. The average efficiency score varies considerably across product categories along the continuum from the high-involvement product category to low-involvement product category (Beta=−.300, p value=0.020). Thus, H2 is supported. Results for the impact of “shipping and handling as a proportion of total product price” on market efficiency follow: Beta=−.357, p value=.005. Thus, H3 is supported. With respect to the impact of number of salient attributes on efficiency improvement: Beta=0.238, p value=0.020 (as shown in Table 4.1). We therefore conclude that the number of salient attributes in a product category has a significant impact on efficiency. This result strongly supports H4.Table 4.2is obtained for multichannel shoppers, but the analysis is limited to 26 high-involvement products (HI_LO_IN=0).The first 26 observations are average efficiency scores of the 26 high-involvement product categories for offline format, and the next 26 observations are average efficiency scores of the same 26 product categories for online format.(1)FACTOR_T (dummy variable, 0 for offline format, 1 for online format).SALIENT (number of attributes for a particular product category).SHIPPING (portion of shipping & handling cost in terms of the whole product price).The R Square is 0.200, and F=4.008, sig.=.013, which means this model is highly significant at alpha=0.05. Coefficients estimates are shown in Table 4.2. The following results show that the online format has significantly improved efficiency, thereby lending support to H1b when the analysis is restricted to these 26 product categories.Table 4.3is obtained by limiting the analysis to 5 low-involvement products (HI_LO_IN=1). The R Square is 0.786, and F=7.359, sig.=.020, which means this model is highly significant at alpha=0.05. Coefficients estimates are shown in Table 4.3. The results show that the online format has significantly decreased efficiency for the low-involvement products.Zettelmeyer (2000) explores how the existence and the size of the Internet affects firms’ optimal pricing strategies. According to Zettelmeyer, firms can charge different prices in the offline and online marketplaces, but these prices cannot be too different from each other before it is profitable to arbitrage between these two. For most products currently offered, the Internet reaches only a subset of potential customers for the product. Two predictions stand out. First, some companies price lower on the Internet than in their traditional retailing format. Second, companies facilitate consumer search more (or at least as much) on the Internet than they do in their traditional retail channels. Firms such as Dell run websites that enable customization of computer systems that fit consumers’ needs exactly, and to link into product reviews and product comparisons. Additionally, many firms charge substantially lower prices for identical products on the Internet (Brynjolfsson and Smith 1999). As more consumers increase their use of the Internet and become multichannel shoppers, the opportunity for the Web to influence their online and offline shopping behavior grows. Multichannel shoppers represent a very powerful audience and tend to be channel-agnostic. Simply put, it is therefore desirable for businesses to integrate across channels.Although hybrid firms (firms relying on both traditional and online channels) have registered impressive growth, these enterprises seem to operate in the two marketplaces by treating them as separable. While many businesses see their online and offline business as separate sales channels, our study suggests that multichannel customers do not make such distinctions. Since multichannel shopping is a dominant segment and also represents a growing trend, failing to understand this finding may lead to lost opportunities to create competitive advantage from market structure changes attributable to the electronic marketplace.Multichannel shoppers and single-channel shoppers have different perceptions on current market structure, and these differences may cause firms to position their brands differently when targeting these two segments in a competitive environment. The competition structure in terms of efficiency scores among brands are significantly different when offline and online domains are assumed to represent two separate marketplaces (single-channel shoppers), when compared to another viewpoint that assumes a hybrid marketplace, or that offline and online markets are inseparable (multichannel shoppers).To assess efficiency when comparing a single (offline-only or online-only shoppers) marketplace with the integrated hybrid marketplace (multichannel shoppers), we develop four indices: OFEC (Offline Efficiency Change), OFFC (Offline Frontier Change), ONEC (Online Efficiency Change), and ONFC (Online Frontier Change), whereOFEC(or ONEC)=∑i=1n(Xi-X-)2/nOFFC(or ONFC)=∑i=1m(Xi-X-)2/mXi: The difference between ith brand’s single efficiency score in offline market or online market and the score in a combined marketplace of offline and online.n: number of brands in the product category.m: number of efficient brands in this category.Among the 31 product categories we investigated, four out of five experience products (Alkaline battery, Butter, Margarines, and Laundry detergents) reflect a “0” value both for offline-efficiency change and offline-frontier change (see Table 5), while all five experience product categories reflect higher values for both online efficiency change and online frontier change. These results support our hypothesis that electronic marketplace has little influence on offline (traditional) retailing formats for experience-featured goods. Electronic marketplace does improve the efficiency for experience goods, but it does not influence the competition structure for experience-featured products.Conversely, 12 (search attributes featured) of the original 31 categories reflect a “0” value on online efficiency change and online frontier change. But they have a relatively higher score on offline efficiency and offline frontier change (see Table 5). These findings provide support for H2, such that search products gain efficiency when placed online, and that traditional retailing formats are influenced the most in terms of frontier change. Two additional product categories need some attention: Digital camera and Gas grill. For both these products, there is significant change in offline efficiency, but this does not appear to impact the efficient brands that appear immune to marketplace changes (see Table 5).We analyzed the benchmark changes from our DEA results. Three major patterns were found:(1)Online brands dominate the same brands offline.Other online brands dominate the former efficient offline brands.No changes for the previously efficient brands.We attribute the first pattern to “firm’s multi-channel influence”, the second pattern to competition structure changes because of online retailing. Pattern (3) occurs when firms simply attempt to duplicate their conventional pricing and communications strategies (as applicable to traditional retail formats) in the online retail setting, an approach that is not necessarily optimal. As shown in Table 6, most product categories advance the efficiency frontier toward their own corresponding online format. This is consistent with Zettlemeyer’s (2000) argument that most brands are sold at lower prices in the online setting. In our research, we found evidence of pattern (3) for all efficient brands in experience product categories like Butter, Laundry detergents, Margerines and Battery.These analyzes also sensitize us to multi-channel conflict and possible arbitrage. The risk especially arises from pattern (2). For example, for “cleaners”, 13 out of 17 efficient brands become inefficient when subjected to multichannel shoppers’ unique perceptions of the marketplace, as a result of competition from other brands. Only 4 out of 17 brands change the efficiency frontier because of their own online channel influence. In general, firms have to be alert so that they do not lose competitive advantage because of the emergence of the online marketplace. Put differently, the electronic marketplace may introduce new turbulence in some product categories, such as satellite, gas grill, hedge trimmers, self-mowers, APS camera, CD players and cleaners, as evident from our research. Most offline brands for search product categories lost efficiency as a result of being dominated by their own brands in the online setting, such as PDA and Digital Receivers.Consider, for example, a firm that is a low-service retailer. As long as the reach of the Internet is limited to single-channel shoppers, it may be in the retailer’s best interest to reorient its online profile to facilitate consumers’ information search. On the other hand, a retailer whose traditional (brick and mortar) store facilitates consumers’ information search will benefit from continuing the same orientation toward consumer search in the online setting.Even if buyers have objective information on brand attributes, the value of an individual attribute or the superiority of one attribute combination over another may not be obvious. Hence, there are no uniform criteria to evaluate the objective quality of information across individuals. Furthermore, no product’s quality can be appraised perfectly through inspection, even if full information is available. If product characteristics change frequently, consumers may never possess complete information about the quality of any product. Moreover, consumers are not perfect information processors. For all these reasons, they are likely to possess imperfect information about brand quality and may rely on cues or heuristics to judge quality in online settings. This occurs, either because information on an attribute is simply not accessible in a given medium (e.g., the scent of a detergent or softness of paper towel are difficult to discern online) or the information can only be obtained with considerable effort (e.g., generating a comparative listing of nutrition attributes for different brands of margarine is more effortful offline than online).Firms can reduce customer price sensitivity for products at their websites by: (1) providing useful information through multiple web pages, in particular, on non-price attributes, (2) making the site highly interactive, whereby price becomes just one of the many attributes that interested shoppers can browse, (3) offering a wide range of product assortments and prices, and (4) making it easier to search on non-price attributes relative to price.Online customers may be more predisposed to search for better prices. But, if a firm offers rich and deep information, an interactive search process, and a wide product selection, customers may have the time to also search non-price attributes. Other strategies that encourage non-price attribute search include a strong editorial content, making customer testimonials available, and embedding special features (e.g., a map with locations of attractions near a hotel).Consumers may be less price-sensitive on search attributes in online settings, especially if they perceive significant value from products or services that offer integrated solutions. However, although online transactions appear transparent, information search activity is constrained by the marginal cost/benefit rule whereby search activity stops when the benefits from search equal the costs due to search. Regardless of a product category is perceived, having little or no product-specific knowledge implies that brands are perceived as undifferentiated (because there is no information with which to differentiate them).Consumers who are uncertain about the evolution of future consumption experience may be less willing or able to use objective/current product quality information in online settings. This is especially likely for a product or service that includes experience attributes (attributes that must be experienced to be evaluated) or credence attributes (those that are very difficult to evaluate and force the customer to rely on the product’s reputation to evaluate them (Darby and Karni 1973, Nelson 1970, Zeithaml 1981). In our study, Laptop users may encounter unanticipated benefits (e.g., as new applications are identified in future) or setbacks (as competing product categories develop over time). In this sense, even if quality information is relatively current, complete and easy to obtain online, this type of information uncertainty may diminish efficiency in the electronic marketplace.Findings from a number of studies on the price–quality relationship reaffirm the significant inefficiency that characterizes both traditional and electronic markets for consumer products. Our study highlights the problem of inefficient brands in electronic markets. One solution to reduce this inefficiency is to improve consumer information on a larger number of product attributes, which has the further advantage of improving choice between brands that are not inefficient, or even eliminating inefficient brands. A unique contribution of this study is to empirically establish that the electronic marketplace does improve market efficiency for some product categories (e.g. high-involvement products) thereby improving consumer well being without damaging competition (dynamic efficiency).Our DEA model assumes that competing products and services are completely undifferentiated beyond the number of investigated attributes. This is a very strong assumption because it can be argued that marketers will always be able to find a non-price basis for differentiation (e.g., warranties, post-sale service, image, and so on). Even minute differences in differentiation, such as how price is bundled with other offering attributes, may allow marketers to price their products or services at a higher level.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
