@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Intelligent use of data to optimize compressive strength of cellulose-derived composites

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Neural network is trained to predict the compressive strength of composites from experimental variables.Input variables are optimized to maximize compressive strength, by genetic algorithm.Experimental constraints are considered during optimization.The consistency of the analysis is verified by laboratory experiments.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Carbon/polymer composites,Compressive strength,Hybrid soft computing,Neural network,Genetic algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Two soft-computing techniques are implemented to model and optimize the compressive strength of carbon/polymer composites. Artificial neural network is used to establish a relationship between the uniaxial compressive strength of fabricated materials and the most significant processing parameters. To put together a database, three different types of wood are carbonized at various heat treatment temperatures, in specific pyrolysis time periods. Compression tests are then conducted at room temperature on the composites, at a constant strain rate. The collected data of compressive strength and the related fabrication parameters are used as sets of data for training a neural network. A nested cross validation scheme is used to ensure the efficiency of the network. Results are indicative of a very good network, which generalizes very well. Next, an attempt is made to optimize the compressive behavior of the composites by controlling carbonization temperature, time and also starting material type with the aid of a genetic algorithm coupled with the trained network. The optimization system yields promising results, significantly enhancing the compressive strength. The validity of the optimal experiment, as proposed by the soft-computing system, is verified by subsequent laboratory testing.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Laboratory experiments are conducted to measure such properties of materials as compressive strength, modules of elasticity, etc. However, if the purpose is to find the optimal processing parameters to achieve a certain value for a property, trial-and-error runs need to be performed in most cases. This can be tedious and costly.To address this problem, this paper introduces a practical approach to model and optimize the processes that use wood for production of composites. In doing so, a hybrid ANN–GA system is used to model the fabrication process and optimize the mechanical properties of cellulose-based composites (based on wood precursor). This is achieved while staying within the bounds of experimental, material and economic constraints. The approach is simple and well-defined, and can be adapted to other similar production processes, with relative ease.In other researches done by the authors [1,2], fuzzy logic concepts were used to model the heating regime and select the base materials for modeling of only the precursor (this study focuses on evaluating the whole composite response to load conditions). A fuzzy controller system was designed and installed on the carbonization furnace. The controller enables the heating system to yield porous carbon body (with predefined density and porosity) based on the starting wood species.In this study, an infiltration step is used to inject polymer as reinforcement to the free spaces of carbon template as matrix of composite. The main goal of this research is to fabricate a wood-derived carbon matrix composite with maximum compressive strength and no process control strategy including heating regime, was taken into account. X-ray diffraction patterns are used to determine the approximate range of amorphous carbon transformation condition. However, instead of using a variety of XRD patterns and searching through peak variations, a soft-computing approach is adopted to model and optimize the product performance under load-bearing conditions.The following sections provide the details of concepts and theories used in the work, the experimental and soft-computing methodologies, and a discussion on laboratory and data analysis results. Main conclusions and suggestions for future work also follow.In this section, first, a review of the studied materials, their properties and manufacturing methods is presented. A short review of the soft-computing techniques used in this work along with examples of their applications in manufacturing of composites then follows.In the past few years, interests of engineers and researchers have been diverted from expensive alloy materials to useful and efficient composite materials. In this context, composites made from natural starting materials have secured a special place for themselves. Wood provides a carbon base for production of advanced materials. In spite of the rapid overture of new materials as substitutes for wood, new uses are still being proposed for it [3]. Natural organics from forest plants, including grasses, seeds, chops and husks, to a multitude of marine plants and agricultural wastes have also been used in a variety of ways [4].Composites based on wood or other natural materials, with their ecological and environmental advantages, present an opportunity to significantly improve the biological impacts. This can be achieved by using biodegradable instead of synthetic materials, such as glass, engineering ceramics or ferrous and non-ferrous metals [5]. The cost of some such biodegradable materials is much lower than some of conventional matrix and reinforcements [6,7]. Use of relatively inexpensive, available and renewable alternative sources of advanced materials is imperative for the durable sustainability of the industrial products [8,9].The use of carbonized wood as matrix for production of cellulose-derived composites (CDC) including carbon/polymer, carbon/carbon, carbon/ceramics and carbon/metal composites has been considered in recent researches [4]. The chemical composition of a typical dried wood sample is: 50wt.% carbon, 44wt.% oxygen and 6wt.% hydrogen. After carbonization of wood, the anatomical features of starting samples remain unchanged, while a completely different composition is achieved [10]. Wood includes several natural polymers forming a complex body of different interconnected long cells, which are parallel to the central axis of the tree. Cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin are the three main polymers of the wood. The major one is cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin are placed in the net shape body of cellulose with different ratios, depending on the position of the wood sample within the tree trunk [11]. During wood carbonization at 5°C/min of heating rate, hemicellulose is decomposed at temperatures ranging from 170 to 240°C. This decomposition occurs for cellulose at 240–310°C, and for lignin at 320–400°C. Many evolutionary reactions like bonding of wood elements and evaporation of some compounds take place during heating and at last only charcoal is left [12]. Several studies on carbonization of different wood samples and their structural evolution and thermal aspects have been conducted [13–18]. Fabricated porous carbons present a variety of desired properties such as stable coefficient of friction, low coefficient of thermal expansion, high damping capacity, excellent far infrared property and self-lubricity [19].Generally, the key purpose of applying reinforcements in composite science and technology is to improve the mechanical, thermal or tribological characteristics of matrix and to reduce the final cost of the product [20]. Reinforcements including ceramics, polymers or metals are being used in carbon composites to improve the mechanical and surface properties of carbon matrix. In the current research, carbon/polymer composite is fabricated by forcing epoxy polymer into the pore spaces of wood-derived carbon precursor.In recent decades, soft computing has attracted materials scientists and engineers. This can be attributed to its unique capabilities in handling intricate problems that were formerly difficult or impossible to solve. Three most recognized paradigms of soft computing are artificial neural network (ANN), fuzzy logic and global optimization methods.Inspired by human nervous system, artificial neural networks are utilized in almost any field of science and engineering. They offer robust, straight-forward computational power for dealing with complex and multi-dimensional function estimation and classification problems [19]. In such cases, finding an appropriate analytical solution is very time-consuming and complicated, if not impossible. A well-trained neural network presents the ability to gain knowledge of a system from a set of typical samples and then generalize to new situations. The neural network model is comprised of several interconnected units called neurons or nodes. Each neuron receives inputs from several other neurons, processes the inputs, and transfers its output to the next neurons. In this work a feed-forward back propagation neural network was used. Further description on neural network can be found in many publications [21–24].Neural computation has been used by materials researchers to approach problems associated with such cases as fatigue crack growth rate of metals [25], drilling processes [26], sintering temperature optimization [27], rolling load prediction [28], tensile properties [29] and non-destructive tests [30]. However, the effect of carbonization parameters on mechanical properties of cellulose-based composites has not been yet studied by such techniques.In many applications, process optimization is the primary goal. It usually follows modeling, control or simulation. In the context of this work, optimization means finding values for the process parameters so that some objective (fitness or error) function is minimized or maximized, while meeting the constraints. Optimization algorithms have different forms. There are analytical vs. numerical, continuous vs. discrete and local vs. global. Engineers are usually challenged with problems that demand numerical global optimization algorithms. In such cases, the problem and hence the objective function might be so complex that finding a solution is only possible through over-simplification, if conventional solvers are employed. Under such circumstances, engineers are encouraged, and in fact prefer to use soft-computing global optimizers, the most established one of which is the genetic algorithm (GA).GA is a completely gradient-free global optimizer, allowing an extremely wide range of problems to be solved without the need for complex formulations and restrictive assumptions. The underlying theories of GA are derived from the biological process of natural evolution and are principally based upon the Darwin's theory of survival of the fittest [31]. The concept was first introduced by John Holland [32]. The workings and details of GA are well-established and discussed in many publications [33–38].A thorough literature review shows that soft-computing tools are being used by researchers in almost any field, including plant-derived carbon and composite materials. Many different hybrid algorithms have been implemented to model and optimize functionality of bio-based materials. Karimi et al. employed hybrid ANN–GA systems to investigate the potential of activated carbon in petrochemical industries for filtering purposes [39]. In another interesting study, the same research group hybridized neural computation with a socio-political method, i.e. imperialist competitive algorithm (ICA), to enhance the usage of carbon composites in the food packing industry [40]. In both of these examples, the researchers made use of hybrid computational tools to optimize the influence of effective parameters on material responses, while satisfying the economic constraints. Materials scientists and engineers are challenged with many cases where destructive and costly testing, such as mechanical tests, seems inevitable for optimized manufacturing of new and advanced materials. However, in many cases trial and error cannot be a plausible strategy. Hence, collecting and integrating historical data and making use of statistical and intelligent tools, seems to be an indispensable alternative, or at least a complement to costly and time-consuming tests. This can also serve to alleviate or reduce the extent of such problems as material loss or long experimental times of such tests as wear resistance or fatigue life estimation [41,42]. In recent years, the researches in formulation of properties in composites successfully present the potential of hybrid intelligence models in this field of materials. Direction-dependency and anisotropic distribution of characteristics in these synthetic materials cause more difficulties but on the other hand, shows outstanding and reliable function estimation capability of hybrid optimization. Modeling critical properties in fabrication of bi-metals via integrating GA by ANN [43] or FL [44], extraction of physical and mechanical behavior of powder metallurgy [45], wood-driven [2] and woven composite [46] products are some examples of such applications.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Two soft-computing techniques have been hybridized to model and optimize the compressive strength of carbon/polymer composites. In doing so, sets of data from compression experiments were collected and used. Artificial neural network was used to establish a relationship between the uniaxial compressive strength of fabricated materials and the most significant processing parameters. (carbonization temperature, time and starting material density). Application of a nested cross-validation scheme along with consideration of multiple performance metrics on the testing set resulted in a very good predictor (with a testing R2 of 0.922). Next, an attempt was made to optimize the compressive behavior of the composites by controlling the processing parameters. This was done with the aid of a genetic algorithm coupled with the trained network. The optimization produced an optimal design, whose consistency was verified by actual testing. This design significantly enhanced the compressive strength. The hybrid system can eliminate the need for time-consuming destructive tests on yields, which can ultimately lead to reduced manufacturing costs.As a result of the experimental study, it was found that at temperatures approximately between 350°C and 1000°C, amorphous carbon forms. As temperature goes higher, ordering of carbon atoms takes place and amorphous carbon begins to transform into graphene.