@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Information granule formation via the concept of uncertainty-based information with Interval Type-2 Fuzzy Sets representation and Takagi–Sugeno–Kang consequents optimized with Cuckoo search

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A technique for forming information granules is presented in this paper.Based on the theory of uncertainty-based information, an approach which forms information granules is presented.Two implementations are proposed which form Interval Type-2 Fuzzy information granules.These approaches capture multiple evaluations of uncertainty from different samples and use these models to measure the uncertainty from the difference among them.The proposed approaches are tested with classification and curve identification benchmark datasets with very good results.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Granular computing,Information granule formation,Interval Type-2 Fuzzy Sets,Takagi–Sugeno–Kang,Cuckoo search,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A technique for forming information granules is shown in this paper. Based on the theory of uncertainty-based information, an approach toward a general base is given which forms information granules. Two implementations are proposed which form Interval Type-2 Fuzzy information granules, both with Takagi–Sugeno–Kang consequents optimized with Cuckoo search algorithm. These approaches capture multiple evaluations of uncertainty from taken samples and use these models to measure the uncertainty from the difference between them. The proposed approaches are tested with classification and curve identification datasets.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Granular computing is concerned with how information is grouped together and how these groups can be used to make decisions [1,20]. It is inspired by how human cognition manages information. Granular computing is used to improve the final representation of information models by forming information granules which better adapt to the known information. Although granular computing expresses information models, more commonly known as information granules, it can use a variety of representations to express such granules, which could be rough sets [19], quotient space [35], shadowed sets [21], fuzzy sets [36], etc.Information granules are representations of similar information which can be used for a purpose, typically to model a portion of information. Forming fuzzy information granules is not new, knowing that many representations can be used there have been many approaches which try to solve this: via their relationships [30], optimization of time granularity [31], information granulation [29], with RBF neural networks [18], etc.With the nature of uncertainty in information, by definition it is hard to explain and even harder to define, especially in a sense of measurement. To be able to measure uncertainty, it is important to first capture it, research has been done in trying to capture it, e.g. via an association of probability values [32], Bayesian learning framework [17], econometric framework [13].Uncertainty-based information [14,15] is a concept that defines that a model can be created in which it reduces the uncertainty via the difference between an a priori uncertainty model and an a posteriori uncertainty model. Based on the concept of uncertainty-based information, this paper proposes an approach to information granule formation by capturing, through samples, evaluations of uncertainty where their difference is a direct measure of uncertainty which is used to form Interval Type-2 (IT2) Fuzzy higher order information granules. IT2 Fuzzy Sets are chosen as a means of representing information granules because of its high compatibility with the general theory of granular computing, as well as directly supporting direct measures of uncertainty [25,27], and its implementability in a wide range of situations, e.g. in hybrid form with neural networks [3], control applications [4], modeling linguistic probabilities and quantifiers [23], image segmentation [22], IT2 c-regression clustering [34]; as well as real world applications, such as prediction of carbon monoxide concentrations mega-cities [33].This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the proposed approach as well as its motivation. Section 3 describes two possible implementations. Section 4 shows benchmark results alongside the discussion. Finally, Section 5 concludes the document.To first understand the main methodology, a review of the motivation is necessary, as it describes the basis for the proposed approach. First, the basis for the proposed approach, which is the theory of uncertainty-based information is described; then, evaluations of uncertainty [12,26] are described, which defines functions that represent uncertainty measures.The concept of uncertainty is closely related to the concept of information. The fundamental characteristic of this relation is that involved uncertainty from any problem-solving situation is a result of information deficiency pertaining to the system within which the situation is conceptualized. This information could be incomplete, imprecise, fragmentary, unreliable, vague, or contradictory.With the assumption that a certain amount of uncertainty can be measured from a problem-solving situation it is possible that a mathematical theory can be formed.With another assumption that this amount of uncertainty is reduced by obtaining relevant information as a result of some action (e.g. obtaining experimental results, observing new data, etc.), the amount of obtained information by the action can be measured by that amount of reduced uncertainty. That is, the amount of information related to a given problem-solving situation that is obtained through some action is measured by the difference between a priori uncertainty and a posteriori uncertainty.In Fig. 1, the shown diagram represents the general idea of the behavior of uncertainty-based information; where a reduction of uncertainty can be obtain by the difference of two uncertain models of the same information. That is, the a priori uncertainty model is obtained with a first sample of information, where as the posteriori uncertainty model is obtained with a second sample of information related to the same problem-solving situation.To capture uncertainty, there are two fundamental types of evaluations: Type A and Type B.Through repeated measurements, an average measured value can infer a standard deviation which forms a Gaussian distribution function, where this functions is a Type A evaluation of uncertainty. In Fig. 2a sample Type A evaluation of uncertainty is shown.Type B evaluations of uncertainty are represented by a rectangular probability distribution, in other words, a specified interval where the measurements are known to lie in. In Fig. 3a sample Type B evaluation of uncertainty is shown.Taking inspiration on uncertainty-based information, this can be interpreted in a manner which forms higher-type information granules where uncertainty can be captured and measured which leads to the building of Interval Type-2 Fuzzy information granules. Although other representations for granules could be formed, fuzzy information granules were chosen.A sample of information can build a model with uncertainty from the complete source of information. Since it is impossible to know the complete truth of any given situation, uncertainty will always exist in any sample information which may be taken from it.Through a first sample of information (D1), an uncertain model (evaluation of uncertainty) can be created. And through a second sample of information (D2), another similar uncertain model can be also created. These two models of uncertainty are analogous to the models in the theory of uncertainty-based information, a priori and a posteriori uncertainty models. Although there is no limit to the amount of samples (Dn) and models which can be created, and used.In a direct comparison with the theory of uncertainty-based information, the proposed approach does not reduce the uncertainty in the model, instead it measures and defines it to be able to use it in an information granule and have an improved representation of said information granule.For sake of simplicity, the paper uses only two samples to create the information granules. The proposed approach is shown in Fig. 4, where a first sample of information obtains an evaluation of uncertainty, in the form of a Gaussian function, or Type-1 Fuzzy Gaussian membership function; and a second sample of information obtained another similar evaluation of uncertainty, of the same form. A difference is found between these two Gaussian membership functions, defining the Fingerprint of Uncertainty (FOU), thus obtaining an IT2 Fuzzy information granule. Here, there are three possibilities: (1) the first Gaussian membership function has a σ which is larger than the second; (2) the second Gaussian membership function has a σ which is larger than the first; and (3) the σ from both Gaussian membership functions are the same. For 1 and 2, the FOU which is created defines some uncertainty which has been measured and can now be used by the IT2 Fuzzy System; and for 3, since no uncertainty was measured a T1 Fuzzy Set is created.By no means the created fuzzy membership function the only possible solution, using a single center and only two standard deviations simplifies the exploration of the viability of the proposed approach in information granules. Other types of membership functions could be used, triangulars, generalized bells, trapozoidals, etc. For the case of Gaussian membership functions, although the simplest form of IT2FS was used, other more complex variations could be used, e.g. Gaussians with two centers and two standard deviations, Gaussians with two centers and one standard deviation. A deeper exploration is open for what specific membership functions best represent the information.To show the viability of the proposed approach in that it captures uncertainty and forms IT2 Fuzzy information granules, two implementations, based on the same principle approach, were created that would allow for results to be obtained. But first, a little background is given on the main algorithms which are used by these implementations, that is, Subtractive algorithm [5], FCM [2], and Cuckoo search [28].The Subtractive algorithm is a density based clustering algorithm, which means that the clusters are found by analyzing the density of data points inside of a given radius, done iteratively until an objective function is within a specified tolerance.The measure of potential for each point is calculated by Eq. (1), which takes into account the value of the radius, as shown in Eq. (2). Where Piis the potential per each point, α an aid to finding the potentials, rais a positive constant, and x are data points.(1)Pi=∑j=1ne−α||xi−xj||2(2)α=4ra2How the highest potential is selected is by means of Eq. (3) and at the same time reduces the potential of the rest of the data points, this equations is given support with aid of the radius through Eq. (4). Where β is an aid to modifying the potentials, and rbis a positive constant.(3)Pi=Pi−P1e−β||xi−xj||2(4)β=4rb2Finally, the exiting condition is shown in Eq. (5). Where ɛ is a small fraction.(5)Pk*<εP1*The FCM is a clustering algorithm which allows any data point to belong to one or more clusters. It is based on the minimization of an objective function, as shown in Eq. (6). Where J is the objective function result, u the degrees of membership for all data points for all clusters, x the data points, and c the potential clusters.(6)Jm=∑i=1N∑j=1Cuijm||xi−cj||2New membership degrees are updated via Eq. (7), and Eq. (8) shows the update procedure for the centers. Where m is a real number greater than 1.(7)uij=1∑k=1c(||xi−cj||/||xi−ck||)(2/(m−1))(8)cj=∑i=1Nuijmxi∑i=1NuijmThe Cuckoo search is a global optimization algorithm inspired by the behavior of cuckoo birds. The main sections of this algorithm are the following. The first is the local random walk each particle has, shown in Eq. (9), wherexitandxit+1are two different solutions, α is a scaling factor, s is a step size, H(u) is a Heaviside function, pais a probability between [0,1], ɛ is a random number, and ⊗ is an entry wise multiplication.(9)xit+1=xit+αs⊗H(pa−ε)⊗(xjt−xkt)The global random walk is done by Eq. (10). Where L is the characteristic scale of the problem of interest, and λ is a value between (1,3].(10)xit+1=xit+αL(s,λ)This ends the required background needed to better understand both proposed implementations.The first implementation focuses on finding subsets via a clustering algorithm, and both samples of data are randomly chosen, this is to calculate the final size of each information granule. The main focus of this implementation is that it obtains two distinct solutions via an initial model, these two solutions are then used together to form an improved model which has captured some of the uncertainty in the information.1.Obtain ruleset and centers. These are obtained through any clustering algorithm, for the experimental case in this paper the subtractive algorithm was used.Through a first sample of information (D1), all σ1 for all centers are calculated. These were found by calculating the Euclidean n-space distance between each data point and all centers, where the shortest distance defines to which center does that point belong to, afterwards having a set of data points for each cluster, a standard deviation was calculated as to form an evaluation of uncertainty in the form of a Gaussian membership function.Through a second sample of information (D2), in the same manner as the previous step, all σ2 for all centers are calculated.Form the IT2 Fuzzy Gaussian information granules as proposed. This only builds the antecedents of a complete IT2 Fuzzy System.The consequents are finally optimized via an evolutionary algorithm, obtaining a complete IT2 Fuzzy System which can be used to acquire results. For this paper, Interval Takagi–Sugeno–Kang (TSK) [10,11] consequents were used, they were optimized via a Cuckoo Search algorithm.The second implementation takes into account an approach were a priori and a posteriori uncertainty models are used. The key element in this implementation is that the second obtained model derives from the first obtained model, thus adhering more to the concept of a priori and a posteriori uncertainty models.(1)Through a first sample of information (D1), ruleset, centers, and σ1 are obtained. Using the Fuzzy C-means (FCM) algorithm D1 is processed. All σ1 are obtained through the use of the U matrix of FCM, which describe the degree of membership for each data point relative to each found cluster center. Where the maximum value defines to which cluster said data point belongs to. This creates subgroups of data points, used to calculate the σ1 values. This can be perceived as having built the a priori uncertainty model.Through a second sample of information (D2) obtain a second set of rules, centers, and σ2 values, done in the same manner as the precious step. Due to the initialization of the FCM, random values are assigned to U, causing that the order of the rules could be non compatible with the previous FCM output. To avoid this pitfall the U from the first FCM is used as initialization values for the second FCM here, this causes that the obtained ruleset, is very similar to the previous ruleset, thus avoiding the mentioned problem. This can be perceived as having built the a posteriori uncertainty model.Form the IT2 Fuzzy Gaussian information granules as proposed. This only builds the antecedents of a complete IT2 Fuzzy System.The consequents are finally optimized via an evolutionary algorithm, obtaining a complete IT2 Fuzzy System which can be used to acquire results. For this paper, Interval Takagi–Sugeno–Kang (TSK) consequents were used, they were optimized via a Cuckoo Search algorithm.These two shown implementations are not a definitive form in how the proposed information granule formation must be done, it is simply a suggested implementation that may or may not be the optimal form to how the interpretation is done.The first set of experiments is done with the first implementation as described in the previous section. These results focused mainly on the defuzzification of the final interval as to obtain a singleton value and use it to obtain real number results.The second set of experiments is done with the second shown implementation in this paper. The results are focused differently from the previous ones, this is, due to the nature of the uncertainty and that intervals are obtained by the IT2FS defuzzification is typically an oversimplification of the interval that is obtained, where this singleton value is usually in the form of the middle point between the lower and the upper interval. The results for this section are in the form of real data coverage by the FOU.For experimental tests on the first implementation, four datasets were used: iris, wine, glass, available from the UCI dataset repository [8], and a 5th order polynomial curve. Where the iris dataset, has 4 input features (petal length, petal width, sepal length, and sepal width), and 3 outputs (iris setosa, iris virginica, and iris versicolor). With 50 samples of each flower type, with a total of 150 elements in the dataset. The wine dataset, with 13 input features of different constituents (Alcohol, malic acid, ash, alcalinity of ash, magnesium, total phenols, flavanoids, nonflavanoid phenols, proanthocyanins, color intensity, hue, OD280/OD315 of diluted wines, and proline) identifying 3 distinct Italian locations where the wine came from. With 59, 71, and 48 elements respectively in each class, for a total of 178 elements in the whole dataset. The glass identification dataset, has 9 input variables (refractive index, sodium, magnesium, aluminum, silicon, potassium, calcium, barium, and iron), and 7 classes (building windows float processed, building windows non float processed, vehicle windows float processed, containers, tableware, and headlamps). With 70, 76, 17, 13, 9, and 29 elements respectively in each class, for a total of 214 elements in the whole dataset.For the second set of experiments, the following curve identification datasets were used. The first, a bodyfat dataset [16], with 13 input (age, weight, height, neck circumference, chest circumference, abdomen 2 circumference, hip circumference, thigh circumference, knee circumference, ankle circumference, biceps (extended) circumference, forearm circumference, and wrist circumference) features and 1 output (bodyfat percentage). With 252 elements in total. The engine dataset [9], with 2 feature inputs (fuel rate, and speed) and 2 outputs (torque, and nitrous oxide emissions). Having a total of 1199 samples in the dataset. And, the housing dataset [8] with 13 inputs (per capita crime rate per town, proportion of residential land zoned lots over 25,000ft.2, proportion of non-retail business acres per town, 1 if tract bounds Charles river, 0 otherwise, nitric oxides concentration, average number of rooms per dwelling, Proportion of owner-occupied units built prior to 1940, weighted distances to five Boston employment centers, index of accessibility to radial highways, Full-value property-tax rate per $10,000, pupil–teacher ratio by town, 1000(Bk−0.63)2, where Bk is the proportion of blacks by town, and percent lower status of the population) and 1 output (median value of owner occupied homes in each neighborhood). With 506 samples in total.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Taking inspiration from the uncertainty-based information theory, higher type information granules can be formed which better conceptualize the uncertainty in the information.The proposed approach reduces the uncertainty in the information model by measuring the uncertainty by means of the difference between two evaluations of uncertainty created by two distinct measurements of information sampling.With two different implementations which apply the same base theory from the proposed approach, different behaviors were achieved which show that either form still adheres the interpretation, and both obtain acceptable results.By choosing Interval Type-2 Fuzzy Sets as the representation of information granules, the proposed approach directly takes the obtained uncertainty measurement and builds higher type information granules.Any other form of granule representation which can express the uncertainty in the information can be used.