@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Genetic search for optimally-constrained multiple-line fitting of discrete data points

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Numerical computations were conducted under many conditions, including different chromosome lengths and search sizes.The good experimental performance of two schemes indicates that the genetic search proposed in this paper is a better way to locate exactly a constrained point at geometric discontinuity.Our algorithm is invariant of chromosome length and search space size to a certain degree.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Geometric discontinuity,Genetic algorithm,Particle swarm,Constrained fitting of multiple lines,Discrete data point,Optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Advanced sensing technologies have produced a significant amount of discrete point data in the past decade. Measurement uncertainty frequently occurs at the geometric discontinuity of mechanical parts. In this paper, a genetic search algorithm is developed for optimally-constrained multiple-line fitting of discrete data points. It contains two important technical components: (a) constrained least-squares fitting of multiple lines, and (b) genetic search for optimal corner/edge points. The algorithm is designed for both two-dimensional and three-dimensional cases. Numerical experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach, compared to the conventional least-squares fitting method as well as exhaustive search method. A comparative study with a particle swarm method indicates that both the genetic search and particle swarm search produce similar results in terms of minimum fitting errors. It can be used for the effective determination of sharp edges or corners based on discrete data points measured for high-precision industrial inspection and manufacturing.direction numbers of a line in a three-dimensional spacebinary numbers for a chromosomecognitive and social parametersdecimal value corresponding to binary bitsthe shortest distance of the ith data point and the fitting linefitness function in two-dimensional casesfitness function in three-dimensional casesthe fitness value of the ith candidate corner, mean and maximum fitnessthe probability of crossoverthe probability of mutationthe position of the globally-best individualthe best previous position of the ith particlerandom numbers that are uniformly distributed within a range [0,0.2]the kth position of the ith particle in 2DThe kth position of the ith particle in 3Dthe coordination of the ith data point in a three-dimension spaceThe coordination of start point for genetic searchorthogonal projection of data points to fitted linesthe real increment in a given genetic searchthe coordination of candidate constrained cornerthe size of genetic search in three coordinate directionsthe coordinates of the point passed by a linethe coordinates of any point in a three-dimension spacethe kth velocity of the ith particleinertial weightthe coefficients of a line equation in two and three dimensionsthe sum of squared coordinate difference in x coordinate between data points and their corresponding points on the fitted linethe sum of squared coordinate difference in y coordinate between data points and their corresponding points on the fitted linethe gradient of E(A, B)the gradient of E(C, D)standard deviation of data points

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Transformation of physical objects into digital models of three-dimensional (3D) point clouds represents a revolution in the 21st century together with 3D printing technology in manufacturing. Large-scale 3D discrete data points are generated by a variety of emerging sensor technologies, including laser scanning, LIDAR (light+radar), and digital range finder. Unfortunately, these loosely-connected point clouds lack structural information about physical objects, and the uncertainty of surface normal at sharp features of objects leads to unpredictable measurement results of the aforementioned sensor technologies. Moreover, a limited number of laser rays likely miss the exact location of corner or edge points. This leads to a significant amount of data errors around the sharp features, as shown in Fig. 1.It is therefore a meaningful research how to handle such kind of data abnormality at geometric discontinuity. Since the geometric discontinuity can be complicated by the intersection of complex geometric shapes, this paper decomposes an entire problem into a number of relatively simple line intersection problems.The problem of traditional piecewise regression of measurement data at G1 discontinuity is the generation of gaps (i.e., G0 discontinuity) at the location of G1 discontinuity, as illustrated in Fig. 2. Here, G1 discontinuity means the discontinuous change in direction of the tangent vectors of lines or curves, while G0 discontinuity refers to the discontinuity of data points of lines, curves, and surfaces. The gap in Fig. 2 is an example of G0 discontinuity, and is enlarged for the purpose of clarity. In the case of high-precision digital manufacturing, an opening of several hundreds of micrometers would be problematic. On the other hand, it is not important in entertainment industry for the sole purpose of modeling or rendering.G1 discontinuity is the most prevailing geometric discontinuity among manufactured parts in various industries, as shown in Fig. 3(sharp edge, corner, and crease). The direction of surface normal becomes undefined or ambiguous at this type of geometric discontinuity. In order to address the high-fidelity fitting at G1 discontinuity for high-precision digital manufacturing and industrial inspection, the gap in Fig. 2 should be avoided at edge points, where two planes meet to form an edge, or corner points, where three or more planes converge to a common point.Although piecewise fitting can give a very low fitting error of each fitted segment, it may cause the gap in Fig. 2. To avoid G0 discontinuity (i.e., a gap), a constrained fitting at geometric discontinuity is needed. Unfortunately, this type of constrained fitting demands the information on the exact location of geometric discontinuity, which is not known a priori, given only a set of discrete data points. Thus, it is crucial to determine the location of corner/edge points before the execution of the constrained fitting.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we focus on an effective data rectification method for discrete points at geometric discontinuity. A genetic search algorithm for optimally-constrained multiple-line fitting is developed. Two-dimensional and three-dimensional cases are both considered in this study. A simple line propagation method is designed for the fast determination of approximate search space. The exact search boundary is constructed by a start-point position and search size. Two schemes (i.e., Schemes 2 and 3) are devised as a more effective way to locate the corner point, i.e., intersection point between lines. Numerical computations were conducted in different test cases with different optimization parameters. The good experimental performance of these two schemes indicates that the genetic search proposed in this paper is a better way to locate exactly a constrained point at geometric discontinuity than traditional least-squares fitting. The following conclusions can be drawn:(1)The conventional least-squares fitting (Scheme 1) does not produce an optimal corner point, even though it chooses the best data point within an approximate search space. The genetic search algorithm in this paper can find a better location of multiple-line constrained corner with less fitting error (Fig. 16). Our Scheme 3 reduces the fitting error by 33.7% (a two-dimensional case) and by 51.2% (a three-dimensional case) in comparison with the traditional Scheme 1.The definition of genetic search space affects its optimizing capability. Scheme 3 (the data point with the minimum fitting error as the central location of search space) achieves a better result of optimization (17% less fitting error) than Scheme 2 (the lower-leftmost data point as a start point) (Fig. 16).Convergence patterns are observed in both two-dimensional and three-dimensional cases. A simple termination condition is designed with a termination threshold being 0.15% (2-D cases) and 0.1% (3-D cases).Our algorithm shows its robustness across 20 different initial populations with the maximum variation from the average values of fitting error being only 4% and 5% for Schemes 2 and 3, respectively.A very small chromosome length causes a large fitting error. When the length is large, it plays an insignificant role in affecting the fitting error (Fig. 18). The sweet spot of initial population ranges from 20 to 30, while the best mutational probability is 0.1 for the problems of this paper.Both genetic search and particle swarm search generate a similar fitting error in the context of this study.There is a penalty of computational time with our algorithm, compared to the conventional least-squares fitting (Table 3). On the other hand, our algorithm is much faster than an exhaustive search (Scheme 4 – a benchmark algorithm) in most cases of Table 4.Our proposed Scheme 3 reduces the fitting errors of real-world laser-scanning data by 23.8% on an average basis over six test cases.