@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Decision support system for collision avoidance of vessels

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We have developed a decision support system for Istanbul Strait to assist vessels.This system warns Vessel Traffic Service (VTS) center and personnel of vessels for possible collision.Vessels which have collision possibility, have been estimated with neural networks.Collision is basically defined as 2 vessels being too close to each other.The collision of 2 vessels is determined by observing the 3min onwards positions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Decision support,Neural networks,Levenberg–Marquardt learning algorithm,Collision avoidance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Although there are many advanced systems to assist vessels with passing through narrow waterways, it continues to be a serious problem because of disturbance factors and geographic structure. By taking Istanbul Strait as a model for this study, we aimed to develop a decision support system and/or a guidance method to assist reciprocally passing vessels. The main purpose is to develop an Artificial Neural Network (ANN) that uses the data of manually controlled vessels to generate predictions about the future locations of those vessels. If there is any possibility of collision, this system is aimed to warn the operators in the Vessel Traffic Services (VTS) centre and to guide the personnel of the vessels. In this study, manually controlled and reciprocally passing vessels’ data were used (including coordinates, speed, and environmental conditions), neural networks were trained, and predictions were made about the locations of vessels three minutes after the initial point of evaluation (this duration was determined by considering the conditions of Istanbul Strait). With this purpose, we used data gathered from vessels and proved the success of the system, especially concerning predictions made during turnings, by determining the possibility of collision between two vessels three minutes after the data was gathered.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Turkey plays a very important role in international sea transportation because of its two natural channels that connect the Mediterranean Sea and Black Sea. Istanbul is a very crowded metropolis, and the vessels pass very near to residential areas while travelling through Istanbul Strait. This is very dangerous because of the nature of the loads carried by the vessels. Because of the narrow structure of Istanbul Strait, there is also the possibility of a crash; ship–ship collisions have the potential to cause catastrophic marine accidents with human and economic losses as well as environmental pollution. The possibility of such accidents is increased because of the traffic volume of the strait; it is known that the traffic in Istanbul Strait is four times that of the Panama or Suez canals. Evaluating the accidents in Istanbul Strait, we determined that there have been more than 500 accidents in Istanbul Strait in the past 60 years. According to the statistics, 80% of these accidents were caused by human error.After the Nassia accident in 1994, it was understood that because its population is over 10 million and its age is over 3000 years, the city of Istanbul is at great risk in the event of a vessel crash or any explosion that occurs because of the dangerous loads carried by vessels.To avoid this, in real navigation, a vessel must track along the selected route as precisely as possible using efficient rudder control. Although almost all of the vessels have advanced navigators, there is a necessity to pass through Istanbul Strait in accordance with manually determined rules. During this study, we evaluated the effects of the human operator, who carries out the passing of the vessel through Istanbul Strait in accordance with the commands of the captain, the route, and the coordinates of the vessel [1].Yet because of complicating factors such as current geographic structure, wind, and stream, there are also many problems that arise during the passage through narrow channels that cannot be remedied with modern navigators [2]. Regardless of continuous work to prevent collisions between vessels, accidents still happen. Due to the serious consequences of collision accidents, it is important to reduce the probability of accidents and to minimise potential damage to both the vessels and the environment.Some studies that have appeared in the literature attempt to obtain intelligent models such as Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) and fuzzy logic models by learning human operator actions, for prediction purposes [3,4]. It should also be mentioned here that Ebada and Maksoud [5] used neural networks to predict vessel turning manoeuvres, and Nicolau et al. [6] predicted the wave effect on the yaw motion of a vessel. A comprehensive literature survey does not reveal any system like the one suggested in this paper that could be employed in Vessel Traffic Services (VTS) systems. ANNs have been trained using position and speed data collected from vessels that were navigated manually in the Strait, and they include the effects of environmental conditions and the geographical characteristics of the strait.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
