@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Gender differences in online auctions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This is the first study examining gender differences in online auctions.Females are more likely to seek enjoyment, information, bargain, and variety.Females score higher on risk aversion, impulsiveness, and need for uniqueness.Males exhibit a higher level of social interaction in online auctions.Males and females purchase different products through online auctions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Online auctions,Gender,Gender differences,Motivations,Psychographics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Gender theories developed from traditional fixed and negotiated price shopping have largely been untested in the context of online auctions. The present study intends to fill this gap. Specifically, this study compares male and female online bidders based on their motivations, psychographics, and purchasing behavior. Our results show that females are more likely than males to be enjoyment seekers, information seekers, bargain hunters, variety seekers, and impulsive buyers. Female online bidders also have a higher level of risk aversion and need for uniqueness, but exhibit a lower level of social interaction than males. This study also finds that males are more likely to purchase electronics and computers, whereas females are more likely to purchase books, clothing, jewelry, and toys through online auctions. Based on these results, theoretical and managerial implications are discussed.The growth of online auctions has been exceptional since the late 1990s. As an alternative retailing format and a dynamic pricing mechanism, online auctions attract many businesses and individuals who can sell and buy almost everything on the Internet. For example, a current leader, eBay, has 157million active buyers worldwide as of the second quarter 2015. On any given day, there are approximately 800million listings and 25million sellers (www.ebay.com).The enormous growth of online auctions certainly generates considerable interest from the academic world. An extensive body of research has explored various aspects of online auctions, such as auction pricing, seller reputation, selling strategy, and online bidding behavior (Bapna et al., 2003; Borle et al., 2006; Chang and Chen, 2015; Heyman et al., 2004; Hou, 2007; Lee et al., 2013; Melnik and Alm, 2002; Park and Bradlow, 2005). Among these studies, several addressed consumer demographics including gender in online auctions. For example, Hou and Elliott (2010) examined how consumer demographics may influence their likelihood and frequency of participation in online auctions, while Korgaonkar et al. (2012) explored how online bidders’ demographics may influence their product purchase preferences.Though a few studies examining online bidders’ demographics provide some insights and helpful information, there is still a lack of understanding of some fundamentals in the context of online auctions. Considering that gender has been perceived and validated as a significant predictor of consumer behavior in both online and offline environments (Ailawadi et al., 2001; Baker and Wakefield, 2012; Bellenger and Korgaonkar, 1980; Chen et al., 2013; Danaher et al., 2006; Croson and Gneezy, 2009; Herrmann, 2004; Noble et al., 2006; Rodgers and Harris, 2003), it is surprising that little is known about gender differences in online auctions. In particular, do males and females attend online auctions for different reasons? Do male and female online bidders differ in terms of their psychographics? Do males and females purchase different types of products through online auctions?Answers to these questions have important theoretical and practical implications. They not only advance our understanding on whether general gender theories hold true in the context of online auctions, but they also provide a basis for segmenting and targeting online bidders based on their gender, which is beneficial for both businesses and individuals who intend to adopt online auctions as a retailing alternative.Therefore, the purpose of this study is to further our knowledge of gender differences in the context of online auctions. Specifically, we investigate three aspects of online bidders’ behavior; namely, how do male and female bidders differ in terms of their motivations, psychographics, and purchasing behavior? The rest of this paper is organized as follows: first, we review the rich literature on gender differences. Second, a set of hypotheses are developed with respect to gender differences in online bidders’ motivations, psychographics, and purchasing behavior. Third, we describe the methodology and present the results to test the hypotheses. Then, findings and implications from this study are discussed. Finally, this study concludes with limitations and future research directions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
