@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An integrated framework for mechatronics based product development in a fuzzy environment

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Proposed integrated framework enhances Mechatronics product development process.A detailed conceptual design based on Fuzzy techniques will ensure a good design.Proper interfacing of various components results in better product.Fuzzy FMEA ensures that the final design is error free.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mechatronics product design,Fuzzy Delphi Method (FDM),Fuzzy Interpretive Structural Modeling (FISM),Fuzzy Analytical Network Process (FANP),Fuzzy Quality Function Deployment (FQFD),Fuzzy FMEA,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
New product development (NPD) is a term used to describe the complete process of bringing a new concept to a state of market readiness. Mechatronics based product requires a multidisciplinary approach for its modeling, design, development and implementation. An integrated and concurrent approach focusing on integrating the mechanical structure with basic three components namely sensors, controllers and actuators is required. This paper aims at developing a framework for a new Mechatronics product development. For conceptual design of Mechatronics system, various tools like Fuzzy Delphi Method (FDM), Fuzzy Interpretive Structural Modeling (FISM), Fuzzy Analytical Network Process (FANP) and Fuzzy Quality Function Deployment (FQFD) are used. Based on the prioritized design requirements, the functional specifications of the required components are developed. Then, Computer Aided Design and control system software are used to develop the detailed system design. Then, a prototype model is developed based on the integration of mechanical system with Sensor, Controller and Electrical units. Performance of the prototype model is monitored and Fuzzy failure mode and effect analysis (FMEA) is then used to rank the potential failures. Based on the results of fuzzy FMEA, the developed model is redesigned. The proposed framework is illustrated with a case study related to developing automatic power loom reed cleaning machine.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Products of Mechatronics Engineering are often based on the close interaction of mechanics, electrics/electronics, control engineering and computer sciences. Mechatronics systems are broadly classified into two categories. In the first category, a spatial integration of mechanics and electronics with an aim to reach a high density of mechanical and electronic functions within the available space focusing mainly on miniaturization, lower production costs and higher reliability is the focus. In the second category, controlled movements of multi-body systems with an aim to improve the behavior by using sensors, the control system and the system's actuators is the focus [17]. It is important that the changes in the physical design and the controller choices must be evaluated simultaneously. A system with a proper controller and a badly designed mechanical system will never be able to give a good performance and the vice versa is also true [1]. Hence it is important that a strict integration of mechanical, control, electrical, electronic and software aspects from the very beginning of the earliest conceptual design phase is required [47].Many researchers have worked on Mechatronics system design. Hussein [22] proposed a geometrical approach for modeling both the physical and logical properties of Mechatronics system. The interconnection between these models is determined and a total model is built. The V-model for Mechatronics design consists of the following phases: functional requirement identification, system level specification, hierarchical system decomposition, definition of subsystems and components, verification and validation [46]. Moulianitis et al. [39] presented an approach for modeling the evaluation process in the conceptual design phase. The elements of the Mechatronics index are presented in terms of flexibility, intelligence and complexity.Hehenberger et al. [19] proposed an approach using hierarchical models in the design of Mechatronics systems. An extended variety and quality of principal solutions can be obtained from the utilization and proper combination of solution principles from different Mechatronics domains. The design engineer can use the specific “views of the object” as an interface to represent the relevant phenomena/effects of interest such as geometry, dynamics, stability or material. Beek et al. [3] proposed a modular design of Mechatronics systems with function modeling. The modularization approach makes use of the function–behavior–state (FBS) model and the design structure matrix (DSM). The approach integrates the DSM based modularization with the FBS modeling. Chhabra and Emami [11] proposed a holistic system approach for modeling in Mechatronics. The approach divides a Mechatronics system into three generic subsystems, namely generalized executive, sensory and control. These subsystems are linked together utilizing bond graph combinations and block diagrams. Energy, entropy and agility are used as design criteria and the obtained designs showed a superior performance compared to the existing ones. Cabrera et al. [6] proposed an architecture model to support cooperative design for Mechatronics products and illustrated the proposed approach with a development of control software. This approach provides proper product representation details, provides the required communication in the product development process and the required information association among the designers. Gausemeier et al. [17] proposed a model which deals with the stated problem by providing a generic procedure model and a specification technique for the integrative development of Mechatronics products and their production systems. The focus is to demonstrate how specific procedures can be derived from this generic procedure model.Sierla et al. [42] proposed the functional failure identification and propagation framework with a purpose to identify fault propagation paths in the conceptual design phase and determined the combined impact of several faults in software-based automation subsystems, electric subsystems and mechanical subsystems. Komoto and Tomiyama [26] proposed a framework for computer-aided conceptual design and its application to system architecting of Mechatronics products. The framework focuses on hierarchical system decomposition and consistency management of design information across different engineering disciplines. Gamage et al. [16] developed a design evolution framework to automate the evaluation and improvement of the design of an existing Mechatronics system. The developed system framework integrates Machine Health Monitoring System (MHMS) and Design Expert System (DES) with an Evolutionary Design Optimization System (EDOS) to obtain a design solution that satisfies the design specifications. An approach based on the mechatronic design quotient (MDQ) for systematic design of a Mechatronics system justifies that mechatronic design could be hierarchically separated into topological design and parametric design, and further “structured” into a multi-layered hierarchy [15].A broad knowledge is required for developing multidisciplinary mechatronic systems/products. To manage the complexity of the product design of mechatronic systems adequate procedure models are necessary. At present, there is lack of integrated development methodologies and tools for mechatronic product design. No single “best” approach exists for the design of a Mechatronics system [19] and the development of Mechatronics systems is still a challenge due to its interdisciplinary nature [15]. Hence in this paper, a new approach for Mechatronics product design extensively focusing on conceptual design phase using NPD development tools like Fuzzy Delphi Method (FDM), Fuzzy Interpretive Structural Modeling (FISM), Fuzzy Analytical Network Process (FANP) and Fuzzy Quality Function Deployment (FQFD) and Fuzzy failure mode and effect analysis (Fuzzy FMEA) is proposed.The proposed model uses few techniques namely FDM, FISM, FQFD, FANP, Fuzzy FMEA. The following sections will describe each technique briefly.The Delphi method proposed by Dalkey and Helmer in 1963 facilitates forecasting by converging a value through the feedback of experts after several rounds. It is criticized because of its shortfalls such as repetitive questionnaires and evaluations, declining response rate of experts, inappropriate convergence, ambiguity and uncertainty in survey questions and more time consumption [9,31]. Hence fuzzy sets are incorporated into conventional Delphi method to tackle the above said problems. A few recent applications of FDM are: road safety performance indicators identification [36], lubricant regenerative technology selection [21], evaluating hydrogen production technologies [10], Six-Sigma project selection [49], ranking the sawability of ornamental stone [38] and new product development [31].Interpretive structural modeling (ISM) proposed by Warfield (1974) enables individuals or groups to develop a map of complex relationships and to calculate adjacency matrix to present the relationship among a set of variables. A few recent applications areas of ISM are: the selection of reverse logistics provider [24], supplier selection process [34], analyze strategic products for photovoltaic silicon thin-film solar cell [29], wind turbine evaluation [30], mutual relationships identification among the enablers of tour value [33], modularizing and clustering the required parts [20].ISM assumes a binary relation to exist, i.e., whether a definite relation exists or no relation between two elements. However, introducing fuzzy relations into conventional ISM will enhance the process of identifying the relationship between the variables [31]. The principle behind is to change the traditional binary value into a fuzzy binary relation. Thus FISM will provide interviewers the opportunity to express the strength or fuzziness of the relationship among elements.Analytical Network Process (ANP) is a popular multi-criteria decision making (MCDM) technique which is widely used because it considered ambiguity and dissension among decision makers and also interdependency over the use of various criteria and alternatives [34]. ANP requires the decision maker's opinion to carry out pair-wise comparisons. The human assessment on qualitative attributes is always subjective and thus imprecise. Therefore, fuzzy sets are incorporated with the pair-wise comparison as an extension of ANP. The FANP approach allows a more accurate description of the decision making process. FANP is used in wide variety of problem areas: to measure the sectoral competition level of an organization [14], evaluating machine tool alternatives [2], SWOT analysis for the airline industry [41], to evaluate green suppliers [5], advanced-technology prioritization [44].Quality function deployment (QFD) is a planning and problem-solving tool that is used for translating customer requirements (CRs) into design characteristics (DCs) of a product/service. Using crisp values for assessing the importance of customer needs, degree of relationship between customer needs and design requirements, and degree of relationship among the design requirements have been criticized by several authors [4,25]. Design requirements and part characteristics are the major phases for QFD in new product development activity. The imprecise design information can be represented effectively by means of linguistic variables and fuzzy set theory [40]. A few application areas where fuzzy set theory is incorporated into QFD are: new product development [13,18], shipping investment decisions [7], conceptual bridge design evaluation [37], manufacturing strategy development [23], credit card evaluation [48] and customer satisfaction determination [45].FMEA is a technique used for defining, identifying and removing known and/or potential failures, problems, errors and so forth from the system, design, process, and/or service before they reach the customer [43]. The potential failure modes are identified and the failure causes are prioritized using FMEA. Risk priority number (RPN) which is the product of the occurrence (O), severity (S) and detection (D) of a failure is used to rank the failure modes. However, in reality, the risk factors O, S and D are difficult to be precisely estimated. The crisp RPNs have been considerably criticized for variety of reasons by various researchers. A few application areas are: assembly process at manufacturing facility in an automotive industry [28], to improve the purchase process in a public hospital [27]. From the literature, it is found that fuzzy rule-base system is the most popular method for prioritizing the failure modes, followed by gray theory, cost based model, AHP/ANP and linear programming [35]. Application of FDM, FISM, FANP-FQFD, Fuzzy FMEA for Mechatronic system design is rarely found in the literature.A systematic methodology that incorporates six stages namely need identification, conceptual design development via FDM, FISM, FANP–FQFD techniques, detailed design development using CAD modeling and control system software, prototype development, redesigning the developed prototype using fuzzy FMEA and commercialization are proposed in Fig. 1. The stages in the proposed framework are explained in the following sections.A committee of experts is formed to define the Mechatronics product development problem. Initially customer requirements (CRs) are identified through interview, questionnaire or brainstorming session. All possible Engineering Characteristics (ECs) are then listed by the expert committee.The Fuzzy Delphi Method is applied to select the most important CRs and ECs from the factors listed in the previous stage. The steps are as follows [31]:(i)Form a committee of experts and employ a questionnaire to ask experts for their most pessimistic (minimum) value and the most optimistic (maximum) value of the importance of each CR (EC) in the possible factor set Sc(Se) in a range from 1 to 10. A score for a CR (EC) is denoted as:(1)Ci=(lki,hki),i∈Sc(2)Ev=(lkv,hkv),v∈Sewherelki(lkv) is the pessimistic index of factor i(v) andhki(hkv) is the optimistic index of factor i(v), rated by expert k.The triangular fuzzy number for the most pessimistic index and the most optimistic index for each factor i(v) is determined. The minimum value (lli(hli) andllv(hlv)), the geometric mean (lmi(hmi) andlmv(hmv)) and the maximum value (lui(hui) andluv(huv)) of the experts’ opinions on the most pessimistic index and most optimistic index are obtained, i.e.,li=(lli,lmi,lui),lv=(llv,lmv,luv)andhi=(hli,hmi,hui),hv=(hlv,hmv,huv).The consensus of experts’ opinions are examined and the consensus significance value of each factor is calculated. The Gray Zone (Fig. 2) is the overlap section of liand hiand is used to examine the consensus of experts in each factor.The consensus significance value of the factor i, si, is calculated by the following rules:•If there is no overlap between liand hi(no gray zone exists), then consensus significance value of the factor is(3)si=lmi+hmi2If a gray zone exists and the gray zone interval value of gi(gi=lui−hli) is less than the interval value of liand hi(di=hmi−lmi), i.e., gi≤di, the consensus significance value of the factor is calculated by (4) and (5).(4)Fi(p)=∫p{min[li(p),hi(p)]}dp,i∈S(5)si={p/maxμFi(p),i∈Swhere Fi(p) is the area of the intersection of liand hi, and siis the cognition value (p) with the highest degree of membership (μ*) of the intersection of liand hi.If a gray zone exists and gi>di, then a great discrepancy among the experts opinions arises. Above all steps need to be repeated until a convergence is obtained. The same procedure is carried out to calculate the consensus significance value of factor v, svSelect factors from the factors list. Select factor i(v) if its consensus significance value is greater than or equal to threshold value TC(TE) which is determined by the experts subjectively based on the mean of all si(sv), i.e., select factor i(v) if si≥TC(sv≥TE).A CR may have an impact on other CRs and similarly an EC may have an impact on other ECs. Hence the interdependence among CRs and among ECs must be studied. In addition, a CR can be fulfilled if one or more ECs are achieved. FISM is applied to determine the relationship and the steps involved are summarized below [32]:(i)From the results of Step I, the selected CRs are defined as xi, i=1, 2, 3, …, n. The relation between two CRs is obtained from the experts with a help of a questionnaire containing linguistic variables namely completely related, strongly related, fairly related, low related and unrelated. The triangular fuzzy numbers in Table 1are used to define the relation between one CR to another. By applying the geometric mean approach to aggregate experts’ opinion, the relation from CAi to CAj is represented by a triangular fuzzy number,x˜ij.α-cut technique is then used for preparing an aggregated fuzzy relation matrix, Dα.(6)Dα=0[x12Lα,x12Uα]....[x1nLα,x1nUα][x21Lα,x21Uα]0....[x2nLα,x2nUα][xn1Lα,xn1Uα][xn2Lα,xn2Uα]....0where 0<α<1An aggregated defuzzified relationship matrix,Dαβwith α-cuts and index of optimism β is obtained using Eq. (7).(7)xijαβ=(1−β)xijLα+βxijUα,∀β∈[0,1]The aggregated defuzzified relation matrix with α-cuts and index of optimism β in generalized form is given as:(8)Dαβ=x11αβx12αβ..x1nαβx21αβx22αβ..x2nαβ..........xn1αβxn2εβ..xnnαβA binary relation matrix, D is prepared to determine whether there is a relation between two CRs. A threshold value is determined by the experts. Ifxijαβis higher than the threshold value, xjis deemed reachable from xiand it is assumed that πij=1, otherwise πij=0. The binary relation matrix for CR–CR is:(9)x1x2…xnD=x1x2⋮xn0π12…π1nπ210…π2n⋮⋮0⋮πn1πn2…0,i=1,2,…,n;j=1,2,…,n,where πijdenotes the relation between the ith row and jth column CRs.The initial reachability matrix, M is obtained by the addition of the binary relation matrix, D and the identity matrix, I:(10)M=D+IThe final reachability matrix is obtained by increasing the power of the initial reachability matrix until the condition M*=Mb=Mb+1 is satisfied. The value of b should be always greater than one. In the final reachability matrix, M* a convergence can be met to reflect the transitivity of the contextual relation among the criteria for determining the interdependencies.The generalized form of M* is given as(11)x1x2…xnM*=x1x2⋮xnπ11*π12*…π1n*π21*π22*…π2n*⋮⋮⋮⋮πn1*πn2*…πnn*,i=1,2,…,n;j=1,2,…,n,The same procedures are used to determine the interdependence among ECs and the influence of CRs on ECs.Using the above result of FISM, the relationship between the customer requirements (CR–CR), relationship between the Engineering characteristics (EC–EC) and relationship between the engineering characteristics (EC) and customer requirements (CR) (i.e.) (CR–EC) are finalized. The House of Quality (HoQ) is then constructed and ECs are prioritized by applying FANP. The procedure of the FANP is as follows [32]:(i)HoQ is constructed using the relationship between CRs and ECs, inner dependence among CRs and among ECs obtained through FISM procedure. A check is entered if there is an influence of one factor to another factor.A questionnaire using Satty's nine-point scale of pairwise comparison for ANP is prepared and the domain experts are asked to fill out the questionnaire. The relationship between CRs and ECs, the inner dependence among CRs and the inner dependence among ECs required for HOQ construction are obtained. Pairwise comparison matrix of each part of the questionnaire from each expert is examined for consistency using Eqs. (12) and (13). If an inconsistency is present, the expert is asked to revise the part of the questionnaire.(12)ConsistencyIndex=λmax−nn−1where n is the order of the matrix and λmax is the largest eigen vector.(13)ConsistencyRatio=ConsistencyIndexRandomIndexFuzzy pairwise comparison matrices are constructed using Table 2. A matrix (A˜k) with pairwise comparison of the importance of CRs for expert k can be obtained:(14)CR1CR2……CRj…CRnA˜k=CR1CR2⋮CRi⋮⋮CRn1a˜12k…………a˜1nk1/a˜12k1…………a˜2nk⋮⋮1…………⋮⋮⋮1a˜ijk……⋮⋮⋮1/a˜ijk1……⋮⋮⋮⋮⋮1…1/a˜1nk1/a˜2nk⋮⋮⋮⋮1where n is the number of CRs.Fuzzy aggregated pairwise comparison matrices are constructed. Using geometric mean approach, the fuzzy pairwise comparison matrices from all experts are combined. There are a total of k sets of pairwise comparison matrices to represent the relationship between CRs and ECs, and also for the inner dependence among CRs and for the inner dependence among ECs for k experts. There are k triangular fuzzy numbers for each pairwise comparison between two elements. A synthetic triangular fuzzy number is obtained by geometric mean approach:(15)a˜ij=(a˜ij1⊗a˜ij2⊗⋯⊗a˜ijk)1/kwherea˜ijk=(lijk,mijk,uijk)The fuzzy aggregated pairwise comparison matrix is as follows:(16)A˜=1a˜12…………a˜1j1/a˜121…………a˜2j⋮⋮1…………⋮⋮⋮1a˜ij……⋮⋮⋮1/a˜ij1……⋮⋮⋮⋮⋮1…1/a˜1j1/a˜2j…………1wherea˜ij=(lij,mij,uij)(v)Defuzzified aggregated pairwise comparison matrices are constructed using the center of gravity defuzzification method. The comparison between elements i and j is defuzzified using the following equation:(17)aij=(uij−lij)+(mij−lij)3+lijThe defuzzified aggregated pairwise comparison matrix is:(18)A=1a12…………a1j1/a121…………a2j⋮⋮1…………⋮⋮⋮1aij……⋮⋮⋮1/aij1……⋮⋮⋮⋮⋮1…1/a1j1/a2j…………1The consistency of the defuzzified aggregated pairwise comparison matrices is checked. A local priority vector is derived for each defuzzified aggregated comparison matrix as an estimate of the relative importance of the elements.(19)A⋅w=λmax⋅wwhere A is the defuzzified aggregated pairwise comparison matrix, w is the eigenvector; λmax is the largest eigen value of A. The consistency property of each defuzzified aggregated pairwise comparison matrix can be examined as explained earlier.An unweighted super matrix is formulated. Priority vectors are entered in the appropriate columns of a matrix to represent the relationships in the HOQ.(20)GCRECMunweighted=GCRECIWCGWCCWECWEEwhere WCGis a vector that represents the impact of the goal on CRs, WECis a matrix that represents the impact of CRs on ECs, WCCindicates the interdependency of CRs, WEEindicates the interdependency of ECs, I is the identity matrix, and entries of zeros correspond to those elements that have no influence.A weighted super matrix is calculated. The stochastic unweighted super matrix is obtained by giving equal weights to the blocks in the same column to make each column sums to unity. Then the limit super matrix is calculated by raising the weighted super matrix to the power of 2k+1 and the final priorities of ECs are obtained. The priority weights of ECs can be found in the EC-to-goal block in the limit super matrix.Based on the prioritized ECs, the functional specifications of the required mechanical structure, sensors, actuators and controllers are determined. The required components are selected based on the characteristics like reliability, maintainability, serviceability, upgradeability and disposability.The detailed design for mechanical systems is developed by considering the effect of forces that act on the system and their corresponding motions with the help of CAD packages. The developed system is analyzed from structural, thermal, fluid power and power transmission perspective.The electrical components frequently used are classified into three types: input modules (sensors, signal conditioning and impedance matching circuits), control modules (Microcontrollers, PLC and computer based controllers) and output modules (mechanical and electrical actuators like motors, contact devices like relays, circuit breakers, etc.). The signals from sensors are fed to the controller module and controllers compare it with the set point and actuate the output modules accordingly. The required analysis for electrical systems is performed using software like SPICE, OrCAD, Proteus, RSLogix, LabVIEW, MATLAB, etc.Prototyping is the process of replacing non-computer subsystems with actual hardware. Based on the detailed design from the previous stage, the required mechanical system is fabricated. The real time interfacing of mechanical system with sensors, controllers and actuators are to be carried out. In mechatronics system design, the main purpose of real-time interface system is to provide data acquisition and control functions for the computer. The real time interfacing includes analog to digital (A/D) and digital to analog (D/A) conversion, analog signal conditioning circuits and sampling theory.The developed prototype model is checked for reproducing the reality. The unmodeled errors are identified and prioritized using Fuzzy FMEA. In this paper, fuzzy FMEA based on fuzzy TOPSIS integrated with fuzzy AHP [28] is used for prioritizing the errors. Chang's extent analysis method for fuzzy AHP is utilized to determine the weight vector of three risk factors namely severity, occurrence and detectability. Chen's fuzzy TOPSIS is utilized to obtain most critical errors by using the linguistic scores of risk factors for each design error. The detailed procedure for this fuzzy FMEA approach is as follows:(i)A group of decision makers identifies the errors in the prototype model.Fuzzy AHP is used to obtain the weights of the risk factors. The procedure for AHP is as follows [8]:Let X={x1, x2,…, xn} be an object set, and U={u1, u2, …, un} be a goal set. According to the method of extent analysis, each object is taken and extent analysis for each goal is performed, respectively. Therefore, m extent analysis values for each object can be obtained with the following signs:M˜gi1,M˜gi2,…,M˜gij,where, all theM˜gij(i=1,2,…,n;j=1,2,…,m)are Triangular Fuzzy Numbers (TFNs). The steps of extent analysis are as follows:Step 1: The value of fuzzy synthetic extent with respect to the ith object is defined as:(21)S˜i=∑j=1mM˜gij⊗∑i=1n∑j=1mM˜gij−1To obtain∑j=1mM˜gijperform the fuzzy addition operation of m extent analysis values for a particular matrix such that(22)∑j=1mM˜gij=∑j=1mlj,∑j=1mmj,∑j=1muj−1and to obtain∑i=1n∑j=1mM˜gijthe fuzzy addition operationM˜gij(j=1,2,…,m)values is performed such as(23)∑i=1n∑j=1mM˜gij=∑i=1nli,∑i=1nmi,∑i=1nuiand then inverse of the above vector is computed such as(24)∑i=1n∑j=1mM˜gij−1=1∑i=1nui,1∑i=1nmi,1∑i=1nliAs shown above, the value of the fuzzy synthetic extent with respect to the ith object is defined and S1, S2, etc. are calculated.Step 2: AsM˜1andM˜2are two triangular fuzzy numbers, the degree of possibility ofM˜2≤M˜1is defined as:(25)V(M˜2≥M˜1)=supy≥xminμM˜1(x),minμM˜2(y)and can be equivalently expressed as follows:(26)V(M˜2≥M˜1)=μ(d)=1,ifm2≥m10,ifl2≥u2l1−u2(m2−u2)−(m1−l1)otherwisewhere d is the ordinate of the highest intersection point D betweenμM˜1andμM˜2as shown in Fig. 3. To compareM˜1andM˜2, both values ofV(M˜2≥M˜1)andV(M˜1≥M˜2)are needed.(27)d′(Ai)=minV(S˜i≥S˜K)The formulae required to compare two triangular fuzzy numbers are given in Step 2 and the degree of possibility is calculated in the Step 3.Step 3: The degree of possibility for a convex fuzzy number to be greater than k convex fuzzy numbersM˜ican be defined by(28)V(M˜≥M˜1,M˜2,…,M˜k)=minV(M˜≥M˜i),wherei=1,2,…,k.Assume thatd′(Ai)=minV(S˜i≥S˜K)for k=1, 2, …, k≠i. Then the weight vector is given by(29)W′=(d′(A1),d′(A2),…,d′(An))Twhere Ai(i=1, 2, …, n) are n elements.Step 4: Via normalization, the normalized weight vectors are(30)W=(d(A1),d(A2),…,d(An))Twhere W is a non-fuzzy number.Weight vector of risk factors can be obtained using pair-wise comparison method. The decision makers use the linguistic variables in Table 3to evaluate the weight vector risk factors. The consistency ratio of the comparison matrix has to be checked. The graded mean integration approach is utilized for this purpose and the fuzzy numbers are defuzzified into crisp numbers through the following Eq. (31):(31)P(M˜)=M=m1+4m2+m36Each value in the matrix is defuzzified and consistency ratio of the matrix is calculated and checked whether it is less than or equal to 0.1 or not.(iii)Fuzzy TOPSIS is used to rank the errors according to the closeness co-efficient [12]. The decision makers use linguistic variables to evaluate the ratings of alternatives with respect to criteria. Tables 4–6give the linguistic scale fuzzy ratings for evaluation of the alternatives with respect to three criteria namely occurrence, severity and detection.The ratings of alternatives with respect to each criterion by K experts can be calculated as:(32)x˜ij=1Kx˜ij1+x˜ij2+⋯+x˜ijKwherex˜ijkis the rating of the Kth decision maker for the ith alternative with respect to jth criterion.The fuzzy multi-criteria decision-making problem is expressed in matrix format after obtaining weights of the criteria and fuzzy ratings of alternatives with respect to three criteria as:(33)D=x˜11x˜12⋯x˜1nx˜21x˜22⋯x˜2n⋮⋮⋮⋮x˜m1x˜m2⋯x˜mn(34)W=[w1,w2,…,wn],wherej=1,2,3…,nThe linguistic variables are described by triangular fuzzy numbers:x˜ij=(aij,bij,cij). The linear scale transformation is used to transform the various criteria scales into a comparable scale. The normalized fuzzy decision matrixR˜is obtained.(35)R˜=r˜ijmxn(36)r˜=a˜ijcj*,b˜ijcj*,c˜ijcj*,j∈B;(37)r˜=aj−cij,bj−bij,cj−aij,j∈C;where C is the set of cost criteria and B is the benefit criteria(38)cj*=maxicij,ifj∈B(39)aj−=miniaij,ifj∈CThe normalization method mentioned above is to preserve the property that the ranges of normalized triangular fuzzy numbers belong to (0, 1).Considering the different importance of each criterion, the weighted normalized fuzzy decision matrix is constructed:(40)V˜=v˜ijm×n,i=1,2,…,m;j=1,2,…,n,where(41)v˜=r˜ij(⋅)d(Cj).According to the weighted normalized fuzzy decision matrix, the elementsv˜ij∀i, j are normalized as positive triangular fuzzy numbers and their ranges belong to the closed interval (0, 1). Then, the fuzzy positive-ideal solution (FPIS, A*) and fuzzy negative-ideal solution (FPIS), A− are defined as:(42)A*=v˜1*,v˜2*,…,v˜n*,(43)A−=v˜1−,v˜2−,…,v˜n−,(44)Wherev˜j*=(1,1,1)andv˜j−=(0,0,0),j=1,2,…,n.The distance of each alternative from A* and A− can be currently calculated as:(45)di*=∑j=1ndv˜ij,v˜j*,i=1,2,…,m,(46)di−=∑j=1ndv˜ij,v˜j−,i=1,2,…,m,where d(., .) is the distance measurement between two fuzzy numbers calculating with the following formula(47)dρ,τ=13[(ρ1−τ1)2+(ρ2−τ2)2+(ρ3−τ3)2]A closeness coefficient is defined to determine the ranking order of all alternatives once thedi*anddj−of each alternative Ai(i=1, 2,…, m) are calculated. The closeness coefficient of each alternative is calculated as(48)CCi=dj−dj*+dj−,i=1,2,…,m(iv)Based on the closeness co-efficient value, the design errors/failures are prioritized. These inputs are fed back to the conceptual design stage and redesigning of the system is carried out. The steps in the above said stages are repeated until the proposed design meets the customer requirements and functional specifications.In this stage, the new product is developed based on the final design which satisfies all the requirements. The full production and commercialization of the new product is then taken up. The product is launched at this stage and associated advertisements are created and implemented and the initial feedback is received.A power loom is a mechanized loom powered by a line shaft and is used to weave cloth. The basic purpose of any loom is to hold the warp threads under tension to facilitate the interweaving of the weft threads. The major components of the loom are the warp beam, heddles, harnesses, shuttle, reed and take-up roll.The major problems in the power looms are: cotton gets deposited in the reed when it is used for longer period and the rust is formed. To use the reed further, it should be cleaned from both dust and rust. At present, the cleaning process is done manually. Initially reed will be cleaned by a needle to remove cotton as shown in Fig. 4and then it will be rubbed with brush to remove dust as shown in Fig. 5. This process consumes more labor hour.Hence it is required to develop an automated reed cleaning machine which will solve the above said problems.CRs and ECs are collected from the experts in the power loom industries. FDM is applied to CRs and ECs to find consensus significance value ((sv)a). The results of FDM for CRs are shown in Table 7. With TEfor CRs is set at 6, five CRs are shortlisted out of 11. The results of FDM for ECs are shown in Table 8. Here TEfor ECs is set at 6.5. So, five ECs are shortlisted out of 8.From FDM, the selected CRs are: Efficiency of cleaning (CR1); Easy to operate (CR2); Minimum cycle time for cleaning (CR3); less skilled labor requirement (CR4) and Low machine cost (CR5). Similarly the selected ECs are: PLC based control mechanism (EC1); selection of suitable brushes and lead screw mechanism (EC2); selection of suitable motor (EC3); selection of sensors and relays (EC4) and automation for stopping the cleaning process (EC5).FISM is then applied to identify the interdependence among CRs, the interdependence among ECs and the relationship between CRs and ECs. A questionnaire is prepared on shortlisted CRs/ECs to obtain these relationships. With α=0.5 and β=0.3, α-cut method is applied to arrive at the crisp values. The influences among CRs and ECs are shown in Tables 9 and 10, respectively. Table 11shows the influence of CRs on ECS.The integrated relation matrix between CRs-CRs is derived as shown in Table 12.The integrated relation matrix between ECs-ECs is derived as shown in Table 13.The integrated relation matrix between CRs-ECs is derived as shown in Table 14.A threshold value is taken as 0.5 to identify whether the two factors are dependant or not [47]. The adjusted relation matrixes are:DCR=0010000110110100000000000DEC=0101100111000001100110010DCR&EC=1100001011000000001100010The initial reachability matrixes M are:MCR=D+I=0010000110110100000000000+1000001000001000001000001=1010001110111100001000001MEC=D+I=0101100111000001100110010+1000001000001000001000001=1101101111001001101110011MCR&EC=1100001011000000001100010+1000001000001000001000001=1100001011001000001100011The final reach ability matrixes M* are:MCR3=1111011110111100001000001MEC4=1111111111001001111111111MCR&EC4=1101101011001000001100011Based on M*, the relationship between the factors are depicted in Fig. 6.A questionnaire using Satty's nine-point scale of pairwise comparison for ANP is prepared based on the relationship among the factors in HoQ. The defuzzified aggregated pairwise comparison matrixes are shown in Tables 15–17, respectively. These pairwise comparison matrixes are examined for consistency using Eqs. (12) and (13).These priorities are entered into the designated places in the unweighted supermatrix as shown in Table 17. The unweighted supermatrix is transformed into a weighted supermatrix and the weighted supermatrix is raised to powers to capture all the interactions and finally the limit supermatrix is obtained as shown in Table 18.The priority weights of ECs from limit supermatrix are:WEC=EC1EC2EC3EC4EC50.0290.2580.4490.1580.096Automatic power loom reed cleaning machine is designed according to the prioritized FANP-QFD based results: selection of suitable motor (EC3); selection of suitable brushes and lead screw mechanism (EC2); selection of sensors and relays (EC4); automation for stopping the cleaning process (EC5); PLC based control mechanism (EC1). With the help of detailed design calculations, the following components are identified for developing further design: AC motor, DC motor, lead screw, bearing, wire brush, proximity sensor, PLC, relay and power supply.Based on the functional specifications and design calculations, the CAD model for the proposed system is developed and is shown in Fig. 7.With the help of CAD model and PLC programming developed using RSLogix software, the prototype model has been developed and it is shown in Fig. 8.Using Fuzzy FMEA, unmodeled errors in the developed prototype are identified and prioritized for further redesigning purpose. Since Mechatronics system involves integrating various modules like hardware and software, this process is highly essential. The various failure modes identified in the prototype model are: Vibrations in AC motors (FM1); Vibrations in lead screw arrangements (FM2); Excessive cycle time for cleaning process (FM3); Improper brush size (FM4); Weight of motor holding setup (FM5); Improper selection of AC motor (FM6) and Improper selection of DC motor (FM7). Fuzzy AHP is used to obtain the weights of the risk factors. Fuzzy TOPSIS is used to rank the errors according to the closeness co-efficient. The importance of the risk factors (S, O and D) is determined by using FAHP method. The linguistic variables from three experts are obtained using Table 3. The corresponding weight vector for the risk factors calculated using FAHP are shown in Table 19.The three experts also evaluate the risk factors with respect to each failure modes using the linguistic variables from Tables 4–6. Using geometric mean approach, the fuzzy evaluations of each risk factor with respect to each failure mode is shown in Table 20.The closeness co-efficient values found using FAHP-Fuzzy TOPSIS method and the ranking are shown in Table 21. The prioritized failure modes are: vibrations in AC motors (FM1); improper brush size (FM4); excessive cycle time for cleaning process (FM3); improper selection of AC motor (FM6); improper selection of DC motor (FM7); Weight of motor holding setup (FM5); Vibrations in lead screw arrangements (FM2).By analysing the developed prototype through fuzzy FMEA, the potential failures are identified and ranked. Based on this ranking, the product is redesigned. The vibration in AC motor setup should be reduced by selecting proper motor capable of running at slow speed. The suitable size of the brush is to be selected according to width of the reed. Because of smaller size brush, the cycle time is increased. Proper DC motor should be selected to drive the lead screw efficiently. If the weight of the AC motor holding setup is reduced, then the vibrations will be in control.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Development of Mechatronics system is a challenging process due to its interdisciplinary nature. Initial design verification is a significant requirement of a new product development, since early design phase account for a major portion of lifecycle costs. Hence, a strict integration of mechanical, control, electrical, electronic and software aspects from the very beginning of the conceptual design phase is required. The proposed model provides a methodology for solving Mechatronics design issues right from the conceptual design phase and helps to reduce the product development costs. Fuzzy based QFD and FMEA take care of customer requirements and failure analysis in the designs respectively.In this paper, a systematic framework that incorporates FDM, FISM, FANP–QFD and fuzzy FMEA for a Mechatronics product development is proposed. The customer requirements and their related engineering characteristics are identified and the critical factors are prioritized through FDM. The FISM is then applied to determine the relationship among the factors. These results are used to construct HoQ and the engineering characteristics are ranked through FANP based QFD. Based on the prioritized engineering characteristics, the functional specifications of the required mechanical structure, sensors, actuators and controllers are developed and the detailed CAD modeling is prepared. The required analysis for electrical systems is performed using controller software. Based on these input, the prototype model of new mechatronic product is developed. The errors/design failures are identified after the trial run of the prototype. Fuzzy FMEA is used to prioritize the potential failure modes. If required, the design is modified and the product can be commercialized. The developed framework is illustrated with a case study related to automatic power loom reed cleaning mechanism.