@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel SVM-kNN-PSO ensemble method for intrusion detection system

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
IDS implemented using ensemble of a six SVM and a six k-NN classifier.Ensembles are created with weight generated by PSO and meta-PSO algorithms.These two ensembles outperform third ensemble system that is created with WMA.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Ensemble,k-NN,LUS,PSO,SVM,Weighted majority voting (WMV),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In machine learning, a combination of classifiers, known as an ensemble classifier, often outperforms individual ones. While many ensemble approaches exist, it remains, however, a difficult task to find a suitable ensemble configuration for a particular dataset. This paper proposes a novel ensemble construction method that uses PSO generated weights to create ensemble of classifiers with better accuracy for intrusion detection. Local unimodal sampling (LUS) method is used as a meta-optimizer to find better behavioral parameters for PSO. For our empirical study, we took five random subsets from the well-known KDD99 dataset. Ensemble classifiers are created using the new approaches as well as the weighted majority algorithm (WMA) approach. Our experimental results suggest that the new approach can generate ensembles that outperform WMA in terms of classification accuracy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Intrusion detection is a new network security mechanism for detecting, preventing, and repelling unauthorized access to a communication or computer network. Intrusion detection systems (IDS) play a crucial role in maintaining a safe and secure network. The term anomaly-based intrusion detection describes a class of techniques that attempt to classify network traffic as either normal or anomalous. It mainly involves binary classification of selected audit data and other aspects of a system. The success of an intrusion detection system depends on how well it succeeds in maximizing its detection accuracy while minimizing its false alarm rate. Because of their success in practice at spotting new and unfamiliar attacks, anomaly-based intrusion detection systems have remained a heavily researched topic in the IDS community [1].In recent decades, anomaly-based intrusion detection and many other classification problems have benefited from the idea of combining multiple classifiers. The idea of combining responses produced by multiple classifiers into a single response is known as the ensemble approach [2].Ensemble-based classifiers are well-studied and have been used to improve the accuracy of several classification tasks. Several ensemble methods have been proposed, including mean combiner, median combiner, max combiner, majority voting, and weighed majority voting (WMV). While individual classifiers can be combined using any one of these methods, WMV is by far the most popular among them partly because of its conceptual simplicity, intuitiveness, and its effectiveness in practice [3].In early research, ensembles were shown empirically and theoretically to possess better accuracy than any single component classifier. An ensemble generated from classifiers trained from the same learning algorithm is termed homogeneous, whereas one generated from classifiers trained from different learning algorithms is a heterogeneous ensemble. For example, bagging and boosting are often used to generate homogeneous ensembles, whereas stacking can be used to produce heterogeneous ensembles. The success of an ensemble classifier strongly depends on the diversity in the outputs of its component classifiers, as well as on the choice of method to combine these outputs into a single one [4]. Because the selection of a suitable combination method is still poorly understood, several heuristic approaches for combining classifiers have been proposed. Particle swarm optimization (PSO) is one such approach. In 1995, Eberhart and Kennedy proposed the PSO method, which is a stochastic optimization technique that models the analogy of a swarm of birds in flight [5].In this paper, we define an expert as a collection of five binary classifiers that together generate a binary vector of responses. We trained six k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) and six support vector machine (SVM) experts on the same dataset. We then created three new ensembles using the two new approaches (PSO and meta-optimized PSO) and the weighted majority algorithm (WMA) approach. The ensembles all combine the opinions of the twelve experts to reach the final decision. The twelve experts were created from binary classifiers using different parameters to ensure their diversity. This in turn means that the resulting ensembles inherit this diversity property. We combined the expert opinions in three ways. In this first way, we generate weights using PSO that is constructed with manually selected behavioral parameters. These weights are then used with the weighted majority voting (WMV) to combine the expert opinions. We call this approach the PSO approach. The second way (meta-optimized PSO) is similar to the first approach, except that the PSO behavioral parameters were optimized using Local unimodal sampling (LUS). The third way (WMA approach) is to combine the opinions using the weighted majority algorithm (WMA). Finally, the three approaches were empirically compared. The experimental results based on five randomly selected subsets of the KDD99 datasets showed that the new method gives better accuracy than weighted majority algorithm (WMA).The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of related work. Section 3 introduces the methodology. Section 4 describes experimental results and discussions. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper and gives direction for future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
