@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Speed control of Brushless DC motor using bat algorithm optimized Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Bat algorithm optimized online ANFIS based speed controller presented for Brushless DC motor.The speed response of Brushless DC motor is analyzed for different operating conditions.The proposed controller eliminates the uncertainty problem due to load disturbance and set speed variations.The proposed controller enhances the time domain specifications and performance indices in all operating conditions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
ANFIS controller,Bat algorithm,Brushless DC motor,Fuzzy PID controller,PID controller,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, speed control of Brushless DC motor using Bat algorithm optimized online Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System is presented. Learning parameters of the online ANFIS controller, i.e., Learning Rate (η), Forgetting Factor (λ) and Steepest Descent Momentum Constant (α) are optimized for different operating conditions of Brushless DC motor using Genetic Algorithm, Particle Swarm Optimization, and Bat algorithm. In addition, tuning of the gains of the Proportional Integral Derivative (PID), Fuzzy PID, and Adaptive Fuzzy Logic Controller is optimized using Genetic Algorithm, Particle Swarm Optimization and Bat Algorithm. Time domain specification of the speed response such as rise time, peak overshoot, undershoot, recovery time, settling time and steady state error is obtained and compared for the considered controllers. Also, performance indices such as Root Mean Squared Error, Integral of Absolute Error, Integral of Time Multiplied Absolute Error and Integral of Squared Error are evaluated and compared for the above controllers. In order to validate the effectiveness of the proposed controller, simulation is performed under constant load condition, varying load condition and varying set speed conditions of the Brushless DC motor. The real time experimental verification of the proposed controller is verified using an advanced DSP processor. The simulation and experimental results confirm that bat algorithm optimized online ANFIS controller outperforms the other controllers under all considered operating conditions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Most of the problems associated with brushed DC motor have been overcome by Brushless DC motor. Brushless DC motor has high efficiency and lower susceptibility to mechanical wear, high torque per weight ratio, increased reliability, reduced noise, longer lifetime and overall reduction of electromagnetic interference. The speed control of the Brushless DC motor is an important aspect in many industrial processes [1–4]. Various control schemes have been developed for improving the speed control performance of Brushless DC motor drives. As a result, interests in emerging intelligent control systems for Brushless DC motor drive has increased significantly and numerous intelligent control schemes for Brushless DC motor were designed based on linear and non-linear models [5–15].The Proportional Integral Derivative (PID) controller based speed controller has been developed for three phase Brushless DC motor in [5]. However, PID controller degrades the system performance by constant gain parameter of the controller and also this controller suffered from improper tuning of constant parameters of the controller. In [6], hybrid fuzzy PID controller has been presented for Brushless DC motor. Genetic Algorithm is used to tune the input and output scaling factor of the fuzzy PID controller. But fuzzy PID controller also has uncertainty problem due to sudden load disturbance and set speed variations. Fuzzy sliding mode controller has been designed for Brushless DC motor in [7] and the effectiveness of the fuzzy sliding mode controller was compared with Proportional Integral Derivative controller. The design of fuzzy controller relies very much on human expertise based on the proposed objective and the sliding mode controller design is also very complex.In [8], parallel fuzzy PID algorithm has been adopted to realize the speed regulator for Brushless DC motor, but fuzzy PID controller has experienced uncertainty problem due to sudden load disturbance. Adaptive Fuzzy Logic Controller has been developed for Brushless DC motor in [9] and the speed response of the Brushless DC motor has a larger steady state error and settling time. Adaptive Fuzzy Logic speed controller for Brushless DC motor drive has been discussed in [10] and effectiveness of the controller has been compared with PI controller. However, controller degrades the performance of the speed of the Brushless DC motor during transient period. In [11], hybrid PI fuzzy logic controller has been developed for Brushless DC motor. The performance of the hybrid PI Fuzzy controller was better than conventional PI controller. But, the controller exhibits uncertainty problem due to set speed variations. In [12], the speed of the Brushless DC motor has been controlled using a fuzzy PD controller. This controller has produced larger overshoot and undershoots in the speed response due to load variations.In [13], fuzzy neural network based PI/PD controller with extended Kalman filter online learning has been outlined for Brushless DC motor. This control design increases the complexity of the controller. In [14], ANFIS controller based on a supervised critic algorithm has been presented, but tuning of the critic proportional and derivative gains has significant effect on the control system performance such as large overshoot, larger settling time and high steady state error in the speed response of the motor. In [15], gain tuning of dead beat proportional integral based speed controller for Brushless DC motor has been designed by particle swarm with ANFIS. If the operating condition changes, the response of the speed has also changed and hence, the controller was designed only for particular operating conditions. Also, online ANFIS controller has suffered from learning parameters that are Learning Rate (η), Forgetting Factor (λ) and Steepest Descent Momentum Constant (α) with change in operating points of the Brushless DC motor. These parameters have significant effect on time domain specifications. Since the operating point of Brushless DC motor changes regularly, it has become essential to vary the η, λ and α based on operating point of the motor.For an optimization objective, numerous algorithms have been formulated and every algorithm has its own advantages and disadvantages. Genetic Algorithm (GA) is developed in [16] for optimal design of fuzzy logic controller. However, this optimization technique requires very long run time depending on the size of the system under study. Also, it suffered from settings of algorithm parameters which have given rise to repeat of the similar suboptimal solutions. Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) based design of membership parameters has been demonstrated in [17]. PSO has some advantages over other related optimization techniques such as GA. However, PSO suffers from the biased optimism, which causes the less exact at the regulation of its velocity and the track. Furthermore, the algorithm suffers from sluggish convergence in advanced search stage, weak local search capability and algorithm may lead to possible trap in local optimum solutions. In order to overcome these drawbacks and for better clarity, recently researchers started to use bat algorithm [18,19]. Bat algorithm is categorized under the group of meta-heuristic algorithms. Bat algorithm is a novel search algorithm which stands on the echolocation behavior of micro bats. Preliminary studies indicated that the Bat algorithm is better to GA and PSO for solving unconstrained optimization problems because these methods fail to deal with the multimodal optimization problems [19].Since, the operating condition of the Brushless DC motor tends to vary much, design of robust controller to work under wide range of operating conditions and also to enhance the control system performance parameters has given ample research scope. In this paper, online Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System based speed controller is presented for Brushless DC motor. GA, PSO, and Bat algorithm are applied for optimizing the learning parameter of the ANFIS controller under different operating condition of Brushless DC motor. The performance of the BAT-online ANFIS is compared with GA-ANFIS and PSO-ANFIS. Moreover, the gain of the PID, fuzzy PID and adaptive Fuzzy Logic is optimized using GA, PSO and Bat algorithm and the effectiveness of the Bat algorithm is compared with GA and PSO. The performance of the proposed BAT-online ANFIS controller is compared with BAT-Proportional Integral Derivative controller, BAT-Fuzzy PID controller, BAT-Adaptive Fuzzy Logic, GA-ANFIS, and PSO-ANFIS controller for the constant load conditions, varying load conditions and varying set speed conditions of the Brushless DC motor. Finally, the proposed controller has been tested with hardware set up under real time operating conditions using an advantaged DSP processor.Brushless DC motor has three stator windings and a permanent magnet on the rotor. The mathematical state space representation of variables of the Brushless DC motor can be characterized by the following equation,(1)ddtiaibicωrθr=−RL−M00000−RL−M00000−RL−M00000−BJ0000P20iaibicωrθr+1L−M00001L−M000001L−M00000−1J0000VaVbVcTL+−1L−M000−1L−M000−1L−M000000eaebecwhere Va, Vband Vcdenotes stator phase voltages of the Brushless DC motor in Volts. R represents stator winding resistance in Ohms. Phase currents of the motor are represented by ia, iband icin Amps. The self inductance of the motor winding is represented by L and the mutual inductances between stator windings are denoted by M in Henry. ea, eband ecdenotes the trapezoidal back-EMF of the each phase in Volts. P is the number of poles of the rotor. θris the rotor position of the rotor in radian. J, B, ωrand TLdenotes the moment of inertia, frictional coefficient, angular velocity and load torque of the motor respectively. The electromechanical torque is expressed in the following equation as,(2)Te=Jdωrdt+Bωr+TLThe equation for the instantaneous electrical torque is given in Eq. (3) and also the relationship between angular velocity and rotor position.(3)Te=(eaia+ebib+ecic)ωrandωr=dθrdtThe block diagram of the proposed system is shown in Fig. 1. In the proposed system, rotor position of the Brushless DC motor is sensed by rotor position encoder. The speed (Na) of the motor is obtained by differentiating the rotor position of the motor, and then the actual speed of the motor is compared with the reference speed (Nr) to produce a speed error (e). The rate of change of speed error (Δe) is obtained by differentiating the speed error. The ANFIS controller receives the six inputs that are e, Δe, η, λ, α and learning error (es) and produce a control signal (Ua) to the switching Logic and PWM Inverter. The learning error is obtained by comparing the outputs of the PID control training data with the output of the ANFIS controller. The Lookup table for PID control training data consists of input–output data of the PID controller. The inputs to the block are e and Δe and output is the PID supervised data (Uc). The Lookup table for bat algorithm optimized values of η, λ and α consists of input–output data of the learning parameter as obtained from Bat algorithm optimization for different operating conditions of the motor. The inputs for the blocks are reference speed and load torque (TL) and output is the learning parameter (η, λ and α). The switching logic circuit provides necessary PWM signals for the inverter gate with respect to rotor position of the motor and the control signals obtained from proposed controller. The PWM inverter controls the speed of the motor by controlling the DC bus voltage of the inverter.PID control training data is depicted in Fig. 2(a). It consists of a 2D lookup table. The 2D lookup table has two inputs that are speed error (e) and rate of change of error (Δe) and single output (U). Totally 6561 data is stored in the lookup table and it is shown in Fig. 2(b). The lookup table arrangement is established based on the principles of proportional derivative controller. The yield of the lookup table is processed via proportional integral controller and it provides the supervised input for the online ANFIS controller.Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System combines the structures of the neural network and fuzzy inference system. Normally, ANFIS structure is formed using two methods namely offline method and online method. Each method consists of two learning, one is structure learning and another one is parameter learning. In offline method, structure and parameter learning are done in a sequential manner. In the beginning phase of the offline mode, initial membership function and fuzzy rules is produced based on partition algorithm. In the second phase of the offline mode, parameter of the ANFIS network, i.e., linear and nonlinear parameters are updated using gradient descent and recursive least square algorithms. But offline mode has some disadvantages, it requires a large amount of input and output data for the training and also a sequential process of the offline mode takes more time to train the ANFIS network. In order to overcome the shortcomings of the offline mode of ANFIS, online mode of the ANFIS network is developed. In online mode, structure and parameter learning are treated concurrently. In this paper, Scatter Partition type structure learning is employed in the ANFIS network.The Scatter Partition type ANFIS consists of five layers as shown in Fig. 3. The scatter partition reduces the number rules to reasonable quantities. Layer 1 is known as the input layer. In this layer input fuzzification takes place. Each input is assigned a membership value to each fuzzy subset that comprises that input's universe of discourse. Mathematically, this function can be expressed by the following equation,(4)oij(1)=μj(Ii(1))whereoij1is the layer 1 node's output, which matches to the jth linguistic term of the ith input variableIi1. A generalized Gaussian function memberships functions used for input variables and expressed in the following equation as,(5)μj(xi)=11+|xi−cij/aij|bijwhere i=1…q and j=1…y. Number of input variables are equal to q and y is equal to number of fuzzy subsets for each input variable. While the triplet of parameters aij, bijand cijis referred to as premise parameters or non-linear parameters and they adapt the conditions and the position of the membership function role. Those parameters are corrected during the training mode of procedure by the error back-propagation algorithm. Those premise parameters or nonlinear parameters are updated at each iteration, i.e., after each input–output pair is received during training and to minimize the instantaneous error function as given in the following equation,(6)E(n)=12(Uc(n)−Ua(n))2where Uc(n) is the desired output or supervised output and Ua(n) is the output of the online ANFIS controller at each step time (n). For each input–output training data pair, the ANFIS operates in the forward pass in order to calculate the current output Ua(n). Subsequently, going from the output layer, and moving backwards, the error back-propagation executes to calculate the derivatives∂E(n)/∂wfor each node at every Layer of the network. At the end of every iteration, the non-linear parameter aij, bijand cijof the input membership function is updated by the following equation as,(7)aij(1)(n+1)=α(aij(1)(n))+η−∂E(n)∂aij(1)bij(1)(n+1)=α(bij(1)(n))+η−∂E(n)∂bij(1)cij(1)(n+1)=α(cij(1)(n))+η−∂E(n)∂cij(1)where η is the learning rate of the network parameters and α is the steepest descent momentum constant.Layer 2 is known as fuzzy AND operation layer. Each node in this layer performs a fuzzy-AND operation. Here, T-norm operator of the algebraic product was chosen. This will result to each node's output. It is the product of all of its inputs and expressed in Eq. (8). Every input node is connected to that rule node.(8)ok(2)=wk=∏i=1qoij(1)where k=1…y2. The output of each node in this layer represents the firing strength or the activation value of the corresponding fuzzy rule.Layer 3 is known as normalization layer. The output of the kth node is the firing strength of each rule divided by the total sum of the activation values of all the fuzzy rules. This will result in the standardization of the activation value for each fuzzy rule and it is presented in the following equation as,(9)ok(3)=wk¯=ok(2)∑m=1y2om(2)Layer 4 is known as a linear parameter layer. Each node k in this layer is accompanied by a set of adjustable parameters d1k,d2k…dyk, d0 and implements the linear function as expressed in the following equation,(10)ok(4)=wk¯fk=wk¯(d1kI1(1)+d2kI2(1)+⋯+dykIy(1)+d0)The weightwk¯is the normalized activation value of the kth rule, calculated with the aid of Eq. (9). Adjustable parameters are called consequent parameters or linear parameters of the ANFIS system and they are set by a Recursive Least Square algorithm. For online supervised ANFIS controller, inputs and output parameters are considered to be e, Δe and Ua. The output is expressed in the following equation as,(11)f(e(m),Δe(m))d(m)=Ua(m)where e(m) and Δe(m) are controller input vectors, f is the known function of the inputs and d(m) is the unknown parameter to be estimated. In order to identify the unknown parameter d(m), we need input–output training data on the target system and it is obtained from the PID control algorithm and expressed in a set of ‘t’ linear equation given in the following equation as,(12)ft(e(m),Δe(m))d(m)=Uc(m)By the application of recursive least square algorithm, the consequence or linear parameter of the online ANFIS controller is updated in the layer 4. It is given in the following equation as,(13)djkn+1=djkn+1λPn−PnffTPnλ+fTPnff(U−fTdjkn)andd0n+1=d0nwherePn=(ftTλft)−1and λ is the forgetting factor of the online ANFIS controller.Layer 5 is known as output layer. This layer consists of one and only node that produces the network's output as the algebraic sum of the node's inputs. It is presented in the following equation as,(14)Ua=o5=∑k=1y2ok(4)=∑k=1y2wk¯fk=∑y2k=1wkfk∑y2k=1wkIn this section, learning parameter (η, α and λ) update law for the online ANFIS controller with different operating conditions of the Brushless DC motor has been described. Fig. 4(a) shows the lookup table for the learning parameter. It consists of three lookup tables. Each lookup table has two inputs, i.e., set speed and load torque of the Brushless DC motor and it provides the learning parameter to the online ANFIS controller based operating conditions of the Brushless DC motor.Fig. 4(b) shows the flowchart for the learning parameters update law for the online ANFIS controller. Initially read the values of the set speed and load torque of the motor. Flowchart consists of two loops, i.e., loop1 is used to update the learning parameter if set speed is between 1000 and 1500rpm else if set speed is between 0 and 1000rpm then loop2 is used. If set speed is between 1000 and 1500rpm, then check the load torque of the motor. If torque is between 0 and 0.5Nm then update the learning parameter of the online ANFIS controller for set speed of 1500rpm and torque of 0Nm conditions, else if torque is between 0.5Nm to 1.2Nm then update the learning parameter of the online ANFIS controller for the set speed of 1500rpm and torque of 1.1Nm condition, else if torque is between 1.2Nm to 2Nm then update the learning parameter of the online ANFIS controller for set speed of 1500rpm and torque of 2.2Nm condition, else go to read the value of the set speed and load torque of the motor, the same process is followed for the loop2.In this section, optimization of parameter (η, α and λ) of the ANFIS controller under different operating conditions of Brushless DC motor by Bat algorithm is explained. Also, the learning parameter is optimized using GA and PSO algorithm. The bat algorithm uses the echolocation behavior of bats. These bats emit a very loud sound pulse (echolocation) and takes heed of the echo that bounces back from the surrounding objects. Their signal bandwidth varies depending on the species. Each sound pulse includes frequency, loudness, and pulse emission rate. Most bats use signals with tuning frequencies while the rest use fixed-frequency signals. The frequency range used by these creatures is between 25kHz and 150kHz. Bat algorithm is based on following aspects; all bats use echolocation and distinguish the difference between victim and obstruction. Bats are flying with a random velocity, in a random location, with a variable frequency, loudness and the pulse emission rate [18,19]. The flowchart for the bat algorithm is shown in Fig. 5. Application of Bat algorithm for optimization of learning parameter of ANFIS controller as follows:Step 1Formulation of Objective function J1(S) for optimization with S=(S1…Sd),where d is the number of tuning parameters. The value of d=3, S1=η, S2=α and S3=λ.The fitness function can be defined as a particular type of objective function that is used to summarize, as a single figure of merit; In general, the fitness function should be a measure of how closely the model prediction matches the observed or expected data for a given set of model parameters. The notion of fitness is fundamental to the application of evolutionary algorithms; the degree of success in their application may depend critically on the definition of a fitness that changes neither too rapidly nor too slowly with the design parameters of the optimization problem. The fitness function must guarantee that individuals can be differentiated according to their suitability for solving the optimization problem.In evolutionary algorithms, the performance of the individual run is measured by a fitness function. After each iteration, the members are given a performance measure derived from the fitness function, and the “fittest” members of the population will propagate for the next iteration. In this paper, to assure stability and attain superior damping to sudden load disturbance and set speed variations, the parameters of the controllers may be chosen to minimize the following objective function described by Eq. (15) is considered as a fitness function for the optimization,(15)J1(S)=H1+H2H1=∑i=1m(ωref−ωacti)2mH2=ωmax−ωrefifωmax>ωref0otherwisewhere ωrefis the reference speed in rpm,ωactiactual speed of the motor in rpm at each sample. “m” is the number samples, in this paper, 20,000 samples has been taken for investigation. ωmaxis the maximum speed of the motor in rpm. The range of tuning parameter of the ANFIS controller is given in Eqs. (16)–(18) as,(16)0≤η≤2(17)0≤α≤2(18)0≤λ≤5Initialize the bat population Siand initial velocity Lifor (i=1, 2…n), where n is the number of bat populations.Define pulse frequency fiat Si. Initialize pulse rates Pi, maximum number of iterations and the loudness factor RiLoop:Start;t=0;While (t<Maximum number of iterations)t=t+1; iteration count.Generate new solutions by adjusting frequency and updating velocities and locations/solutions by Eqs. (19)–(21)(19)fi=fmin+(fmax−fmin)γ(20)Lit=Lit−1+(Sit−1−Sb)fi(21)Sit=Sit−1+Litwhere γ is a random vector drawn from a uniform distribution and frequency range fmin=0 and fmax=100. Sbis a global best for every iteration or generation.If (random number (0 to 1)>Pi)Select a solution among the best solutions and generate a local solution around the selected best solution using the following equation,(22)Sit=Sb+εRtwhere ɛ is a random number. WhileRt=〈Rti〉is the average loudness of all the bats at this time step (t).End ifGenerate a new solution by flying randomlyIf (random number (0 to 1)<Ri& J(Si)<J(Sb))Accept the new solutions,Increase Piand reduce Riusing Eqs. (23) and (24).(23)Rit+1=βRit,Pit+1=Pi0(1−e(−σt))where β and σ are constants. For any 0<β<1 and σ>0, we have(24)Rit→0,Pit=Pi0,ast→∞For simplicity, β=σ can be used and for this work, β=σ=0.9 is considered.End ifRank the bats and find the current best (Sb)End whileLoop endDisplay the optimum solutions.This paper focuses on optimal tuning of learning parameter of the online ANFIS speed controller using GA, PSO, and Bat algorithm. The intention of this optimization is to minimize the target function, in order to amend the time domain specification and performance indices such as rise time, overshoot, undershoot, recovery time, settling time, steady state error, root mean squared error (RMSE), integral of absolute error (IAE), integral of time multiplied absolute error (ITAE) and integral of squared error (ISE) under different operating conditions. Block diagram of the tuning parameters of the online ANFIS controller using GA, PSO and BAT algorithm is shown in Fig. 6. The Parameters used for the GA, PSO and BAT algorithm are presented in Table 1.The objective function is minimization function as given in the equation (15), Different operating conditions are considered for Brushless DC motor as given in Table 2. For each operating conditions leaning parameter is optimized. The convergence curves for the considered operating conditions are depicted in Fig. 7.From the convergence graphs shown in Fig. 7, it is clear that, the bat algorithm minimizes the fitness value to global optimum at second iteration for all operating conditions. But, GA and PSO minimize the fitness value to global optimum at second iteration for some operating conditions and it take more than two iterations for the some operating conditions. And finally, average computation time and optimal value of η, α and λ of the online ANFIS controller for the different operating conditions of the Brushless DC motor using GA, PSO and bat algorithm are presented in Table 3. From these results, it is evident that, BAT algorithm has minimum fitness value than GA and PSO for all operating conditions. Moreover, average computation time also favors only for the BAT algorithm.The Minimal value of fitness function and average computation time is not only the decisive parameter for judging the BAT algorithm to be better than GA and PSO. In order to evaluate the superiority of the BAT algorithm, time domain specification (rise time, overshoot, undershoot, settling time and steady state error) and performance indices (RMSE, IAE, ITAE, and ISE) are measured and analyzed for different operating conditions of the Brushless DC motor and also compared with GA and PSO. Table 4shows the performance parameter of the Brushless DC motor for the all operating conditions with GA, PSO and BAT. From these results, BAT algorithm has small value total indices for the different operating conditions of the Brushless DC motor than GA and PSO. Considering all vital parameters such fitness value, average computation time and total indices, it is evident that BAT algorithm is performing better than GA and PSO.In this section, optimization of the gain of the PID (Kp, Ki, Kdand Td), Fuzzy PID (Ke, Kce, Gp, Gi, and Gd), and Adaptive Fuzzy Logic Controller (Ke, Kce, Ku, and Kb) using GA, PSO and BAT algorithm is presented. Fig. 8shows the structure of the PID, fuzzy PID and Adaptive Fuzzy Logic controller.Same objective function in Eq. (15) is used for optimization of gains of the above controller using GA, PSO and BAT algorithm. Convergence curve of the optimization is shown in Fig. 9. From this curve (Fig. 9), it is clear that, BAT algorithm converges to the fitness value of the global optima within second iteration but GA and PSO takes more than two iterations to converge. The optimal values of the gain of the PID, Fuzzy PID, and Adaptive Fuzzy Logic controller and average computation time are presented in Table 5. From these analyses, BAT algorithm has best fitness value and average computation time than GA and PSO. Minimum fitness function value and average computation time are not only the vital parameter to judge the superiority of bat algorithm over GA and PSO. Time domain specification and performance indices are also evaluated and tested for the motor with set speed of 1500rpm and load torque of 1Nm condition. Table 6shows the performance analysis parameters for the PID, fuzzy PID, and Adaptive Fuzzy Logic controller with GA, PSO, and BAT algorithm.From these analysis results presented in Table 6, it is proved that, BAT algorithm has good quality of fitness value, average computation time and total indices than GA and PSO.In this section, Simulink model and simulation results are presented to validate the effectiveness of the proposed bat algorithm optimized ANFIS controller (BAT-ANFIS). Speed response characteristics for constant load condition, varying load conditions and varying set speed conditions of Brushless DC motor are obtained for the proposed controller and compared with BAT-PID controller (BAT-PID), BAT-fuzzy PID controller (BAT-FPID), BAT-Adaptive Fuzzy Logic controller (BAT-AFLC), GA-Online ANFIS (GA-ANFIS), and PSO-Online ANFIS (PSO-ANFIS) acting separately. The specifications of the Brushless DC motor drive system are: Rated power – 1.1 HP, rated current – 4.52 Amps, rated voltage – 310V DC, rated speed – 2000rpm and rated Torque – 2.2Nm.The overall Simulink model of bat algorithm optimized ANFIS based speed controller for Brushless DC motor is shown in Fig. 10.The Simulink model consist of three phase voltage source PWM inverter, three phase Brushless DC motor, Online ANFIS controller, switching logic, PWM generator and motor measurement blocks. The Simulink model of switching logic and PWM generator model consists of a triangular wave generator, three AND gates, comparator and three NOT gates. Another simulink model is invoked consisting of an online ANFIS controller and two lookup tables. One lookup table used to provide the PID controller training data. Another lookup table is used to provide the learning parameter such as Learning Rate (η), Forgetting Factor (λ) and Steepest Descent Momentum Constant (α) to the ANFIS controller. Another Simulink model is created for measuring rotor speed, rotor position, electromagnetic torque, back EMF and stator current.In this section, speed response characteristics of Brushless DC motor under no load and full load conditions are explained. Fig. 11(a) shows the speed response for no load condition with set speed of 1500rpm. The performance parameter of the speed response is shown in Table 7. The proposed BAT-online ANFIS has a better time domain specification and performance indices than the other considered controllers. The vital parameters such as overshoot and steady state error are in favor of the proposed controller only.Fig. 11(b) shows the speed response characteristics for full load condition with set speed of 1500rpm. The performance parameter of the speed response is shown in Table 8. From the results, it is clear that the proposed controller has better time domain specifications in speed response and performance indices. All considered parameters such as rise time, overshoot, undershoot, settling time, steady state error, RMSE, ITAE are favoring only the proposed controller. The transient state region, speed response is under damped for BAT-PID controller, BAT-FPID controller and BAT-AFLC controllers. The speed response is over damped nature for the proposed controller and the proposed BAT-ANFIS controller outperforms the other considered controllers.In order to validate the effectiveness of the proposed controller, the motor is subjected to sudden load changes also and the response is observed. The speed response characteristics for varying load conditions are analyzed for two cases. Case A, speed is set at 1500rpm and load is varied from no load to full load at 0.1sec. Case B, speed is set at 1500rpm and load is varied from full load to no load at 0.1sec. Fig. 12(a) shows the speed response for case A condition and performance parameters are shown in Table 9. The total performance indices are less for the proposed controller than other considered controllers. Moreover, the very important parameter such as recovery time, overshoot, and steady state error are also in support of the proposed controller.Fig. 12(b) shows the speed response for case B condition. The performance parameter of the speed response is shown in Table 10. From these outcomes, it is ascertained that the proposed controller is able to perform better under sudden change in load conditions also. The uncertainty problem due load variations is completely tackled and tracked by the proposed controller and this makes it ideal controller for Brushless DC motor foe use in industrial environment.In order to judge the superiority of the proposed controller, the motor is subjected to varying set speed conditions also. Two important cases are considered. In Case C, speed is varied from 1500rpm to 1000rpm at 0.1s. In Case D, speed is varied from 1000rpm to 1500rpm at 0.1s. Fig. 13(a) shows the speed response characteristics for case C. The corresponding performance parameters are shown in Table 11. The response is over damped nature with proposed controller whereas it is under damped nature for the other considered controllers.Fig. 13(b) shows the speed response characteristics for the case D condition. And the corresponding time domain and performance indices are shown in Table 12. Important parameters such as overshoot, recovery time, steady state error, RMSE, IAE, ITAE, and ISE are favoring the proposed controller for the varying set speed conditions also like the other results discussed above. The system response is also well damped for the proposed controller under different operating conditions considered.In order to validate the performance of the proposed controller under extreme working conditions such as varying load and set speed conditions, simulation results alone could not be taken for consideration. Verification of the performance through experimental set up supplements the justification in favor of the proposed controller.Block diagram of the DSP-based computer control system for a Brushless DC motor drive using the voltage-controlled technique is shown in Fig. 14(a). Real time hardware setup is provided in Fig. 14(b). The setup consists of Micro-2407 trainer, personal computer, rectifier, Inverter module, Brushless DC motor, torque sensor and Hall sensor signal conditioner.The Micro-2407 a 16-bit fixed point DSP trainer based on TMS320LF2407A DSP Processor is used as a controller unit. This trainer has digital control along with basic DSP functions such as filtering, PWM generation and calculation of spectral characteristics of input analog signals. The TMS320LF2407A contains a C2xx DSP core along with useful peripherals such as ADC, DAC, Timer, and PWM Generation integrated onto a single piece of silicon. The Micro-2407 trainer can be operated in two modes. In mode 1(serial mode) the trainer is configured to communicate with PC through serial port. In mode 2 (stand alone mode), the trainer can be interacted with the IBM PC keyboard and 16×2 LCD display [20,21].The Personal computer is used for displaying the actual speed of the motor and giving reference set speed to the DSP processor. The input AC voltage is rectified by the Diode Bridge Rectifier circuit. The rectified DC voltage is fed to the power circuit through a filter capacitor. The Power circuit consists of three leg IGBT-diode pair switches. The PWM signal from the driver IC is fed to the gate of the switch. The output of the power circuit is given to the Brushless DC motor. The PWM signals to the IGBT switches are generated by the DSP controller unit. The PWM signal from the controller is fed to the IGBT PWM inverter module through the connector provided on the front panel. In this implementation, controller is used for PWM generation and switching logic generation for the IGBT module. Torque sensor, Hall sensor and speed sensor units are used for sensing the load torque, position and speed of the rotor of the Brushless DC motor. It is fed to the DSP processor via A/D converter. The DSP controller program for the proposed control process was written in C language. Controlling and compiling process was performed by a compiler program.Some experimental results are provided to demonstrate the control performance of the proposed Bat algorithm optimized online ANFIS controller for the Brushless DC motor. Two test conditions are provided in the experimentation, which are the sudden load variation case and the set speed variation case.Fig. 15(a) and (b) depicts the speed response characteristics of the Brushless DC motor for sudden increases in load from 0Nm to 2Nm and from 2Nm to 0Nm respectively. During load variation, speed of the motor decrease lightly for load increasing conditions and speed increases lightly for load decreasing conditions and then track the set speed quickly. Fig. 16(a) and (b) depicts the speed response characteristics for set speed variations from 1500rpm to 1000rpm and from 1000rpm to 1500rpm respectively. During set speed variations, speed response of the Brushless DC motor is able to track the set speed command for both increasing and decreasing conditions of the reference speed. From the experimental studies, it is proved that the proposed controller has excellent tracking performance.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
