@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A note on the TOPSIS method in MADM problems with linguistic evaluations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The ranking ambiguity of the extended fuzzy TOPSIS method in MADM is revealed.Graphical interpretations are demonstrated to fully stress the ranking inadequacy.Two supplemental indexes are formulated to assist the extended fuzzy TOPSIS method.The sufficiency of the two indexes plus the original fuzzy TOPSIS method is proved.Impacts caused by the factors such as alternative quantity are discussed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fuzzy decision making,Linguistic evaluation,Multiple attribute decision making,TOPSIS,Triangular fuzzy number,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The TOPSIS method, commonly known as the technique for order preference by similarity to ideal solutions, is one of the most popular approaches used in multi-attribute decision making (MADM). The fundamental procedure of the traditional TOPSIS method is rather straightforward, the ranking position of an alternative depends on its relative closeness to the positive ideal solution and the negative ideal solution, respectively. In order to encompass uncertain and ambiguous decision elements, an extension of the original TOPSIS method has been coined. With the help of fuzzy sets based TOPSIS, an overwhelming trend of fuzzy decision making applications has been witnessed. In the present work, however, it is found that the extended fuzzy TOPSIS method is unable to distinguish all the different alternatives under linguistic environment. Moreover, the undistinguishable alternatives are countless in quantity, and they have formed specific patterns with respect to the parameters of TOPSIS methods. To dampen this ranking ambiguity, we designed a set of supplemental methods to construct a revised TOPSIS approach with linguistic evaluations. Correspondingly, the sufficiency of the revised TOPSIS method to guarantee total orders has been proven. Furthermore, a numerical example concerning the production line improvement of a manufacturing company is demonstrated to validate the feasibility and supremacy of the proposed method. Finally, a series of further discussions are performed to shed some lights on the impacts caused by the changes of the alternative quantity, the attribute quantity, and the type of linguistic term.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In retrospect of the existing literature on the subject of multi-attribute decision making (MADM) or multiple criteria decision making (MCDM), the TOPSIS method receives considerable attention in contrast with other ranking methodologies. Originally designated to solve crisp valued MADM problems, the TOPSIS method was firstly introduced by Hwang and Yoon [18] (also see [7]). The classical procedure of TOPSIS includes the following three primary steps. (1) To predetermine one positive ideal solution (PIS) and one negative ideal solution (NIS) of the original decision making problem; (2) To calculate the distance from each alternative to the PIS/NIS, or the similarity between each alternative and the PIS/NIS; (3) To order all the alternatives according to their closeness coefficients of distances or similarities.Statistically speaking, the TOPSIS method has been successfully employed to deal with MADM problems of many kinds [2]. And the review paper composed by Behzadian et al. also indicates the broad scope of the TOPSIS method implementations and the globally accepted consensus on its popularity. It is verified that the TOPSIS method could rationally reflect the experts’ judgements, and it could be easily implemented in the decision making process. Meanwhile, in practical decision making procedures, it is noticeable that merely using crisp numbers in the decision matrix simply cannot fulfil the task of modeling people's opinions. In other words, decision makers usually express their assessments toward the alternatives with linguistic terms, which could be uncertain, ambiguous, and sometimes even completely vague. Judging from that phenomenon, other more appropriate representations of the linguistic terms should be introduced into the MADM domain.Recall that the fuzzy sets theory, which was proposed by Zadeh [42], describes the classes of objects in the real physical world without precisely defined criteria of membership. And one pivotal purpose of the introduction of fuzzy sets was to help process natural languages, or to compute with words. Apparently, the fuzzy sets theory properly meets the demand of uncertain and ambiguous information processing. As a result, much work has been conducted in the area of fuzzy value comparison [14,32]. Without those talented pioneering work, such as ranking with the spreads, the mean values or even the shapes of the fuzzy numbers, the fuzzy MADM approaches could not progress to its current level. Moreover, Chen [6] proposed an extended TOPSIS method under fuzzy environment. In which the evaluations of the decision making problems are in the form of triangular fuzzy numbers. Similar to the notions in traditional TOPSIS method, fuzzy positive ideal solution (FPIS) and fuzzy negative ideal solution (FNIP) are defined accordingly. Since then, the extended fuzzy TOPSIS method has expanded its territory to many application fields such as management [4,11,17,20,22,28,33], human resources [1,25], logistics [3,10,16,34], manufacturing [23,24,27] and so on [40,41].Nevertheless, an inherent shortcoming of the extended TOPSIS method and the traditional TOPSIS has been discovered [21]. To elaborate, since the TOPSIS method is a relative comparison instrument built upon the closeness coefficient, it can not guarantee a minimized distance from the best alternative to the positive ideal solution, and a maximized distance from the best alternative to the negative ideal solution, simultaneously. As it was formulated by Lai et al., the satisfactory levels of both the distances from PIS and NIS are the same, while the priorities of the two criteria may vary under certain circumstances. To this end, a bi-objective programming method has been developed to search for the best alternative which satisfies both the farthest from the NIS and nearest to the PIS [26]. In a recent study, to overcome the aforementioned shortcoming, an intersection connective related approach in dealing with TOPSIS method has been proposed [5].Even though it is critical to consider the two pieces of distances as a pair of independent criteria, here in this paper, another shortcoming of the extended fuzzy TOPSIS method should also be attended. In the present manuscript, it is revealed that the traditional TOPSIS method could not distinguish every pair of different alternatives. Especially when these alternatives are expressed in the linguistic or TFN types of formats. To help the comprehension of the ranking ambiguity with a visual aid, the following two scenarios are discussed respectively. If the closeness ratio based TOPSIS method is applied, then the undistinguishable alternatives compose a part of a sphere surface or a plane, depending on the actual value of the ratio; Otherwise, if the distance based TOPSIS is employed, then the undistinguishable alternatives form a series of circles centered on the diagonal line of the unit cubic area. Although it could be reckoned that these undistinguishable alternatives are equivalent in decision making problems, but inherently they are different TFNs. In a real world managerial situation, it is quite normal to perform further differentiations in order to completely distinguish all the alternatives. The goal of which is to determine the one best alternative for future investment, or just the one worst alternative to perform immediate improvements. Therefore, it is necessary to understand that the traditional TOPSIS method should be enhanced to give more precise ranking orders for MADM with linguistic evaluations. Merely using the closeness coefficient measure or the distance values from PIS and NIS could not rank all of the alternative with different linguistic judgements [12,13].Therefore, in the present paper, a revised TOPSIS method based on fuzzy decision matrix composed with linguistic evaluations is proposed. The mean value and shape value of the TFNs are two supplemental methods used to help the ranking process. With these two methods, an accurate ranking order could be obtained. Suppose that two alternatives with TFN evaluations are considered equivalent even when the revised TOPSIS method is applied, then the theorems introduced in this work could deduce that these two alternatives are exactly the same. The sufficiency of the revised TOPSIS method has been proved, but the necessity of the revised method is left unproven. This lack of necessity proof keeps future attempts toward developing other supplemental methods permissable.Furthermore, another contribution of the present work lies in the discovery of the following patterns under the linguistic decision making condition. Suppose more alternatives and attributes are added into the decision matrix when we apply the traditional TOPSIS method, the extent of the undistinguishable alternative proportion keeps increasing. Similarly, if the linguistic variable type alters, say, there are more linguistic terms used to express the experts’ opinions, the proportion of undistinguishable alternatives grows as well. The above pattern reminds us that when the size of the linguistic based decision making problem gets larger, the possibility of encountering undistinguished but different alternatives becomes more often. The traditional TOPSIS method may yield ambiguity, while in practice, the managerial staff prefers to seek for an accurate ranking order of all the alternatives. Moreover, the research outcomes from this end also indicate that the increase of alternative quantity casts an effect on the ranking ambiguity more prominently than the number of attributes. And the attribute quantity influences the ranking ambiguity more than the types of linguistic variables.To clarify the major contributions achieved by the present paper, and to distinguish the research gap between the existing literature and us, the following tabular form of comparisons are demonstrated.As it is shown in Table 1, the focus of the present manuscript resembles that of the work composed by Opricovic et al. [26]. But the revealed shortcomings of the TOPSIS method are completely different. Opricovic et al. pointed out that the ratio form of the TOPSIS method is inappropriate in seeking for the best alternative; While the present study indicates that the traditional TOPSIS methods with both the ratio and the distance forms could cause ranking ambiguity of some level. As for the shortcoming pattern recognition part, Opricovic et al. illustrates the different ranking patterns caused by using TOPSIS and VIKOR respectively; While the present paper presents the changing patterns of the same TOPSIS method with varied decision making model parameters, i.e., the number of alternatives, the number of attributes, and the types of linguistic terms. Notice that Francisco et al. [16] also mentions the variations of alternative quantity and attribute quantity in their work, however, the results obtained by Francisco et al are built upon fuzzy TOPSIS approach, not the linguistic evaluation based decision making. Also, the change of parameters in Francisco et al's only concerns with the agility and time complexity of the decision making process; In comparison, our work concentrates on the total number or the proportion of the undistinguishable alternatives. Chamodrakas et al. [5] compensated the same shortcoming of TOPSIS method revealed by Opricovic et al. [26] with the fuzzy set representation (FSR) model and the simulation experiments. Different from the above discovered shortcomings of the TOPSIS method, Dymova et al. [15] pointed out that the extended fuzzy TOPSIS method may not be complete, since the ideal solutions are represented as crisp values or fuzzy values which cannot be obtained from the decision matrix. Hence they employed a so called local criteria aggregation method to ameliorate the extended fuzzy TOPSIS method, and obtained compromised final decisions. Judging from the aforementioned comparative analysis of the related literature, it can be concluded that no overlaps between our work and the existing contents is observed.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In the second section, some preliminary knowledge is introduced to pave the way for further discussion. In Section 3, the inherent limitations of the two types of traditional extended TOPSIS methods are revealed, respectively. After Section 3, the next section mainly introduces the revised TOPSIS method proposed by the present paper. The definition and theorems necessary to construct the structure of the revised TOPSIS method are also demonstrated in Section 4. In order to validate the proposed method, a numerical example concerning the manufacturing production line improvement is shown in Section 5. Finally, the section of further discussions reveals the various levels of influences caused by the changes of the alternative quantity, the attribute quantity, and the types of linguistic variables. The last section concludes the paper.Fundamental knowledge concerning the triangular fuzzy numbers and the traditional TOPSIS method is introduced in this section so as to facilitate further discussions.Definition 2.1[42] A fuzzy set (FS for short) A of the universe X is characterized by a function μA: X→[0, 1]. The function μAis called the membership function of A. The function value μA(x) is termed the degree of membership of x in A.The fuzzy set A can be represented as follows:(1)A={〈x,μA(x)〉|x∈X}.Notice that in this expression, if μA(x)=0, then the element x is completely not belong to A; and if νA(x)=1, then the element x is completely belong to A. If μA(x)∈{0, 1} for all x∈X, then the fuzzy set A degenerates to a crisp set.The following several concepts come from Kaufmann and Gupta [19], or Chen [6].Definition 2.2An FS A of the universe X is convex if and only if ∀ x1, x2∈X and ∀ λ∈[0, 1], we have(2)μA(λx1+(1−λ)x2)≥min(μA(x1),μA(x2)).Definition 2.3An FS A of the universe X is normal if there exists some x0∈X such that μA(x0)=1.Definition 2.4A fuzzy number is a fuzzy set of the universe X which is both convex and normal.Definition 2.5The α-cut of a fuzzy numbera˜where α∈[0, 1] is defined as(3)a˜α={x∈X|a˜(x)≥α}.For a defined fuzzy number, its α-cut is a closed interval denoted asa˜α=[aαl,aαr], where aαland aαrare the lower and upper bounds of the interval respectively.Definition 2.6Given a fuzzy numbera˜and ∀α∈[0, 1], ifa˜αl>0, thena˜is called a positive fuzzy number.With the definition of fuzzy numbers, triangular fuzzy numbers as one special category of fuzzy numbers could be introduced as follows.Definition 2.7A triangular fuzzy number (TFN)t˜, denoted a triple (tl, tm, tr), is defined by the following membership function μt, which is shown in Fig. 1.(4)μt(x)=0,x<tl,x−tltm−tl,tl≤x≤tm,x−trtm−tr,tm≤x≤tr,0,x>tr.Definition 2.8If a triangular fuzzy numbert˜is a positive fuzzy number, and satisfies tr≤1, then t is called a normalized positive triangular fuzzy number.In this paper, we always assume that all TFNs appeared are normalized positive TFNs. By using this assumption, we can avoid unnecessary discussions and steps in related procedures.Definition 2.9Presume that two TFNs aret˜=(tl,tm,tr)ands˜=(sl,sm,sr), λ is a constant real number, the basic operations with TFNs are as follows:(5)(1)t˜+s˜=(tl+sl,tm+sm,tr+sr);(2)t˜×s˜=(tl×sl,tm×sm,tr×sr);(3)λ×t˜=(λ×tl,λ×tm,λ×tr).Definition 2.10Presume that two TFNs aret˜=(tl,tm,tr)ands˜=(sl,sm,sr), two comparison measurements based on TFNs are as follows:(6)(1)Mean(t˜)=tm:ifMean(t˜)>Mean(s˜),thent˜≻s˜;(2)Spread(t˜)=tr−tl:ifSpread(t˜)>Spread(s˜),thent˜≺s˜.where the symbol “≻” stands for having a higher ranking order than; the symbol “≺” stands for having a lower ranking order than; and the symbol “∼” stands for having the same ranking order with.Remark: in the above two measures, the spread measure is not performed until the mean measure could not distinguish different TFNs.Definition 2.11The Euclidean distance between two TFNst˜=(tl,tm,tr)ands˜=(sl,sm,sr)is defined as follows:(7)d(t˜,s˜)=13[(tl−sl)2+(tm−sm)2+(tr−sr)2].Although there are other distances between fuzzy sets (see [29]), Euclidean distance is adopted here because there is no obvious difference among various types of distances. Each type of distance may have its specialty, but in general the relative ranking positions of alternatives derived by different distances are approximately the same [9].Suppose that in an MADM problem, there are n alternatives A1, A2, …, Anand m attributes T1, T2, …, Tm. Thus the fuzzy decision matrix of this problem is of the following form:M=(mij)n×mwhere the entry mijstands for the evaluated value of ith alternative Aiabout jth attribute Tj. Usually mijis a linguistic term such as “good”, “bad” or “very bad”.Then each linguistic term could be transformed into a TFN, and every alternative could be characterized by aggregating all the m TFNs into a single TFN by aggregation operators such as simple weighted average method.Definition 2.12Assume that there are 2n+1 linguistic terms used to represent the meanings of the experts in a decision making process, then each linguistic term Sicould be represented via an approximation of TFN as below,(8)Si=(0,0,12n),i=1(i−22n,i−12n,i2n),1<i<2n+1(1−12n,1,1),i=2n+1For the sake of simplicity, suppose that the PIS in this formulation is (1, 1, 1), which degenerates from a typical TFN to a piece of line on the upper bound of the space defined in the closed interval [0, 1]; And the NIS is denoted as (0, 0, 0). Thereby we could calculate the ranking index (closeness coefficient) of these alternatives by the determined PIS and NIS with the help of Definition 2.11.Definition 2.13The closeness coefficient Riof alternative Aiis calculated as follows,(9)Ri=d(Ai,NIS)d(Ai,NIS)+d(Ai,PIS),i=1,2,…,n,where d is Euclidean distance defined by (7).From the formula (9), we could see that the further the alternative is from the NIS, the larger the ratio number will become, and thus the alternative is a better choice judged according to people's intuition. To this end, we could use the closeness coefficient as a pivotal index in ranking alternatives with linguistic evaluations.In order to illustrate the inadequacy of the extended fuzzy TOPSIS method more intuitively, in this section MADM models are assumed to possess only one attribute as well as multiple alternatives. This kind of problems can also be named single attribute decision making (SADM) problems. In fact, some authors transformed MADM problems into SADM problems by aggregating multiple evaluated values into a single value (e.g., see [36]). Hence, for each example demonstrated below, the decision matrix would be expressed as an n×1 matrix. And evaluations of these alternatives are normalized positive TFNs. One sample of n×1 decision matrix is as below.A1A2⋮An(t1l,t1m,t1r)(t2l,t2m,t2r)⋮(tnl,tnm,tnr)t1t2⋮tnIf we think of the evaluated TFNs as points in the three dimensional space, for a typical TFN t=(tl, tm, tr), the coordinates of the corresponding point in the space is (x, y, z). The second triple is considered as the visualized counterpart of the first triple. The following inequality holds:(10)0≤x=tl≤y=tm≤z=tr≤1.The points in the three dimensional space satisfying the above condition is displayed in Fig. 2.From this figure, we could see that the showed pyramid O−A−B−C is the feasible region of the possible evaluations of all the alternatives. The pyramid has its vertex O (0,0,0) and its bottom formed by three vertexes A (0,1,1), B (1,1,1) and C (0,0,1). Points inside the pyramid stand for TFNs which can become possible evaluated values to the SADM problem.For triangular fuzzy numbers, the PIS of all the normalized positive triangular fuzzy numbers could be considered as B (1,1,1). And the NIS is considered as O (0,0,0). Again in Fig. 2, we could regard one of the vertexes of the cube as PIS, and the origin O (0,0,0) of the chart as the NIS. The line connecting the two points is the main diagonal line of the cube.For the points in the feasible region of a TFN, namely, TFNi, their coordinates are in the form (x,y,z), and the closeness coefficient in formula 9 could be expressed as follows,(11)Ri=x2+y2+z2(x−1)2+(y−1)2+(z−1)2+x2+y2+z2For any two different alternatives Riand Rj, where i≠j, if they have the same closeness coefficient value, then we could presume that Eq. (11) is equivalent both for point i and j. To simplify Eq. (11), we have the following function,(12)x2+y2+z2(x−1)2+(y−1)2+(z−1)2=λ,where λ stands for a constant real number.If any two different coordinates satisfy this formula (12), we may regard them as alternatives which could not be distinguished by the extended fuzzy TOPSIS method. However, as these coordinates must fall into the feasible region to form a TFN, an intersection between the pyramid and a sphere surface could be derived. When λ equates different constant values, the graphical interpretations alter accordingly.For the four possible λ values, there are infinite points which are feasible as TFNs but could not be distinguished according to the extended fuzzy TOPSIS method. Furthermore, we could also get information regarding the shape of the sphere in the following 4 figures: when λ<1, the sphere bent over to the NIS (0,0,0), and the smaller the λ value, the more bent over of the sphere surface to the NIS, and the radius of the sphere becomes smaller as well; when λ>1, the sphere bent over to the PIS (1,1,1), and the larger the λ value, the more bent over of the sphere surface to the PIS, but the radius of the sphere becomes smaller in this case; when λ=1, the sphere will degenerate to a part of the plane x+y+z=1.5, which is composed of feasible TFNs with the same distance to both the PIS and NIS. From these illustrations, we could also discover that there are infinite λ values in the interval (0, +∞), and hence the incapability of the extended fuzzy TOPSIS method in TFN settings should be given special attention to (Fig. 3).As claimed by some recent studies, the inherent relative comparison method of TOPSIS would lead to conflicts. To avoid which, the distances from alternatives to PIS and NIS should be optimized simultaneously. Therefore, we consider the following case, where alternatives having equivalent distances to PIS and NIS are discussed. Let's assume that two points A=(x1, y1, z1), B=(x2, y2, z2) are in the feasible region of TFNs. Meanwhile, their distance to PIS and NIS are calculated with the following equations, respectively.d(A,PIS)=d(B,PIS)=ξ1,d(A,NIS)=d(B,NIS)=ξ2When the two equations yield the same distance value, the following equations could be derived.(13)(x1−1)2+(y1−1)2+(z1−1)2=(x2−1)2+(y2−1)2+(z2−1)2=ξ1;x12+y12+z12=x22+y22+z22=ξ2.From the above equations, two spheres centered in (0,0,0) and (1,1,1) with radiusesξ1andξ2are considered as two sets of equal distance values to PIS and NIS respectively. Since these two spheres should contain elements within the feasible pyramid representing TFNs, the radius of them should not be larger than the length of the diagonal of the cube, which is3; and these two equations should be reached at the same time, these two spheres should have point(s) in common, which means that the sum of their radiuses is larger than or equal to3. From geometric point of view, the intersection shape of these two spheres is a circle centered on the diagonal of the cube. With the variation of the two spheres’ radiuses, the center and the radius of the circle alter as well. The special case occurs when the two spheres are tangent, the circle degenerates to a point, and this is the unique occasion where all of the different TFNs could be distinguished. Except the special tangent instance, different points on the intersected circle inside the feasible pyramid region should be deemed as different TFNs, which could not be differentiated by the extended fuzzy TOPSIS method.As Fig. 4shows, the dashed circles centered on the main diagonal line mentioned above are the special point sets. Since the points on the same circle have the same distance values to both PIS and NIS calculated by the formula (13).Combining Figs. 2 and 4, we could find that the intersection part of the equal value circles with the dashed three dimensional region in Fig. 2 is composed by exceptions of the extended fuzzy TOPSIS method. In these intersection parts, different points stand for different evaluations toward different alternatives. But even they are different, they could not be distinguished with corresponding ranking orders, all points in the intersection parts are considered as equivalent alternatives.Linguistic evaluations could be transformed to TFNs as shown in Definition 2.12. Also, in the linguistic decision matrix, different evaluations with respect to various attributes of each alternative will be aggregated into a single TFN through all sorts of aggregation methods. Thereafter, the revised fuzzy TOPSIS method could be employed to obtain the ranking order for the alternatives of the aggregated SADM problem.Since TOPSIS method is originated from the distance measure or the similarity measure, the actual shape and characteristics of TFNs are largely bypassed. For this reason, our revised fuzzy TOPSIS method will add two supplemental measures considering the shape and position attributes of the TFNs. And these two methods are the mean value of the TFNs defined in Definition 2.10, and a new type of shape value of the TFNs defined in Definition 4.1, respectively. From people's intuition, mean values of the TFNs reflect the general position of the TFNs, and the new shape values of the TFNs reflect the individual quality of the TFNs.Definition 4.1∀ TFNa˜=(al,am,ar), the new shape value of the TFNa˜is defined as(14)Shape(a˜)=al2+ar2.Definition 4.2For any two different alternatives Aiand Ajrepresented by the two TFNs α and β, the revised fuzzy TOPSIS method could be conducted according to the two major categories of the traditional TOPSIS methods,The ratio based TOPSIS method,(1)If R(α)>R(β), then Ai≻Aj;If R(α)<R(β), then Ai≺Aj;If R(α)=R(β), thena.If Mean(α)>Mean(β), then Ai≻Aj;If Mean(α)<Mean(β), then Ai≺Aj;If Mean(α)=Mean(β), then[1]If Shape(α)>Shape(β), then Ai≻Aj;If Shape(α)<Shape(β), then Ai≺Aj;If Shape(α)=Shape(β), then Aiand Ajare equivalent.The distance based TOPSIS method,(1)If d(Ai, PIS)>d(Aj, PIS), then Ai≺Aj;If d(Ai, PIS)<d(Aj, PIS), then Ai≻Aj;If d(Ai, PIS)=d(Aj, PIS), then the following steps are the same as in Part I.Theorem 4.1∀Si≠Sj, where Siand Sjare both linguistic evaluations representing alternatives Aiand Aj, then a distinct ranking order can be obtained via the ratio based revised fuzzy TOPSIS method.In order to prove the above sufficiency of the ratio based revised fuzzy TOPSIS method, it is equivalent to prove the following opposite proposition.Proposition 4.1∀Aiand Ajwith TFN evaluations asm˜andn˜, if R(Ai)=R(Aj), Mean(Ai)=Mean(Aj), and Shape(Ai)=Shape(Aj) all hold, then Ai=Aj.ProofSuppose that the two linguistic evaluations could be transformed into the TFN forms ofn˜andm˜. Since Si≠Sj, thenn˜≠m˜.IfR(n˜)≠R(m˜), the ranking of Aiand Ajdegenerates to the range of the common extended fuzzy TOPSIS method. And the proof of which is omitted here.IfR(n˜)=R(m˜), then the two alternatives should be further differentiated by the two supplemental methods.Supposen˜=(nl,nm,nr)andm˜=(ml,mm,mr). The mean values of the two alternatives are nmand mmrespectively; And the shape values of the two alternatives arenl2+nr2andml2+mr2, respectively. Meanwhile, the PIS is assumed to be (1, 1, 1), the NIS is (0, 0, 0).Since the extended fuzzy TOPSIS could not distinguish the two alternatives, with Formula (9), we havenl2+nm2+nr2(nl−1)2+(nm−1)2+(nr−1)2=ml2+mm2+mr2(ml−1)2+(mm−1)2+(mr−1)2.It is also known from the proposition that,Mean(n˜)=Mean(m˜), which is nm=mm;AndShape(n˜)=Shape(m˜), which isnl2+nr2=ml2+mr2.When the above two equations are substituted into the original extended ratio based fuzzy TOPSIS equation, the numerators of both the left side and the right side of the equation are equal. That is the denominators of the two sides are equal as well, then we’ll have the following equation,nl+nr=ml+mr, and also nl×nr=ml×mr. While we have nr>nland mr>ml, combine the above two equations would lead us to a new equation,nr−nl=mr−ml.Then it could be discovered that combining the obtained results above, the equations nl=mland nr=mrcould be deduced. Together with the known condition nm=mm, we get that the two TFNsn˜andm˜are exactly the same. Therefore, the sufficiency of the ratio based revised TOPSIS method has been proved.□Meanwhile, to avoid conflicts when applying the relative closeness coefficient, the absolute distance values from any alternative to the PIS or NIS could also be used in the distance based TOPSIS. In Section 3, it is demonstrated that when the absolute distances from the alternatives to PIS and NIS are both equal simultaneously, the undistinguishable points are located on a series of circles. Which are the intersections of two spheres with the PIS and NIS as their centers.The sufficiency of the distance based revised fuzzy TOPSIS method is stated as Theorem 4.2.Theorem 4.2∀Si≠Sj, where Siand Sjare both linguistic evaluations representing alternatives Aiand Aj, then a distinct ranking order can be obtained via the distance based revised fuzzy TOPSIS method.Similarly, the opposite proposition of Theorem 4.2 is written below,Proposition 4.2∀Aiand Ajwith TFN evaluations asm˜andn˜, if d(Ai, PIS)=d(Aj, PIS), d(Ai, NIS)=d(Aj, NIS), Mean(Ai)=Mean(Aj), and Shape(Ai)=Shape(Aj) all hold, then Ai=Aj.ProofBased on the distance based model, the following assumptions could be made,d(Ai,PIS)=d(Aj,PIS)=ρ,d(Ai,NIS)=d(Aj,NIS)=η,where ρ and η are both constant numbers. Recall that in ratio based TOPSIS method, with the actual distances, the R value could be calculated as,R(Ai)=d(Ai,NIS)d(Ai,NIS)+d(Ai,PIS)=ηη+ρ.Similarly, the R value of the alternative Ajcould be obtained as,R(Aj)=ηη+ρ.Since R(Ai)=R(Aj), it is found that the present proposition is equivalent to Theorem 4.1. Therefore, the sufficiency of the distance based revised TOPSIS method has been proved.□To summarize our procedure of the revised fuzzy TOPSIS method, an algorithm including six steps is stated as follows.Step 1. For a fuzzy MADM problem with n alternatives and m attributes, derive a fuzzy decision matrix DMn×mand weights of importance of all the attributes;Step 2. For every alternative, select a suitable fuzzy information aggregation method, e.g., weighted average method, and aggregate m TFN evaluations into a TFN evaluation;Step 3. Select the ideal solutions PIS and NIS. In aggregated TFN cases, these two ideal solutions are selected as (1,1,1) and (0,0,0), respectively;Step 4. Apply the extended fuzzy TOPSIS method to calculate both the distances between all alternatives and the PIS and NIS, and then compute the corresponding closeness coefficients Riand Rjwith formula (9);Step 5. If different alternatives have different closeness coefficients, which is Ri≠Rj; or in the absolute distance case, if different alternatives have different absolute distances to PIS and NIS, then a final ranking is arrived, and the algorithm stops; else go to Step 6;Step 6. For any two different alternatives with the same closeness coefficient Ri=Rj=R, or with the same distance values to PIS and NIS, according to the revised TOPSIS method, we should first compare the mean values Mean(Ai) and Mean(Aj), then compare the shape values Shape(Ai) and Shape(Aj), so as to thoroughly distinguish the alternatives.An automobile engine manufacturing plant runs a mixed production line with 10 automatic workstations and 4 manual workstations. Since the automatic workstations could be improved by setting the codes of the controller computer, the managers would like to evaluate the four manual workstations to find out the bottleneck of the production line so as to improve the overall throughput of the plant. A lean production expert was invited to the plant to check the four manual workstations and give evaluations of each workstation according to the lean production standards. In the evaluation procedure, four primary attributes of manual workstations (A1−A4) are given, these attributes are the ergonomics conditions of that workstation (T1), the SOP design and instructions of that workstation (T2),the material flow around that workstation (T3) and the workers’ actual working time distribution (T4). And the organization chart of this MADM problem is as follows (Fig. 5),After careful study of the four workstations according to the above four attributes, the weight value of each attribute and the evaluation of each workstation is given by the expert with linguistic terms, which are defined as the following charts (Fig. 6).And in the above charts, letter “V” stands for very, “M” stands for mediate, “B” stands for bad, “G” stands for good, “S” stands for slightly, “L” stands for low, and “H” stands for high. Then we could get the following tables as the importance weight values of each attribute, evaluations of each alternative under every attribute and their corresponding TFNs matrixes (Tables 2–5).With the TFNs operation formulas in (5), we could get the weighted decision matrix under TFNs setting:A1A2A3A4T1T2T3T4(0.21,0.32,0.45)(0.20,0.30,0.42)(0.20,0.30,0.42)(0.21,0.32,0.45)(0.24,0.36,0.50)(0.35,0.48,0.63)(0.00,0.00,0.06)(0.28,0.40,0.54)(0.06,0.12,0.2)(0.30,0.42,0.56)(0.24,0.35,0.48)(0.21,0.32,0.45)(0.15,0.24,0.35)(0.35,0.48,0.63)(0.16,0.25,0.36)(0.14,0.24,0.36)In order to obtain the ranking order of the four alternatives, aggregation should be conducted in the first place. And since the aggregated TFNs might not be in the interval [0,1], a normalization procedure is required. For a TFNt˜,Norm(t˜)=(tl3,tm3,tr3).The normalized TFNs matrix is as follows:A1A2A3A4(0.273,0.413,0.580)(0.290,0.413,0.577)(0.270,0.403,0.563)(0.267,0.403,0.567)Then apply Step 4, we calculate the distances of each aggregated alternative and PIS and NIS, then the closeness coefficient of each alternative. The following results could be derived.d(A1,PIS)=1.024,d(A1,NIS)=0.763;d(A2,PIS)=1.014,d(A2,NIS)=0.766;d(A3,PIS)=1.039,d(A3,NIS)=0.744;d(A4,PIS)=1.040,d(A4,NIS)=0.745.Moreover, we have the following ratio valuesR1=0.427,R2=0.431,R3=0.417,R4=0.417.Thus from the extended fuzzy TOPSIS method, the final ranking result isA2≻A1≻A3∼A4.Here the formula A3∼A4 stands for A3 and A4 are equivalent alternatives, because they have the same closeness coefficient. However, A3 and A4 are two alternatives with different evaluations. If we proceed with the revised TOPSIS method by comparing the mean values of the two alternatives, which could be calculated as follows.Mean(A3)=A3m=0.403;Mean(A4)=A4m=0.403.Since mean values of the two different alternatives still could not distinguish them, then we calculate the shape values of A3 and A4. The results are as follows,Shape(A3)=A1r2+A1l2=0.390;Shape(A4)=A3r2+A3l2=0.392.From the above unequal shape values of the two alternatives, a thorough ranking rule, i.e., the one with a smaller shape value outperforms the larger one, could therefore be employed. Ergo, we have the following final ranking order of the entire four alternatives.A2≻A1≻A4≻A3.With revised TOPSIS method, the two different alternatives are distinguished. Therefore, the improvement measures should start from the third workstation, then the fourth workstation, then the first, and the second workstation is the last one in need of improvement performance.This revised fuzzy TOPSIS method could be used in the situations where the extended fuzzy TOPSIS could not distinguish alternatives. And this numerical example informs us that the improvement toward the first workstation would be unnecessary given that the third workstation hasn’t been improved yet. This conclusion will save management large amount of money and time if the improvement task is both expensive and hard to undertake.Judging from the supremacy of the revised fuzzy TOPSIS method over the extended fuzzy TOPSIS, a question arises naturally. Could the modifications of the internal properties of the decision making problem influence the final ranking capability, and to what extent? To fully emphasize this inquiry, an experiment based study is conducted to examine the magnitude of the effects that each internal factor has in regards to the ranking ambiguity.To serve the purpose of brevity, the case study of an auto-maker in Section 5 is quoted here. And a series of extensions are made by altering the number of attributes, the number of alternatives and the different categories of linguistic terms. Each factor is tested independently, which means that the separate results are obtained while the other elements remain fixed. In this way, the interference between different factors could be largely omitted.In the original multi-attribute decision making problem in Section 5, there are in all four alternatives. And by applying the ratio-based extended fuzzy TOPSIS method, A3 and A4 are still indistinguishable. For this specific decision making matrix, increasing the number of alternatives will not change the fact that at least two alternatives, in this case A3 and A4, could not be differentiated. To consider the problem backwards by removing the existing alternatives from the matrix, the incapability of the extended fuzzy TOPSIS method will have the chance to change from one pair to none. Meanwhile, the possibility of the unchanged incapability remains, if the removed alternative were not A3 or A4. As a consequence, the probability of the resulting decision matrix with three random alternatives having stable differentiating capability would be 0.5.In comparison with the backward perspective of removing alternatives, a forward study should receive equivalent attention. Since the evaluations of an otherwise non-existed alternative would seem rather arbitrary, ergo all of the possible linguistic assessments of the new alternative will be considered. From Fig. 7, it is easily recognizable that there are 11 different linguistic variables used to assess each alternative with respect to each criterion. Therefore, for any new alternative, 14641 different assessments are eligible. To facilitate the derivation procedure, a computer programme is constructed to run the model for incapability check.As regard to the forward mode, in which a new alternative is merged into the decision matrix, a hypothesis with respect to the TOPSIS method is made. According to the slightly modified version of TOPSIS, the overall evaluations of two different alternatives are judged not by their strict equivalency, but the gap between the two ratio values calculated via Formula (9). As it is programmed into the Matlab model, the number of undistinguished alternative pair from the decision matrix in Section 5 is found to be zero or one, depending on the predetermined threshold of the gap. For instance, in the numerical example adopted from Section 5, if the two alternatives are deemed to be equivalent when their difference is less than 0.001, the number of undistinguished pair would become one. Which is composed of alternative A3 and A4, as it is demonstrated in the last section. Nevertheless, if the preset gap value keeps decreasing, and it reaches a value like 0.0001, the two alternatives will be regarded as distinguishable entities. This phenomenon arises a new question, is it possible that there is none of such pair of alternatives with exactly the same evaluation? The answer would be positive. But in this circumstance, after we set the threshold condition to be “equal to zero”, there are still 38 pairs of undistinguished alternatives remained (Table 6).In addition to the modification of number of alternatives in a decision process, a tremendous impact could also be caused by the change of attribute quantity. In this decision making problem mentioned in Section 5, there are 14641 combinational possibilities of just increasing one attribute. And counting in all of the possible undistinguishable pairs of alternatives together, we have a total of 114×6 paired comparisons to be considered.To provide in-depth analysis of the influences cast by the number of attributes, the following table is charted (Table 7).Furthermore, the types of linguistic terms can also incur changes of undistinguished alternatives. In order to look into influences caused by that factor, a new set of linguistic terms versus triangular fuzzy numbers are depicted in the chart below (Fig. 8).As the same set of linguistic statements are processed by the new linguistic terms, it is obvious that some of the terms, such as “slightly good”, cannot be translated directly. In a nine linguistic term system, such terms are represented by the average of their original two adjacent linguistic terms. In the case of “SG”, a mixed expression half way from “M” and “MG” can be employed to settle the confusion. Therefore, the following table could be derived.Base on the observations of the above tables, it is apparent that the number of undistinguished pairs of alternatives are mostly easily influenced by the number alternatives itself. When a random alternative joins the decision matrix, the average increasing rate of the indiscernable pairs could be more than ten percent. While for the attribute number, a new random attribute could only obtain a rate of 3.31%. Table 8informs us that the modification of linguistic variable types incurs the least possible changes of rate among the three primary impact factors.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In the present paper, an inherent ranking ambiguity property of the extended fuzzy TOPSIS method is revealed. And the reasons for the incapability of the extended fuzzy TOPSIS method in solving fuzzy MADM problems are portrayed with a series of three-dimensional graphical interpretations. In order to deal with the ranking ambiguity phenomenon, a revised TOPSIS method including a combined set of supplemental approaches is proposed. Compared with the original fuzzy TOPSIS method, the revised method can distinguish different linguistic assessments which are considered as equivalent otherwise. In the light of the research conducted by Opricovic et al. [26], the revised TOPSIS methods are divided into two scenarios, the ratio based model and the distance based type. The sufficiency of the revised TOPSIS methods of both categories have been proved via Theorems 4.1 and 4.2. Furthermore, a numerical example with a background in manufacturing management is demonstrated to validate the proposed revised TOPSIS method. Finally, extended from the numerical example, a series of discussions are performed with respect to the significance of impacts caused by altering the number of alternatives, the number of attributes, and the types of linguistic term types within the fuzzy decision making process.In the future, the ranking ambiguity of the TOPSIS methods should be discussed under other uncertain environments, such as the group decision making, interval-valued fuzzy setting, type-2 fuzzy setting [8], and intuitionistic fuzzy setting (see: [22,35,37,38]). Besides, there is also a possibility to host future research of more effective and efficient supplemental methods to constitute a more sophisticated revised fuzzy TOPSIS method.