@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Detection of phishing attacks in Iranian e-banking using a fuzzy–rough hybrid system

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Identifying outstanding phishing features that best fit the Iranian bank websites.Extracting a reduct of influential indicators in phishing detection for Iranian e-banking system using rough sets theory.Determining critical phishing detection rules and forming a flexible rule base for phishing detection.Building a fuzzy–rough hybrid system as a core processing unit of phishing detection applications or web browser add-ons and extensions concentrated on Iranian e-banking.Applying the proposed system on Iranian phishing sites and achieving an efficiency of 88%.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
E-banking,Phishing,Fraud detection,Fuzzy expert system,Rough sets theory,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Phishing is a method of stealing electronic identity in which social engineering and website forging methods are used in order to mislead users and reveal confidential information having economic value. Destroying the trust between users in business network, phishing has a negative effect on the budding area of e-commerce. Developing countries such as Iran have been recently facing Internet threats like phishing, whose methods, regarding the social differences, may be different from other experiences. Thus, it is necessary to design a suitable detection method for these deceits. The aim of current paper is to provide a phishing detection system to be used in e-banking system in Iran. Identifying the outstanding features of phishing is one of the important prerequisites in design of an accurate system; therefore, in first step, to identify the influential features of phishing that best fit the Iranian bank sites, a list of 28 phishing indicators was prepared. Using feature selection algorithm based on rough sets theory, six main indicators were identified as the most effective factors. The fuzzy expert system was designed using these indicators, afterwards. The results show that the proposed system is able to determine the Iranian phishing sites with a reasonable speed and precision, having an accuracy of 88%.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Appearance of e-banking has led to wide revolution in relations among clients, bank, and the dealing methods. This technology has provided available opportunity for banking service reliability, economic thrift, and efficiency improvement. On the other hand, it should be noted that launching and realization of e-commerce mostly relies on realization of e-banking. E-banking provides banking services by means of public and accessible computer networks (Internet/Intranet) having high security. E-banking comprises of systems which enables financial institutions to access their accounts without physical attendance, using network tools alone, and obtain information about financial products and services [1].E-banking relies on network and Internet-based environment. As a public network, the Internet encounters top confidential and security information. Its nature leads to prominence of threats and various deceits, and development of the dark and ambiguous side of the network. Access to the Internet, anonymity, high speed of propagation, lack of face-to-face contact, free access to services and invaluable contents, also lack of suitable laws and international agreements are among factors that allow threats to spread and make their prosecution hard [2]. That is why online and electronic banking could have plenty of dangers for economic institutes, which might be controlled and managed by screening and selection of a comprehensive risk management program. Obviously, in such situation e-banking security is one of the most important subjects in e-commerce. It should be noted that by increasing the bank facilities and services in the Internet and increasing growth of online interactions by clients, occurrence of financial crimes in banking industry is also growing up fast. One of the most dangerous Internet attacks that often targets e-banking is “phishing” [3].Phishing is a method of social engineering, which means deceiving Internet users by guiding them to visit websites, which are totally similar to the target one. This case is usually more tangible in bank sites, credit institutes, Internet auctions, social and popular networks, Internet service providing sites, etc. The main idea of this attack is that a hank is sent for people so that they catch the hank and become hunted. In many cases, the hank is an email or a spam that deceives the user for entering the site. This type of deceit makes the user to reveal his vital information such as name, password, details of credit card, bank account, etc. Then this stolen information is used for the purpose of swindle, etc. [4–6].Phishing attacks and the related financial losses are growing at an alarming rate. According to a report by International Anti-Phishing Working Group (APWG), the number of phishing websites is increasing [7,8]. Results indicate that by sending 5million phishing emails, 2500 people are deceived. Although this fraction is only 0.05% of the receivers, the benefit comes from this group keeps phishing still a good source of income for Internet swindlers [8]. As shown in Table 1, in June 2012, most of phishing attacks had been related to information service providers (e.g. libraries, and social networks), banks and active firms in field of e-commerce, respectively.Phishing offends users, organizations, and brands in many aspects. Following is an indication to the subsequences of this attack [9]:a.The direct phishing consequence that reveals users’ confidential information (like username, password, or other sensitive details of their credit cards) and subject the users to financial losses.Destroys users’ trust towards the Internet interactions and builds a negative image in their minds.By destroying the trust in users, phishing causes a gradual avoidance of Internet purchase and use of Internet in commercial actions and prevents e-commerce from further improvement and success.Phishing has a negative effect on stakeholders, which leads to inability to maintain the brands and finally ends in bankruptcy.Trust is one of the most important characteristics of e-banking [10]. As indicated, phishing can offend Internet business. In fear of becoming the victim of swindles, people gradually lose their trust towards Internet interactions [11]. As a case in point, many people believe that use of e-banking increases the likelihood of identity robbery and phishing; whereas, e-banking is more protective of people identity compared to customary paper banking [10].In Iran, phishing is very important since the statistics show that in 2011, computer crimes had been 8.3 times as much as the previous year, most of which had been related to banking crimes. According to this report, phishing attacks and one of its methods namely “pharming attack” is on the third rank among Internet crimes in the country. Moreover, in 2010, 1035 Internet crimes were recorded in Iran that has grown to 4000 cases in 2011 and it has been anticipated to reach 8–10 thousand cases in 2012 [37].The detection method provided in this paper is based on fuzzy logic, which is combined with rough sets-based data mining algorithm. So, the structure of the paper is arranged as follows: Section 2 introduces related works on phishing detection and the shortcomings of existing methods. In Section 3, the fundamentals of practical methods are described. Then in Section 4, the determination steps for input variables and their reduction by rough set theory are elaborated. After the output variables are determined, the determination of variable membership functions, fuzzifier, defuzzifier, and fuzzy deduction engine are provided. In Section 5, operation of the design system is declared and discussed. Finally, the limitations and innovations of this study are discussed and conclusions are provided in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
