@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An integrated fuzzy MCDM based approach for robot selection considering objective and subjective criteria

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A model for the selection of robots by considering both objective and subjective criteria is proposed.Justification on selection of criteria is carried out using Fuzzy Delphi Method (FDM).Weights of the criteria are found using FAHP.Alternatives are ranked by Fuzzy TOPSIS/Fuzzy VIKOR method.Ranking identified using Fuzzy VIKOR is closest to ideal solution.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Robot selection,FDM,FAHP,Fuzzy TOPSIS,Fuzzy VIKOR and Brown–Gibson model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Robots with vastly different capabilities and specifications are available for a wide range of applications. Selection of a robot for a specific application has become more complicated due to increase in the complexity, advanced features and facilities that are continuously being incorporated into the robots by different manufacturers. The aim of this paper is to present an integrated approach for the optimal selection of robots by considering both objective and subjective criteria. The approach utilizes Fuzzy Delphi Method (FDM), Fuzzy Analytical Hierarchical Process (FAHP), Fuzzy modified TOPSIS or Fuzzy VIKOR and Brown–Gibson model for robot selection. FDM is used to select the list of important objective and subjective criteria based on the decision makers’ opinion. Fuzzy AHP method is then used to find out the weight of each criterion (both objective and subjective). Fuzzy modified TOPSIS or Fuzzy VIKOR method is then used to rank the alternatives based on objective and subjective factors. The rankings obtained are used to calculate the robot selection index based on Brown–Gibson model. The proposed methodology is illustrated with a case study related to selection of robot for teaching purpose. It is found that the highest ranked alternative based on Fuzzy VIKOR is closest to the ideal solution.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Robots are very powerful elements of today's industry and are defined as automatically controlled, reprogrammable, multipurpose manipulators programmable in three or more axes [1]. The recent advancement in automation field has lead to increased usage of robots with distinct capabilities, features and specifications. A company's competitiveness in terms of the productivity of its facilities and quality of its products will be adversely affected by improper selection of robots [2,3]. The determination of the most appropriate robot considering multiple conflicting qualitative and quantitative criteria has been a difficult task for the decision makers. Literature reveals that multi-criteria decision making (MCDM) methods, production system performance optimization models, computer-assisted models and a general category of solutions are employed in robot selection process [4–6]. Among these models, MCDM is the most common method for ranking robots and production system performance optimization models are rarely used [5,6]. Hence, the methodologies for robot selection are divided into three broad categories: (a) MCDM, (b) integrated approaches, and (c) a general category of solutions.Various MCDM methods reported in the literature for robot selection process are: AHP (Analytic Hierarchy Process), TOPSIS (technique for order preference by similarity to ideal solution), VIKOR (VIsekriterijumsko KOmpromisno Rangiranje), ELECTRE II (ELimination and Et Choice Translating REality), PROMETHEE II (Preference Ranking Organization METHod for Enrichment Evaluation) and DEA (Data Envelopment Analysis). Due to vagueness in the data and ambiguity in decision-making process, fuzzy set theory has been incorporated into MCDM techniques by many researchers for robot selection problem. The selection criteria and the techniques considered by various researchers are presented in Table 1. Among these techniques, TOPSIS and VIKOR methods seemed to be more appropriate for solving the robot selection problem because they have capability to deal with each kind of judgment criteria, having clarity of results and easiness to deal with attributes and decision options [12].In the integrated approach category, one or more techniques are integrated or combined to select robot for various applications. Table 2provides the list of works related to integrated approach category along with their selection criteria. The general category of robot selection models includes statistical models, mathematical models and soft computing based models. Table 3provides the list of works related to general solution category along with their selection criteria. From all the approaches, various criteria considered for selecting a robot for a particular application includes: load capacity, repeatability, horizontal and vertical reach, velocity or speed of travel, degree of freedom, positioning accuracy, maximum tip speed, memory capacity, manipulator reach, velocity ratio, purchase cost, repeatability error, warranty period, vendor's service quality, programming flexibility, man–machine interface, stability, compliance, service contract, drive system, geometrical dexterity, path measuring system, robot size, material of robot, weight of robot, initial operating cost and life-expectancy. The literature review demonstrates that the majority of researchers have considered the selection of proper criteria as important, but they did not justify their selection or analyze their suitability [4]. Hence, a proper methodology to justify the selection of objective and subjective factors has to be incorporated in the decision making process. Fuzzy Delphi Method can be employed to overcome this limitation.The criteria which are defined in tangible terms are classified as quantitative or objective criteria e.g. cost, load capacity etc. and the criteria that have qualitative definitions i.e., they are unable to be defined in tangible terms are classified as qualitative or subjective criteria e.g. programming flexibility, stability, etc. The classification of criteria into objective and subjective for robot selection is done by only few authors [11,3,32,37]. Even though few researchers have considered this type of classification, weights given to objective and subjective factors are equal. But in real-life applications, the weights for quantitative and qualitative evaluation criteria will be different. Hence in the developed approach, this limitation is taken care off.Therefore, this paper aims to develop a new decision making method which takes care of suitable objective and subjective criteria selection and proper evaluation of the alternatives treating it as a MCDM problem. The proposed approach integrates Fuzzy Delphi Method, Fuzzy AHP, Fuzzy TOPSIS/Fuzzy VIKOR and Brown–Gibson model. In order to do so, the remainder of this paper is set out as follows. The proposed methodology is described in Section 2. In Section 3, selection of robot for educational purpose is used to illustrate the proposed method. Conclusions are presented in Section 4.A systematic procedure is proposed in Fig. 1which incorporates five steps namely listing the objective and subjective factors, critical factors identification using FDM, criteria weights calculation using FAHP Method, ranking of alternatives using Fuzzy Modified TOPSIS/Fuzzy VIKOR method and selection index calculation using Brown–Gibson model. The stages in the proposed approach are explained in the following sections.From the literature review and experts’ survey, the possible objective factors (OFs) and subjective factors (SFs) are listed.FDM is applied to select the most critical OFs and SFs from the factors lists. The steps are as follows [42]:(i)Form a committee of experts and employ a questionnaire to ask experts for their most pessimistic (minimum) value and the most optimistic (maximum) value of the importance of each OF (SF) in the possible factor set Sc(Se) in a range from 1 to 10. A score for a OF (SF) is denoted as:(1)Ci=(lki,hki),i∈Sc(2)Ev=(lkv,hkv),v∈Sewherelki(lkv)is the pessimistic index of factor i(v) andhki(hkv)is the optimistic index of factor i(v), rated by expert k.The triangular fuzzy number for the most pessimistic index and the most optimistic index for each factor i(v) is determined. The minimum value (lli(hli)andllv(hlv)), the geometric mean (lmi(hmi)andlmv(hmv))and the maximum value (lui(hui)andluv(huv))of the experts’ opinions on the most pessimistic index and most optimistic index are obtained i.e.,li=(lli,lmi,lui),⋅lv=(llv,lmv,luv)andhi=(hli,hmi,hui),hv=(hlv,hmv,huv).The consensus of experts’ opinions is examined and the consensus significance value of each factor is calculated. The gray zone (Fig. 2) is the overlap section of liand hiand is used to examine the consensus of experts in each factor.The consensus significance value of the factor i, si, is calculated by the following rules:If there is no overlap between liand hi(no gray zone exists), then consensus significance value of the factor is(3)si=lmi+hmi2If a gray zone exists and the gray zone interval value of gi(gi=lui−hli)is less than the interval value of liand hi(di=hmi−lmi), i.e., gi≤di, the consensus significance value of the factor is calculated by (4) and (5).(4)Fi(p)=∫p{min[li(p),hi(p)]}dp,i∈S(5)si={p/maxμFi(p),i∈Swhere Fi(p) is the area of the intersection of liand hi, and siis the cognition value (p) with the highest degree of membership (μ*) of the intersection of liand hi.If a gray zone exists and gi>di, then a great discrepancy among the experts opinions arises. Above all steps need to be repeated until a convergence is obtained. The same procedure is carried out to calculate the consensus significance value of factor v, sv.Select factors from the factors list. Select factor i(v) if its consensus significance value is greater than or equal to threshold value TC(TE) which is determined by the experts subjectively based on the mean of all si(sv) i.e., select factor i(v) if si≥TC(sv≥TE).FAHP [43] is used to obtain the weights of the critical OFs and SFs obtained from the Step II. The procedure for FAHP is as follows.Let X={x1, x2,…, xn} be an object set, and U={u1, u2,…, un} be a goal set. According to the method of extent analysis, each object is taken and extent analysis for each goal is performed, respectively. Therefore, m extent analysis values for each object can be obtained with the following signs:M˜gi1,M˜gi2,…,M˜gij,where, all theM˜gij(i=1,2,…,n;j=1,2,…,m)are Triangular Fuzzy Numbers (TFNs). The steps of extent analysis can be given as,Step 1: The value of fuzzy synthetic extent with respect to the ith object is defined asTo obtain∑j=1mM˜gijperform the fuzzy addition operation of m extent analysis values for a particular matrix such that(7)∑j=1mM˜gij=∑j=1mlj,∑j=1mmj,∑j=1muj−1and to obtain∑i=1n∑j=1mM˜gijthe fuzzy addition operationM˜gij(j=1,2,…,m)values is performed such as(8)∑i=1n∑j=1mM˜gij=∑i=1nli,∑i=1nmi,∑i=1nuiand then inverse of the above vector is computed such as(9)∑i=1n∑j=1mM˜gij−1=1∑i=1nui,1∑i=1nmi,1∑i=1nliAs shown above, the value of the fuzzy synthetic extent with respect to the ith object is defined and S1, S2 etc. are calculated.Step 2: AsM˜1andM˜2are two triangular fuzzy numbers, the degree of possibility ofM˜2≤M˜1is defined asThe formulae required to compare two triangular fuzzy numbers are given in Step 2 and the degree of possibility is calculated in the Step 3.Step 3: The degree of possibility for a convex fuzzy number to be greater than k convex fuzzy numbersM˜ican be defined byAssume thatd′(Ai)=minV(S˜i≥S˜K)for k=1, 2,…, k≠i. Then the weight vector is given by(14)W′=(d′(A1),d′(A2),…,d′(An))Twhere Ai(i=1, 2,…, n) are n elements.Step 4: Via normalization, the normalized weight vectors areFuzzy TOPSIS method is used to rank the robots by considering OFs and SFs separately. In this paper, Fuzzy modified TOPSIS method proposed by Vahdani et al. [17] is used with two modifications: instead of incorporating both OF and SF into a single matrix, two different matrixes are prepared; the weight for each criterion is obtained from FAHP procedure. The steps are:Step 1: A group of k decision makers (DMs) is established.Step 2: The rating of m alternatives versus each of OF and SF criterion from each DM is obtained.Step 3: Let the ratings of the alternatives versus each OF criterion bex˜ij.The fuzzy ratings of all DMs are in the form of triangular fuzzy numbersx˜ijk=(aijk,bijk,cijk),k=1,2,…,K.The aggregated fuzzy rating can be obtained as:(16)x˜ij=(aij,bij,cij),k=1,2,…,Kwhereaij=1K∑k=1Kaijk,bij=1K∑k=1Kbijk,cij=1K∑k=1KcijkStep 4: The normalized decision matrix is computed. Vector normalization is applied to calculater˜ij.Step 5: The fuzzy weighted normalized decision matrix,V˜=[v˜ij]mxn. The fuzzy weighted normalized decision matrix is calculated by multiplying each column matrix by the weights obtained from FAHP.Step 6: The fuzzy numbers in the normalized decision matrix are defuzzified using centroid method. For the triangular fuzzy numbers,v˜=(a,b,c), the defuzzified centroid value is:Step 7: The positive ideal and negative ideal solutions are determined. The values for A* and A− are defined as:The DM desires to have a maximum value among the alternatives for benefit criterion and a minimum value for cost criterion.Step 8: Construct ideal separation matrix (D*) and anti-ideal separation matrix (D−) which are defined as:Step 9: The collective index (CI) is calculated using Eq. (23).Step 10: The preference order is ranked. The best satisfactory alternative can be determined according to preference rank order of Siand Ti. Minimum values of the CI indicate the better alternative. The same procedure is repeated for ranking the alternatives based on SFs.The highest ranked alternative by TOPSIS is the best in terms of the ranking index, which does not mean that it is always closest to the ideal solution. Hence a new approach based on Fuzzy VIKOR method [44] is also used to obtain the rankings. This method focuses on ranking and selecting from a set of alternatives and determines compromise solutions for a problem with conflicting criteria, which can help the decision makers to reach a final decision. The steps are follows:Steps 1–6: The same steps as followed in Fuzzy TOPSIS method.Step 7: Determine the bestfj*and the worstfj−values of all criterion ratings, j=1, 2, …, n.Step 8: Compute the values Siand Riby the relationsStep 9: Compute the values Qiby the relationsStep 10: Rank the alternatives, sorting by the values S, R and Q in ascending order.Step 11: Propose as a compromise solution the alternative (A(1)) which the best ranked by the measure Q(minimum) if the following two conditions are satisfied.C1. Acceptable advantage:C2. Acceptable stability in decision making:The alternative A(1) must also be the best ranked by S or/and R. This compromise solution is stable with in a decision making process, which could be the strategy of maximum group utility (when v>0.5 is needed), or “by consensus” v≈0.5, or “with veto” (v<0.5). Here, v is the weight of decision making strategy of maximum group utility.If one of the conditions is not satisfied, then a set of compromise solution is proposed, which consists of•Alternatives A(1) and A(2) if only the condition C2 is not satisfied, orAlternatives A(1), A(2),…, A(M) if the condition C1 is not satisfied; A(M) is determined by the relation Q(A(M))−Q(A(1))<DQ for maximum M (the positions of these alternatives are “in closeness”).The same procedure is repeated for ranking the alternatives based on SFs.Step 1: Triangular fuzzy numbers are assigned to the two different sets of ranking based on objective and subjective factors. Let them beO˜iandS˜irespectively.Step 2: Each alternative's fuzzy ranking is multiplied by its factor weight for objective and subjective factors respectively. Then, Brown and Gibson Model [45] is used to arrive at the Aggregated Robot Selection Index (ARSI). ARSI of ith alternative can be obtained through the following equation:Step 3: Aggregated Robot Selection Index is defuzzified using centroid method to arrive at Robot Selection Index (RSI). The robot with highest RSI value is selected.Due to vast growth in automation field, educational institutions have started to implement “Robotics” course in under graduate and post graduate studies. A robot for teaching purpose has to be selected in the department of Mechatronics Engineering. Quotations from three leading companies are called for and these three robots will be referred as A1, A2 and A3. From these three alternatives, the best Robot has to be selected. The following sections will explain the application of proposed methodology for the selection process.From the literature and the experts’ opinions the factors used for selecting robot are identified and listed in Table 4.FDM is applied to select the most critical OFs and SFs from the factors lists. FDM is applied to OFs and SFs to find consensus significance value((sv)a). The results of FDM for OFs are shown in Table 5. With TEis set at 6.5, 8 OFs are shortlisted out of 15. The results of FDM for SFs are shown in Table 6. Here TEfor SFs is set at 6.5. So, 6 SFs are shortlisted out of 7.From FDM, the selected OFs are: equipment cost (O1); load capacity (O2); repeatability (O3); maximum tip speed (O4); positioning accuracy (O5); memory capacity (O6); vertical reach (O7); delivery time (O8). Similarly the selected SFs are: man–machine interface (S1); programming flexibility (S2); vendor's service contract (S3); supporting channel partner's performance (S4); simulation software (S5); stability (S6).The weight of each selected factors are identified by using FAHP. Table 7shows the linguistic variables and their corresponding fuzzy numbers used in FAHP calculations.Tables 8 and 9denote the pairwise comparison matrix for OFs and SFs obtained from experts. The required weight of the factors used for robot selection process is calculated based on these tables.The alternatives are evaluated using Fuzzy modified TOPSIS method. Table 10shows the linguistic variables and their corresponding fuzzy numbers used in TOPSIS calculations.Three decision makers are asked to evaluate the alternatives with respect to OFs and SFs respectively using above mentioned linguistic terms. Tables 11 and 12give the ratings of the robots with respect to selected OFs and SFs.Tables 13 and 14show the aggregated fuzzy ratings of the alternatives by decision makers. The aggregated fuzzy rating is calculated using Eq. (16).The normalized decision matrix is calculated using Eq. (18). The normalized decision matrixes OFs and SFs are shown in Tables 15 and 16.The defuzzified weighted normalized decision matrix is calculated by multiplying each column of matrix by the weight, which is obtained by pair wise comparison of elements in the fuzzy AHP method. Consequently positive and negative ideal solutions are determined by Eqs. (19) and (20). Defuzzified weighted normalized decision matrix is shown in Tables 17 and 18.Ideal separation matrix (D*) and anti-ideal separation matrix (D−) are constructed by using Eqs. (21) and (22). Finally, the values of Si, Tiand CI are computed by using Eqs. (23)–(25) and are shown in Tables 19 and 20.The aggregated fuzzy rating is calculated using Eq. (16). Then the aggregated fuzzy rating of alternatives is defuzzified into crisp value and listed in Tables 21 and 22. The weight of each criterion which is calculated from the fuzzy AHP method is also included in the crisp value decision matrix.The values of Si, Riand Qiare calculated using Eqs. (28)–(30) for each alternatives separately for both OFs and SFs and are listed in Tables 23 and 24. The ranking using Fuzzy VIKOR method is also shown.Since different set of rankings are obtained from Fuzzy TOPSIS and Fuzzy VIKOR based approach, the obtained ranks are converted into fuzzy numbers using Table 25.For education purpose robot, SFs get more weight than OFs. Therefore α value is set as 0.4 i.e., (1−α)=0.6. Using Eq. (32), ARSI is calculated for each alternative and it is defuzzified using centroid method to arrive at RSI. The robot with highest RSI value is selected and results are presented in Tables 26 and 27.A3 is ranked as best alternative when Fuzzy modified TOPSIS method is used and A2 is ranked as best alternative when Fuzzy VIKOR based approach is used. The Fuzzy modified TOPSIS method introduces the ranking index including the distances from the ideal point and from the negative-ideal point. These distances are simply summed in without considering their relative importance. Hence, TOPSIS method has been proved to be less efficient. Moreover, the highest ranked alternative by Fuzzy VIKOR is the closest to the ideal solution. Fuzzy VIKOR method also proposes a compromise solution with an advantage rate. Hence, the result obtained by the Fuzzy VIKOR based method is taken as an optimal one. The robot A2 is selected as a best alternative among other three alternatives.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Robots are preferred in many industrial applications to perform repetitious, difficult and hazardous tasks with precision. Hence the course “Robotics” is gaining momentum among the graduates. In this paper, a new methodology to select a robot for teaching robotic course is proposed. Initially fifteen quantitative and seven qualitative factors are considered for robot selection. FDM is used to select the potential criteria for further process based on the decision makers’ opinion. Fuzzy AHP method is then used to find out the weight of each criterion. Fuzzy modified TOPSIS/Fuzzy VIKOR method is then used to rank the alternatives based on OFs and SFs. The rankings obtained are converted into fuzzy numbers and are used to calculate the robot selection index using Brown–Gibson model. Weights for OF and SF helps to arrive at a better solution. Comparison between Fuzzy TOPSIS and Fuzzy VIKOR method results is studied and it is found that results from Fuzzy VIKOR method are closest to ideal solution. Through further refinements and extensive field testing, the proposed method can also be applied to various MCDM problems.