@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel quasi-oppositional harmony search algorithm for automatic generation control of power system

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
AGC study of single- and multi-area power systems by using a novel QOHS algorithm.Effects of GRC in the studied three- and five-area power system model.Incorporation of PID controller in single- and three-area power systems.Investigation of IDD controller performance in five-area power system.Comparative analysis of the QOHS algorithm over other methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Automatic generation control (AGC),Integral-double derivative (IDD) controller,Multi-area power system,Optimization,Proportional-integral-derivative (PID) controller,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents the significances of a novel quasi-oppositional harmony search (HS) (QOHS) algorithm in the context of automatic generation control (AGC) of power system. The proposed QOHS algorithm is framed by utilizing the quasi-oppositional concept in the pre-available basic HS algorithm. Also, the proposed algorithm houses both the characters of two guesses i.e. opposite-point and its mirror point (quasi-opposite point) to converge rapidly toward the optimal solution(s). The proposed QOHS algorithm is, individually, applied to single-, three- and five-area interconnected test power systems (considering suitable cases) for its survival in AGC domain. The single- and three-area test systems are supplemented with the proportional-integral-derivative (PID) controller installed in each control area. In the second phase of investigation, the proposed QOHS based integral-double derivative (IDD) controller is also examined in AGC mechanism of five-area test power system. Initially, integral of square error based objective function is minimized and, further, two performance indices (such as integral of time absolute error and integral of time square error) are also calculated to test the AGC performance offered by the proposed QOHS based PID/IDD controller. To add some degree of non-linearities, appropriate generation rate constraint (GRC) is also considered for both three- and five-area test power systems. The simulated results, as obtained by the proposed QOHS algorithm, are compared to those offered by other optimization algorithms reported in the recent state-of-the-art literature. The extensive results, as presented in this paper, reveal that the proposed QOHS algorithm may be, effectively, imposed to boost the AGC performance of power system having various degrees of complexities (like model uncertainties) and non-linearities (like GRC).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The qualitative and quantitative aspects of automatic generation control (AGC) design of power system have been always a difficult task for the researchers. The identified problems associated with the dynamics of power system components are (a) non-linear in nature, (b) having higher order dynamics and (c) exhibiting difficulty to model in a single-line diagram. These problems may invite several complexities while dealing with system modeling and its operational behavior. In common aspect, the load frequency control (LFC) problem is, usually, expressed to relatively small change in step load perturbation (SLP). The instant effects, as observed due to application of incremental change in SLP, are (a) deviation in scheduled frequency from its nominal one, (b) unbalance flow of powers in tie-lines, (c) problem of synchronization of the connected generators and (d) exhibition of generation losses resulting in change in operating point of power system.The term power frequency (or nominal frequency), directly, depends on the generated active power. A considerable drop in frequency may result in high magnetizing current in ac motors and transformers [1]. Therefore, the deviation in frequency is a clear indication of the imbalance between the electrical load and the active power demand supplied by the connected generators [2]. The point of concern regarding AGC subject is to closely examine the deviation in frequency in each control area and regulate the power transfer via tie-lines among the control areas at nominal rate [3]. Similarly, the interest levels while dealing with proper design of AGC system are to (a) limit area control error (ACE) during some unusual conditions, (b) avoid fluctuation of ACE signal and (c) keep the amount of control action, called for by the AGC, at a minimum value [4].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
