@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Modeling nonlinear behavior of Buckling-Restrained Braces via different artificial intelligence methods

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Nonlinear modeling of Buckling-Restrained Braces using 5 AI techniques was presented.Modeling is done based on experimental data obtained from BRB specimens.The AI models considered are TDNN, NARX, GMMR, ANFIS and PCR.NARX and PCR yielded the best prediction results in terms of objective measures.PCR is found to be far superior to all methods in terms of computational complexity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Buckling-Restrained Brace (BRB),Time-Delayed Neural Networks (TDNN),Nonlinear Auto-Regressive eXogenous neural networks (NARX),Gaussian-Mixture Models Regression (GMMR),Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference Systems (ANFIS),Polynomial Classifier Regression (PCR),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Five AI models are presented to model the dynamic nonlinear behavior of Buckling-Restrained Braces (BRBs). The AI techniques utilized in the models are: Time-Delayed Neural Networks (TDNN), Nonlinear Auto-Regressive eXogenous (NARX) neural networks, Gaussian-Mixture Models Regression (GMMR), Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference Systems (ANFIS) and Polynomial Classifier Regression (PCR). The models are developed using time-delayed brace displacements inputs and brace force outputs to predict updated brace forces during load reversals. The training and testing of the AI models are performed using experimental data from BRB specimens tested at the Pacific Earthquake Engineering Research (PEER) Center. The training stage for every method makes use of the experimental data from one specimen. In order to assess the models’ learning and generalization capabilities, three sets of experimental data for different specimens are used. To arrive at an optimized architecture that best models the phenomenon, the model performance with different parameters is evaluated. The brace force predicted by the proposed model shows excellent resemblance to the experimental results for the training sample, for all techniques. The predicted behavior of the testing samples shows noticeable accuracy and further demonstrates the generalization and prediction capability of the proposed modeling techniques. The various techniques are compared on the basis of selected performance criteria. It is found that the performance of two AI techniques standout among the others: the NARX and the PCR. Although the NARX demonstrates a slight advantage in the prediction accuracy over the PCR, the latter is far more superior in terms of computational efficiency. Thus, the PCR would be recommended for scenarios where online training is needed. The BRB design and performance investigation processes can be facilitated by the developed modeling techniques thus minimizing the need for, and extent of, experimental testing.As far as nonlinear behavior is concerned, conventional concentric braces are prone to many drawbacks. Low ductility, asymmetrical behavior (hysteretic curves) in tension versus compression, strength deterioration and stiffness degradation are quite common to conventional braces [1]. Such poor performance under load reversals opens the gateway for research to develop improved alternatives. A reliable solution, to most if not all the limitations of conventional braces, is offered by Buckling-Restrained Braces (BRBs). The qualitative improvement of BRBs to conventional braces’ hysteretic behavior (cyclic force–displacement relationship) is depicted in Fig. 1. The BRB's structure comprises of a low-yield steel core embedding into an outer casing of concrete-filled steel tube. This surrounding encasement eliminates the global buckling of the steel core and allows it to withstand significant levels of inelastic deformations. BRBs are associated with stable hysteretic behavior and exhibit superb energy dissipation capabilities. Fig. 2[2] illustrates the anatomy of a typical BRB. In the last decade or so several experimental studies have been conducted for BRBs components as well as assemblages (e.g.: [2–8]). Other numerical investigations have also been recently conducted (e.g.: [9,10]).It is observed that there exists a significant difference between the BRB tension and compression capacities despite the stable hysteretic behavior exhibited by BRBs under load reversals. Due to the decoupled confinement of the brace, geometric nonlinearity like isotropic hardening is also introduced. In order to minimize the cost of experimental results, cost effective and highly refined modeling techniques encompassing BRB peculiar dynamic nonlinear behavior are motivated. Finite Element Analysis (FEA) has served as an excellent and validated substitute to extensive experimental programs. However, when compared to the experimental efforts, explicit FEA modeling is not a trivial task either and significant efforts remain needed. Moreover, similar to physical experiments, the FEA lacks the capability of producing closed-form solutions to the simulations. Hence, the need for general modeling techniques continues to exist, and therefore, artificial intelligence (AI) is explored in this research.The problem at hand can be viewed as a black-box system identification problem whereby an AI model is determined based on a learning scheme operating on experimental measurements. These measurements represent input and output data obtained from the actual system as will be described in the experimental data section (Section 2). The selection of an AI model is based on its suitability to capture the time variant nonlinear dynamics of the system to be modeled. Accordingly, in this paper we examine five AI models configured in a way such that they are able to capture the time variant nonlinear dynamics of the BRB system. Capturing nonlinearity and time variance is achieved by using multilayer architecture, nonlinear activation functions, and time delays in the AI models.The AI techniques investigated in this paper are: (a) Time-Delayed Neural Networks (TDNN), (b) Nonlinear Auto-Regressive eXogenous (NARX) neural networks, (c) Gaussian Mixture Models Regression (GMMR), (d) Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS) based regression and (e) Polynomial classifiers based regression (PCR).The following organization is adopted in this paper: Section 2 describes the experimental data utilized for training and testing the different intelligent techniques used in this paper. Predicted brace force results using the five AI techniques are illustrated in Sections 3–6 along with descriptions of the corresponding techniques except for the NARX method. The reader is referred to our previously published work in [11] which provides detailed description of the NARX method. The relevant results of the NARX method are re-presented in this paper for the sake of comparison and completeness. Section 3 focuses on TDNN and NARX, Section 4 focuses on GMMR, Section 5 focuses on ANFIS, and Section 6 focuses on PCR. Comparison of the performance of the different modeling techniques is presented and discussed in Section 7. Finally, the paper is concluded in Section 8.The experimental data utilized to develop the different intelligent models were those of the full-scale tests performed by Uriz and Mahin [8] at the University of California at Berkley.Four BRB specimens representative of modern code-compliant construction, fabricated at or near full scale were selected for full scale testing. The testing setup comprised of two stories, realistic boundary conditions, and BRBs were subjected to load reversals resembling intense earthquake ground motions. Specifically, three one-bay wide, two-story planar frames were tested. The upper stories were stiffened and strengthened for these specimens so that inelastic deformations would be concentrated in the lower stories containing the BRBs. Intense shaking was applied to both inverted V and single diagonal braced frames configurations (Fig. 3a and b, respectively). In this study, specimen BRB-3 test results are used for training the network. The test results from the remainder of the specimens are utilized for testing the network's prediction capability.The conducted experiments followed the standard loading protocol provisions outlined in the AISC/SEAOC Recommended Buckling-Restrained Brace Frame Provisions [12]. The protocol comprises of 16 cycles and is designed to demonstrate the desirable stable hysteretic behavior by subjecting the specimen to sufficient accumulated inelastic demands. Fig. 4provides a graphical representation of the loading protocol. Details of the four specimens are listed in Table 1. Further description of the experimental program and the specimens can be found in the PEER report no. 2008/08 [8].The basic input for the different proposed intelligent models is brace deformation for which it is required to predict a corresponding output comprising of the brace force. Since the conducted tests followed the AISC/SEAOC standard test protocol, the deformations recorded are prescribed in terms of specimen yield deflection (Δy), as in Fig. 4. Thus, the reported experimental deformations are normalized by the specimen Δyprior to being fed into the model. The deformation normalization allows the intelligent model to recognize the specific behavioral patterns of each individual specimen. The yield deflection (Δy) effectively describes the uniqueness in individual specimens as it relates all the parameters influencing the BRB behavior. The Δyincorporates the combination of several parameters, such as the brace yield length, cross-sectional area and yield stress into the network's learning process in an efficient manner.This section investigates the feasibility of using the TDNN technique in modeling the complex nonlinear dynamic behavior of BRBs under cyclic loading. It also re-presents the result obtained using another ANN architecture (namely, NARX). The development of the proposed ANN model involves training, validation and testing the system on the results of full-scale tests performed by Uriz and Mahin [8] at the University of California at Berkley. Experimental data of four BRBs are used in the process whereby only one of them (BRB3) is used to train the network. Experimentation with individual BRB datasets as the training set yielded that BRB3 provides the best training dataset for generalization purposes. To assess the prediction performance of the model, the trained network is then tested using all four BRB data sets (namely, BRB3, BRB2, BRB1-North, and BRB1-South). The prediction performance on BRB3 dataset is expected to be superior to the rest of the datasets.Time Delay Neural Network (TDNN) is a variant of neural network widely used in variety of applications. TDNN have been utilized in prediction of control for nonlinear dynamic systems [13] as well as in nonlinear system identification [14]. Their use has been tremendous in stabilizing the output feedback for interconnected nonlinear systems [15]. They have been acknowledged as a smart tool for predicting chaotic time series and an adaptive model for multistep prediction of sunspot activity [16]. TDNN constitutes a structure very similar to the multilayer feed forward network with some minor modifications. In a conventional network each neuron processes the inputs, computes the weighted sum of the inputs and then passes this sum through a nonlinear activation function. However, in TDNN each neuron is modified by introducing certain delays associated with all the weights. The delays are fixed and are chosen depending on the nature of application. The present study is focused on the TDNN developed incorporating only the input delays.In order to generate a dynamic mapping between the inputs and outputs of a single neuron, every branch of the neuron is augmented with a delay. The governing relation for the input–output representation of a neuron in a TDNN network is given by Eq. (1):(1)y(t)=σ∑i=1Nwixi(k−τi)where wi's represent the neuron weights, τiare the delays embedded in each neuron branch and σ(·) is the nonlinear activation function. In a conventional TDNN there is usually more than one connection (link) between two neurons, but for simplicity and without loss of generality the adopted structure in this research shall utilize only one branch. Note that in above equation, the output of the neuron at time instant k depends on the previous values of the inputs which results in a dynamic behavior making it suitable for modeling dynamic nonlinear systems.The dynamic multilayer feed forward network can be easily constructed by utilizing the dynamic neuron described as above. The governing equations for a typical neuron is given by Eq. (2)(2)zjl(k)=∑i=1Nl−1wjilyil−1(k−τjil)+bjloutjl(k)=γ(zjl(k))whereoutjl(k)denotes the output of the jth neuron in the lth layer at time k.wjilandτjildenote the weight and the associated delay respectively connecting the jth neuron in the lth layer to the ith neuron in the (l−1)th layer. Note that j varies from 1 to Nl, i varies from 1 to Nl−1, andτjilvaries from 0 to τmax (which is to be chosen subsequently as the maximum delay used to represent the desired input–output map). γ(·) is an activation function. Alsozjl(k)represents the weighted input of the jth neuron in the lth layer at time k. The output of the ith neuron in the first (hidden) layer is given by the following Eq. (3).(3)mi1(k)=∑i=1Nl−1wi11xi1(k−1−τi11)+bi1Now substitutingyi1(k)in Eq. (3) yields the value ofoutjl(k)at the second (output) layer as given by Eq. (4)(4)outj2(k)=f∑i=1N1wji2(s((wi11xi1(k−1−τi11−τji2))+bi1)+bj2Since i varies from 1 to N1 and j varies from 1 to N2, thusoutjl(k)can be re written as Eq. (5)(5)outj2(k)=f[x(k−1−τ111−τj12),x(k−1−τ211−τj22),…,x(k−1−τN111−τjN12)]It can be easily noticed that the parameterτjilis not fixed and rather varied such that the error norm is minimized. Keeping in mind theτjilvaries from 0 to τmax, the output of the last layer can be shown in extended form as given by Eq. (6)(6)outjL(k)=NANN[x(k−1),x(k−2),…,x(k−1−Lτmax)]where NANN is the nonlinear mapping realized by the network.The brace deformation measurements versus time acquired from the experimental data serve as the input to the TDNN; with the corresponding brace force as the network output. The adopted architecture for the network has one hidden layer intermediate to the input and output layers. In this work, the input memory order for the network is empirically chosen to be 10 based on the best error performance for validation data set. This allows formulating an ideal network structure for suitable prediction of the time series. The TDNN network contains 20 neurons in the hidden layer and a single neuron in the output layer. Fig. 5represents the adopted TDNN architecture.The learning process utilized is the static back propagation algorithm to compute the gradients. During the learning (training) phase the network makes use of the true output (targets) to perform classical static error back-propagation. In order to avoid overtraining the network, an algorithm that is capable of regularization is utilized. This process involves modifying the performance index function by replacing typical performance function used in training, MSE by a new regulated one, MSEreg, as follows:(7)J=MSEreg=ξMSE+(1−ξ)MSWwhere ξ the performance ratio and MSW is the mean squared weights.Back propagation is used to calculate derivatives of performance with respect to the weight and bias variables. Each variable is adjusted according to gradient descent with momentum. The increment in weights is proportional to the negative gradient of the error computed w.r.t weights given as.(8)Δw=−(1−mc)η∂J∂wwhere η is the learning ratio and mcis the momentum constant.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
