@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A multi-objective routing algorithm for Wireless Multimedia Sensor Networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new multi-objective approach for the routing problem in Wireless Multimedia Sensor Networks (WMSNs) is proposed.Classical approximations optimize a single objective or Quality of Service (QoS) parameter.Classical approximations do not take into account the conflicting nature of QoS parameters which leads to sub-optimal solutions.The proposed approach takes into account multiple QoS requirements such as delay and the Expected Transmission Count (ETX).The case studies applying the proposed approach shows clear improvements on the QoS routing solutions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi-objective optimization,Wireless Multimedia Sensor Networks,Strength Pareto Evolutionary Algorithm,Quality of Service,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a new multi-objective approach for the routing problem in Wireless Multimedia Sensor Networks (WMSNs) is proposed. It takes into account Quality of Service (QoS) requirements such as delay and the Expected Transmission Count (ETX). Classical approximations optimize a single objective or QoS parameter, not taking into account the conflicting nature of these parameters which leads to sub-optimal solutions. The case studies applying the proposed approach show clear improvements on the QoS routing solutions. For example, in terms of delay, the approximate mean improvement ratios obtained for scenarios 1 and 2 were of 15 and 28 times, respectively.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Wireless sensor networks [1] are composed of small devices, called sensor nodes, which cooperate to forward collected data to a sink node that either uses the data locally or forwards it to other networks through a gateway, like for example, the Internet. Sensors are resource-limited devices composed of sensing, processing, transceiver, and power units.The addition of low cost multimedia hardware to sensors fostered the development of Wireless Multimedia Sensor Networks [2], allowing the retrieval of multimedia streams, and/or scalar sensor data. Wireless sensor networks have many application areas [2] such as multimedia surveillance sensor networks, storage of potentially relevant activities, traffic avoidance, enforcement and control system, and many more.Routing protocols [3] in WSNs can be classified according to the network structure, protocol operation, how routing information is acquired and maintained. In terms of network structure, routing protocols can be divided into flat-based routing, hierarchical-based routing and location-based routing. In flat-based routing, typically nodes have similar roles, whereas in hierarchical-based routing nodes have different roles. In location-based routing, location information is used to route data in the network. According to protocol operation, these protocols can be classified as multipath-based, query-based, negotiation-based, QoS-based, or coherent-based routing techniques. In multipath-based routing, multiple paths are maintained between a source-destination pair. In query-based routing, the destination node sends a query through the network and the node with this data, sends an answer. In negotiation-based routing, high level data descriptors are used to eliminate redundant data transmissions through negotiation. In QoS-based routing, certain QoS metrics have to be satisfied while routing data through the network. In coherent-based routing, sensors cooperate in processing data flooded throughout the network. According to how routing information is acquired and maintained, they can be classified into proactive, reactive, and hybrid. In proactive protocols, nodes compute routes before they are needed. In reactive protocols, nodes compute route on demand. Hybrid protocols combines ideas of both.Multimedia applications have different QoS requirements such as, bounded latency or delay, throughput, jitter, availability, and energy consumption. Since energy efficiency is considered as the main goal of most WSNs routing protocols, the majority of these protocols does not perform well when applied to QoS-constrained WMSN. Routing techniques in WMSN can be classified similarly to those of WSNs. In [4] another categorization for WMSN routing protocols is presented. Protocols are classified based on the handled data types, data delivery model types, classes of algorithms adopted, and the used hole-bypassing approach.Many routing schemes [4,5] have been proposed to address QoS requirements. In most of these schemes, only one of the desired objectives is optimized, while others are assumed as problems’ constraints [6]. In certain applications, a meta-heuristic approach [7,8] using a multi-objective optimization (MO) algorithms that can provide several optimal solutions may be preferred, since single design objective algorithms ignore other relevant objectives. By considering all objectives simultaneously, a set of optimal solutions can be generated, also known as the Pareto solutions [9] of the multi-objective problem. It is also known from [10] that finding optimal routes for multiple objectives in networks (multi-constrained QoS routing), is a NP-complete problem, hence efficient heuristic search algorithms based on reduced-complexity Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs) [11] are necessary.The Expected Transmission Count (ETX) [12] metric is an estimation of the expected total number of transmissions (including retransmissions) required to deliver a packet to the destination node successfully. ETX allows finding high throughput paths on a multi-hop wireless network, and incorporates the effects of link loss ratios, asymmetry in the loss ratios between the two directions of each link, and the interference among the successive links of a path.This paper proposes a new multi-objective approach for the WMSN routing problem that takes into account QoS parameters such as delay and ETX. A comparison of the proposed approach with two alternative routing protocols was also presented.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses related work. Section 3 presents the WMSN routing problem formulation. Section 4 presents the multi-objective optimization concept, formulation and our Strength Pareto Evolutionary Algorithm (SPEA) implementation used to solve the problem. Sections 5 and 6 present the simulation model and results respectively. Finally, Section 7 presents conclusions and future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A multi-objective optimization algorithm aims at producing (1) solutions as close as possible to the POS and (2) solutions as diverse as possible in the obtained non-dominated set. This diverse set of optimal solutions expresses trade-offs between different objectives. Routing protocols for WMSN must take into account a set of QoS requirements like bandwidth, delay, energy consumption. The ETX metric allows finding high throughput paths on a multi-hop wireless network, and incorporates the effects of link loss ratios, asymmetry in the loss ratios between the two directions of each link, and the interference among the successive links of a path.In the route selection process, DSR only considers hop count, not meeting WMSN QoS requirements. Hop count does not consider the paths links conditions. HTLC-MeDSR uses ETX during the path selection process to evaluate link conditions along the path. Since HTLC-MeDSR is a multipath routing protocol, it also considers the Correlation Factor during the path selection process, to find multiple paths with minimum cross interference among a source-destination pair. The proposed MOEA algorithm allows finding paths that minimize both objectives, and paths that express trade-offs among objectives.The paths found by the proposed SPEA present 2.2 and 2.15 times less ETX than those found and used by HTLC-MeDSR for scenarios 1 and 2 respectively. In terms of end-to-end delay, the paths found by the proposed SPEA present 26.07 and 51.95 times less delay than the ones found and used by DSR, and 4.39 and 3.30 times less delay than the ones found and used by HTLC-MeDSR, for scenarios 1 and 2 respectively.The insertion of the proposed MOEA on HTLC-MeDSR route sets building procedure and subsequent evaluation is left for future work.