@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Design of a novel adaptive TSK-fuzzy speed controller for use in direct torque control induction motor drives

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose an adaptive Takagi-Sugeno-Kang-fuzzy (TSK-fuzzy) speed controller (ATFSC) for use in direct torque control (DTC) induction motor (IM) drives to improve their dynamic responses.The parameters of the TSK-fuzzy controller were adjusted online based on the adaptive rules derived in Lyapunov stability theory.The ATFSC, fuzzy control, and PI control schemes were experimentally investigated, using the root mean square error (RMSE) performance index to evaluate each scheme.The robustness of the proposed ATFSC was verified using simulations and experiments, which involved varying parameters and external load disturbances.The experimental results indicate that the ATFSC scheme outperformed the other control schemes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Direct torque control,Speed control,Online turning,Lyapunov stability,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study proposes an adaptive Takagi-Sugeno-Kang-fuzzy (TSK-fuzzy) speed controller (ATFSC) for use in direct torque control (DTC) induction motor (IM) drives to improve their dynamic responses. The proposed controller consists of the TSK-fuzzy controller, which is used to approximate an ideal control law, and a compensated controller, which is constructed to compensate for the difference between the TSK-fuzzy controller and the ideal control law. Parameter variations and external load disturbances were considered during the design phase to ensure the robustness of the proposed scheme. The parameters of the TSK-fuzzy controller were adjusted online based on the adaptive rules derived in Lyapunov stability theory. The ATFSC, fuzzy control, and PI control schemes were experimentally investigated, using the root mean square error (RMSE) performance index to evaluate each scheme. The robustness of the proposed ATFSC was verified using simulations and experiments, which involved varying parameters and external load disturbances. The experimental results indicate that the ATFSC scheme outperformed the other control schemes.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The topic of direct torque control in electric drives [1–3] has been studied for several decades. In contrast to field-oriented control, direct torque control (DTC) is simpler and requires fewer computational resources. In addition, stator resistance is the only parameter required for DTC, substantially reducing the dependence on system parameters. However, to construct high-performance DTC-based induction motor (IM) control systems, nonlinear characteristics and inherent uncertainties must be considered, including the rotor inertia and viscous frictional coefficients. Therefore, this paper presents a systematic and effective method for constructing high-performance DTC-based IM control systems.The conventional control scheme, proportional integral (PI) control, is the most widely used solution in various industries. However, its parameters must be retuned when a modification is made to, or a change occurs in, the controlled system. In practice, this tuning process is time-consuming. Thus, model-free methods, such as neural networks (NNs) [4–9], cerebellar model articulation controllers (CMACs) [10,11], and fuzzy controls [12–14], have been developed and evaluated in the past decades. The approach based on NNs is favorable for use in nonlinear control tasks because of its excellent learning capacity. An NN-based controller can exploit this excellent learning capacity to approximate system dynamics and compensate for system uncertainties. Huh et al. [15] and Grzesiak et al. [16] employed the NN-based approach in DTC drives. Based on these studies, the tradeoff between system performance and the complexity of the NN must be considered and addressed in a typical NN-based control system. Moreover, powerful additional computing processors are typically required to ensure the controlled performance of NN-based real-time control systems. Installing these processors not only increases hardware costs, but also limits the practicability of NN-based schemes. Albus [11] presented a subclass of NNs, namely CMACs, to solve these problems. The CMAC offers several advantages over other NNs: rapid learning, favorable generalization capability, and simple computation. Hence, the CMAC is more effective compared with an NN in real-time control applications. The CMAC has considerably progressed, particularly in real-time applications. Previous studies have addressed various aspects associated with the conventional CMAC, including selecting a basis function, input space partitioning, weight space size, and incorporating an appropriate learning algorithm [17–20]. These aspects directly affect the control performance; however, the conventional CMAC outputs remain discontinuous for consecutive quantized states, causing the control actions to fluctuate.Regarding another well-known model-free scheme, fuzzy control is also an attractive solution for controlling DTC drives because it is readily implemented and performs favorably. Rehman [21] and Romeral et al. [22] applied Mamdani-type fuzzy control in DTC drives, and obtained satisfactory experimental results. The results of their studies indicated that this fuzzy logic approach was effective and suitable for application in DTC drives. However, the disadvantage of the Mamdani-type fuzzy controller is that numerous fuzzy sets, typically seven for each input and seven for each output, and 49 rules are required to ensure the optimal level of performance. Moreover, the system performance level depends on sufficient designer knowledge of and experiences with specific applications, considerably weakening the applicability of the fuzzy scheme. Another proposed fuzzy scheme, the Takagi-Sugeno-Kang-fuzzy (TSK-fuzzy) scheme [23–25], is attractive for function approximation because of its ability to model nonlinear relations by using relatively few inference rules. Regarding the TSK-fuzzy system, fuzzy rules are equipped with functional-type consequences instead of fuzzy terms as in Mamdani-type fuzzy systems. Thus, the TSK-fuzzy controller can tune its parameters in consecutive parts, achieving outstanding performance levels based on the design of suitable adaptation rules rather than expert experience. In addition, system stability can be guaranteed by adhering to these designed adaptation rules. These strengths render TSK-fuzzy control highly suitable for use in nonlinear control tasks. Thus far, studies on the TSK-fuzzy control scheme have rarely involved exploring or developing DTC drives. Thus, in this study, a TSK-fuzzy-based speed controller is proposed for use in high-performance DTC-based IM control systems.The proposed adaptive TSK-fuzzy speed controller (ATFSC) is composed of a TSK-fuzzy controller and compensated controller. The TSK-fuzzy controller is self-tuned and used to approximate an ideal control law. The compensated controller then compensates for the approximation error of the TSK-fuzzy controller. In addition, the parameters of the ATFSC are tuned online based on the adaptation laws that were derived from Lyapunov stability theory. Thus, the proposed ATFSC both exhibits a strong performance level and guarantees the stability of the control system and error convergence. To confirm the effectiveness of ATFSC, three control strategies, the ATFSC, fuzzy control, and PI control schemes, were separately implemented in a practical DTC drive and their performance levels were evaluated. The experimental results were evaluated using the root mean square error (RMSE) performance index. Based on the results, the ATFSC markedly outperformed the other control schemes.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the DTC-based IM control system, Section 3 presents the design of the ATFSC, and Section 4 presents a numerical simulation and experimental evaluation of the performance of the proposed method, verifying that the ATFSC can manage external load disturbances. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.A typical DTC-based IM speed control system, as shown in Fig. 1, generally requires speed, torque, and flux controllers. Accordingly, torque and stator-flux estimators are required for estimating the correct values of the torque and flux controls. Regarding speed control, an encoder is typically required to sense the rotor speed and the sensed value is fed back. However, a speed-sensorless scheme was applied in this study; thus, a rotor speed estimator was required instead of an encoder. In this study, the estimates of rotor speed and electromagnetic torque were obtained by adopting the stator flux oriented scheme, which is introduced in this section.The d and q components of the stator-flux vector in a stationary frame can be formulated as follows:(1)λˆdss=∫(vdss−Rsidss)dt(2)λˆqss=∫(vqss−Rsiqss)dtIn addition, the electrical angle θecan be formulated as follows:(3)θe=tan−1λˆqssλˆdssBy using the stationary-to-synchronous transformation and the stator-flux orientation condition, the formed d and q components of the stator-flux vector can be expressed as follows:(4)λˆdse=λˆdsscosθe+λˆqsssinθeλˆqse=0The q component of the stator-flux vector must equal zero to meet the stator flux-oriented condition. The estimated electromagnetic torque can be formulated as follows:(5)Tˆe=3P4λˆdseiˆqseBy differentiating Eq. (3) regarding time, the estimated electrical angular speedωˆecan be derived as follows:(6)ωˆe=λˆdsspλˆqss−λˆqsspλˆdssλˆdss2+λˆqss2Moreover, the slip-speed can be estimated using the stator-flux orientation, and expressed as follows:(7)ωˆsl=(1+στrp)Lsiqseτr(λdse−σLsidse)The estimated rotor mechanical speedωˆmcan then be calculated based on Eqs. (6) and (7):(8)ωˆm=2P(ωˆe−ωˆsl).Using Eq. (8), the rotor speed can be estimated and used as a speed feedback for speed control. The speed controller in the proposed system generally uses a typical PI controller. However, the tuning process for the PI parameters might be time-consuming in practice. Thus, an intelligent speed controller, ATFSC, was implemented in this study; this controller is introduced in the following section.In this section, the fundamentals of the TSK-fuzzy system are introduced. Various parameters and external loads of the DTC drive were considered as uncertainties when developing the proposed ATFSC. Finally, an improved compensation control strategy was adopted to reduce the fluctuation of control effort u. The details are discussed as follows.Typically, a TSK-fuzzy controller comprises four principal aspects: the fuzzification, inference mechanism, knowledge base, and defuzzification. The knowledge base stores all necessary information, including the linguistic variables of input signals, membership function of each linguistic variable, and a collection of TSK-fuzzy If-then rules. The ith fuzzy rules are described as follows:(9)R(i):IFx1=F1iandx2=F2i,THENyi=q0i+q1ix1+q2ix2=θiT[1xT]TwhereFkiare fuzzy sets, k=1, 2,xT=x1x2is the input vector,θiT=q0iq1iq2iis a vector of the adjustable parameters, and yiis the scalar output. By using the central average defuzzifier and product inference, the output of the TSK-fuzzy controller yTSK is expressed as follows:(10)yTSK=v1y1+v2y2+⋯+vNryNrv1+v2+⋯+vNr=∑i=1Nrviyi∑i=1Nrvi=∑i=1NrviθiT[1xT]T∑i=1Nrviwhere Nris the total number of fuzzy rules,vi=∏k=12μFki(xk), andμFkiis the membership value of fuzzy setFki. Thus, Eq. (10) can be rewritten as follows:(11)yTSK=θTφwhereθT=θ1Tθ2T…θNrTis the aggregated vector of the adjustable parameter vectors, andφT=φ1Tφ2T…φNrTis the fuzzy basis function vector defined as follows:(12)φi=vi[1xT]T∑i=1Nrvi.In this study, the input variables of the TSK-fuzzy controller were speed error e and the change in speed error Δe. The output of the TSK-fuzzy controller was designed to yield a control law uTSK. Regarding the adjustable parameters, the parameters θTere adjusted using adaptive rules that were derived from Lyapunov stability theory and are described in the following section. In addition, each parameter was initialized to zero before being adjusted.To design the adaptive TSK-fuzzy speed controller for use in a speed sensorless DTC-based IM control system, some reasonable assumptions must be made. For example, the rotor speed, flux, and torque are assumed to be perfectly estimated. The equation of IM dynamics can be expressed as follows:(13)Te=TL+Bmωm+Jmω˙m.where Teis the electromagnetic torque, TLis the load torque, Jmis the rotor inertia, Bmrepresents the viscous frictional coefficient, and ωmis the rotor mechanical speed of the IM.LetAP=−BmJm,BP=1Jm, CP=−BPFrom Eq. (13), the mechanical equation for DTC drives can be calculated as follows:(14)ω˙m=APωm+BPTe+CPTL=APωm+BPu+CPTL.where Teis the control input of the control system. In real-time application, the parameters change when the drive system is operated in various conditions. Accordingly, the real parameters of the DTC-based IM control system include the nominal parameters and their variations. Eq. (14) can then be rewritten as follows:(15)ω˙m=Apωm+Bpu+CpTL=(A¯p+ΔAp)ωm+(B¯p+ΔBp)u+(C¯p+ΔCp)TL=A¯pωm+B¯pu+C¯pTL+ΔApωm+ΔBpu+ΔCpTL=A¯pωm+B¯pu+dwhereA¯p,B¯p, andC¯pare nominal values of Ap, Bp, and Cp; ΔAp, ΔBp, and ΔCpare parameter variations; and d is the system uncertainty, which comprises the magnitude of parameter variations and external load disturbances. The speed error is defined as follows:(16)e=ω∗−ωmwhere ω∗ is a predefined desired rotor speed. The control objective is to design a controller such that the rotor speed ωmcan track ω∗. If the nominal parameters of the IM and system uncertainty d are known, then an ideal control law can be defined as follows:(17)u∗=−A¯pωm−d+ω˙∗+k1eB¯pwhere k1 is a positive constant. Substituting Eq. (17) into Eq. (15) yields the following error dynamics:(18)e˙+k1e=0.Eq. (18) implies that the rotor speed can asymptotically track the predefined trajectories. Although the nominal parameters of the motor can be measured, the parameter variations and external load are always unknown. Hence, the ideal control law, Eq. (17), cannot be achieved in practice; thus, an ATFSC is proposed to approximate the ideal control law.The control law of the ATFSC is expressed in the following form:(19)u=uTSK+uC=uATFSCwhere uTSK is the TSK-fuzzy control effort and uCis the compensated control. The TSK-fuzzy control is the dominant control that is employed to approximate the ideal control law, and the compensated control is intended to compensate for the residual of the approximation error. From Eqs. (15), (17) and (19), the following error equation is obtained:(20)e˙=−k1e+B¯p(u∗−uTSK−uC).Assume that an optimal adjustable parameter vector θ∗ exists for TSK-fuzzy controller to approximate the ideal control law u∗ exhibiting a minimal approximation error. The error ρ can be defined as follows:(21)ρ=u∗−θ∗Tφwhere the minimum approximation ρ is assumed to be less than a low positive constant δ (i.e., |ρ|<δ). The error Eq. (20) can be represented as follows:(22)e˙=−k1e+B¯p[(u∗−θ∗Tφ)+θ∗Tφ−θTφ−uC]=−k1e+B¯p[ρ−(θ−θ∗)Tφ−uC]=−k1e+B¯p[ρ−θ˜Tφ−uC]whereθ˜=θ−θ∗.Consider the Lyapunov function candidate:(23)V(t)=12e2+12αθ˜Tθ˜,where α>0 is denoted as the adaptation gain. Differentiate the Lyapunov function regarding time. Based on Eq. (22), this yields the following:(24)V˙(t)=ee˙+1αθ˜Tθ˙=−k1e2+eB¯p[ρ−θ˜Tφ−uC]+1αθ˜Tθ˙To satisfyV˙(t)≤0, the adaptation lawθ˙and compensated control uCwere designed as follows:(25)θ˙=αeB¯pφ(26)uC=δsgn(eB¯p).Applying Eqs. (25) and (26) to Eq. (24) yields the following:(27)V˙(t)=−k1e2+eB¯pρ−eB¯puC.≤−k1e2+|eB¯p||ρ|−eB¯puC≤−k1e2≤0BecauseV˙(t)≤0is a negative semidefinite function and V(t)≤V(0), e andθ˜are bounded. Let functionΞ(t)=k1e2≤−V˙(t). Integrating function Ξ(t) regarding time:(28)∫0tΞ(τ)dτ≤V(0)−V(t)Because V(0) is bounded, and V(t) is nonincreasing and bounded, the following result is obtained:(29)limt→∞∫0tΞ(τ)dτ<∞.In addition, becauseΞ˙(t)is bounded, Barbalat's lemma [26] indicateslimt→∞Ξ(t)=0. Accordingly, e→0 as t→∞. Thus, the stability of the ATFSC is guaranteed.The aforementioned compensated controller was employed to compensate the approximation error between the TSK-fuzzy controller and the ideal control law. However, including the TSK-fuzzy controller, all the approximation methods required a period of time to approximate the target function. The approximation error of the TSK-fuzzy controller was considerably large at the transient stage, implying that a substantial compensation effort is required to overcome this difficulty.In practical control applications, a large uCmay cause the control system to exhibit a more favorable transient response compared with a small uC; however, severe chattering phenomena might occur during the steady state. If a small uCis selected, then undesired chattering phenomena may be eliminated during the steady state, but a favorable transient response would not be retained. To address this tradeoff, a novel compensated controller, which improves the transient response and chattering phenomena of the traditional compensated controller, is presented in this section [27]. The proposed controller was designed to increase the level of compensation when the TSK-fuzzy controller is at the transient stage, maintaining a sufficiently small level of compensation during the steady state. Because an insufficient level of compensation causes the system to exhibit a large speed error at the transient stage, the speed error e can be applied as an index to identify whether the TSK-fuzzy controller is actually at the transient stage. This concept can be expressed as follows:(30)uC=δsgn(eB¯s),0<|e|≤ζδ⋅γ⋅e,|e|>ζwhere ζ≥1(rad/s) is the threshold, which can be prespecified to switch the control effort; and γ≥1 is a compensating constant. Evidently, the stability of the ATFSC can be guaranteed if |ρ|<δ is provided.The validity and robustness of the proposed DTC drives were verified using simulations and experiments. Fig. 2shows the experimental setup for implementing the proposed system. Fig. 2(a) shows a block diagram of the experimental setup, and Fig. 2(b) shows a photograph of the experimental setup. The experimental equipment in this study comprised a PC, PC-based control board, IGBT inverter, and a 2.2kW IM. The PC-based control board was plugged into the PC and provided A/D and D/A interfaces between the PC and IM drive. The entire control algorithm encompassed the proposed ATFSC, DTC scheme, and corresponding observers, which were designed and implemented on the PC by using MATLAB/SIMULINK. In addition, the sampling frequency of the PC-based experimental setup was 10kHz. Notably, control algorithm computations could be completed at the given sampling frequency (0.1ms). The resolution of the shaft encoder considered in the experimental setup was 2048 counts/rev. The switching frequency of the PWM inverter used in the experimentation was 10kHz, and its rated power was 3kW. Table 1shows the IM parameters in detail. The TSK-fuzzy system introduced in Section 3 was used as the TSK-fuzzy controller in both the simulation and experimental study. Each input variable was assigned two fuzzy sets, as shown in Fig. 3. Thus, only four rules and 12 parameters for tuning the proposed ATFSC were applicable. Table 2shows the parameter values of the proposed ATFSC for the experiments. Regarding the ATFSC, several parameters, including k1,A¯P,B¯P, andC¯P, depend on motor specifications. The other parameters, such as the adaptation rate of the compensating controller, δ, and learning rate of the ATFSC, α, were set based on experience. However, these values may differ depending on the case. In both the simulation and experimental study, the sampling frequency was set to be the same (10kHz) regarding the speed, torque, and stator-flux control.To confirm the improved compensating control strategy, robustness against parameter variation and tracking ability of the proposed ATFSC, simulations were performed. First, the proposed ATFSC (equipped with an improved compensated controller) was implemented, and its performance was compared with that of the previous ATFSC (equipped with a constant compensated controller). Second, two parameter variations, moment of inertia Jmand viscous friction coefficient Bm, were used to verify the robustness of the proposed control scheme. Regarding the aforementioned simulations, the external load TL=8Nm and speed references (or speed profiles) for single-quadrant operation in this study were used to form the spline-shaped curve (depicted as a dotted line in speed waveform figures) rather than the step commands.Using δ=0.01, Fig. 4(a) indicates that the speed error was approximately 0.01rpm when the DTC drive system was in the steady state. The low δ value caused a low level of compensation, producing a large speed error (approximately 30rpm) at the transient stage. As shown in Fig. 4(b), the maximum transient error was reduced using by using δ=2 to achieve increased compensation. However, a high compensation level caused an undesired chattering phenomenon during the steady state. Thus, these simulation results proved that a fixed compensation was incapable of simultaneously controlling the system in transient and steady states.The results of simulating the proposed ATFSC equipped with the improved compensated controller were Eq. (30) and δ=0.01, as shown in Fig. 4(c). The figure indicates that the improved compensated controller provided increased compensation at the transient stage, and maintained a low compensation level during the steady state of the DTC drive system. This improved compensation enabled the proposed ATFSC to perform well in not only the transient state but also the steady state of the system. Fig. 5presents the simulation results based on various Jmand Bmparameter variations to verify the robustness of the proposed ATFSC. The speed response, speed error, and control effort uATFSC are shown in each subplot. Fig. 5(a) presents the simulation results when Jmand Bmwere not varied yielding a maximum speed error of 12.78rpm; in the steady state, the speed error was in the range of ±0.01rpm. Fig. 5(b) shows the simulation results at incremental variations of 100% regarding Jm, Fig. 5(c) shows the simulation results at incremental variations of 100% regarding Bm, and Fig. 5(d) shows the simulation results at incremental variations of 100% regarding both Jmand Bm. As shown in Fig. 5, the performance level of ATFSC was slightly affected as the mechanical parameters Jmand Bmvaried. The robustness of the proposed ATFSC against parameter variations was verified using these simulations.To confirm the feasibility, tracking capability, and robustness of the proposed ATFSC applied on a practical DTC drive at varying external loads, the following experimental studies were conducted. First, the proposed scheme was operated at various speed commands (36rpm, 1200rpm, and ±1800rpm) and an external load of TL=8Nm to verify its feasibility and observe the dynamic behaviors of control efforts. Second, the proposed ATFSC was adopted, using the aforementioned operating conditions (i.e., 36rpm, 1200rpm, and ±1800rpm and an external load of 8Nm) to compare its control performance level with that of the fuzzy control and PI speed control. The designs of the fuzzy control and PI speed control are described as follows. The inputs of the fuzzy controller were speed error and the change in speed error. The fuzzy rules of the fuzzy controller [28] were assigned in seven fuzzy sets, which exhibited conventional triangular shapes and 50% overlap, and the output of the fuzzy inference mechanism was derived from a singleton membership function. The center of area defuzzification method was used to derive the control output of the fuzzy controller. The parameters (kpand ki) of the PI controller were designed according to the Ziegler–Nichols method. Subsequently, the designed PI parameters were fine-tuned for use in a practical IM drive. The tuned kpand kivalues were 3 and 10, respectively. The same parameters were adopted under all conditions. Finally, to test the robustness against the external load disturbance, the proposed ATFSC was initiated using no load, and an external load disturbance of TL=4Nm was applied after 2s when the control system was in the steady state.Fig. 6shows the experimental results obtained using the ATFSC at various speed references and an 8-Nm external load. The experimental results show the control effort uATFSC and its constitutions uTSKand uCas well as corresponding speed responses. The compensated controller provided more control effort during the transient state compared with the steady state because the compensated controller in the transient period was designed to adapt to considerable system variations. During the steady state, uTSK dominated the control effort, and the compensated controller provided relatively less control effort than it did during the transient state to compensate for the small approximation error between the uTSK and the ideal control law. Fig. 7presents the experimental results obtained using three control schemes at three speed references and an 8-Nm external load. Subplot (a) shows the results for the proposed ATFSC, subplot (b) shows the results for the fuzzy control, and subplot (c) shows the results for the PI speed control. As shown in Fig. 7(a), at various speed reference conditions, the ATFSC markedly outperformed the other control schemes, particularly at the low speed of 36rpm. The speed error during the steady state was less than 6rpm, and the maximum transient-state error was less than 20rpm. Notably, controlling an IM is difficult at low speeds. The practical dynamics of the IM caused by its interior structure (4 poles) are inevitable. As shown in Fig. 7(b), although the fuzzy control performed favorably during the steady state, a large speed error was produced in the transient state because it lacked self-adaptation ability and an optimized knowledge base. The PI speed control functions well when it is well tuned. However, the PI speed control does not perform satisfactorily at a wide range of speeds. As shown in Fig. 7(c), the speed response was slow because the PI speed control parameters were tuned for a speed command at ±1800rpm. This problem is an inherent limitation of the PI speed controller and more than one set of PI speed control parameters is required to ensure a wide range of speed regulation. Unlike the PI speed control, the proposed ATFSC could perform at various speeds because its control strategy is self-tunable. During four-quadrant operation, the ATFSC effectively managed variable speed commands, particularly at the zero-crossing point. The undershoot of the ATFSC was maintained within 50rpm, which is markedly lower compared with that obtained using the fuzzy (87rpm) and PI controllers (102rpm). Thus, the dynamic tracking ability of the proposed ATFSC was outstanding and more favorable than was that of the other controllers.To verify the robustness of the proposed ATFSC when exposed to external load disturbance, the ATFSC, fuzzy controller, and PI controller were separately implemented and operated at 1200rpm without any external load torque for 2s. A 4-Nm external load disturbance was suddenly applied at approximately 2s, as shown in Fig. 8. The PI controller exhibited the largest speed drop and longest settling time, and the fuzzy controller also exhibited a large speed drop, although its settling time was shorter compared with that of the PI controller. Regarding the ATFSC, although a speed drop occurred, the speed recovered to the reference speed within 0.3s, a markedly shorter duration compared with the other controllers. Thus, the proposed ATFSC performed more satisfactorily than did both the fuzzy and PI controllers when exposed to external load disturbances.Table 3lists a comparison of the experimental RMSEs. The RMSE performance index is defined as follows:(31)RMSE=∑i=1Me2[i]Mwhere M is the number of sampled points. Table 3 indicates that ATFSC outperformed the other control schemes in all operational conditions because of its improved approximation ability and self-turning control strategy. The experimental results conclusively established the regulation ability of the proposed ATFSC at a wide range of speeds, its dynamic tracking ability, and robustness.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
