@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Two-level iterated local search for WDM network design problem with traffic grooming

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new mathematical formulation of the network design problem with traffic grooming (NDG) is presented.A two-level iterated local search (TL-ILS) algorithm is proposed to solve the NDG problem.A novel tree search based neighborhood construction and a fast evaluation method.A strengthening formulation of the NDG problem and a method to obtain the lower bound of the NDG.Results in comparison with CPLEX and lower bounds show the effectiveness of the TL-ILS algorithm.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
WDM mesh network,Traffic grooming,Local search,Metaheuristic,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Two important problems arise in WDM network planning: network design to minimize the operation cost and traffic grooming to maximize the usage of the high capacity channels. In practice, however, these two problems are usually simultaneously tackled, denoted as the network design problem with traffic grooming (NDG). In this paper, a mathematical formulation of the NDG problem is first presented. Then, this paper proposes a new metaheuristic algorithm based on two-level iterated local search (TL-ILS) to solve the NDG problem, where a novel tree search based neighborhood construction and a fast evaluation method are proposed, which not only enhance the algorithm's search efficiency but also provide a new perspective in designing neighborhoods for problems with graph structures. Our algorithm is tested on a set of benchmarks generated according to real application scenarios. We also propose a strengthening formulation of the original problem and a method to obtain the lower bound of the NDG problem. Computational results in comparison with the commercial software CPLEX and the lower bounds show the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The network design problems arise in optical telecommunication where both construction and operation are significant cost drivers. A wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) network involves three layers, which are the traffic demands between each pair of nodes, the optical network representing the lightpaths carrying the traffics between each pair of nodes, and the physical network in the WDM network [1]. The physical network seldom changes when it is constructed, while the optical network varies according to different scenarios of traffic demands.The edges in the optical network are called lightpaths, which are responsible for transferring traffics by two transceivers at the source and sink nodes. In real applications, the cost of the transceivers is a dominant cost in the WDM network. Since each lightpath corresponds to two transceivers, the number of transceivers is twice the number of lightpaths. Therefore, assigning an exclusive lightpath to each traffic is rather expensive. In general, lightpaths have much larger capacities compared to the bandwidths of traffics. Thus, a lightpath can be usually shared by several traffics.The network design problem with traffic grooming (NDG) can be stated as: Given the physical network and the traffic demands, the objective is to design an economical optical network which is able to carry all the traffic demands. In this paper, we study the NDG problem, which aims to design a network (the optical layer of the WDM network) with the minimum number of lightpaths while satisfying the grooming constrains. We present an integer programming model for the NDG problem, which provides a representation for the optical network and the paths for all the traffics. In order to solve the NDG problem we adopt a two-level iterated local search (TL-ILS) which is a metaheuristic already applied in a wide range of applications. To strengthen the search power of the TL-ILS algorithm, we develop a tree search based neighborhood evaluation method. The proposed algorithm is applied to tackle two sets of benchmark instances, showing its high efficiency by comparing to the public software CPLEX and the lower bound. These instances are generated according to the real application scenarios, and are public for future comparisons with other reference algorithms.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
