@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An interactive machine-learning-based electronic fraud and abuse detection system in healthcare insurance

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The nature of problem and claim management environment are well-defined.Very comprehensive literature revive is presented.An IML based novel DSS detecting fraud and abuse in healthcare insurance is developed.Unlike earlier studies, the system embraces all relevant actors and commodities.Real data are used for the evaluation and perform better results wrt previous studies.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Decision support systems,Fraud detection,Health insurance,Interactive machine learning,Machine intelligence,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Detecting fraudulent and abusive cases in healthcare is one of the most challenging problems for data mining studies. However, most of the existing studies have a shortage of real data for analysis and focus on a very limited version of the problem by covering only a specific actor, healthcare service, or disease. The purpose of this study is to implement and evaluate a novel framework to detect fraudulent and abusive cases independently from the actors and commodities involved in the claims and an extensible structure to introduce new fraud and abuse types. Interactive machine learning that allows incorporating expert knowledge in an unsupervised setting is utilized to detect fraud and abusive cases in healthcare. In order to increase the accuracy of the framework, several well-known methods are utilized, such as the pairwise comparison method of analytic hierarchical processing (AHP) for weighting the actors and attributes, expectation maximization (EM) for clustering similar actors, two-stage data warehousing for proactive risk calculations, visualization tools for effective analyzing, and z-score and standardization in order to calculate the risks. The experts are involved in all phases of the study and produce six different abnormal behavior types using storyboards. The proposed framework is evaluated with real-life data for six different abnormal behavior types for prescriptions by covering all relevant actors and commodities. The Area Under the Curve (AUC) values are presented for each experiment. Moreover, a cost-saving model is also presented. The developed framework, i.e., the eFAD suite, is actor- and commodity-independent, configurable (i.e., easily adaptable in the dynamic environment of fraud and abusive behaviors), and effectively handles the fragmented nature of abnormal behaviors. The proposed framework combines both proactive and retrospective analysis with an enhanced visualization tool that significantly reduces the time requirements for the fact-finding process after the eFAD detects risky claims. This system is utilized by a company to produce monthly reports that include abnormal behaviors to be evaluated by the insurance company.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In traditional machine learning applications, the domain experts (who are usually the end users as well) usually participate in the modeling stage at two points [1,2]. First, the domain expert educates the knowledge engineers who develop the decision support tool so that the tacit knowledge (e.g., the objectives of the machine learning application, the relevant features that should be utilized in the analysis, natural groupings that are already known by the experts, and how to address missing data, etc.) can also be included in the development process. Secondly, especially for applications where the readily available data lack the required labels for machine-learning-based classification algorithms (i.e., unsupervised learning), the domain experts are asked to label the training data. Both of these contributions are commonly used and have proven to be very successful in various real-life applications.However, in certain domains such as defense, healthcare, biosciences, etc., the experts are highly motivated and want to interact with the data and tools; hence, they are not satisfied by the above-mentioned role [1,3]. Therefore, they are usually reluctant to use traditional machine learning systems in their analysis unless they engage in the development process and are able to customize it based on their expertise. Furthermore, although computers are able to analyze vast amounts of data, human intelligence might be still preferable for analyzing smaller data sets in more detail [1,4,5].As a result, the concept of interactive machine learning (IML) has emerged and attracted the attention of the research community and practices due to its ability to incorporate the domain experts directly into the model building process by providing various human–computer interaction tools and data visualization and analysis techniques as part of the developed applications [6–8]. Using IML, users can train a learning algorithm by choosing parameters, then evaluate and compare models, selecting those that are most appropriate for their goals.Unlike the traditional machine learning approach, in which the humans (users) and machine work independently on different tasks, in IML, they work on the same task during the training stage [1,5]. That is, the human component utilizes the computational power of the machines to learn from the relationships hidden in data (using data visualization and analysis techniques) and in return directs the training process. This interaction makes IML particularly valuable whenever the hypotheses and objectives of machine learning are subject to change. The users can interact with the execution of the tool and modify it within the deployed environment.This current research is motivated by the demand for a reliable and usable tool for fraud detection in the healthcare insurance business. In this study, an IML-based decision support tool that couples claim management systems, which will be utilized to detect fraud and abuse, is developed. The decision support tool uses the transactional data in order to identify suspicious cases (by assigning a value-function-based risk measure to each transaction) and provides a visual environment to aid users in the determination of whether the transaction is actual fraud or abuse.Although there are some studies on anomaly detection time-series data and event sequence data [9] note that it is not viable to decide whether a single transaction is fraudulent or abusive in healthcare claims other than the trivial cases (such as prescribing a postpartum drug to a male patient, etc.) [10]. Usually, fraud and abuse in healthcare claims can only be detected if the earlier transactions by the same actors are also taken into consideration during the analysis. On top of the fruitless process of trying to label the transactions as fraudulent or abusive, the abundant number of transactions also limits the applicability of more elaborate classical machine learning techniques as the engine of the developed decision support tool. Furthermore, the fraudulent and abusive behavior evolves over time [9,11]. That is to say, the actors of the system are intelligent and adapt to the policing of insurance claims by changing their tactics. Therefore, rather than classical machine learning techniques, an IML-based decision support tool is extremely well suited for detecting fraud and abuse in healthcare insurance.The developed framework imitates the process that experts use to determine suspicious cases, which is usually based on a bottom-up analysis of each actor and his or her relationship with healthcare associated commodities. Next, a top-down approach is utilized to automate the experts’ method to identify the relevant evidence. The developed decision support tool significantly decreases the necessity of manual analysis by highlighting only the most suspicious cases and eliminating those that are unlikely to be critical. Furthermore, the data visualization tool enables the user to investigate each case effectively and thereby learn more about fraud and abusive behaviors, informing modifications of the risk assessment and evaluation engine.The rest of the study is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present the problem statement and the ecosystem of the fraud and abuse detection problem. This section is critical for readers who are not familiar with the healthcare insurance domain. Furthermore, it will also clarify why a single, perfectly normal-seeming transaction might in fact be part of a greater fraud. Section 3 is devoted to the review of the related literature. Note that the existing literature, which is subtle but growing, deviates from our research in that it focuses only on the fraudulent and abusive behavior of a particular actor and not the transactions, which incorporate multiple actors and commodities. The developed framework is introduced in detail in Section 4. In order to measure the performance of the framework, an experimental analysis based on real data is presented in Section 5. The study ends with some concluding remarks and future research plans.The steady increase in life expectancy due to advancements in the health sciences, better standards of living, and increasing awareness of healthy lifestyles significantly enlarged the magnitude and share of healthcare in the global economy. For example, the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) reported that the total healthcare spending for the United States of America in 2010 was 2.6 trillion USD, which is 17.9% of the nation's gross domestic product (GDP). For comparison, in 2000, the US's total healthcare spending was 1.4 trillion USD (nearly half of its spending in 2010), and its share of the nation's GDP was 13.8% [12]. Improvements in medical technologies have also lead to major process and product diversification in healthcare services. Increase in healthcare expenditures, diversified healthcare services, and the rising expectations of the insured have cultivated the need for a systematic approach to manage the entire process. As a result, healthcare insurance payment management systems (for public and private insurance) have been developed to maintain the competitiveness of insurance companies and organizations in the marketplace.Any healthcare insurance payment management system includes the payment model (e.g., fees for services, fees for capita) and the claim management system. The specifications regarding the payment, which are set by exogenous decision-makers, i.e., regulatory bodies, such as the government and the insurance authorities, primarily determine the payment model. Fig. 1depicts the payment model which governs the payment among the three major stakeholders of the healthcare insurance systems, namely the insured, the insurance company and the healthcare providers. In addition, the claim management system component monitors the policy and contract terms (which are represented by the payment rules) among the stakeholders in order to provide proper healthcare service to the insured at the prices specified in the contract.Generally, in practice, the management of the payment rules is considered as a relatively easy task and handled mostly by a rule-based system in practice. On the other hand, the data accumulated by the claim management systems also provide the opportunity for more advanced analysis, such as fraud detection and management. However, detecting fraudulent and abusive behaviors is not an easy task and requires more intelligent solution approaches that are intuitive (for the users) [13] and heuristic-based due to the highly nonlinear and complex nature of the problem. Although various electronic claim management systems have been developed and successfully used to manage payment rules in the marketplace (e.g., ECP Drug of CompuGroup Medical) [14], no analogous product can manage fraud detection in the marketplace, other than the few isolated attempts reported to date (which will be discussed in more detail in the literature review).Many health insurance payment management systems primarily rely on human experts to review insurance claims and identify suspicious cases manually [15]. Because manual review of suspicious claims is quite an expensive way to detect fraudulent and abusive behaviors and has a highly questionable performance [11,16], insurance companies are attempting to develop an electronic fraud and abuse detection system that utilizes actual data gathered via claim management systems. Thus, researchers have been increasingly interested in fraud and abuse detection research in recent years especially that use techniques based on data-mining methodologies.The National Health Care Anti-Fraud Association (NHCAA) defines healthcare fraud and abuse, respectively, as follows [17]:“Health care fraud is an intentional deception or misrepresentation that the individual or entity makes knowing that the misrepresentation could result in some unauthorized benefit to the individual, or the entity or to some other party.”“Health care abuse is the provider practices that are inconsistent with sound fiscal, business and medical practices, and result with unnecessary cost, or in reimbursement of service that are not medically necessary or that fail to meet professionally recognize standards for health care”.U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation [18] estimates that between 3% and 10% of claims in both public and private healthcare expenditures are fraudulent. Due to the considerable increase in healthcare spending experienced by most countries, efficient handling of fraud and abuse detection is crucial for insurance companies, as they struggle to decrease healthcare costs while ensuring that the insured are adequately satisfied with their coverage.In order to understand the fraud detection problem within the context of healthcare insurance, it is vital to understand the healthcare insurance payment process and claim management tools utilized during this process, i.e., electronic claim processing (ECP).There are four key entities in a claim management system: the insurance company, the beneficiaries (i.e., the insured), the service providers, and the claims [19]. The claim management system validates the claim, i.e., checks whether it is appropriate to make the payment based on the terms of the contracts between the stakeholders. These conditions cover a variety of factors, such as the content, amount, price, and whether the individual is covered for the particular sickness. To monitor the claim process, the health care provider should provide necessary information via the claim submission. This set of data, which is referred to as the electronic claim data set hereinafter, includes factors, such as the identity of the insured, content, amount, and price.Most insurance companies use basic ECP systems, which generally use rule engines in claim management. These rule engines include rules that are primarily based on simple criteria, such as gender, age, dependent services, mutually exclusive services and services that are beyond the scope of the policy. An ECP system deterministically evaluates the particular claim itself and does not refer to earlier claims by the same beneficiary and/or the health provider that is involved in the particular claim. Rare exceptions occur for certain basic quantity controls, such as “allowed x time(s) in a year”, which are still rule-based.There are two categories of rules that ECP systems handle: medical rules and insurance rules. The medical rules indicate whether the provided health service is appropriate for the declared age, sex, and similar attributes of the insured, whereas the insurance rules are the common and specific terms specified by the contract (policy) of the insured. Since the goal with the ECP systems is not to replace provision experts but to support their function [20], they cannot handle all of the medical and insurance rules completely. First, the medical rules are very difficult to model for all possible cases. Second, the electronic claim data set includes very limited data due to the practices and unwillingness of the healthcare providers. Third, the nature of medical science, particularly the wide variety of alternative approaches in the treatment process, requires a vast amount of knowledge and flexibility during the validation stage. Lastly, the change management of the available rules can be dramatically sophisticated for large numbers of rules. Therefore, nearly all health insurance companies establish a claim management office, wherein a team of medical experts struggles to manage those cases that are not handled by the ECP system. The general usage of ECP systems and their relationship with claim management offices is depicted in Fig. 2.Even though effective management of the payment rules faces the above-mentioned challenges, the ECP systems still primarily succeed using a rule engine. As a result, the ECP systems accumulate a huge set of data, which can be mined for various other reasons, such as fraud and abuse detection. However, this task is even more challenging due to the peculiarity of fraudulent and abusive behaviors. In particular, the fragmented nature of fraud and abuse behaviors requires more intelligent approaches and extensive computational resources for detection.Fraud and abuse behaviors are generally fragmented into a series of claims and can only be identified after defragmentation [10,21]. That is, it is very hard to decide whether a single transaction is fraudulent or abusive; instead, the earlier transactions by the same actors must also be taken into consideration in the analysis. Consider a fraud scenario in which a physician and a pharmacist fix a deal with a drug company representative so that the physician prescribes drugs from that particular company for various patients with or without their knowledge, i.e., creates fake prescriptions. It is quite possible that every prescription can be considered to be valid with respect to the payment and medical rules by the ECP systems. However, one can compare the activities of the actors (i.e., physicians, pharmacists, and beneficiaries) with other similar actors or with self-historical transactions with regard to the particular drug company and can determine the anomaly in such fake transactions. That is, a transaction that appears very normal can in fact be part of a set of fraudulent transactions within a period. Therefore, a thorough analysis is required for an effective fraudulent and abusive behavior detection process. Fig. 3illustrates the fraudulent behavior of the fake prescription and its fragmented nature. Note that the gray prescriptions in the figure might be valid transactions individually but, when taken as a group, might reveal a plot among the actors.The fragmented nature of fraud and abuse behaviors limits alternative solution approaches to the fraud and abuse detection problem and mostly excludes supervised learning-based machine-learning approaches. Note that the supervised learning methods require each transaction to be labeled as suspicious or not suspicious (e.g., by domain experts). However, a transaction should not be labeled as fraudulent or abusive without taking the actors' histories into account, in the first place. For example, it is quite possible that for two transactions with precisely the same content in terms of the electronic claim data sets, one could be part of a fraud and the other not, depending on the earlier transactions of the actors involved in each transaction [10,22].Before presenting the formal definition of the fraud and abuse detection problem, the following definitions must be presented:Definition 1AnactorAibis a uniquely represented participant involved in a claim transaction. An actor type (specified by the b index inAib) can be an insured individual, physician, or institutional health provider, such as a hospital or pharmacy.Acommodity Cjis a uniquely represented treatment material, such as a medication or health service, that the insurance company is requested to pay for. The commodity can have tightly coupled attributes so that, they can be used instead of the commodities’ brand name in order to represent the relationship between actors and commodities. For example the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) code, which is used to define the active ingredient of the drug, can be used instead of the brand name of the drug. This enables to analyze the relations of actors with commodities from different perspectives.Amedical claim MCkis a set of triplets ({Aib}, {Cj}, t), where {Aib} and {Cj} identify the set of actors and commodities involved in the claim, respectively, and t represents the time, e.g., transaction.The key actor type in the process is the patient, and the objective of the rest of the actors is to diagnose and treat the patient. For both of these purposes, the patient can visit several healthcare providers (several times each) during the whole process, and each visit that involves a payment results a medical claim. All of the payments are for commodities supplied to the patient by the healthcare providers. Therefore, any fraud and abusive behavior should be associated with those commodities to identify unauthorized benefits by one or more of the actors involved in the process. Note that as discussed earlier, identification of any abnormal behavior (e.g., fraud and abuse) requires an analysis of fragmented medical claims as a whole.Definition 4Anabnormal behavior Flis a fraudulent or abusive behavior of the actors that can be determined based on a set of fragmented medical claimsMCk.There are different types of abnormal behavior, depending on the actors and commodities involved. For example, the National Health Care Anti-Fraud Association (NHCAA) [23] specifies the following types of abnormal behavior (among others) for various actors:The service provider's fraud and abuse, including•Billing services that were never rendered.Performing more expensive services and procedures than necessary.Performing medically unnecessary services solely for the purpose of generating insurance payments.Misrepresenting non-covered treatments as medically necessary for the purpose of obtaining insurance payment.Falsification of patients’ diagnosis and/or treatment histories.The insured's fraud and abuse, including•Misrepresenting an application to obtain a lower premium rate.Falsification of records of employment/eligibility.Falsification of medical claims.The insurance company's fraud and abuse, including•Falsification of reimbursements.Falsification of benefit/service statements.TheattributesTijm,bare metrics representing the scores of the relationship between actorsAiband commodities Cj. Note that different types of fraudulent and abuse behavior produces anomalies in various attributes as indicators of their existence; therefore, the index m represents the associated metrics as depicted in Fig. 4. The figure illustrates that the attributeTijm,brefers to the score of the mth metric that measures the relation between the ith entity of the bth actor type and the jth commodity.Theproactive approachis a way of detecting fraudulent and abusive cases on-line. Such systems are used to support the medical insurance experts who work in the provision departments to approve the claim or not in an acceptable time and show the risk degree of the claim and relevant justifications of the risk of the actors.Thereactive approachis a way of detecting fraudulent and abusive cases retrospectively. Such systems are used to support the damage experts who work in the reimbursement departments to approve the payment to the health institutions or not. Such systems are not required to process the risks on-line, but the reporting and analysis should be fast enough for the users. Such systems should also show the risk degree of the claim and relevant justifications of the risk. If there is a proactive system that can calculate the risk of any claim on-line, then the reactive system may use the risk engine of the proactive system to calculate the risks; but shows the risky claims in more comprehensive analysis module to provide the damage experts to make more detailed evaluation.In summary, the fraudulent and abusive behavior detection problem involves the determination of whether a medical claim demonstrates a particular abnormal behavior given the earlier fragmented medical claim data set that involves all relevant actors and commodities by considering the dynamic nature of the problem.Although, as mentioned above, the prevalence of fraudulent claims is estimated to be between 3% and 10% in both public and private healthcare expenditures [18], a limited number of studies have addressed fraud detection in healthcare insurance. There are various reasons for this shortage. First of all, fraud detection requires an extensive amount of data as well as data processing resources. However, electronic data has only become commonly available in the last decade, with the advent of telecommunication technologies. Secondly, the fraud detection process in the healthcare context is more complex than that in other contexts, such as credit card fraud or car insurance; thus, the motivation of investors to fund research is limited. Thirdly, even though a certain degree of research has been conducted on limited versions of the healthcare insurance fraud detection problem, the details of the approach are usually a business secret; therefore, it is difficult to report the results in a way that satisfies the curiosity of the scientific community without divulging too much information. However, we can confidently state that there are virtually no healthcare fraud detection products available as a viable solution for the complete problem in the marketplace.Phua et al. [24] present a comprehensive literature review of fraud detection problems, covering 51 studies that incorporate data mining approaches for fraud detection problems. Among these 51 studies, only 14 are associated with fraud detection in the context of insurance, and only five are in the healthcare insurance domain. The same study states that researchers usually complain about a lack of data to be analyzed and a shortage of well-examined methods and techniques in the published literature. However, only seven of the 51 examined studies have actually been implemented (only two of these are in the insurance business and none are in healthcare insurance).A more recent review focuses on data mining techniques in financial fraud detection only and covers 49 papers, suggesting increased interest by researchers [25]. Among these 49 papers, five are in the domain of healthcare insurance (three overlap with those covered by Phua et al. [24]).The first comprehensive healthcare fraud detection literature review (published prior to the previous two reviews) is presented by Li et al. [26]. This review classifies studies in terms of the utilized feature selection and statistical modeling techniques, performance evaluation approaches, data sources, and data pre-processing. The review also provides a discussion of the limitations of the existing techniques and presents various challenges for future research. In this section, we will briefly discuss the studies that were covered in these reviews as well as those published later.He et al. [27] target the fraud and abusive behavior of general practitioners (GPs) utilizing the Australian Health Insurance Commission (HIC) data. These authors use 28 features that experts had suggested to be relevant in the fraud detection process. The experts also specified whether existing data should be tagged as fraud or abusive behavior, facilitating a supervised learning approach. In this study, a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) neural network was used to classify the practice profiles of a sample of 1500 general practitioners. Next, the effects of using a self-organized map (SOM) in conjunction with MLP were examined. SOM was used to classify the network classes, after which the MLP was applied for two-class classification, yielding better results. The authors report that the agreement rates (i.e., accuracy) were 63.60%, 59.87%, and 88.40% for MLP, SOM, and SOM followed by MLP, respectively. Note that this study only addresses data regarding GPs and does not attempt to develop a fraud detection method for the transactions.Williams [28] conducts another study based on the HIC database. As a solution for fraud detection in the health insurance sector, Williams proposes a data mining method referred to as hot spots (HS). The HS method is fundamentally based on the determination of interesting and analyzable nuggets (i.e., chunks). The methodology is proposed for data mining applications in a general context, and healthcare fraud detection is used as a case study. In the analysis, over 30 raw attributes (e.g., age, sex) and approximately 20 derived attributes (e.g., number of times a patient visited a doctor per year, number of different doctors visited) are utilized to detect fraud and abusive behavior on the part of patients. A three-step framework of unsupervised learning is developed. In the first step, the dataset is clustered with a multivariate k-means algorithm. The second step is rule induction, in which one or more rules are constructed for each cluster attained in the first step. Lastly, an interestingness score is calculated for each rule. In the healthcare fraud case, the average number of services and average total benefit paid to patients, among other factors, are used to calculate the interestingness score. In the paper, no experimental analysis in terms of model validation is presented, and the authors declare that, although early feedback indicates that HS does provide a useful expansion of the search space, they cannot claim the usefulness of the method. The proposed framework can also be generalized for other actors (e.g., physicians or pharmacies), having different relevant features. However, again, the study is limited to the actors and does not consider the transactions.Yamanishi and Takeuchi [29] propose an online-unsupervised outlier detection methodology named SmartSifter. In their work, the HIC database is utilized as a case study for the SmartSifter application in healthcare fraud detection. SmartSifter addresses the problem from a statistical learning theory viewpoint. Each time a new data point is fed, SmartSifter evaluates how much the data point deviates from the expected value, which is calculated based on a probabilistic model learned from the existing dataset. The probability density of the categorical values is determined using a histogram, and the density of the continuous variables is determined based on a Gaussian mixture model. Even though only fraud and abuse behavior detection for the pathology providers is presented in the paper, the proposed methodology is also applicable for various other actors, such as patients and physicians (left as a future research topic). For the case of pathology providers, only seven features were utilized (five of which were proportions in five different pathology groups, i.e., microbiology, chemical, etc., and the sixth was the number of different patients) in the analysis. The proposed methodology can be used in both proactive and reactive settings. However, the risk of the actor rather than the transaction is addressed. Furthermore, the authors did not conduct a formal experimental analysis of the proposed methodology, merely providing anecdotal evidence for the validation purposes.Major and Riedinger [30] propose a two-stage electronic fraud detection (EFD) system as a reactive tool to identify suspicious healthcare providers. The EFD system incorporates 27 features (referred to as behavior heuristics in the paper) determined by experts in five different categories: financial, medical, logical, temporal, and spatial. For each health provider, samples associated with each feature are collected, and the sample statistics, such as the mean and variance, are calculated. The authors assume normality and use the sample statistics to determine the information gain of the corresponding feature, which is a measure of the deviation of a particular health provider and its peers. Next, the system utilizes a Pareto frontier curve, which is based on the total dollars paid, and the information gain to identify the most suspicious healthcare providers. The Pareto curve analysis is conducted for each of the 27 features, and those providers that are on the frontier of at least four features (i.e., the threshold for hot tips=four) are referred to as hot tips. The hot tips are brought to the attention of the investigative consultants for field investigations. The validation of the proposed system was not presented because the results of field investigations were unavailable at the time of publication. However, a receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curve analysis is presented based on the threshold for hot tips frontiers, assuming that all of the candidates examined by the investigative consultants are fraudulent. Although the authors do not give the AUC value, we can easily calculate it from the given ROC values as 66.53%.Ortega et al. [31] propose a supervised learning methodology based on MLP to determine fraud in the context of medical reports for employee sick leave. Thus, this study is distantly related to our study but is included for the sake of completeness. In their methodology, four different models are developed for each actor in the process: the beneficiary (i.e., the employee), the physician (who prepares the medical report), the employer, and the medical claim. In all, 125 different features associated with the four actors are used in their model. The fraudulent and abusive behaviors of each relevant actor are inferred based on the values of their features. The proposed methodology is applied in a case using two datasets acquired from Banmedica (Chile). In the datasets, each claim is tagged as accepted, rejected, or reduced by the experts. Only partial information is presented due to the terms of a confidentiality agreement with Banmedica. To validate the proposed model, ROC analysis is utilized. The authors suggest an optimal threshold value yielding a true positive rate of 73.4% and a false positive rate of 6.9%.Yang and Hwang [15] utilize the concept of clinical pathways (i.e., care plans in which diagnosis and therapeutic intervention are performed by physicians, nurses, and other staff for a particular diagnosis or procedure) to determine fraud and abusive behavior on the part of healthcare providers. In their proposed methodology, a graph is formed considering the reference pathway data for a certain disease. Nodes on the graph demonstrate the processes that are parts of the clinical pathway, whereas arcs represent the precedence relationships among the processes. Next, all possible single, double, triple, etc., sub-graphs of this graph are determined and utilized as features in their methodology. However, the clinical pathway of an average disease yields tens of thousands of sub-graphs. Therefore, a filter-based feature selection approach is utilized as a part of the supervised learning process, where the experts specify the labels of the data. Lastly, the C4.5 algorithm is used for classification purposes. To validate the proposed methodology, the data set associated with pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) from the gynecology department of a Taiwanese hospital is used. The rate of correct detection of cases, including fraud or misapplication (i.e., the sensitivity) is 64%, whereas the rate of correct detection for cases that do not include fraud (i.e., specificity) is 67%. Again, the focus of their research is only distantly relevant for the purpose of our study.Sokol et al. [32] use information visualization techniques to detect fraud and abusive behaviors. In their paper, special attention is given to the data preprocessing stage and data extraction, data transformation, and data auditing, which are presented in detail. Various examples of information visualization techniques are discussed in which field experts determine the analyzed features. The discussed techniques are appropriate for reactive analysis, and they do not provide any comparisons or validations of the results. They propose various machine-learning approaches, such as abuse and misuse profiling, normative profiling, and link analysis as future research topics.One of the most recent studies on prescription fraud is that by Aral et al. [33]. This study proposes a novel approach to assess the fraudulent risk of prescriptions (i.e., transactional data) based on cross-feature analysis, which can be used as both a reactive and a proactive tool. In their proposed approach, five pairs (i.e., medicine–diagnosis, medicine–age, medicine–sex, medicine–medicine, diagnosis–cost) are chosen from six features (medicine name, price, prescription ID, age, sex, and diagnosis) based on correlation, and the corresponding incidence matrices are developed. These incidence matrices are used to calculate the risk matrices. The authors propose two different risk metrics, one for categorical features and one for ordinal features, yielding higher risk values with a decreased incidence rate. The authors use ROC curves and the area under curve (AUC) measures to validate the proposed techniques and report an AUC of 85.7%. To develop the ROC curve, a medical expert labels each prescription as fraudulent or not fraudulent, and the proposed algorithm's predictions are compared with these labels.Another recent study proposed by Johnson and Nagarur [34] has a six-staged approach including provider profiling, demographic screening, claim amount screening, fraud risk quantification, risk threshold determination for fraud detection and comparison of risk values with risk thresholds. The prominent feature of this study is the usage of real data set including 878,691 claims of an insurance company. The study considers the doctors as the only actor type from four different specialties, such as otolaryngology, general practice, neurology, and ophthalmology. The accuracy model of the study is based on sensitivity, specificity and accuracy rates and measurements are held for all six stages and for four actor groups separately. Regarding the overall rates, the results vary from 83% to 88%, and the accuracy is %86 in average. At the end of the study, the authors compare the results of their study using ANOVA with the result of both unsupervised and semi-supervised neural networks. They claim that the mean accuracy rate of their study is significantly higher than both neural networks.In summary, a general assessment of the above-mentioned studies, which are relevant to our research to varying degrees, is presented in Table 1. The deficiencies of the existing literature can be summarized as follows:•Using only reactive methodologies is not a deficiency; however using both reactive and proactive approaches is an enhancement on a reactive only methodology. From this viewpoint, only two out of the eight studies claim some sort of proactive solution.The processing times, i.e., computational requirements are extremely high.Only one actor or process is considered in the analysis; however, in reality, fraud is often the joint work of multiple actors, such as the insured, the physician, the pharmacist, and none of them can be excluded from the analysis.No single model covers all types of claims, actors, and processes.Only one type of fraudulent and abuse behavior is taken into account in the studies.The relationship between actors and commodities has not been included in the analysis.Information on the results and the applications of the models in real-life cases is very limited.As a result, taken individually, none of the previously mentioned studies would be adequate to detect fraudulent and abuse cases that involve multiple claims independently of the health providers, beneficiaries, and type of service. The absence of commercial fraud detection systems in the healthcare insurance domain also supports this observation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this research, we developed a novel interactive machine-learning-based framework for detecting fraud and abusive behaviors in the healthcare insurance industry. The developed framework is actor- and commodity-independent, configurable (i.e., easily adaptable in the dynamic environment of fraud and abusive behaviors), and effectively handles the fragmented nature of the abnormal behaviors. It can be used both for proactive and reactive analyses. The framework also includes a visualization tool that significantly reduces the time requirements for the users during the fact-finding process after the eFAD Suite alerted the user of risky claims.The developed framework is among the few successful applications of fraud and abusive behavior detection in healthcare insurance. Recall that the literature consists of applications that limit their focus to specific actors, such as physicians, patients, or healthcare providers, or distantly related applications, such as health report fraud or clinical pathways. Therefore, the developed framework is the only application that includes nearly all of the actors and commodities in the healthcare insurance domain and provides a solution that can satisfy the demand for a decision support tool that can assign risk measures to claim transactions.The performance of the proposed framework is assessed using experimental analysis. By incorporating with the experts’ experience, the storyboards are prepared and relevant actors and attributes are selected regarding the storyboards of the fraud types by a focus groups study. Then experts are requested to express their opinion about weighting by using pairwise comparison method. The normalized average weights of the experts are taken as the consensus of the experts for the experimental iterations. Until the results of the experiments are satisfactory in terms of both accuracy (i.e., the AUC of ROC curves) and cost savings model, the experimental iterations continued. As a result, the proposed framework is developed and marketed as eFAD Suite as a part of a dynamic damage management service provided by CGM Turkiye for private insurance companies.Meanwhile, this system is used by CGM on behalf of its customers to produce monthly reports, including abnormal behavior cases to be evaluated and acted upon by the insurance company.Although it is specifically developed for healthcare insurance systems, this framework can also be adapted to other insurance contexts due to the flexibility of its actor–commodity-based approach. This task is left as a further research topic. On the other hand, a thorough analysis of the interactive machine learning process, particularly the details of the experts’ opinion revision process (e.g., what are the factors and how they influence the decision making process, is it purely a trial-error or a structured learning process or a hybrid version adopted, etc.) will be valuable for the future IML applications. Additionally, we should note that most of the attributes may be used within some other series to detect different fraud types. Thus, when an expert changes the weight of an attribute, then the series may become similar to another series of another fraud type and start to catch some claims which may belong to this relevant fraud type. Besides, the set of frauds is dynamic, and the predefined fraud types and their series including actors, commodities, attributes and weights should change in time or new fraud types should be defined.Lastly, incorporating an engine that also considers the relationships between actors, i.e., the network risk of the actors (i.e., actors that are related to more risky actors become more risky themselves and those related to less risky actors become less risky themselves) is also being considered as a further extension of the framework.