@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A revised ant algorithm for solving location–allocation problem with risky demand in a multi-echelon supply chain network

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study addresses a capacitated location and allocation problem against uncertain demands.A multi-echelon supply chain of TFT-LCD industry is investigated.The study models the problem by bi-level stochastic programming. This study develops a revised ant algorithm with efficient greedy heuristics to solve the problem.The proposed algorithm reaches 95–99% of the optimal solution while consuming only 1000th of time.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Ant algorithm,Location–allocation problem,Stochastic programming,Multi-echelon supply network,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study addresses a capacitated facility location and task allocation problem of a multi-echelon supply chain against risky demands. Two and three-echelon networks are considered to maximize profit. The study represents the problem by a bi-level stochastic programming model. The revised ant algorithm proposed in the study improves the existing ant algorithm by using new design of heuristic desirability and efficient greedy heuristics to solve the problem. A set of computational experiments is reported to not only allow to fine-tune the parameters of the algorithm but also to evaluate its performance for solving the problem proposed. Experiments reveal that the proposed solution algorithm can reach 95–99% of the optimal solution against risky demands while consuming only 1000th of the computational time for large-sized problems as compared to an optimization-based tool.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Industries always face the severe challenge of trying to resolve their facility location and task allocation decisions (i.e., location–allocation decisions) under demand uncertainty and from a global viewpoint. For instance, many firms in the Thin film transistor liquid crystal display (TFT-LCD) manufacturing industry in East Asia, particularly those in Taiwan and South Korea, are transferring part of their factories to mainland China owing to the cost down consideration. They must debit capital to build newer generation factories to maintain their competitiveness in the market. However since the customer demands are risky, they suffer from both investment and market risks at the same time. The facilities cost of TFT-LCD factories are extremely high, furthermore, to decide where to deploy the factories, the firms must consider not only the position of upstream suppliers but also the location of downstream buyers. They have many choices of available science-based industrial parks, where these choices yield different aspects of benefits for the firms. Therefore, the decisions about building new generation TFT-LCD factories become a critical issue to succeed. In addition, suppliers and buyers are motivated to form industry clusters and coherent supply chains (SC) to lower channel/distribution setup costs and to increase responsiveness. The synergy of suppliers, manufacturers, and marketplaces in forming such collaborative SCs through an effective and efficient location and allocation strategy can yield tremendous productivity and profit for individual firms as well as an entire SC.The industries face three-fold challenges in determining the location–allocation decisions. First, there are 3 linked decisions that need to be determined simultaneously: the facility location decision, distribution assignment of entire SC, and the distribution quantity decision. The second challenge is that the customer demands are risky, varying dramatically over time. For example, in the TFT-LCD industry, the demand derived by its various applications like monitors and notebook computers, varies in months. The third challenge is the fact that the optimization-based methods can only solve small-scaled problems, while the firm managers will always seek for a “best” methods to maximize profit and many “best practice” methods that derive from professional experiences do not grantee stability in performances. Thus an efficient solution method is required to solve such stochastic problem and to reduce the computational time of determining the optimal solution.Therefore, this study addresses the issue of a class of capacitated location–allocation problems in a multiple-echelon SC where the customer demands are risky and the SC supplies to multiple marketplaces. The SC consists of three parties, the logistics provider who is responsible for setting up the factories and distribution channels, the sales party who is in charge of serving market and maximizing the profit, and their material suppliers. That kind of business model commonly occurs in contemporary business world, for example in the SC of smartphones, where exists a multiple-echelon relation among the sales party (e.g., Apple Co.) and the logistics/production provider (e.g., Foxconn Co.), and their materials suppliers. Because of the nature of risky demands in markets scatter geographically and there is a decentralized management power authorization by the involving parties, the SC constantly faces trade-off between the cost of setting up the factories and channel, cost of material sourcing, and the profits created from service responsiveness to markets. Thus the decisions from one party will affect the objective of the other.The current study thus formulates this type of location–allocation problem in relation to a stochastic programming model and proposes a revised ant algorithm, one of a powerful metaheuristic methods to find the optimal solution for the model. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related research on ant algorithms and location–allocation problems. Section 3 develops two models that concern decision-making about location and distribution strategy for maximizing the profits of two-echelon and three-echelon SCs, respectively. In Section 4, a revised ant algorithm is developed. In Section 5, different solution-oriented methods are compared. Finally, Section 6 draws conclusions of this study.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
