@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A hybrid solution method for fuzzy train formation planning

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Proposing a multi-depot train driver scheduling model with fuzzy duty costs.Presenting an efficient hybrid algorithm by combining local branching and relaxation induced neighborhood search to solve the proposed model.Using design of experiments to tune the proposed algorithm parameters.Applying the proposed model and the solution method in Iranian railway.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fuzzy train formation model,Hybrid algorithm,Local branching algorithm,Relaxation induced neighborhood search method,Design of experiments,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The train formation plan (TFP) determines the routing and frequency of trains, and assigns the demands to trains. In this paper, in order to consider the real-life condition of railways, a mathematical model with fuzzy costs is proposed for train formation planning in Iranian railway. In this fuzzy model, the costs are considered in three scenarios, namely optimistic, normal and pessimistic. The model is formulated based on the fixed-charge capacitated multicommodity network design problem. Since the TFP problem is NP-hard, an efficient hybrid algorithm combining local branching and relaxation induced neighborhood search methods is presented. A three-step method is applied for parameter tuning using design of experiments approach. To evaluate the efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed algorithm, the results are compared with those of the state-of-the-art optimization software.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The train formation plan (TFP) is one of the most important research areas in rail transportation planning. Among different transportation modes, railway has comparative advantages over others in the area of safety and transportation capacity for the long-distance or large-scale freight transportation. In railway network, it is desirable that the transportation plan adjusts to the changing economic and regulatory conditions, and offers reliable, high quality and low cost services to their customers, thus making an optimal transportation plan becoming an important issue for railway networks [1].The large-scale planning problem is classified into two separate operating approaches: scheduled railway versus demand-driven railway. Iranian railway is a demand-driven railway. Fig. 1presents the train formation planning in demand-driven railways. In demand-driven railways, trains only run when the freight is ready and there is no fixed train schedule. Arrival and departure times would be determined at the operational level. Assad divided planning activities into strategic (long-term), tactical (medium-term) and operational (short-term) levels. The formation of trains is classified as a tactical level problem [2].In this paper, a new mathematical formulation and a hybrid solution method for the TFP problem in Iranian railway are presented. In order to consider the real-life condition of railways, the costs in the proposed model are considered in fuzzy forms, and three different scenarios are defined and applied. This fuzzy TFP model is formulated as a network design problem. The network design models are easy to describe but the medium and large-scale ones are difficult to solve [3,4]. The complexity of a train formation problem dependents on several factors such as number of yards, number of demands, number of potential trains, the network topology, and the dominances of variable or fixed costs.A hybrid solution method combining local branching and relaxation induced neighborhood search is proposed to solve the suggested model. In order to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed algorithm, design of experiments approach is used for tuning the parameters. To evaluate the proposed model and the solution method, they are implemented for Iranian railway and the results are compared with those of CPLEX optimization software.The main contributions of this paper are as follows. First, a new mathematical formulation is presented for the fuzzy TFP problem. Second, to solve the model, a hybrid local branching algorithm and relaxation induced neighborhood search is proposed. Third, the proposed model and solution method are applied to generate the fuzzy TFP in Iranian railway network.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the literature review is conducted. Sections 3 and 4 present the proposed fuzzy mathematical formulation and the hybrid algorithm. In Sections 5 and 6, parameter tuning by using design of experiments and experimental results are described. In Section 7, the fuzzy TFP model in Iranian railway is solved and the results are reported. Conclusions are presented in Section 8.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, a new fuzzy mathematical formulation and a hybrid solution method is presented for train formation planning by considering real-world condition for Iranian railway. The hybrid solution method is based on combining local branching and relaxation induced neighborhood search. To adjust the best parameter values in the proposed algorithm, the design of experiments method is used. The efficiency of the proposed solution method is proved in comparison with the CPLEX software solution. The average of relative gap and CPU time for generated test problems are −0.05 and 646, respectively. The relative gaps between the proposed hybrid algorithm and CPLEX solutions for the TFP problem in Iranian railway are −0.67%, −1.10% and −1.43%, for optimistic, normal and pessimistic scenarios, respectively. The proposed algorithm achieves the objective value with better quality in a very low computational time. In the real world, the main goal of train formation problem is to reduce the total cost. The cost consists of the wages of the train crew and additional costs associated with the labor, fuel, motive power, and classification yard facilities required to switch cars form one train to another. The proposed fuzzy model is able to consider real-life condition in train formation problem and save significant cost such as time and money through solving this problem in Iranian railway.By applying slight changes, the proposed fuzzy model can be used in different fields of optimization problem such as train scheduling, car blocking problem, and capacitated multicommodity network design problem.