@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A hybrid method for estimating the process change point using support vector machine and fuzzy statistical clustering

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new hybrid method is developed for estimating the process change point inx¯control chart.An effective sets of features were extracted and the control chart patterns (CCP) are classified using support vector machines (SVM).Change point estimation methods were implemented for detecting the process change point.The proposed hybrid method provides a more accurate estimate of the process change point.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Statistical process control,Change point,Support vector machine,Fuzzy statistical clustering,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Control charts are the most popular process monitoring techniques designed to determine whether a process is in a state of statistical control or not. When a process change occurs, the control chart exhibits an out-of-control signal. In most cases, the signal is followed by a substantial amount of delay. To address this drawback, supplementary techniques have been considered to be employed along with the control charts to identify the exact time of the process change. This paper presents a hybrid method for estimating the change point onx¯chart when neither the change type nor its magnitude are known. For this purpose, two sets of features with the most discriminatory power betweenx¯chart patterns are selected. Then the feature vectors are extracted from the control chart patterns (CCPs) and served as an input to a classification scheme which is comprised of several support vector machine (SVM) classifiers. After parameters tuning, the classifiers are built and used for classifying the CCPs and identifying the change type. Once the change type is determined, the fuzzy statistical clustering (FSC) and the maximum likelihood (ML) estimators are employed to identify the process change point. The performance of selected features, the classification scheme, and the change point estimators are evaluated by conducting several simulation studies. Empirical results show that in identifying the change types, the proposed classification scheme is more accurate than two recent CCP classification methods. The results also confirm that the proposed hybrid method offers an accurate estimate of the process change point, as compared to the most recent methods developed for the change point estimation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Statistical process control (SPC) tools, such as control charts, have substantially contributed in stabilizing and reducing process variability [1]. The primary objective of using control charts is to detect variations in the process parameter(s). A typical control charting procedure involves taking successive samples over time, calculating the control limits and values of a monitoring statistic, and plotting the values with respect to the control limits. Once the calculated value of the statistic falls outside of the control limits, or a series of plotted sample points exhibits systematic or unnatural patterns, the process appears to be no longer in control. Usually, there is a considerable delay between the start of variations and the out-of-control signal. In SPC literature, the start of variations (i.e., the point in time where the statistical properties of the underlying process distribution changes) is known as a change point.An early detection of variations in the process parameter would enhance the chance of taking a timely action to stabilize the process and minimize the process variability. So far many methods have been developed to enhance the performance of the control charts in early detection of assignable causes [36,40,39,37]. Various supplementary techniques have also been developed alongside control charts for change point detection. These techniques vary considerably with the type of change that the process may undergo, the number of quality characteristics, and the type of process variables that should be monitored. Literature review shows that most of the techniques are designed for detecting step change and linear trend disturbances, and the maximum likelihood (ML) seems to be the most commonly used approach [2]. The maximum likelihood estimators for detecting the change point in processes with the presence of step change [3–5], and linear trend disturbances [6–8] have already been derived.Various methods have been developed aiming at increasing the estimation accuracy and modeling the uncertainty associated with the sample points on control charts [9–11]. The fuzzy approach overcomes the limitations of the binary classification for drawing conclusions about the state of the sample points. The concepts of fuzzy SPC are well documented in the literature [12], but further concepts development, in order to deal with the change point estimation problem, was carried out by Alaeddini et al. [13]. Alaeddini et al. [13] proposed a Gaussian membership function for the degree to which a sample point belongs to the in-control or out-of-control process. Their method was accurate and easy to implement when used for change point estimation. However, it still required the information regarding the change type and the magnitude of the disturbance to accurately estimate the change point. Monitoring the process mean with the presence of linear trend disturbance, Kazemi et al. [14] estimated the out-of-control process mean and the magnitude of the linear trend disturbance, but their method was still dependent on the information regarding the change type.Without knowing the change type, the choice of a particular change point estimator is unreliable and the estimate might be misleading. Literature review shows that most change point estimation techniques assume that the change type is known, however such information is rarely available in practice. Thus, it would be useful to utilize control chart pattern recognition (CCPR) systems before using change point estimation techniques. CCPR systems can determine the change type, considering that each change type could be associated with one particular control chart pattern (CCP) [15]. The main challenge in implementing any CCPR system is designing the classification scheme and choosing the way that the input patterns should be represented. Typically, the input data is represented in the form of raw data or extracted features. However, the inefficacy associated with using raw data as a large input vector, inspired the researchers to use feature-based techniques, which have smaller input vector and improved recognition accuracy [16]. The advantages of using a feature vector have provoked large amounts of interest and further studies on finding the most efficient set of features for the CCPR [17].Despite the consistency in using feature-based techniques in recent studies, the adopted approaches vary considerably. Various approaches including artificial neural networks (ANN) [18], support vector machines (SVM) [11], and expert systems (ES) [19] have been developed for classifying CCPs. A review of literature shows that ANN is the most commonly used approach [15]. ANNs are widely used for supervised and unsupervised CCPs classification as they are capable of handling noisy data and require no initial guess of the statistical distribution of the input data. Nonetheless, the difficulty in determining the architecture of neural networks is often considered as their main disadvantage. Thus, hybrid approaches, including ANN-PSO and ANN-GA [15], Wavelet-ANN [20], Clustering-ANN [21], and SVMs have been employed to improve the recognition accuracy of classification schemes [38].SVMs tend to be more accurate and less prone to overfitting than other classification schemes [22]. They can also efficiently handle the multiclass classification cases in CCP recognition [23–25]. Yet, various studies have been conducted to enhance the efficiency of SVMs further. Ranaee and Ebrahimzadeh [26] utilized a multi-resolution wavelets for extracting the most effective set of features as an input for a multiclass SVM classifier. Lu et al. [27] applied independent component analysis (ICA) to the CCPs before serving them as an input for multiclass SVM classifier. Das and Banerjee [28] proposed a hybrid detection system using the SVM and self-organized maps (SOMs) for the CCP recognition. Ebrahimzadeh et al. [29] presented a hybrid method for recognition of six common types of CCPs using the ANN and SVM, with particular attention to the structure of classifiers. They used two sets of features, namely, statistical and shape features as an input to the proposed method. Ghomi et al. [30] proposed an ANN-based model for CCPR that also addresses the change point estimation problem. Their method was efficient in identifying unnatural CCPs, but the change point estimates that are presented in the form of the out-of-control average run length (ARL1) were still followed by a considerable amount of delay.Our literature review shows that there are few studies in the context of pattern recognition that emphasis on the change point estimation as well. In this paper we present a hybrid method that is designed to estimate the change point onx¯chart where neither the change type nor the process parameters in the state of out of control are known. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the basic properties of control charts, change point models, and SVMs. In Section 3, the structure of CCP classification scheme and the change point estimators are detailed. Section 4 describes the implementation aspects of the proposed classification scheme. In Section 5, the performance of the proposed hybrid method is investigated. Finally, the conclusions are drawn and some directions for future works are discussed in Section 5.In the most general sense, change point estimation is the procedure of identifying the real time of change in a process parameter(s). It involves determining an out-of-control situation, specifying the change type and applying an appropriate change point estimator. In this section, the background and definitions which provide motivation for our study are presented. First, the control limits of thex¯charts are specified. Then the mathematical models for different change types are introduced. Finally, the concepts and essence of SVMs for CCP classification are discussed.A typical control chart consists of the statistics calculated from the samples taken from the process at different time periods, a center line (CL) which represents the mean value of the statistic, and upper and lower control limits (UCL/LCL) that indicate the threshold which beyond that, the process output is considered statistically out of control. Suppose that a quality characteristic is normally distributed with mean μ and standard deviation σ, where both are known. The center line and control limits ofx¯chart for monitoring the process mean are CL=μ,LCL=μ−3σ/n, andUCL=μ+3σ/n, where n is the sample size.The disturbance in the mean of the process can be modeled mathematically with respect to time. Suppose thatx¯iis the average of the ith sample taken from a normal process. The following model expresses the essential features of the step change in the mean of the process(1)x¯i∼N(μ0,σ02/n),i=1,2,…,τ−1,x¯i∼N(μ1,σ02/n),i=τ,…,T.where μ0 andσ02/nare the sample mean and sample variance in the state of in-control, respectively. As soon as a change occurs at time τ, the process mean shifts to an out-of-control level μ1 and remains at this level up to time T when the sample point plots outside of the control limits.A trend can be defined as a gradual change in the process parameter in either upward or downward direction. The change point model for the mean of the process in the presence of linear trend disturbance can be expressed as(2)x¯i∼N(μ0,σ02/n),i=1,2,…,τ−1,x¯i∼N(μ0±β(i−τ),σ02/n),i=τ,…,T.Model (2) assumes that the process mean is initially in control at the level μ0 until the (τ−1)th sample is taken. After the change point τ, the process mean gradually changes with time to μ0±β(i−τ) where β is the magnitude of linear trend disturbance. The plotted sample averages may also display a cyclic pattern on thex¯chart. The model for a cyclic change in the mean of the process can be written as(3)x¯i∼N(μ0,σ02/n),i=1,2,…,τ−1,x¯i∼N(μ0±δsin(iω)),σ02/n),i=τ,…,T.where β and ω>0 are the amplitude and the frequency of the cyclic change, respectively.A support vector machine is a promising supervised learning algorithm with a strong theoretical foundation. The SVM, when used in the area of pattern recognition, has been shown to achieve significant empirical successes [31]. Based on a given training data set, SVM determines the optimal hyperplane to separate the data into two classes and uses the result to classify the test set. Let the training data set D be given as (xi, yi), i=1, 2, …, m, wherexi∈ℝdand yi∈{−1, +1} are the feature vector and the associated class label, respectively. A separating hyperplane can be written as wTx+b=0, where w is the normal vector to the hyperplane and b is the bias. The goal is to find the maximum marginal hyperplane, the one which has the maximum distance to the closest training data of either class with respect to the following constraint:(4)yi(wTxi+b)≥1−ξi,∀i,where ξiis the slack variable which relaxes the ith constraint. The primal problem of the SVM is as follows:(5)minP(w,b,ξ)=12∥w∥2+C∑i=1mξi(6)Subject toyi(wTxi+b)≥1−ξi,∀i,(7)ξi≥0,∀i,where C is a penalty for violations of the constraints. Introducing Lagrange multipliers αi(where αi>0∀i), and converting to the dual form results in the following optimization problem:(8)maxD(α)=∑i=1mαi−12∑i=1m∑j=1mαiαjyiyjxiTxj(9)Subject to0≤αi≤C,∀i,(10)∑j=1mαiyi=0.The dual form requires only the calculation of the dot product of each input vector xi, thereby make it possible for the introduction of kernel functions. Kernel functions map the data into a higher dimensional space, hence makes it possible to handle the case when the data is not linearly separable. In this study, the Gaussian RBF is used which has the following form(11)K(xi,xj)=exp−∥xi−xj∥22γ2,where γ is the Gaussian RBF kernel scaling factor. The Gaussian RBF kernel has fewer numerical difficulties as it only has one parameter which influences the complexity of parameter selection [35]. Moreover, Ranaee and Ebrahimzadeh [26] has shown that this kernel has the best performance in CCP classification.Although the SVM is generally developed for binary (i.e., two-class) classification, but its concept can be extend to address the multiclass cases. Several strategies have been proposed for handling multiclass classification cases including one-versus-one, one-versus-all, directed acyclic graph (DAGSVM), etc. Hsu and Lin [32] have shown that the one-versus-one and DAGSVM methods are most suitable ones for practical use. Furthermore, the one-versus-one approach which solves smaller dual problems needs less computational effort. Assume that the training data consists of k classes. The one-versus-one method constructs k(k−1)/2 classifiers where each one is trained on the training data from two classes. For each pair of classes, if x is in the ith class, then the vote for the ith class is incremented by one. Otherwise, the jth is added by one. Finally, x belongs to the class with the largest vote.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
