@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
On the efficacy of imperfect public-monitoring of seller reputation in e-commerce

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The main objective is the empirical study of e-transactions for the formation of buyers’ beliefs.Theoretical analysis of reputation in on line transactions is presented in terms of game theory.A game with imperfect public monitoring and adverse selection is detailed.Empirical evidence on the determinants of perceived buyers’ reputation of virtual shops is shown.Web buyers consider both advertising and social signals to learn seller’s characteristics.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
E-commerce,Empirical research,Game theory,Online selling,Modeling research,Monitoring technologies,Probit model,Reputation games,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Reputation is crucial in promoting exchanges in online markets, since it may overcome information inefficiency through successful signals of sellers’ quality to less informed customers. To explore this issue, I study web sellers’ reliability in business-to-consumer online transactions with reference to reputation games. Customers can gather information in online marketplaces like e-Bay through public feedback systems. In contrast, without a centralized reputation system, it is not clear how potential buyers form their beliefs. For the latter case, I provide empirical evidence on perceived reliability and its determinants for some virtual shops operating worldwide in the clothing retail sector.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Electronic commerce means no physical meeting of sellers and potential buyers, incomplete information about the seller, inability to directly verify the quality of a product and to monitor sellers’ behavior in the stages of packing, shipping, and so on. In the absence of perfect information, a buyer who perceives a risk related to the likely seller’s opportunistic behavior and reputation is crucial in promoting the seller’s reliability and facilitating online transactions.Reputation can be theoretically analyzed in terms of reputation games with a long-run seller and several short run buyers. It may be interpreted as a successful signal of sellers’ quality to less informed potential customers. The latter form their beliefs in several ways by means of some imperfect public-monitoring devices, which are strictly influenced by the characteristics of online transactions.Online transactions are managed in most cases by means of online marketplaces, such as e-Bay, Alibaba and Yoonx, among others, and information gathering is centrally managed by the web master of the marketplace. Electronic marketplaces are characterized by the simultaneous presence of several sellers, after they register their accounts. Buyers and sellers can evaluate their transactions by providing feedback. Customers also can obtain seller transaction histories through a public feedback system. Feedback consists of a general rating of positive, neutral, or negative for a transaction. In addition to leaving general ratings, buyers can rate specific aspects of a transaction. A buyer may review item quality to verify if it matches with the item that was received, may rate the degree of satisfaction about the seller’s communication, the time it took to mail the item for receipt, and the shipping and handling charges.Recently, several enterprises have explored the use of alternative channels for e-commerce. Increasing diffusion of independent e-commerce websites directly implemented by sellers is observed in the marketplace. In these websites, no public feedback systems are available. In the absence of an independent and well-recognized public reputation system, which elements drive the repositioning of confidence on the part of potential buyers are unclear.In this article, I study reputation in online transactions as a reputation game with imperfect public-monitoring and asymmetric information related to seller’s quality, especially adverse selection, from a theoretical perspective. The analysis mainly focuses on the role of reputation devices in stimulating the formation of buyers’ beliefs.Reputation mechanisms enable efficient transactions in the presence of post-contractual opportunism, in other words, moral hazard, and adverse selection as well. Moral hazard appears when each party in a contract may have the opportunity to gain from acting differently from the agreed conditions. In online transactions, buyers typically send money to sellers before receiving goods. They then could be tempted to keep the money and not ship the requested goods, or to ship lower quality goods than those advertised. Adverse selection is present in situations where sellers have more information than buyers (or vice versa) about some aspect of their ability or product quality they supply. Specifically, sellers may have different characteristics or may sell high-low quality goods, etc. Since sellers do not have an incentive to advertise both positive and negative characteristics, consumers cannot be certain about the true quality offered by each seller until they have actually bought some items. Knowing this, consumers will assume that all sellers are of average quality and will not be willing to pay more than the average price. Akerlof (1970) shows that, in such a situation, the highest quality sellers exit the market, while the lowest quality ones keep selling online.Reputation mechanisms can deter moral hazard by acting as sanctioning devices. They can limit negative effects of adverse selection by acting as signaling devices. The role of reputation mechanisms in moral hazard settings is to constrain behavior of the best informed party, whereas the role of such mechanisms in adverse selection settings is to induce learning behavior of the least informed one (Dellarocas 2006). In real-life transactions, moral hazard and adverse selection considerations are often simultaneously present. By concentrating on the study of e-transactions for the formation of buyers’ beliefs, I need to consider reputation mechanisms which are able to foster learning effects. This justifies my choice of modeling online transactions in terms of reputation games in the adverse selection framework.From an empirical point of view, I provide some evidence on the determinants of perceived buyers’ reputation. By browsing an e-commerce website, consumers can get some information. I refer to this source of information as advertising signals. Moreover, online consumers also evaluate sellers’ reliability by gathering independent information from social communities. I define these sources of information as social signals. In this case, I empirically test if potential buyers exploit publicly-available information to promote information circulation from virtual shops websites in terms of their advertising signals, and from the most widespread social communities as social signals.Previous evidence confirms that reputation effects are important in transactions conducted on web marketplaces. Specifically, reputation profiles are predictive of future performance, though eBay’s net feedback statistic is not the best predictor available, according to Resnick and Zeckhauser (2002). Cabral and Hortacsu (2004) showed that negative feedbacks reported in e-Bay lower weekly sales growth rates, and exit probability were increasing the lower was reputation.It is not clear if and when reputation acts as a sanctioning device or a signaling one, however. When concentrating on the buyers’ perspective, I noted that the longer is a seller’s transaction history, the higher is the buyer’s willingness-to-pay (Resnick et al. 2006). Reputation effects are magnified in the case of heterogeneous goods (Melnik and Alm 2005). This confirms that perceptions of sellers’ reliability in online sales includes signaling mechanisms, and this calls for further investigation into which factors are involved in the formation of beliefs.For independent e-commerce websites, though no publicly-recognized feedback systems exist, I provide some empirical evidence on the way sellers signal their type to potential customers and how customers form their perceptions of seller reputation. Up to now, no research has been done on this issue to the best of my knowledge.First, I conducted a survey to identify all sources of information, both internal and external, with reference to some e-commerce business-to-consumer websites operating worldwide in the clothing sector. Second, I quantitatively assess the importance of both types of signals in the construction of perceived reputation by potential buyers. Because no transaction history was available, I use survey data to estimate the probability of e-seller reputation levels with a probit model. The role of seller and social factors on the perceived reputation of the e-seller is a focus of this investigation.The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, I present a model of a reputation game with imperfect public-monitoring. Section 3 describes some stylized facts about some e-commerce websites involved in business-to-consumer e-commerce in the clothing sector. I also describe the survey I conducted on a sample of potential buyers related to their perceptions of seller reputation and their sources of information. I view these as relevant in the formation of reputation assessments. The econometric analysis is developed in Section 4 and conclusive comments are reported in Section 5.This section presents a stylized model of reputation. I employ the adverse selection approach, which assumes asymmetric information related to the seller’s quality. For this, I follow the approach used by Mailath and Samuelson (2006).In each period, the seller can either exert high effort H or low effort L, and the buyer can decide either to buy B or not NB. When effort is high, the buyer receives a gross utility of U>0, and zero otherwise. Net utility is obtained as gross utility less price, which is equal to R. Revenues are equal to R if the buyer decide to buy independent of the effort exerted by the seller. Costs are equal to C when high effort is given, and zero otherwise. Fig. 1shows the players’ payoffs.Low effort L is strictly dominant for the seller, while higher payoffs for both players are achieved if the seller exerts high effort. In the perfect monitoring game of complete information, (L, NB) is the unique equilibrium outcome. The equilibrium outcome may change to (H, B) if the game is infinitely repeated, provided that the seller is sufficiently patient.The adverse selection approach allows the study of the situation where the buyer is uncertain about the seller’s payoffs. Incomplete information implies that past behavior influences expectations of future behavior and can be interpreted as an investment on reputation. Specifically, the seller develops a reputation for playing H, if she persistently plays H. This may be initially costly for the seller if the buyer is not immediately convinced that she will play H and hence plays NB for some time. However, the subsequent payoff can make this investment worthwhile for a sufficiently patient seller.Suppose there is a positive probability assigned by the buyer to the seller being a commitment type who always plays H. Even a tiny probability of a commitment type introduces a necessary link between past play of H and expectations of future play.1A commitment type always plays a specified repeated game strategy. If she plays the same stage-game action in every period, regardless of her history, we refer to her as a simple commitment type. In this article, the simple commitment type is the seller who always exerts high effort. Other commitment types may be committed to more complicated sequences of action, such as random actions, tit-for-tat, and so on.1The next step requires the specification of the commitment type’s behavior since the seller chooses to develop a reputation for behaving as the most favorable type. Under general conditions, the incomplete information is a short-run phenomenon in imperfect monitoring games. The buyer must eventually learn seller’s type and the continuation play converges to an equilibrium outcome of the complete information game. To have a long-run reputation model, some mechanism to incorporate uncertainty about types is needed. The long-run player’s type can be described by a stochastic process. It involves the probability that the seller is replaced by a new seller with random type is positive – as unobservable replacement – or the buyers’ posteriors about the seller are bounded away from certainty – as bounded memory.In the repeated game, I view the buyer as a continuum of small and anonymous players. Thus, a device describing the way in which their actions are coordinated is required. I define this as the monitoring technology, which can be assumed as perfect public, private or imperfect public.If consumers receive common signals from perfect public-monitoring, there is no difficulty in using public bad signals to trigger punishments, even if consumers are confident the seller exerted high effort. In this case, the game converges to the equilibrium outcome of the complete information game (H, B), provided that the seller is sufficiently patient.If consumers receive idiosyncratic signals from private-monitoring technology, a bad signal brings a buyer no information about what other buyers have seen, preventing buyers’ coordination that is essential for effective incentives. In this case, multiple belief-free equilibrium outcomes arise, so that the probability of choosing B does not depend on any signals about the play of the seller.If consumers receive idiosyncratic signals from an imperfect public-monitoring technology, different consumers receive different realizations, since each observes only her own signal. When monitoring is imperfect and public, we can show that a belief-based equilibrium exists. In this case, the probability the buyer assigns to the seller exerting high effort in period t depends on the set of all signals from period 0 to period t.To see how the game-theoretic framework can be applied to the analysis of trustworthy behavior in online sales, we first consider a simplified game with imperfect public monitoring, which is repeated for a finite number of periods. This model allows supports the identification of which characteristics are essential in promoting online transactions: features and the related probability distribution of seller types and buyer beliefs.Then, I consider an infinitely repeated game to study how and which factors influence investment decisions related to reputation: especially the buyers’ beliefs and the costs related to high quality effort.I now present a finitely repeated reputation game with imperfect public-monitoring, and for simplicity, by limiting it to two periods. The set of public signals is given by Y=[yL, yH]. The signal depends only on the seller’s action aS= [H, L] according to distributionρ(yH|aS,aB)=pifaS=HqifaS=L.Here, ρ is the probability to observe public signal yHand 0<q<p<1. The buyer’s actions are public, while the type of the seller is unknown to the buyer. We assume that there are only two types: the normal type and the commitment type, who plays H in every period.2A normal type plays the game strategy that maximizes the average discounted value of payoffs.2The buyer’s prior belief about the seller’s type at the beginning of the game is given by a probabilityμH0if the seller is thought to be a commitment type.The seller of the normal type is expected to choose H with probabilityγ. Ifγ=1, the commitment and normal types play identically and the related signals reveal no information. For anyγ<1, the commitment type is more likely to generate signal yH. Hence,φ(μH|yL)<μH0<φ(μH|yH), whereφ(μHyi)is the updated posterior that the seller is a commitment type following a signalyi,i=L,H. In the second period, the prior probability that the seller is a commitment typeμH1is given by this updated posterior calculated at the end of the first period stage game, and therefore, it is a function of p, q,γandμH0.The two-period game can be solved by backward induction. The second period equilibrium is strictly influenced by belief revision, which is the updated probability that the seller is a commitment type H. The following result applies here:Proposition 1Second-Period Actions of the Game ParticipantsIn the second period, the commitment type chooses H and the normal type chooses the strictly dominant action L. The buyer’s best response is B ifμH1>12, NB ifμH1<12and a mixed strategy ifμH1=12.3For a proof of Propositions 1 and 2, see Chapter 17 of Mailath and Samuelson (2006).3First-period behavior depends on the buyer’s prior probability that the seller is a commitment typeμH0. We defineμ′as the prior probability that implies a zero probability for the normal player to choose H in the first period and the observation of a signal yH. We also defineμ″as the prior probability that implies a zero probability for the normal player to choose H in the first period and the observation of a signal yL. It is easy to show thatμ′=qp+q<12andμ″=1-q2-p-q>12. I now offer another result:Proposition 2The First-Period Action of the Normal TypeIn the first period, the normal type chooses the action L whenμH0>μ″and whenμH0<μ′. The normal type chooses the action H with probabilityγ=1whenμH0=12, with probabilityγ=γ′whenμH0∈μ′,12and with probabilityγ=γ″whenμH0∈12,μ″, where the probabilityγ′(γ″) is obtained by imposing the buyer’s posterior after yH (yL) to be 1/2.When explicitly modeling reputation, an infinite horizon is required. In this framework, it is interesting to consider a modified version of the two-period game presented earlier. I proposed a reputation game with a long-lived seller and a short-lived buyer, with the latter representing either a succession of players who live for one period or a continuum of small and anonymous players who live infinitely.In the infinitely repeated game with complete information, the normal type chooses H, when she is sufficiently patient. In this case, a reputation for playing H is associated with the normal type, who is interested in separating her type from the commitment type. In this case, the commitment type always plays low effort L and is referred as inept type. Therefore, the signaling scheme of a high-effort type is changed with respect to the two-stage game.With incomplete information, a seller receives revenues that depend on the distribution of the consumer’s beliefs about the seller’s effort. Consumers observe their own signals and update their beliefs about the type of seller. Finally, there is a positive probability of the seller’s replacement. When consumers receive idiosyncratic signals from an imperfect public monitoring technology, the probability the buyer assigns to the seller exerting high effort in period t depends on the set of all signals from period 0 to period t. Again, the positive probability of an inept type introduces a necessary link between past play and expectations of future play.Since the commitment type is a bad type, the normal type wants to separate, and it can be shown that a pure strategy equilibrium in which the normal seller always plays H exists only if the cost of high effort c is not too large. The upper bound cost depends on the (positive) probability of an inept type replacement λ, as we note in the following proposition:4For further details, see Chapter 18 of Mailath and Samuelson (2006).4Proposition 3High-Effort EquilibriumSupposeλ∈(0,1). There isc¯>0such that for all0⩽c<c¯, there exists a high-effort equilibrium.Empirical evidence confirms that the equilibrium outcome depends on the seller’s transaction history, and reputation effects are important in the case of transactions conducted in web marketplaces (Cabral and Hortacsu 2004; Melnik and Alm 2005; Resnick et al. 2006). With reference to e-commerce websites, directly managed by sellers that are called virtual shops, I have not found any papers providing evidence on the determinants of web sellers’ perceptions of reputation.As for online virtual shops, it seems that no public transaction history is available. In the absence of a centralized reputation system, it is not clear how potential buyers form their beliefs. They can use either private or imperfect public-monitoring technologies. Thus, the research question is the following: Which monitoring technology will potential buyers use in such circumstances? If the signals are idiosyncratic, the probability of choosing the option to buy will not depend on any signals. If it depends on some signals received by the seller, a private monitoring technology will be applied. Otherwise, if it also depends on some signals received by other buyers, we can state that an imperfect public-monitoring technology will be adopted to encompass the coordination problem and a reputation game. This is an appropriate theoretical framework to use to think about the interaction between the seller and the buyer.I will empirically evaluate what determines perceived reputation in such a framework, by considering two information sets. The first source of information is directly given by the virtual shops and the other set includes all of the signals received by buyers.With the purpose of identifying what type of information the seller gives, I did a preliminary investigation of the main websites operating in the retail clothing sector.5I found 24 business-to-consumer companies that sell online through their websites, operating in the clothing sector since 2000. The origin countries are Australia, China, Singapore, South Korea, UK, and USA. See Table A1 in the Appendix.5Websites report some information related to several aspects of the potential transaction that they can support. These characteristics can be classified into give categories: product descriptions, order and shipping details, payment conditions, customer care services, and feedback systems. I define these elements as advertising signals.As to signals received by other buyers when a public feedback system is not implemented, we can see that there is other user-generated content developed in the online world. A potential buyer can simply insert the name of the seller and the word “opinion” in any search browser to find them. I identified five different online communities reported for my application to clothing sector. In descending order of importance, they include: blogs; websites that collect reviews such as BestShopping.com in Italy (it.bestshopping.com); review videos such as what YouTube offers; question–answer websites such as Yahoo! Answers (answers.yahoo.com); and other discussion forums. I define these elements as the sources of social signals.In a second step, I collected individual data on perceived reputation and the signals of potential web buyers by means of a survey based on a sample of 252 web users. Respondents were 18–55years old, with an average age of 26year. The sample was composed for 47.6% males and 52.4% females. All web respondents bought clothes online at least once. The questionnaire was created to collect information about virtual shops, but explicitly excluding large marketplaces such eBay.The questions were related to the perceived overall reliability of a virtual shop. I also created a set of control variables, including the a respondent’s number of years as web user, the number of hours of Internet use per day, the person’s professional status, and his or her educational level. I also used other variables to evaluate the various advertising and social signals that were present.My econometric analysis of survey data evaluates the correlation of the overall perceptions of reputation with advertising and social signals. Perceived high and low levels of reputation are obtained by exploiting answers related to the degree of reliability assigned by an online buyer to a web store where he or she bought some product. A dummy variable REPUTATION takes the value 1 when reputation is high and 0 when reputation is low. As to advertising signals, I consider the evaluation of the presence of images and product descriptions. Order and shipping details are evaluated in terms of whether there is free shipping, a first-purchase discount, delivery tracking, and free product returns. The payment conditions refer to the possibility of using Paypal or paying cash on delivery. Customer care services are considered by asking how important are call centers and feedback systems, such as social networks or comments that are sent to and posted on the seller’s website. For social signals, I leverage the respondents’ scores for measuring the importance of blogs, websites that collect reviews, review videos, question–answer websites and forums.The probability of perceiving a high reputation is estimated by using a probit model:6A preliminary analysis has been conducted with reference to a multinomial variable considering all possible degrees of reputation reported by respondents (null, low, medium and high reputation). An ordered probit model was estimated using the same explanatory variables as the probit specification. The results show that the impact of the advertising and social signals are homogenous for all cases reporting at least a medium score, while the coefficients have opposite signs for the remaining responses. Detailed results are available upon request.6lnμH=lnProb(REPUTATIONj=1)=a0+∑c∈CacXcj+∑i∈IaiXij+∑s∈SasXsj+εjwhere Xc,c∈C, are the control variables (years as web user, hours of Internet use per day, dummies for professional status and education levels), Xiis an advertising signal, and Xsis a social signal. Table 1reports the marginal effects for all of the variables.My results confirm that potential web buyers consider both internal and external signals: the estimated effects on perceived reputation are all significant. Well-explained product characteristics and direct contact with the seller improve the probability of seller’s high reliability, as well as opinions and reviews of previous buyers or opinion leaders, such as bloggers. It can be argued that an imperfect public-monitoring technology was adopted to address the coordination problem.Some differences emerged when I split the sample into two groups by education level. When education is low, old and highly-intensive web users showed less confidence about virtual sellers. Moreover, some advertising elements, such as the first-purchase discount, free shipping and free product returns negatively affect the seller’s perceived reliability though. Feedback systems through social networks are more important than direct contacts with the seller. As to social signals, the browsing of question–answer sites positively affects reputation. When education is high, delivery tracking and Paypal payment promote the construction of high-quality reputation, while payment by cash on delivery and the presence of a call center decrease the probability that buyers will perceive a high level of seller reputation. Feedback systems that involve buyers sending comments about seller websites positively affect such reputation too. Blogs seem to be considered as providing good social signals, while videos are bad ones.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Reputation has several determinants in online transactions, which are very similar when the seller operates through a site of e-commerce or in a marketplace. When assuming heterogeneity of online sellers’ reliability, reputation works as a mean for agents to signal their type. I studied belief formation in a reputation game with imperfect public monitoring. My theoretical interpretation of reputation as a signaling device was confirmed by the data that I analyzed. Besides the information provided by the seller, potential buyers always consider social signals in the process of learning about an unknown seller’s characteristics. In virtual shops, web users exploit other web buyers’ opinions that are disseminated in social communities, such as blogs and question–answer websites.With reference to the survey data, I collected a sample of 252 web users who bought clothes in virtual shops at least once. My results have shown a positive effect on reputation for some of the services provided by the seller, such as careful product descriptions, safe electronic payment mechanisms, and the presence of feedback systems. In addition, blogs and question–answer sites are important social signals for high-quality reputation and reliability.An interesting future study may consider an empirical evaluation of perceived reputation in other sectors in which virtual shops are becoming available. Specifically, it may be interesting to study the role of contractual complexity in influencing sellers’ incentives to invest in reputation, and in turn, to assess the effects of reputation on various kinds of contractual outcomes, as suggested by Banerjee and Duflo (2000).See Table A1.