@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Using a consumer socialization framework to understand electronic word-of-mouth (eWOM) group membership among brand followers on Twitter

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examine the factors which discriminate between Twitter brand followers’ decisions to engage in eWOM behaviors on the site.Brand followers with positive attitudes toward brands are more likely to tweet brands.Brand followers with positive relationships with brands are more likely to tweet brands.Brand followers who serve as role-models to others are more likely to tweet brands.Similar patterns were found in terms of retweeting the links of brands.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Socialization,Electronic word-of-mouth,Brand,Twitter,Social media,Discriminant analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
With the real-time brand communications prevalent in Twitter, it has emerged as an increasingly important social technology that facilitates brand-focused electronic word-of-mouth (eWOM) activities. The objective of the current research is to examine the factors which discriminate between Twitter brand followers’ decisions to engage in eWOM behaviors on the site. Specifically, this study proposes that peer communication, brand-related factors, and Twitter usage motivate brand followers to share eWOM messages on Twitter. Results from an online survey showed that brand followers who serve as role-models to others, those with positive attitudes toward and relationships with brands on Twitter, those who most heavily use Twitter and follow many brands, were most likely to tweet brands. Similar patterns were found in terms of retweeting the links of brands. This study contributes to the literature by demonstrating that Twitter is a socialization agent that facilitates eWOM and provides useful insights for social media marketers.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Broadly defined as information exchange among consumers, word-of-mouth (WOM) has long been recognized as an important source of information that influences consumer decision making. For example, Mochalova and Nanopoulos (2014) suggest that recommendations that are based on consumers’ social ties play a pivotal role when choosing a product or service. Past research has indicated that WOM is linked to attitudes and behavior, customer satisfaction (Lang 2011), and technology acceptance (Parry et al. 2012). Because people are likely to trust information given by a friend or acquaintance (Feick and Price 1987; Jurvetson 2000), WOM is able to influence consumers’ opinions, attitudes and decisions.As media continue to evolve, electronic word-of-mouth (eWOM) can reach large numbers of consumers (Hung and Li 2007) and influence attitudes (Chang et al. 2013), product judgments (Lee and Youn 2009), and sales (Chevalier and Mayzlin 2006). Steffes and Burgee (2009) suggest that the Internet has allowed consumers to exchange brand-related information and share purchase experience in a way similar to how they do offline. With the emergence of social technologies available to Internet and smartphone users, social media such as Facebook, Twitter, and Pinterest have empowered consumers to engage in brand-related eWOM and have emerged as promotional tools for marketing (Araujo and Neijens 2012; Liu et al. 2010; McCarthy et al. 2014) and eCommerce (Sharma and Crossler 2014).In particular, Twitter has attracted marketers to build brand profiles that allow consumers to become “brand followers” and obtain immediate brand messages (Burton and Soboleva 2011; Kwon and Sung 2011). More importantly, tweets are passed on from one follower to many others, propagating the information to millions of Twitter users (Liu et al. 2012). According to a recent forecast by eMarketer (2013), Twitter’s ad revenue is expected to reach $1 billion in 2014. The social applications of Twitter enable consumers to interact with one another to seek information, provide advice, and comment on their consumption experiences. The speed and global reach of eWOM on Twitter provide marketers with a means to leverage the power of peer communication and consumer-brand relationships (Kwon and Sung 2011). Therefore, the concept of eWOM is extremely important for a variety of online consumption communities, especially for Twitter as brands seek new ways to develop long-term relationships with their consumers and enhance customer equity (Kim and Ko 2012).Consumer socialization suggests that individuals function as consumers in the marketplace by acquiring knowledge, skills, and attitudes from others through communication (Ward 1974). With the increasing popularity of social media, consumer socialization using social media websites has received mounting attention in recent years (Wang et al. 2012). In their study, Wang et al. (2012) found that consumer socialization through peer communication about products on social media is positively related to product attitudes. Using a consumer socialization framework, our study proposes that peer communication, brand-related factors, and Twitter usage motivate brand followers to share eWOM messages on Twitter. Peer communication is an important source of influence, or a “socialization agent,” for young consumers (Moschis and Churchill 1978) and is found to influence many aspects of consumer behavior. Social media facilitate peer-to-peer communication, representing a new form of consumer socialization (Wang et al. 2012) that may have an impact on Twitter users’ eWOM behaviors. When consumers follow brands on Twitter, the brands may create favorable brand attitudes, resulting in more loyal consumers. Thus, an examination of brand followers’ attitudes toward brands and brand relationship quality is needed. Yet little research attention has been paid to peer communication and brand-related factors in the social media context within the consumer socialization framework.As more and more consumers access Twitter accounts through mobile applications (Lee and Cho 2011), the potential impact of eWOM on Twitter expands exponentially. However, no research to date has examined the factors that influence Twitter users’ decisions to engage or not to engage in eWOM on the site. Compared to another major social networking site (hereafter SNS), Facebook, there is a relatively limited understanding of Twitter users’ information sharing behaviors. While a few studies have analyzed brand-focused eWOM patterns on Twitter (Jansen et al. 2009; Smith et al. 2012), it is unclear what makes consumers willing or reluctant to participate in brand conversations on Twitter. To fill this gap, the objective of the current research is to demonstrate that Twitter is a socialization agent that facilitates eWOM by examining the factors which discriminate between Twitter brand followers’ decisions to engage in eWOM behaviors on the site. Using discriminant analysis, eWOM group membership in Twitter will be examined.By empirically investigating how three major factors (peer communication, brand-related factors, and Twitter usage) influence consumers’ eWOM patterns on Twitter, this study contributes to the theoretical knowledge of eWOM in a social network environment. From a managerial standpoint, results of this study offer significant implications to marketers in developing effective and efficient Twitter accounts as a form of online communication.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
