@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Concept drift mining of portfolio selection factors in stock market

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Provide a model based on causal discovery technique (ANMCPT) for concept drift mining in cross-sectional analysis.AVMCPT can discover causal in high-dimensional and dynamic environment.ANMCPT outperform the classical Fama–French framework.Concept drift phenomenon in China stock market is observed and exhibited clearly.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Concept drift mining,Stock analysis,Cross-sectional analysis,Causal discovery,Modified Additive Noise Model with Conditional Probability Table,China stock market,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Concept drift is a common phenomenon in stock market that can cause the devaluation of the knowledge learned from cross-sectional analysis as the market changes over time in unforeseen ways. The widely used cross-sectional regression analysis based on expert knowledge has obvious limitations in handling problems that involve concept drift and high-dimensional data. To discover causal relations between portfolio selection factors and stock returns, and identify concept drifts of these relations, we apply a novel causal discovery technique called modified Additive Noise Model with Conditional Probability Table (ANMCPT). In evaluation experiments, we compares ANMCPT to the conventional cross-sectional analysis approach (i.e., Fama–French framework) in mining relationships between portfolio selection factors and stock returns. Results indicate that the factors selected by ANMCPT outperform the factors adopted in most previous cross-sectional researches that followed the Fama–French framework. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first to compare causal inference technique with Fama–French framework in concept drift mining of stock portfolio selection factors. Our causal inference-based concept drift mining method provides a new approach to accurate knowledge discovery in stock market.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Stock market has always been followed closely by investors all over the world; electronic order book trade in principal markets has reached 48 trillion USD in 2012 (World Federation of Exchanges 2013). However, stock trading is accompanied with great risk, and all market participants strive to trade with higher risk-adjusted returns (Atsalakis and Valavanis 2009, Bahrammirzaee 2010, Bodie et al. 2005, Fama and French 1992, Malkiel and Fama 1970). One of the key challenges to successful stock market investment is the accurate and timely recognition of informative factors that are closely tied to the expected returns and risks of stocks (called effective portfolio selection factors), as well as the (causal) relationships between these factors and the future returns and risks of stocks.Concept drift/shift is a phenomenon that the underlying data distribution changes over time, space and conditions, making the relationships between variables found in the past inconsistent with the new data (Delany et al. 2005, Tsymbal 2004, Wang et al. 2003, Zliobaite 2009). According to the efficient market theory (Malkiel and Fama 1970) and numerous empirical researches (Chan et al. 2000, Fama and French 1998, Lam 2002, Lucas et al. 2002, Wang and Di Iorio 2007), effective portfolio selection factors in stock market would change over time and markets; therefore, timely identification of this concept drift is a key problem to stock investment.Existing researches provide an incomplete view of the concept drift issue in stock market due to limitations in analysis approach and factor selection. Cross-sectional analysis is a conventional approach to discover effective portfolio selection factors, and the most famous one is the cross-sectional regression framework presented in (Fama and French 1992) (hereafter Fama–French framework). The Fama–French framework selects factors according to previous researches and examines the effect of those factors on stock returns using long-term data and multivariable cross-sectional regression model. Although the Fama–French framework were used in many studies and have identified numerous effective factors in various markets, several limitations of this approach were observed: First, it is ineffective in handling high dimensional data, because testing all possible regression models of candidate factors is often complicated and time consuming, and thus sufficient priori knowledge is needed for feature selection. Second, the selection of factors is theoretically not optimal because most fundamental researches were about US market before 1990; applying factors considered in these researches to other markets might suffer from a concept drift problem. Lastly, it might neglect the nonlinear effects between factors, and, most importantly, regression model identifies correlations rather than causalities.Compared to the conventional cross-sectional analysis approach, combining causal inference and concept drift adaptation techniques is a more promising approach to discover causalities from high dimensional stock market data. Prior researches have proposed causal discovery techniques for two-to-one and one-to-one causality (Hoyer et al. 2008, Hu et al. 2013, Liu et al. 2014, Zhang et al. 2014). However, the number of factors that influence stocks is uncertain. Thus, this paper proposes a novel causal discovery technique called modified Additive Noise Model with Conditional Probability Table (ANMCPT) to address the problem of many-to-one causality discovery.In this study, we collected cross-sectional data from China stock market, covering a 13-year period of July 1999 to June 2011. To evaluate the validness and effectiveness of ANMCPT, we first applied the conventional Fama–French framework on a low-dimensional data (Dataset I). Both vertical and horizontal drifts of the relations between factors and stock returns and of the relations among factors were observed. Then, we applied ANMCPT to the same dataset (Dataset I). Results showed that ANMCPT can produce consistent result. Finally, we applied ANMCPT to a high-dimensional data (Dataset II, which consists of 53 factors) and conducted a concept drift analysis. Results revealed obvious concept drifts–the most informative factors changed over time. Moreover, the factors selected by ANMCPT outperformed those by Fama–French framework when being used to construct stock prediction models. This demonstrates the importance of applying causal discovery technique for concept drift mining when we conducts cross-sectional analysis.The contributions of this paper could be concluded as two points. First, in contrast to most existing approaches for cross-sectional analysis such as the Fama–French framework, our method can not only handle many-to-one causality discovery in high-dimensional dynamic stock markets, but also empirically outperform the classic Fama–French framework. Second, we have clearly exhibited and analyzed the concept drift phenomenon of effective portfolio selection factors. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first to compare causal inference technique with Fama–French framework in mining concept drifts of effective portfolio selection factors. The proposed method will provide a new approach and framework for accurate knowledge discovery in stock markets.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the related works on cross-sectional analysis and concept drift. Section 3 introduces the Fama–French framework and the ANMCPT method. Section 4 describes two datasets used in our experiments while Section 5 presents the comparative empirical results and analyses. The last section provides conclusions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In conventional cross-sectional analysis, the regression approach proposed by Fama and French (1992) is used to investigate the relationships among explanatory variables and stock returns. However, this approach requires expert knowledge, which has obvious disadvantages when handling problems that involve concept drifts and high-dimensional data. Therefore, in this study, we applied ANMCPT, which is derived from a popular observational data-based causal inference method called ANM, to identify causal relationships in China stock market (covering a long period from July 1999 to June 2012).In our experiments on the low-dimensional dataset of 8 factors (Dataset I), firstly, we conducted multivariate cross-sectional analysis, and found that: (1) the reversion of value premium (B/P effect) is confirmed; (2) as the explanatory power of A/P is absorbed by Size, the internal cause of B/P effect has changed; (3) E/P effect can no longer be captured by B/P and size, and size effect seems contrary to the Hong Kong market in a long-term period; and (4) the above results suggest that both vertical (between different markets) and horizontal (between different periods) concept drifts have occurred, and the drifts exist in both the relations between factors and returns and between factors. Then, we applied ANMCPT to Dataset I and compared its results with that of cross-sectional regressions. The results show that ANMCPT can identify similar relationships as the regression approach does, e.g., the significant size and B/P effects.In our experiments on the high-dimensional dataset of 53 factors (Dataset II), we (can only) applied ANMCPT. Results show that factors selected by ANMCPT outperformed the factors considered in most former cross-sectional researches in more than 80% of the total 11 periods and nearly 70% of the total 55 tests. Moreover, the dynamic nature of the explanatory powers of different factors on future stock returns has been exhibited. For example, the effect of B/P is weak or redundant when more factors are considered in recent China market, the size effect is significant only between 2006 and 2011, and other informative factors for portfolio selection also change over time.As the knowledge discovered from historical data might become useless or reversed on new data with unexpected patterns, it is necessary to continuously investigate concept drifts. For instance, it is difficult to determine whether the factors not selected by ANMCPT would always be useless or just useless in some specific testing periods. Moreover, the difference of B/P effect in Dataset I and Dataset II necessitates further consideration of the interactions among factors.To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first to empirically compare the conventional cross-sectional regression approach with a causal inference method, and it may motivate a series of future researches towards the application of advanced computational techniques, such as data mining and causal discovery, to address the concept drift issue in cross-sectional analysis of stock markets.For further studies, we suggest researchers to (1) utilize more advanced causal inference methods to explore continuous stock market data because the discretization of a continuous variable would inevitably lead to the loss of information quality; (2) predict/estimate when a concept drift would occur before it really occurs, rather than merely confirm the previous ones; and (3) investigate the concept drift phenomenon in other markets and other time periods.