@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Understanding knowledge contribution in online knowledge communities: A model of community support and forum leader support

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Social exchange theory and organizational support theory are used to explain knowledge contribution.Perceived community support and perceived leader support positively affect knowledge contribution.Pro-sharing norm and information need fulfillment positively affect perceived community support.Perceived recognition from leader and perceived co-presence of leader positively affect perceived leader support.We identify the mediation effects of perceived community support and perceived leader support.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Knowledge contribution,Online knowledge communities,Perceived community support,Perceived leader support,Organizational support theory,Social exchange theory,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
No research has quantitatively investigated knowledge contribution from the perspective of community support and leader support. Drawing on social exchange theory and organizational support theory, this study develops a model of perceived community support and leader support for knowledge contribution in online knowledge communities. The research model was tested using survey data collected from 169 online knowledge community users. The result shows that perceived community support and perceived leader support positively affect users’ knowledge contribution. Additionally, we identified the antecedents of perceived community support and leader support. Theoretical and practical implications are discussed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nowadays, online knowledge communities are becoming popular and increasingly adopted by individuals (Chiu et al. 2006, Faraj et al. 2011, Ma and Agarwal 2007). It has been reported by TheBiggestBoards.com1The reported data was retrieved from http://www.thebiggestboards.com on May 31st, 2014. TheBiggestBoards.com is a Web directory that lists most active online communities ranked by their post count, user count, category, and software used to build the online community.1that as of May 2014, there are in total 2550 online knowledge communities, among which 139 communities have more than 100,000 registered users. The biggest online knowledge community listed in the report – the UK Gaia Online2http://www.gaiaonline.com/forum/index.php.2contains 26.5 million registered users with more than 2.08 billion posts in total. These communities are revolutionizing lives by offering a space for social interactions (Phang et al. 2009), where individuals obtain knowledge and feedback from others and to express opinions (Faraj et al. 2011, Ma and Agarwal 2007). In a recent survey, for example, 70% of Americans are found to acquire knowledge through online knowledge sharing platforms, such as bulletin boards and online forums, and 62% reported to have spent more than 30min online every week to acquire new knowledge (Zalesne 2009).Knowledge contribution is considered a critical element for the sustainability of online knowledge community as individuals share and combine knowledge for their own benefits, while enhancing the value of the community (Faraj et al. 2011, Jeppesen and Frederiksen 2006). However, the lack of knowledge contribution has been identified as an alarming issue faced by online knowledge communities (Fang and Chiu 2010). For example, a survey of 1650 Americans has revealed that less than 1-out-of-10 (6%) have engaged in knowledge contribution behaviors, such as posting of comments (PEW 2009). Past research has revealed similar evidence. For instance, Cummings et al. (2002) have examined 1066 listservs for a 130-day period and reported that less than 50% of members contributed messages. Likewise, Preece et al. (2004) have revealed that contributing individuals made up 54.5% of health support communities and only 18% of software support communities.Much research to date has focused on understanding what motivates knowledge contributions in online knowledge communities from different perspective (e.g., Chiu et al. 2006, Ma and Agarwal 2007, Sun et al. 2012, Wasko and Faraj 2005). However, limited research has investigated the influences of online knowledge community itself (e.g., providing support to individual members) on individuals’ knowledge contribution. Researchers note that the online knowledge community per se, e.g., community size (Butler 2001), roles and rules (Preece et al. 2004), and community governance (Murray and Mahony 2007), could affect members’ knowledge contribution behaviors. Although past literature has postulated or marginally informed the impacts of online community support on members’ knowledge contribution (Andrews 2002, Coulson 2005, Turner et al. 2001), few have quantitatively scrutinized the relationship. Online community support here refers to members’ general belief that the online knowledge community, as a collective whole, is a source of knowledge and social support.Further, there is a lack of research examining the influences of forum leader support on members’ knowledge contribution. Typically, forum leader is defined as individuals who can influence other members or play leading roles in online communities (Koh et al. 2007). The enthusiasm and involvement of forum leaders are essential to the building of community membership (Figallo 1998, Koh et al. 2003) and foster community members’ care and attention on the community (Kim 2000, Preece 1998, 1999), regardless of whether the forum leader is officially assigned and titled by the online community provider or is the self-proclaimed proprietor of an online community. In online knowledge communities, forum leaders may include active members, opinion leaders, and moderators (Lu et al. 2011). These forum leaders contribute to online knowledge communities by either serving as sources of useful knowledge or, helping encourage and guide members’ productive contributions and collaboration (Preece 2002, Williams and Cothrel 2000, Zhang and Watts 2008). Extant literature notices that the interpersonal interaction between members and the forum leaders may affect members’ knowledge contribution (Figallo 1998, Koh et al. 2007, Preece and Shneiderman 2009). The forum leaders may support member’s knowledge contribution through developing necessary social climate to elicit interactions (Koh et al. 2007), synthesizing discussions and arguments to articulate ideas for other members (Cassell et al. 2006), or re-organizing and combining postings for easier retrieval and better understanding (Faraj et al. 2011). The existence of the forum leaders helps enhance the sustainability of online knowledge communities (Preece and Shneiderman 2009). Although past literature has postulated the potential influences of forum leader support, the effectiveness of forum leader support on members’ knowledge contribution has not been empirically examined. Forum leader support here refers to members’ general belief that the forum leader, as a specific person, is a source of knowledge and social support. In addition, given the potential importance of community support and forum leader support, it is critical to know what drives member’s perception of such supports. However, no study has examined the antecedents of community support and forum leader support.In this paper, we ask two important research questions: (1) how do community support and forum leader support affect member’s knowledge contribution and (2) what are the antecedents of community support and forum leader support? To develop our research model, we integrate social exchange theory (Homans 1958) and organizational support theory (Eisenberger et al. 1986). Specifically, the model maintains that perceived community support and perceived leader support enhance knowledge contribution in online knowledge communities. Since online knowledge communities represent a virtual form of organization with rules and norms resembling the regulations and cultures of mundane organizations (Faraj et al. 2011), organizational support theory could be applied to the context of our study (Andrews 2002, Coulson 2005, Turner et al. 2001). To identify the antecedents of perceived community support and leader support, we draw on social exchange theory as suggested by previous studies (e.g., Wasko and Faraj 2005). However, it is important to note at the up front that the focus of this paper is on knowledge-based type of online communities such as www.codeproject.com and stackoverflow.com, rather than other types of online communities such as networking-based type of online communities (e.g., facebook.com, twitter.com).The paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, we introduce the theoretical foundation of this paper, i.e., social exchange theory and organizational support theory. Based on the theoretical foundation, we develop our rationale for each of the hypotheses accordingly. Subsequently, we introduce the data collection method and the operationalization of constructs. We then conduct data analysis and present the results. Ultimately, we conclude this paper with a discussion of the contributions and implications of the findings.Social exchange theory explains human behaviors in social exchanges (Blau 1964). It posits that individuals behave in ways that maximize their benefits (Molm 1997) and that they take part in an exchange only when they expect benefits from it (Gefen and Ridings 2002). Social exchange differs from economic exchange in the sense that the exchange is not governed by explicit rules or agreements. In such exchanges, people do others a favor with a general expectation of some future returns but no clear expectation of exact future returns. This belief of future returns (or reciprocity) is the central to a social exchange because the lack of explicit rules and regulations means that people have to rely on this belief to justify their expected benefits from the exchange. Therefore, social exchange theory assumes the existence of relatively long-term relationships of interest as opposed to one-off exchanges (Molm 1997).Social exchange theory has been used to understand the knowledge exchange phenomenon in organizations (Kankanhalli et al. 2005) and online communities (Chiu et al. 2006, Wasko and Faraj 2005). In the context of online communities, members engage in a social exchange with the online community as a whole as well as with a particular forum leader. According to the theory, a member will contribute to an organization or community as long as they obtain benefits from their contributions such as reputation and recognition (Jeppesen and Frederiksen 2006, Kankanhalli et al. 2005). Furthermore, past research adopting social exchange theory suggests that knowledge contribution can be derived by expectation of fair exchange, e.g., obtaining information or knowledge from others (Wasko and Faraj 2005) as well as norms for reciprocal exchange (Ye et al. 2010), e.g., pro-sharing norms (Kankanhalli et al. 2005).As a critical extension of the social exchange theory, the organizational support theory posit that there are two types of perceptions, i.e. organizational support and supervisor support, that predict individuals’ behaviors within an organization (Eisenberger et al. 2002, Rhoades et al. 2001). Organizational support refers to individuals’ general beliefs concerning the extent to which the organization values their contributions and cares about their well-beings (Eisenberger et al. 1986). Supervisor support represents individuals’ general beliefs that the supervisor is appreciative to their contributions and cares about their well-beings (Eisenberger et al. 2002).Previous research has examined the outcomes of support perceptions. Prior organizational studies suggest that communal exchange and dyadic interaction both motivate organizational citizenship behavior (Eisenberger et al. 2002, Shanock and Eisenberger 2006), which is defined as “on the job behaviors which are discretionally, not formally or directly recognized by the organizational reward system, yet promote the effectiveness of the organization” (Moorman and Blakely 1995, Organ 1997). For example, Eisenberger et al. (2001) empirically found that perceived organizational support of employees will motivate them to reciprocate the organization with affective commitment and organizational spontaneity. Meanwhile, Schyns and Felfe (2006) found that the relationship between leader and members is influential on group consensus, which in turn, will induce organizational citizenship behaviors. Similarly, Wayne et al. (1997) noted that the perception of supervisor supportiveness leads to organizational citizenship behaviors (i.e., favor-doing behavior).In the context of online knowledge communities, individuals voluntarily engage in knowledge contribution, which refers to the degree of individual’s knowledge contribution to the online knowledge community, with the aim of helping other members who need help/information or develop new insights (Ma and Agarwal 2007). Knowledge contribution has been viewed as a critical form of organizational citizenship behavior (e.g., Lin et al. 2009, Watson and Hewett 2006, Yu and Chu 2007). Similarly, extant research has suggested that community members that perceive supportiveness from the online community itself or from the forum leaders will reciprocate by contributing their knowledge to the online community (Anderson 2004, Iriberri and Leroy 2009, Turner et al. 2001, Wiertz and Ruyter 2007, Yu and Chu 2007). However, there is a lack of studies that theoretically and empirically examine the influence of perceived community support and perceived leader support on knowledge contribution in online knowledge communities. To address the knowledge gap, this study draws on social exchange theory and organizational support theory to examine the influence of perceived community support and perceived leader support on knowledge contribution in online knowledge communities. Additionally, this study investigates the antecedents of community support and leader support based on social exchange theory, which is discussed in next section.In terms of organizational support, previous literature has investigated its antecedents. Researchers have found that organizational support perception is determined by expectation fulfillment and incentives (Coyle-Shapiro and Conway 2005, Rhoades and Eisenberger 2002). For instance, Rhoades and Eisenberger (2002) observed that organizations that recognize and fulfill employees’ expectations signal their appreciation of employees’ contributions. This will lead employees to perceive organizational support. Aselage and Eisenberger (2003) also suggested that individuals perceive organizational support when the organization fulfills their expectations. In a similar vein, Coyle-Shapiro and Conway (2005) reported that organizational incentives are important to individuals’ perception of organizational supportiveness. In the context of online communities, when the communities can fulfill their members’ needs for information or knowledge by, for instance, providing various tools for knowledge sharing and searching (Andrews et al. 2001), their members’ will perceive the community as being supportive for their welfare, thereby engendering high perception of community support (Iriberri and Leroy 2009, Wiertz and Ruyter 2007).In terms of supervisor support, past research suggested that respects from supervisors will increase individual’s perception of supervisor support (e.g., Dholakia et al. 2004, Schyns and Felfe 2006). Through receiving cues like being recognized and cared by supervisors, individuals could perceive a high level of support from supervisors (Eisenberger et al. 2002). In the context of online communities, for instance, when the members perceive the forum leaders recognizing their participations and contributions, they are more likely to develop high perception of leader support (Kankanhalli et al. 2005).From the above discussion, it can be seen that community support is based on a communal exchange between community members and the online community as a whole, while leader support is based on a dyadic interaction between community members and the forum leaders. More specifically, community members will exchange with the community as well as their forum leader for knowledge aids and social support in online knowledge communities (Chiu et al. 2006). They will perceive support from the community by browsing the postings and getting solutions, and perceive support from the forum leader by receiving recognitions and attentions from the forum leader (Koh et al. 2007, Preece and Shneiderman 2009).Following the above discussion, we expect that information need fulfillment affects perceived community support while perceived recognition from leader affects perceived leader support. Furthermore, according to social exchange theory, the norm of reciprocal exchange (e.g., pro-sharing norm) is critical to the sustainability of knowledge contribution (Kankanhalli et al. 2005, Ye et al. 2010) while perceived co-presence of forum leader engenders the members’ feelings of companionship (Ma and Agarwal 2007). Members feeling a norm of pro-sharing in the community will perceive the community as a supportive environment promoting knowledge sharing and contribution, which, in turn, motivates them to engage in knowledge contribution behaviors. Similarly, members obtain psychological support through companionship, which is an incentive for members to participate in online knowledge communities. Therefore, we also expect that pro-sharing norm affects perceived community support while perceived co-presence of leader affects perceived leader support.On the basis of social exchange theory and organizational support theory, we synthesize past empirical findings and propose that knowledge contribution can be predicted by support perceptions (i.e., perceived community support and perceived leader support). Specifically, we expect that perceived community support and perceived leader support positively affect knowledge contribution. Furthermore, drawing on social exchange theory, we identify the antecedents of perceived community support and perceived leader support. In particular, we expect that pro-sharing norm and information need fulfillment positively affect perceived community support while perceived recognition from leader and perceived co-presence of leader positively affect perceived leader support. The model is shown in Fig. 1.From a social exchange perspective, when benefits directed at individuals are honored by the organization, a feeling of obligation is created (Wayne et al. 1997). This obligation, in turn, propels individuals to reciprocate in ways that are beneficial to the organization (Eisenberger et al. 1986). In a similar vein, individuals who perceive community support experience a sense of indebtedness (Ye et al. 2010), and hence are motivated to address such aversive feeling by making contributions to the organization (Moorman et al. 1998). In online knowledge contribution, individuals exert explicit efforts on contributing their knowledge and making their perspectives and opinions transferrable to the online community. The knowledge contribution exemplifies individuals’ reciprocity to the support they have obtained from the online knowledge community (Ye et al. 2010). Moreover, as per organizational support theory, individuals who perceive support from the organization (i.e., online knowledge communities) intend to engage in organizational citizenship behaviors (i.e., knowledge contribution in online knowledge communities). Thus, we expect that perceived community support will enhance knowledge contribution.H1Perceived community support is positively related to knowledge contribution.A number of organizational studies applies social exchange theory to suggest that when individuals perceive support from their supervisors (i.e., leaders), they will reciprocate such supervisor support by engaging in behaviors that benefit the organization (Jordan et al. 2002, Kim and Taylor 2001, Liden and Maslyn 1998). For example, in a study on perceived organizational support and leader–member exchange, Wayne et al. (1997) have reported that individuals who experience high quality leader–member relationship are more willing to reciprocate through organizational citizenship behaviors. Likewise, Settoon et al. (1996) have found that better relationship between supervisors and subordinates enhances work quality and induces mutual helping among coworkers. These findings imply that individuals’ positive beliefs about the forum leader may induce beneficial behavior towards the organization. In the context of online knowledge communities, forum leader usually answer questions of community members, and engage in synthesizing and combining useful postings for members’ convenience and ease of future retrieval (Koh et al. 2007, Preece and Shneiderman 2009). Perception of such leader support will stimulate members to behave reciprocally toward the forum, e.g., knowledge contribution (Yu and Chu 2007). Moreover, from the organizational support theory, individuals who perceive support from the forum leaders who act as agents of the online communities are more willing to engage in behaviors that benefit the online knowledge communities (i.e., knowledge contribution). Therefore, we expect that perceived leader support will enhance knowledge contribution through individuals’ positive beliefs on the forum leader.H2Perceived leader support is positively related to knowledge contribution.Pro-sharing norm refers to the prevalence of norms that are intended to facilitate knowledge sharing in online knowledge communities (Kankanhalli et al. 2005). As per social exchange theory, pro-sharing norm induces a feeling of reciprocity in which individuals expect other community members to contribute knowledge and provide social support, which in turn, may induce their perceptions of community support (Chiu et al. 2006). Past studies have found that individuals use pro-sharing norm as a proxy to evaluate normative influence of the online knowledge community (Yee et al. 2007). Individuals who perceive a strong pro-sharing norm are likely to regard the online knowledge community as committed and supportive to its members (Ye et al. 2010). Pro-sharing norm can ensure that members will be reciprocated by the community in future exchanges (Kankanhalli et al. 2005, Yee et al. 2007). The perception of future reciprocity could increase members’ belief that the community is enacting a healthy environment for development and providing better services for members. Thus, we expect that pro-sharing norm will enhance perceived community support perception:H3Pro-sharing norm is positively related to perceived community support.Based on social exchange theory, individuals are motivated by benefits to participate in a social exchange (Kankanhalli et al. 2005). Under such expectations, individuals are motivated to pursue their extrinsic and intrinsic benefits (Wasko and Faraj 2005). Past research has examined extrinsic benefit through information need fulfillment (Dholakia et al. 2004) and intrinsic benefits in terms of perceived recognition from the forum leader (Schyns and Felfe 2006). Information need is defined as individuals’ desire to locate and obtain information to satisfy their conscious or unconscious needs (Dholakia et al. 2004). In online knowledge communities, fulfillment of information need is not limited to the acquisition of knowledge but also the understanding of others members’ opinions and perspectives (Flanagin and Metzger 2001). From a social exchange perspective, individuals’ positive regard toward an online knowledge community is influenced by the amount of useful information they obtain through participations (Ma and Agarwal 2007, Ridings and Gefen 2004). When individuals’ information need is fulfilled, they are satisfied with the online knowledge community and hence perceive strong support from the online knowledge community. Thus, we expect that information need fulfillment will enhance perceived community support.H4Information need fulfillment is positively related to perceived community support.Whereas extrinsic benefit is derived from information need fulfillment, intrinsic benefit is obtained through perceived recognition from the forum leader. Perceived recognition from leader refers to the extent to which the forum leader appreciates and acknowledges individuals’ contributions to the online knowledge community (Kottke and Sahrainski 1988). Past leadership research borrows logics from the social exchange theory to suggest that individuals respond more positively to leaders who recognize them on the basis of their contributions (Podsakoff et al. 2003, Wayne et al. 2002). For instance, Tangirala et al. (2007) have investigated the relationship between supervisors and subordinates and found that recognition from the supervisors results in better employees’ attitude towards the supervisors. Similarly, in a study on leader–member exchange, Wat and Shaffer (2005) have found that when the leader recognizes a member’s contribution to the organization, the member would form more positive perception on the leader. In the context of online knowledge communities, recognition is also shown to induce reciprocal respect and commitment between members (Jeppesen and Frederiksen 2006, Kankanhalli et al. 2005). When individuals perceive that the forum leaders recognize their participations, they develop strong feelings of leader support. Thus, we hypothesize that perceived recognition from leader will enhance perceived leader support.H5Perceived recognition from leader is positively related to perceived leader support.Perceived co-presence of leader refers to a psychological connection to and with the forum leader (Nowak and Biocca 2003). Past research has considered the effect of co-presence, as an IT-artifact, on the quality of dyadic exchange. For example, Matheson (1991) has found that perceived co-presence has a positive relationship with interpersonal awareness. In a study of virtual education, Richardson and Swan (2003) have found that perceived co-presence significantly influences students’ relationship with the instructor. In essence, these studies hold that perceived co-presence induces interpersonal closeness, which in turn, influences the quality of a dyadic exchange. As per social exchange theory, the quality of a social exchange will enhance individual expectation for future exchanges (Molm 1997). Considering that perceived leader support is known to be derived from social exchange, it is safe to argue that perceived co-presence of the forum leader will enhance perceived leader support. Hence, we propose that perceived co-presence will enhance perceived leader support.H6Perceived co-presence of leader is positively related to perceived leader support.We also include age, gender, Internet experience, experience with the online knowledge community, experience with leader, and community dummy in our model as control variables that might affect knowledge contribution.We collect data from the target population (i.e., online knowledge community users) through an online survey. Most of the constructs in our theoretical model are latent variables, which are best studied using the survey approach (Nunnally and Bernstein 1994). It is worth noting that the online knowledge community that this study focuses on corresponds to the type of online community of common interest or information exchange categorized by Armstrong and Hagel (1996), as knowledge contribution is a key theme of this type of online community.3The other three types of online communities classified by Armstrong and Hagel (1996) are communities of relationship, communities of fantasy, and communities for transaction. People participate in communities of relationship for social interaction, where they can extend their social networks and seek for emotional support. Such communities are relationship oriented and emphasize less on the knowledge contribution of individual members. Communities of fantasy are places where people participate for role playing. Such communities are game oriented and also rely less on knowledge contribution. Communities of transaction such as Amazon.com and eBay.com enable business transactions and delivery. They likewise rely less on members’ knowledge contribution to succeed. As the focus of this study is on knowledge contribution, we did not study these three types of online communities.3Table 1provides formal definitions of the constructs. Where available, the constructs were measured using instruments adapted from past studies to enhance validity (Stone 1978). Otherwise, new instruments were developed based on a review of the previous knowledge management and information systems literature. All the instruments were measured using seven-point scales anchored from “strongly disagree” to “strongly agree” (see Table 2for the instruments).Before the main study, the online survey was pilot tested using respondents from online knowledge communities4Samples of the pilot study were recruited from the same online knowledge communities in the main study.4with the instruments’ wording, content, format, and procedures. For this pilot test, surveys were distributed to 60 active users. Pilot participants completed the instruments and provided comments about length, wording, and instructions. Three of the participants were interviewed to gain a richer understanding of the feedback.5The interviews were used to know the context and operations of online knowledge communities and revise our instruments, rather than doing a mix-method study.5Based on the results of the pilot test, minor modifications were made to the survey design. We used university students with online knowledge community experience as our samples. The rationale for doing so was to exemplify those who are typically active in online forums (Synovate 2008).An email invitation was sent to 1300 students who had been randomly selected from the email directory of a university. The e-mail invitation included a short description of the study and a hyperlink to the online survey questionnaire. The survey was divided into three parts. The first part included the clear definitions of online knowledge community and forum leader.6Definitions of online knowledge community and forum leader are provided as follows: Online knowledge community refers to a group of people with common interests, goals, or practices, who participate to share knowledge and engage in social interactions over the Internet (i.e., online forums and message boards). Forum Leader refers to a member of the online community who can influence other members or play leading roles in the online community (e.g., active member, opinion leader, moderator).6Based on these definitions, respondents were instructed to indicate the online knowledge community which they have used, their user names, and identify a forum leader with his or her user name. In the second part, measurements for all research variables were presented (Table 2). Finally, the third part included measurements for the control variables (Table 3). The online survey ran for 2weeks.A total of 214 completed surveys were received, yielding a response rate of 16.5%. Communities with less than 20 respondents were discarded from further analysis. As a result, 169 respondents from 6 communities remained (see Table 4). All reported online knowledge communities had a strong focus on knowledge-sharing (i.e., product reviews and immigration tips). The largest response from a single community was 44 (26%) and the smallest was 20 (12%). The average age of the respondents was 21.6years, and 45.6% are female. The respondents also reported that they had an average of 9.53years of internet experience and 3.04years of online knowledge community experience. As recommended by Armstrong and Overton (1997), non-response bias was assessed by comparing early and late respondents. No significant differences between the first third and last third of all respondents were found on the variables in the research model. This suggests that non-response bias was not a serious concern in this study. We compared the demographics of our sample with the information provided by an analytic website, i.e., Alexa.com and found that the demographics of our sample at large corresponded with those of average participants in the six communities. We have run a set of Chow’s (1960) tests to assess whether it is possible to combine the data from the six communities. The resulting F-statistics were not significant, suggesting that the data could be pooled together.The survey data was analyzed using Partial Least Square (PLS). PLS is a suitable choice for analyzing the multi-stage model with multiple relationships (Chin 1998, Ma and Agarwal 2007). Besides, PLS places minimal demands on variable distributions. This will reduce the bias caused by relying on factor-based covariance approaches using software such as LISREL and AMOS to analyze variables that are not normally distributed (Chin 1998, Ma and Agarwal 2007). Following Chin (1998), bootstrapping was performed to test the statistical significance of path coefficients. In the model tested, all constructs were modeled as reflective, because their measurement items are manifestations of these constructs and because these items covary (Chin et al. 2003). SmartPLS (version 2.0.M3) was used for data analysis.Convergent validity is assessed by (1) reliability of items, (2) composite reliability of constructs (>0.7), (3) average variance extracted (AVE) (>0.5) (Hu et al. 2004), and (4) factor analysis results. Examining each item’s loading on its corresponding construct assesses reliability of items (Loading>0.7). In this study, the loading of each item meets this criterion (Table 4). Regarding internal consistency (reliability), composite reliability scores and Cronbach’s alpha scores for every construct (as shown in Table 5) are well above 0.70, which is the suggested benchmark for acceptable reliability (e.g., Barclay et al. 1995, Chin 1998, Fornell and Larcker 1981, Hair et al. 1995). The adoption of 0.7 as the threshold for both the composite reliability (ICR) and Cronbach’s alpha has been used by a number of papers in premier IS journals (e.g., Kankanhalli et al. 2005, Ma and Agarwal 2007, Wasko and Faraj 2005). AVE measures the amount of variance that a construct captures from its indicators relative to the amount due to measurement error (Chin et al. 2003). It is recommended to exceed 0.50 (Hu et al. 2004). Table 5 shows that the AVE score for every construct, ranging from 0.72 to 0.90, satisfies this requirement. In addition, to show good convergent validity in factor analysis results, all of the items should load highly on their own latent variables (Hair et al. 2006, Tabachnick and Fidell 2000). The factor analysis results in this study (see Table 5) are satisfactory according to these criteria.Discriminant validity is assessed by examining the indicator-construct loadings and inter-construct correlations (Chin et al. 2003). As shown by Table 5, that all indicators load more strongly on their corresponding constructs than on other constructs in the model. Table 6shows the square roots of the average variance extracted (AVE) are larger than the inter-construct correlations. Overall, the constructs demonstrate strong discriminant validity.Finally, we assessed the extent of common method variance (CMV) using the marker-variable technique (Malhotra et al. 2004). The marker variable utilized was fantasizing. Results from confirmatory factor analysis showed that the smallest correlation with fantasizing was −0.06 (p=n.s.), indicating that CMV was not substantial in our study (Lindell and Whitney 2001).The path coefficients and explained variances for the structural model are shown in Fig. 2. Demographic variables (i.e., gender, age, internet experience, community experience, and leader experience) and the online community dummy variable were included in the analysis as controls for knowledge contribution. None of the control variables were significant.All the six hypotheses were supported. Consistent with our prediction, perceived community support exhibits a positive influence on knowledge contribution (β=0.41, p<0.01), hence supporting H1. Perceived leader support shows positive influence on knowledge contribution (β=0.34, p<0.01), thereby supporting H2. Consistent with our prediction, pro-sharing norm is positively related to perceived community support (β=0.22, p<0.01), thereby supporting H3. Information need fulfillment is found to be positively related to perceived community support (β=0.43, p<0.01) whereas perceived recognition from leader is found to be positively related to perceived leader support (β=0.35, p<0.01), therefore H4 and H5 are supported. As anticipated, H6 is supported as perceived co-presence exhibits a positive relationship with perceived leader support (β=0.28, p<0.01). Table 7summarizes the results of the hypothesis tests.Multiple regression analyses were conducted to assess each component of the proposed mediation model. Results are shown in Table 8. First, it was found that pro-sharing norm, information need fulfillment, perceived recognition from leader and perceive co-presence of leader are positively related to knowledge contribution. Second perceived community support and perceived leader support were found to be positively related to knowledge contribution. Third, pro-sharing norm and information need fulfillment are positively related to perceived community support while perceived recognition from leader and perceived co-presence of leader are positively related to perceived forum leader support.Because both the a-path and b-path were significant, mediation analysis were tested using the Bootstrapping method with bias-corrected confidence estimates (MacKinnon et al. 2002, Preacher and Hayes 2008). In the present study, the 95% confidence interval of the indirect effects was obtained with 5000 bootstrap re-samples (Preacher and Hayes 2008). Results of the mediation analysis confirmed the mediating role of perceived community support in the relation between pro-sharing norm and knowledge contribution (Beta=0.15, CI=0.05–0.27) and between information need fulfillment and knowledge contribution (Beta=0.26, CI=0.26–0.41), and perceived forum leader support in the relation between perceived recognition from leader and knowledge contribution (Beta=0.37, CI=0.22–0.52) and between perceive co-presence of leader and knowledge contribution (Beta=0.18, CI=0.10–0.29). In addition, results indicate the direct effects of perceived recognition from leader on knowledge contribution (Beta=0.03, p>0.05) and perceive co-presence of leader on knowledge contribution (Beta=0.13, p>0.05) became non-significant when controlling for perceived forum leader support, thus suggesting full mediations.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
