@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new method for control of nonlinear networked systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The actual plant input is known to the controller at each time step, therefore, it can cope with relatively large network delays and packet losses.A new controller design methodology is proposed for nonlinear systems, by taking the delay variation into account.Sampling period is adapted based on the network condition.The tracking issue is addressed well.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Nonlinear networked control system,Nonlinear variable selective control,Linear matrix inequality,Takagi–Sugeno fuzzy modeling,Parallel distributed compensation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Networked control of a class of nonlinear systems is considered. For this purpose, the previously proposed variable selective control (VSC) methodology is extended to the nonlinear systems. This extension is based upon the decomposition of the nonlinear system to a set fuzzy-blended locally linearized subsystems, and further application of the VSC methodology to each subsystem. Using the idea of parallel distributed compensation (PDC) method, the closed-loop stability of the overall networked system is guaranteed, using new linear matrix inequalities (LMIs). For the real-time implementation, real-time control signals are constructed for every entry of pre-specified vector of time delays, which is selected based on the presumed upper-bound of the network time delay. Similar to the traditional packet-base control methodology, such control signals are then packed as a control-side packet and transmitted back to a time delay compensator (TDC) located on the plant-side of the network. According to the most recent network time delay, the TDC selects just one entry of the control vector and applies it to the actuator through a zero order hold element. A sufficient condition for closed-loop asymptotic stability is determined. Simulation studies on nonlinear benchmark problems demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Due to the expansion of physical setups, the traditional point-to-point communication architecture of control systems in which the sensors, actuators and controllers communicate through wires is no longer able to meet new requirements, such as less modularity and integrated diagnostics, quicker and easier maintenance, and lower cost. On the other hand, recently, network technologies have dramatically been developed with the special properties of reduced wiring and increased flexibility. Therefore, network technologies have been more and more applied to control systems [1–4], which are usually referred as networked control systems (NCSs) or particularly, Internet-based control systems. In this way, the geographically separated sensors, actuators and controllers are interconnected into closed-loop systems through wired or wireless communication channels, e.g., the Internet. These permit an economic, and flexible, remote monitoring and adjustment of plants over the Internet, which provide the benefit of reacting to plant fluctuations from anywhere around the world at any time. Moreover, NCSs are implemented in a broad range of systems, such as tele-manufacturing, tele-surgery, automated traffic control, space exploration, disaster rescue, health care, museum guidance, and military systems [5,6].However, due to the complex working conditions and limited bandwidth, the insertion of a communication network into a closed-loop control system has also given rise to some interesting and challenging problems such as Network-induced, random, time delay, packet loss, and packet-disordering; that is out-of-order arrival of packets at the destination. As a result, direct usage of many traditional control methodologies to NCSs may lead to performance degradation and/or instability. How to compensate the negative effects of these factors on the control performance and stability of an NCS has therefore received remarkable attentions in the recent years. In this way, most of the researches have been concentrated on the linear NCSs, for example in [7,8]. For this purpose, Rahmani and Markazi proposed a variable selective control (VSC) strategy by combining the variable sampling period and packet based control methods [9,2]. This method could guarantee the closed-loop stability, even for the large network delay and/or packet loss rate.All aforementioned researches have been extended for the linear plants, but, most physical systems are difficult to be modeled linearly. Therefore, nonlinear networked control systems have been an ever hot research issue over the past few years. On one hand, some previous methods were developed based on the nonlinear control theories. Ma et al. [10] designed a state feedback controller, using the discrete-time (DT) sliding mode concept and guaranteed the robustly exponential stability of the closed-loop system. Mirkin et al. [11] proposed the sliding mode coordinated decentralized model reference problem for multi-agent systems with communication delays. Wouw et al. [5] proposed a prescriptive framework for designing the stabilizing controllers based on approximate DT models for nonlinear NCSs. Guan [12] studied the adaptive output feedback control methodology for uncertain, nonlinear, time-delayed systems. Yoo [13] proposed an adaptive output-feedback control approach using the observer dynamic surface design technique for uncertain nonlinear time-delayed systems.On the other hand, in order to implement the previously developed linear multi-variable system theories, some researchers used Takagi–Sugeno (T–S) fuzzy technique. T–S fuzzy models have been proven to be universal function approximators in the sense that they are able to approximate any smooth nonlinear functions to any degree of accuracy in any convex compact set [14]. The appeal of T–S fuzzy models is therefore creating the ability to combine the flexible fuzzy logic theory and good linear multi-variable theories into a unified framework. A number of important issues have been studied for fuzzy control of nonlinear NCSs based on T–S models [15,16]. The common drawback of most of the prescribed studies is that they cannot guarantee the closed-loop stability, unless the network delay and/or packet loss rate is small.Motivated by the aforementioned issues, in the present paper, a Nonlinear variable selective control (NVSC) strategy is proposed by combining the variable selective control and fuzzy T–S methods. In order to deal with the network delay and packet loss, NVSC includes two parts: off-line control design and on-line control implementation. In the former, T–S fuzzy model is used to model the nonlinear system as a set of linear subsystems. Secondly, associated with a range of pre-specified time delays, appropriate discrete-time models is calculated for each subsystem. Using linear matrix inequalities (LMIs) and for all of the calculated subsystems, some stabilizing state feedback gains are then designed. In the on-line procedure, event-driven sensors are implemented to sample the plant output only when the new control input signal is received by the actuator. Based on the parallel distributed compensation (PDC) method and by fuzzy blending of the designed gains, appropriate, instantaneous, control signals are constructed for the pre-specified time delays. Similar to the traditional packet-base control methodology, this control signals are then packed in the control-side packet and are transmitted back to the plant side. To cope with the packet loss issue, a simple algorithm is adopted in the controller. In the light of this formulation, the nonlinear NCS can be considered as a mixture of fuzzy and switched linear systems and therefore, the important theoretic results, previously extended to such systems, can be used for stability analysis and controller design of the NVSC. Simulation studies on well-known benchmark problems demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.The proposed NVSC method has the following advantages: (1) the actual plant input is known to the controller at each time step, therefore, it can cope with relatively large network delays and packet losses; (2) a new controller design methodology is proposed by taking the delay variation into account; (3) sampling period is adapted based on the network condition; (4) the tracking issue is addressed well.The paper is organized as follows. The current section will end with introducing some notational conventions and concepts. In Section 3.1, problem definition and assumptions are provided. In Section 2.1, the idea of VSC is elaborated. The main idea of the T–S fuzzy modeling and PDC methodologies are described in Section 2.2. The proposed NVSC method is then described in Section 3.2. Sufficient conditions for asymptotic stability of the VSC are derived in Section 3.3 and based on them, a controller design methodology is then proposed. The off-line control design and on-line control implementation procedures are summarized in Section 3.4. The effectiveness of the proposed method is demonstrated through well-known benchmark example in Section 4.Notations: Throughout the paper,ℝndenotes the n-dimensional Euclidean space.ℝm×nis the set of all m×n real matrices. 0m×nand Im×nstand for a m×n zero matrix and m×n identity matrix, respectively. The notation P>0 means that P is a symmetric and positive definite (PD) matrix. For a matrix P, PTrepresents the transpose of P.Consider a typical NCS shown in Fig. 1. Suppose that the physical plant is a multi-input multi-output (MIMO), linear time-invariant system described by(1)x˙(t)=Ax(t)+Bu(t),y(t)=x(t),wherex(t)∈ℝn,u(t)∈ℝmare state, input vectors, respectively.As depicted in Fig. 1, the control input is generated and transmitted to the plant through communication network; therefore, the closed-loop system is a blend of continuous and discrete-time evolutions. By definition,τkscandτkca, respectively stand for the “sensor-to-controller” and “controller-to-actuator” time delays associated with the kth plant-side and control-side data packets, respectively (see Fig. 2). Also, tk, k={0, 1, 2, …, ∞} denotes a set of sampling instants with tk+1>tk, and t0=0. As demonstrated in Fig. 2, for any fixed sampling period, the outputs of the plant and controller could transmit over the network with possibly random transmission time delay, packet loss and packet disordering. Therefore, during a sampling interval, none, one or even more than one data packets may arrive at the actuator. On the other hand, an older control data could arrive after the new ones. This phenomena could potentially cause difficulties in mathematical modeling, controller design and practical implementation of an NCS [2].The objective is to design a feedback controller which can asymptotically track the reference input yd(t), for the whole range of network time delays with a presumed upper bound. Assumptions are: (1) the number of consecutive packet losses and the network time delay are bounded; (2) the pair (A, B) is controllable; (3) sensors and actuators are connected through local wiring with negligible delay, compared to the delay of the communication network.Rahmani and Markazi [2,9] proposed the VSC method by the combination of event-driven sensors and packet based control methods for networked, linear time-invariant (LTI), systems. According to the first idea, as shown in Fig. 3, the sensors are triggered to sample the outputs of the plant side, only when new control signals are received by the actuators, where is at the plant side, shown in Fig. 1. For the sake of simplicity of presentation of VSC method, packet loss is temporarily ignored here, and will be considered later, in Remark 1.Assume that the kth plant-side packet, sent at time tk, will be received by the controller at timetk+τksc, and based on which, the proper control-side packet is designed and sent to the plant-side (see Fig. 3). Since this packet is arrived at timetk+τksc+τkca, the total control loop delay isτk=τksc+τkca. From Fig. 3, it can be easily seen that the next sampling period at the tk+1, i.e., Tk=tk+1−tk, will be such that the property Tk=τkholds. This property greatly simplifies the mathematical derivations which follow. Another advantage is that any possible packet disordering, would not bring about further difficulties in the mathematical modeling. In fact, as shown in Fig. 3, by making use of event-driven sensors, any possible packet disordering simply appears as random and time varying time delays in the loop.Suppose that the continuous-time (CT) open-loop model of a LTI system is described by (1). In the light of the illustrated sampling methodology, for a shift-varying sampling period Tk, the sampled-data model of the NCS is represented as(2)x˙(t)=Ax(t)+Bu(tk−τk−1),tk≤t≤tk+1y(t)=x(t),and therefore, the ZOH equivalent, discrete-time (DT), model of this system is in the form of(3)x(tk+1)=Akx(tk)+Bku(tk−1)y(tk+1)=x(tk+1),where Ak=eATk, andBk=∫tktk+TkeA(Tk−λ)dλB. For simplicity, the notation xk+1 is used instead of x(tk+1), and so on; therefore,(4)xk+1=Akxk+Bkuk−1yk+1=xk+1.In order to make the VSC strategy feasible, a recorded vector of the recent input-output history of the plant, is sent to the control side in the form of a packet called plant-side packet, and stamped with its sending time. The transmitted packet is arrived at the predictive controller with some random time delay, and employed to generate a vector of candidate stabilizing control signals for each actuator, where each entry is associated with a possible network time delay. This vector is then transmitted back to the plant side in the form of a control-side packet, received by the TDC module, an event-driven component in the plant-side, which continuously memorizes the latest received control-side packet. According to the actually occurred time delay in the loop, TDC selects a single entry of the received control vector for each actuator, and applies them to the plant, through ZOH elements. Simultaneously, the sensors are triggered to measure the new plant data, the plant-side packet is assembled and transmitted to the controller side. The above procedure is then repeated from start.Remark 1Packet dropout is a common issue in many communication networks. If the number of consecutive packet dropouts is limited, e.g., less than N times, then its counter-effect can be overcome by considering suitable network transmitters in every controller/sensor node, to send every data packet N times. The procedure is to compare the time stamp of every incoming packet with the recorded time stamp of the previous packet held in the buffer. If the two time stamps happen to be identical, the repeated packets received afterwards are ignored, and otherwise replaced in the buffer as a new valid data packet. This policy guarantees that at least one of the N similar packets is safely arrived at the destination, and ensures one that any interruption of the data flow is avoided.Remark 2Let Bcand BTare the controller and TDC buffers, respectively. Suppose, the content of Bcat time t isYk1:=[yk1−No,…,yk1;uk1−No,…,uk1;tk1], which is in fact the plant-side packet sent at timetk1. Now, if for a new packetYk2:=[yk2−No,…,yk2;uk2−No,…,uk2;tk2]received by the controller, it turns out thattk2>tk1, thenYk2is replaced forYk1in Bc, otherwise just ignored. Similarly, if the control-side packet at timetk1′, i.e.,Uk1′c=[uk1′τ1,uk1′τ2,…,uk1′τmax;tk1′]is residing in BT, and a new control packet,Uk2′c=[uk2′τ1,uk2′τ2,…,uk2′τmax;tk2′], is received by TDC, thenUk2′cis replaced forUk1′cin BTiftk2′>tk1′, and ignored otherwise.Suppose that the physical plant is a multi-input multi-output (MIMO), nonlinear autonomous system described by(5)x˙(t)=f(x,u)y(t)=x(t),where,x(t)∈ℝnandu(t)∈ℝm, are state and input vectors, respectively.The main idea of the T–S fuzzy modeling methodology is to represent local input-output relations of nonlinear system (5) into several locally linearized subsystems, so that the overall nonlinear behavior of the system could be captured by fuzzy blending of such subsystems. Assume the original nonlinear system satisfies the sector nonlinearity condition, that is the values of nonlinear terms in the state-space equation remain within a sector of hyper-planes passing through the origin [14,17]. The fuzzy rule associated with the ith linear subsystem, is of the following form:ith rule: If z1(t) is Mi1, and z2(t) is Mi2, … and zp(t) is Mipthen(6)x˙(t)=Aix(t)+Biu(t)y(t)=Cix(t),where, i=1, 2, …, r,Ai∈ℝn×n,Bi∈ℝn×m, Ci=In×n and r is the number of IF-THEN rules. Here,z1(t),z2(t),…,zp(t), known as premise variables, are some nonlinear functions of the state variables obtained from the original nonlinear equation. Mijare fuzzy sets, for j=1, 2, …, p, p is the number of premise variables, andMijzjis the grade of membership of zjin a fuzzy set Mij. Whenever there is no ambiguity, the time argument in z(t) is dropped. By the fuzzy blend of the linear subsystems, the overall output will then be as follows:(7)x˙=∑i=1rωizAixt+Biut∑i=1rωiz=∑i=1rhizAixt+Biut,and(8)yt=∑i=1rωizCixt∑i=1rωiz=∑i=1rhizCixt,where(9)ωiz=∏j=1lMijzj,andhiz=ωiz∑i=1rωiz.It is also true, for all t, that∑i=1rωiz>0,ωiz≥0,i=1,2,…,r∑i=1rhiz=1.Using the T–S model, a control design strategy named by parallel distributed compensation (PDC) is employed. For this purpose, a fuzzy combination of the stabilizing state feedback gains, Ki, i=1, 2, …, r, associated with every linear subsystem, is used as the overall state feedback controller. The general structure of this controller is then asIf z1 is Mi1, and z2 is Mi2, …, and zpis Mip then(10)u=−∑i=1rwizKixt∑i=1rwi=−∑i=1rhiKix(t).The T–S model and the PDC have the same number of fuzzy rules and use the same membership functions.Consider a typical NCS shown in Fig. 1. Suppose that the physical plant is a (MIMO), nonlinear autonomous system described by (5). The objective is to design a fuzzy feedback controller which can asymptotically stabilize the networked control system shown in Fig. 1, for the whole range of time delays smaller than a presumed upper bound. Another objective is to track the desired trajectory yd(t), while all other signals remain bounded.It is assumed that: (1) overall nonlinear behavior of the system can be captured by fuzzy blending of linear subsystems as in (6), i.e., it is assumed that f(·, ·) satisfies the sector nonlinearity condition, as descried in Section 2.2; (2) the number of consecutive packet losses and the network time delay are bounded; (3) ever pair (Ai, Bi) is controllable; (4) sensors and actuators are connected through local wiring with negligible delay, compared to the delay of the communication network.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
