@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The effect of website features in online relationship marketing: A case of online hotel booking

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Hedonic features of the website have a stronger significant effect on affective commitment.Utilitarian features have a stronger significant effect on calculative commitment.Web design features are important for online relationship marketing.Both commitment dimensions were found to be precursors of trust whereas affective commitment is the precursor of e-loyalty.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Relationship marketing,Website features,Customer loyalty,E-commerce,Hotel booking,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The primary objective of this research is to develop a theory-based model of utilitarian and hedonic website features, customer commitment, trust, and e-loyalty in an online hotel booking context. Structural Equation Modeling was deployed to test research hypotheses. Findings highlight the importance of creating loyalty by focusing on both hedonic and utilitarian features. Affective commitment is more influenced by hedonic features whereas calculative commitment is driven by utilitarian ones. Both commitment dimensions sway customers’ trust towards the online vendor and trust is an important antecedent of e-loyalty. Findings confirm that web design features are important for online relationship marketing. Both commitment dimensions were found to be precursors of trust whereas affective commitment is the precursor of e-loyalty.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Lately, online shopping has witnessed a remarkable leap forward (Chiu et al. 2014, Kim et al. 2006, Luo et al. 2012) with sales growing more than 19% a year (Internet Retailer 2011) and has become an important distribution channel or business model for many companies (Chiu et al. 2014). Worldwide retail online sales had already reached approximately $1 trillion by the end of 2010 (Goldman Sachs 2011). More than 60% of US online users made a purchase online in 2009 (Forrester Research 2009). The Cisco IBSG Economics and Research Practice predicts that e-commerce will reach almost $1.4trillion in 2015 globally (Bethlahmy et al. 2011). Forrester Research estimates that online shoppers will spend $327billion in 2016 in the US alone, up 45% from $226billion in 2012, and 62% from $202billion in 2011 (Forrester Research 2012). However, regardless of the rapid growth in online shopping, many customers indicate that they are unsatisfied with their online purchase experiences (Luo et al. 2012). This calls for more research to better understand the factors that affect customers’ evaluations in their online shopping behaviors (Luo et al. 2012).In a similar vein, electronic distribution of various services including hotel rooms, flights, travel packages, attraction tickets, cruises, and car rentals has been on the rise due to many advantages to both consumers and e-tailers. Over the last decade, the Internet has developed into being one of the most significant channels for hotel room distribution (Doolin et al. 2002, Thakran and Verma 2013). The Internet allows potential guests to gather information about hotel amenities and facilities in a utilitarian nature since they can compare prices without contacting a hotel’s sales representative or travel agent and prepare their travel itineraries while looking at a screen (Runfola et al. 2013). Because of the high acceptance of e-commerce, successfully adopting a more effective e-commerce channel has become a significant matter for hospitality businesses (Kim et al. 2006).E-commerce in hospitality and tourism has progressed in recent years from the preliminary sales of less-complex products such as airline tickets, accommodations and car rentals, to embrace more complex products including vacation packages and cruises (Beldona 2005; Inversini and Masiero 2014, Nusair and Parsa 2011). However, during this evolution, it is usually claimed that online travel portals have fallen behind when creating a pleasant online environment for customers (Hassan 2013). We hypothesize that developing compelling and useful online shopping portals would help e-commerce companies build and maintain relationships with their customers. We further hypothesize that customer commitment in online environments will be established via website features.It is important to understand consumer behavior in online environments and develop strategies to increase customer loyalty towards the website. From a theoretical perspective, it is important to develop a model that explains the antecedents of relationship marketing in e-commerce. Even though hotel reservations constitute the second most frequently purchased travel product online (Card et al. 2003); limited research has investigated the factors that influence loyalty in an e-travel context.The primary objective of this study is to develop a theory-based model of utilitarian and hedonic website features, customer commitment, trust, and e-loyalty. This model investigates the relationship between website features and loyalty, as well as the relationship between various components of customer commitment, online trust and customer loyalty.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The primary objective of this study was to develop a theory-based model of utilitarian and hedonic website features, customer commitment trust and e-loyalty. Leaning on relationship marketing and customer value theories, we explained how to build long lasting relationships with customers in e-commerce contexts. Earlier research highlights the utilitarian nature of online shopping, suggesting customers are seeking for utilitarian benefits in e-commerce. However, our findings suggest that utilitarian natures are necessary, but not sufficient condition for building customer commitment in online environments. Our findings further highlight the importance of creating loyalty by focusing on both hedonic and utilitarian features.As our results show, affective commitment is influenced more by hedonic features. On the other hand, calculative commitment is driven by utilitarian ones. Both commitment dimensions influence customers’ trust towards the online vendor. We confirm that trust and affective commitment are the precursors of customer e-loyalty. This relationship can similarly be explained through brand loyalty. Specifically, trust and affective commitment were shown to have a positive effect on brand loyalty (Sirdeshmukh et al. 2002), and brand loyalty was shown to be highly correlated with e-loyalty (Grommans et al. 2001).The notion of customer value considers what customers want and believe they get from buying a product (Woodruff 1997) from an online vendor. Online shopping produces both hedonic and utilitarian outcomes (Babin et al. 1994). As Babin et al. (1994) acknowledged two decades ago, “the consumer is portrayed, in a shopping context, as both intellectual and emotional” (p. 653). This approach recognizes that not all consumer behavior is directed toward satisfying some functional needs. This is especially important during the dreaming stage of decision making. Customers may visit the hotel booking website and be immersed in the pictures and virtual tours, and at a later stage decide to purchase. Hedonic consumption experiences are important in e-commerce in addition to rational choices. The total value of online shopping experience includes both the hedonic and utilitarian beliefs and perceptions of a product. Thus, website features that encompass both dimensions are likely to perform better. We hypothesized that website features will create customer loyalty by the mediating roles of customer commitment. It was found that hedonic and utilitarian features are important variables influencing future consumer decisions through relationship marketing. Hedonic features transfer to later consumption experiences by triggering affective commitment, whereas utilitarian features found to have a strong effect on calculative commitment.The hedonic aspect of web performance is the evaluation of a website based on the assessment by users regarding the amount of fun, playfulness, and the pleasure they experience or anticipate from the website. These hedonic features had significant effects on both calculative and affective commitment. The findings of this study suggest that hotel booking websites could create positive shopping experiences and commitments if they focus on hedonic features such as virtual tours and innovative website designs. Similar to the way a hotel employee might provide a good impression to guests, a well-designed hotel website can provide good impressions about the property to online customers before guests actually experience or stay at the property (Bilgihan et al. 2013). E-commerce websites that incorporate games, enable co-creation possibilities, build online communities, and create a pleasing online experience are likely to succeed.Utilitarian features are the goal-directed website design features. These features represent an assessment of a website based on the evaluation by users regarding the instrumental benefits they obtain from its’ non-sensory attributes. They are related to the performance perception of usefulness, value, and wisdom (Batra and Ahtola 1991). These features call users to visit a website out of necessity instead of recreation needs; consequently, this characteristic of performance is evaluated according to whether the particular purpose is accomplished (Davis et al. 1992; Venkatesh 2000). However, it was found that utilitarian features had a significant positive effect on both affective and calculative commitment. Reliable, effective, functional, practical, ordered, necessary, wise, and correct features are needed to create customer commitment in online shopping. Our findings support that consumer rationalism is an important precursor of future intentions by the mediating role of calculative commitment.Affective commitment helps create marketing relationships, which are more stable because customers tend to have a positive rapport with the organization they identify themselves with. Affective commitment was also found to be positively related to both trust and loyalty. Results from marketing literature indicated that affective commitment is positively related to involvement, loyalty and attachment (Gundlach et al. 1995).Calculative commitment is defined as the intent to continue the relationship, considering switching costs and a lack of alternatives (Bendapudi and Berry 1997). The findings of this study indicate that calculative commitment is positively related to trust but not to loyalty. One of the explanations for this result could be that trust mediates the relationship between calculative commitment and loyalty. This finding is even more probable considering that trust had a significant positive effect on loyalty.The results of this study provide several important theoretical and practical implications. In the first place, a comprehensive theoretical model of relationship between website features, commitment and loyalty is developed. This model indicates that e-commerce and online booking websites should focus on both hedonic and utilitarian features in order to increase customer loyalty. In practical terms, this means that the interactive and social aspects of an e-commerce website presenting hedonic features should be improved. For instance, Marriott’s Travel Brilliantly (https://travel-brilliantly.marriott.com) challenges their customers to help “shape the future of travel” by asking them to share their groundbreaking ideas about how to improve the modern travel experience. Members of such platforms receive both hedonic and utilitarian benefits from interacting with like-minded customers and gaining mutual assistance. In online environments, social relationships create a sense of community. Additionally, websites should work on their functionality, practical design and user friendliness. This, in turn, should improve customer loyalty and develop trust with online hotel booking websites.The study findings should provide valuable guidelines for future research stream in hospitality e-commerce. Future studies are advised to test the model in different situations (e.g. leisure travelers vs. business travelers) as different motivations may have a strong effect on the shopping experience. It is recommended for future studies to reexamine the model and collect data during the online booking. Participants would not have to recall their last booking experience but simply evaluate the present one, improving the overall validity of the results.Future studies should also test true causality using an experimental design. The present study was not directly testing causality since it was based on survey design and SEM analysis. This type of analysis only assumes causality based on theoretical support without being able to examine it directly. All of the significant relationships that were detected in the present study could be further tested for causality using scenario based experimental design in which different websites with different hedonic and utilitarian features would be created. This would help researchers recognize specific website features that have the strongest positive effect on customer e-loyalty and overall satisfaction with the website and booking experience. Additionally, results from this study could be used to develop similar models in other e-commerce settings since it is expected that hedonic and utilitarian website features have a similar effect on customer behavior regardless of the e-commerce setting.Finally, future studies should focus on the analysis of different variables that moderate the relationship between website features and customer behavior. Customer characteristics such as demographics and personality traits could act as moderators.This study had several limitations. The main limitation of the study was that the survey was conducted in an online environment and therefore asked participants to revoke memories about their last hotel booking experience. Unless the experience left a truly strong impression on participants, they would not be able to express their opinion regarding specific details that were asked in the survey. This could also create a potential non response bias. A number of potential participants would not qualify to complete the survey if they had not booked a hotel online in the previous three months.Additionally, the questionnaire length and the time needed to complete the survey might have caused questionnaire fatigue, which influenced the validity of participants’ responses. Although it was assumed that the respondents completed the survey objectively, the reliability could have been affected by respondents’ beliefs, attitudes, reward drive and desire to provide honest answers. In general, feedback from participating respondents did not mention that this was a concern.The instruments used in the survey could potentially be a limiting factor. These instruments were tested for validity and reliability. Nevertheless, additional follow-up studies could further improve those. Finally, the main study sample was obtained from a US-based marketing company. Therefore, findings cannot be generalized beyond that target population.ConstructQuestionnaire ItemsHedonic Features (adopted from Kim and LaRose 2004, self-created)HED1. This online booking experience was truly a joyHED2. Compared to other things I could have done, the time spent booking was truly enjoyableHED3. I felt the excitement of huntHED4. I like email alerts of special offers from this booking websiteUtilitarian Features (adopted from Kim and LaRose 2004, self-created)UTIL1. I use this website’s search engine for finding the room I wantUTIL2. I use this website for product price informationUTIL3. I feel really smart about this booking experienceUTIL4. I read the reviews written by other travelersAffective Commitment (adapted from Allen and Meyer 1990)ACO1. I enjoy discussing the good aspects of this website with other peopleACO2. It is easy to become attached to this websiteACO3. This website has a great deal of attraction for meCalculative Commitment (adapted from Allen and Meyer 1990)CCO1. I am afraid something will be lost if I stop using this websiteCCO2. To stop using this website would require considerable personal sacrificeCCO3. Some aspects of my life would be affected if I stop using this website nowTrust (adopted from Morgan and Hunt 1994)TRU1. This website can be trusted at all timesTRU2. This website can be counted on to do what is rightTRU3. This website has high integritye-loyalty (adopted from Chang and Chen 2009; Li et al. 2006)LOY1. I seldom consider switching to another hotel booking websiteLOY2. As long as the present service continues, I doubt that I would switch my hotel booking websiteLOY3. I try to use this website whenever I need to book a hotel roomLOY4. When I need to book a hotel room, this website is my first choiceLOY5. To me this website is the best booking website to do business withLOY6. I believe that this is my favorite booking websiteGenderMale45%150Female55%184AgeUnder 218%2621–249%3025–3419%6435–4424%8045–5421%7055–6413%43Above 656%20Household income$0–50k11%37$50–100k21%70$100–150k32%107$150k+36%120EducationNo College38%127College43%144Grad School19%64EthnicityCaucasian81%271African American7%23Asian3%10Hispanic8%27Other1%3