@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evolutionary approach on connectivity-based sensor network localization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A two-objective evolutionary algorithm framework to solve the connectivity-based localization problem is proposed.The sensor network localization based on connectivity is modeled as a non-convex optimization problem.Besides of counting the wrong connectivity, seriousness of the connectivity's violation is also an important objective.PAES is used to tackle this optimization problem, while SDP is set as an appropriate initial decision vector.Compared with MDS, DV-Hop, and SDP, the developed method can decrease the estimated position error by nearly 50%.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wireless sensor network,Localization,Connectivity,Evolutionary algorithm,Genetic algorithm,Non-convex constraints,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The sensor network localization based on connectivity can be modeled as a non-convex optimization problem. It can be argued that the actual problem should be represented as an optimization problem with both convex and non-convex constraints. A two-objective evolutionary algorithm is proposed which utilizes the result of all convex constraints to provide a starting point on the location of the unknown nodes and then searches for a solution to satisfy all the convex and non-convex constraints of the problem. The final solution can reach the most suitable configuration of the unknown nodes because all the information on the constraints (convex and non-convex) related to connectivity have been used. Compared with current models that only consider the nodes that have connections, this method considers not only the connection constraints, but also the disconnection constraints. As a MOEA (Multi-Objective Evolution Algorithm), PAES (Pareto Archived Evolution Strategy) is used to solve the problem. Simulation results have shown that better solution can be obtained through the use of this method when compared with those produced by other methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Position estimation is necessary in many applications such as remote patient monitoring, package and personnel tracking, environment monitoring and wildlife habitat monitoring. In these systems, there could be hundreds or even thousands of simple sensor nodes, which can take some simple measurements. Based on either the signal strength or the connectivity among the nodes, we would like to estimate the location of these nodes in a wireless sensor network. It is necessary to accurately localize the sensors in order to measure data which is geographically meaningful. This localization issue has been studied by many researchers and there are many different methods and algorithms [1,3–6] dealing with this situation.For applications like automatic guidance, and wildlife habitat tracking, GPS-like devices are widely used. However, GPS devices are expensive and inefficient on power consumption [1]. Moreover, GPS devices are useless in indoor conditions such as patient monitoring, package and personnel tracking. Thus, in sensor networks with a large number of sensor nodes, attaching a GPS device to each node is not practical. In most cases, there are only a few nodes with known positions in the whole sensor network, while others are unknown. The only information between the known nodes and the unknown nodes is the communication among them, which can also include information on connectivity.In a sensor network, a few nodes have known positions, and they are called the anchors [2,3]. However, the positions of the majority of the nodes need to be estimated using their relationships to the anchors and other unknown nodes. Based on whether the distances between nodes in a sensor network are known or not, the localization methods can be grouped into two categories: range-based and range-free. Range-based (or distance-based) methods are for situations where distances between each pair of nodes are estimated or measured. The information is then communicated to a centralized station in the sensor network and algorithms such as MDS [4] compute the location of each sensor in the network. There are two methods using radio frequency signal (RF) to estimate the distance between each pair of nodes. The first one is ultra-wide band signal (UWB), which is relatively expensive and can only be used in indoor environment [5,6]. The other method is the signal strength received between two nodes, and this information is very noisy in practice [7,8]. On the other hand, range-free methods, which are also called connectivity-based methods, assume that the distances between any two nodes are unknown. Instead, connectivity information between them is known. If the distance between any two nodes in the network is within a range, connectivity between the two nodes is said to be established. Although the actual distance is unknown, this would provide many connection-imposed proximity constraints to the problem. These connectivity-based methods only require very simple and low-cost hardware. Yet, they can give adequate position estimation based on just connectivity information among the nodes. This paper will focus on the connectivity-based scenario. Current algorithms [9–34] on connectivity-based localization just focus on the connections, but ignore the dis-connections between node-pairs. The dis-connections are modeled as non-convex constraints while the localization problem is built as an optimization problem in this paper. Based on this novel model, a two-objective evolutionary approach is utilized to tackle this non-convex optimization problem. The simulations show that great improvement is archived compared with current algorithms.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
