@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A quantum backpropagation multilayer perceptron (QBMLP) for predicting iron adsorption capacity of calcareous soil from aqueous solution

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The ability of calcareous soil to remove Fe(II) from aqueous solution is investigated.The maximum adsorption of Fe(II) of 2.475mg/g at 6.0mgL−1 initial Fe(II) concentration was found at pH 6.0 and a temperature of 303K after 120min.As an inhouse alternative, an intelligent technique has been envisaged by a conventional MLP and a proposed QBMLP architecture.Both the MLP and QBMLP are found to be efficient in the compared to the batch study process.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sorption,Iron removal,Batch process,Thermodynamic parameters,Quantum computing,Quantum inspired neural network,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Removal of miscible hazardous materials from aqueous solutions is an alarming problem for the environmental scientists. Several linear and nonlinear regression models like Langmuir, Freundlich, D–R, Tempkin isotherm models are in vogue for determining the adsorbing capacity of standard adsorbents used for this purpose.In this article, we propose a novel quantum inspired backpropagation multilayer perceptron (QBMLP) based on quantum gates (single qubit rotation gates and two qubit controlled-not gates) for the prediction of this adsorption behavior exhibited by calcareous soil oftentimes used in adsorbing miscible iron from aqueous solutions. The backpropagation learning formulae for the proposed QBMLP architecture has also been generalized for multiple number of layers in both field homogeneous and field heterogeneous configurations characterized by three standard activations, viz., sigmoid, tanh and tan1.5h functions.Applications of the efficiency of the proposed QBMLP over the regression models are demonstrated with regards to the prediction behavior of the adsorption of iron by calcareous soil from an aqueous solution with effect to various characteristic adsorbent parameters. The adsorption process is considered to be a physical one since the activation energy (EA) of ferrous ion adsorption is 9.469kJmol−1 due to Arrhenius. Moreover, the thermodynamic parameters of Gibb's free energy (G0), enthalpy (H0) and entropy (S0) values indicate it be spontaneous.Results indicate that QBMLP predicts the adsorption behavior of calcareous soil to a very closer extent thereby obviating the need for further regression/experimental analysis. Comparison with the performance of a similar classical multilayer perceptron (MLP) architecture also reveals the prediction and time efficiency of the proposed QBMLP architecture.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Removal of miscible hazardous and heavy materials from aqueous solutions is an alarming problem for the environmental scientists as a part of mitigating environmental pollution and maintaining ecological balance. The contamination from the industrial effluents [1] form the bulk of these types of problems of toxicity and non-biodegradability [2]. Though iron is an essential mineral for human beings, yet its presence in ground water above a certain level makes water unusable mainly for aesthetic considerations. Added to it, water loses its softness and becomes prone to life-threatening diseases, viz., diabetes, heart failure, poor growth, risk of lung cancer [3–5]. Hence, WHO has laid down the acceptable value of iron in drinking water as 0.3mgL−1 in different countries of the world [3].With a view to reduce the environmental hazards caused by this disproportionate amount of miscible iron and other heavy metals in drinking water and aqueous solutions, scientists and technologists are continuously on the search of newer and cost effective methods. Aeration followed by separation is one of the most widely used method for removal of iron from groundwater in public water supply systems [3]. Other notable methods include the ion-exchange method [6], chlorine/potassium permanganate based oxidation methods [7] to name a few. Sharma et al. [8,9] demonstrated the use of iron-oxide-coated sand in the removal of iron. While Benjamin et al. [10] illustrated the role of iron-oxide-coated sand for removal of metal cations, viz., Cu, Cd, Pb, Ni and Zn. Lo and Chen [11] emphasized its usage for the removal of certain oxy-anionic metals, viz., SeO3 and AsO3.Of late, a non-metabolic mediated process of metal ion binding by natural biomaterials, referred to as biosorption[12] has proved to be both an efficient and cost effective alternative to the traditional adsorption technologies in vogue for the removal of metal ions from waste water. Typical examples include peat, marine algae, clays, maize cob, bagasse, palm fruit bunch, lalang leaf, saraca indica leaf, nile rose plant, tamarind bark, potato peel waste [4], zea mays dust [13] to name a few. Yeddou and Bensmaili [14] used a natural biosorbent in the form of an eggshell (calcium carbonate containing adsorbent) for the removal of iron from water. Zuyi et al. [15] used a multitracer technique to determine the distribution coefficients of 47 elements from Na to Bi on a calcareous soil, a red earth and an alumina. It was found that there is a common general trend of variation in the distribution coefficients for both soils and the alumina, i.e. all the shapes of plots of logarithms of distribution coefficients versus electron binding energy are an “inverted V”, hence the important role of chemical interaction in the adsorption of trace inorganic cations, anions and neutral complexes on the soils and the oxides was demonstrated. For the alkali and alkaline earth elements, the common sequences of the distribution coefficients on the three adsorbents were in accordance with the sequences of effective ionic radii or single ion hydration enthalpies. However, all these methods rest on time consuming and expensive laboratory based techniques.A novel waste-derived sorbent for removal of Fe ion from aqueous solutions was developed in [16]. Three types of ashes, rice husk ash (RHA), palm oil fuel ash (PFA) and coal fly ash (CFA) were used in the preparation of sorbent. Batch studies were performed to illustrate the effect of various experimental parameters, i.e., initial concentration of iron, pH, agitation time, agitation rate and sorbent dosage. Result showed that a pH of 2 gave optimum conditions to remove Fe ion from solutions. The agitation time was found to be 40min. At 60mgL−1 the removal efficiency was the highest while 0.9g of sorbent manifested the highest removal efficiency. The higher removal efficiency achieved was 99.8%. The constant capacitance model, a chemical surface complexation model, was applied to selenite, Se(IV), adsorption on 36 soils selected for variation in soil chemical properties in [17]. The constant capacitance model was able to fit Se(IV) adsorption by optimizing one monodentate Se(IV) surface complexation constant and the surface protonation constant. A general regression model was developed for predicting these surface complexation constants for Se(IV) from easily measured soil chemical characteristics like inorganic carbon content, organic carbon content, iron oxide content, aluminum oxide content, and surface area. In [18], calcareous soil with various physical parameters along with Fourier transform infrared (FTIR), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was used for removal of Fe2+ from aqueous solution through batch process. During batch study the effects of the various parameters on the adsorption capacity of Fe2+ were investigated. This adsorption was followed by pseudo-second-order kinetic and Langmuir isotherm model. The activation energy was determined at 9.47kJmol−1 indicating physical adsorption. A six-layered feed forward neural network with BP training algorithm was developed using 21 experimental data sets obtained from laboratory batch study. The ANN predicted results were compared with the experimental results of the laboratory test.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
