@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A hybrid expert system approach for telemonitoring of vocal fold pathology

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A hybrid expert system approach is proposed for remote monitoring of vocal fold pathology.To improve the robustness and discriminative ability of the features, clustering based feature weighting methods are proposed.From the compressed voice samples, the detection of vocal fold pathology has been successfully performed by means of this proposed method.Very promising classification accuracy of 100% for both MEEI voice disorder database and MAPACI speech pathology database.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Vocal fold pathology,Feature extraction,Feature weighting,Compressed voice samples,Classification,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Acoustical parameters extracted from the recorded voice samples are actively pursued for accurate detection of vocal fold pathology. Most of the system for detection of vocal fold pathology uses high quality voice samples. This paper proposes a hybrid expert system approach to detect vocal fold pathology using the compressed/low quality voice samples which includes feature extraction using wavelet packet transform, clustering based feature weighting and classification. In order to improve the robustness and discrimination ability of the wavelet packet transform based features (raw features), we propose clustering based feature weighting methods including k-means clustering (KMC), fuzzy c-means (FCM) clustering and subtractive clustering (SBC). We have investigated the effectiveness of raw and weighted features (obtained after applying feature weighting methods) using four different classifiers: Least Square Support Vector Machine (LS-SVM) with radial basis kernel, k-means nearest neighbor (kNN) classifier, probabilistic neural network (PNN) and classification and regression tree (CART). The proposed hybrid expert system approach gives a promising classification accuracy of 100% using the feature weighting methods and also it has potential application in remote detection of vocal fold pathology.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
People who have trouble in using their voices are about 7.5 million approximately in the United States [1]. Due to the nature of job, unhealthy social habits and voice abuse, people suffering from vocal fold pathology have been increasing dramatically. Any problem in the vocal folds causes involuntary movements of one or more muscles of the larynx which results in hoarseness and eventually reduces the voice quality [2,3]. Hence, voice can be a reliable source to investigate the vocal fold pathologies. Medical professionals use subjective techniques or invasive methods such as the direct inspection of the vocal folds and the observation of the vocal folds by endoscopic instruments to detect vocal fold pathology. These techniques require costly resources such as special light sources, endoscopic instruments and specialized video-camera equipments, besides they are expensive, risky, time consuming, annoying for patients [2,3]. In order to circumvent these problems, non-invasive methods have been developed to help the medical professionals to detect vocal fold pathology.With the proliferation in signal processing techniques, voice signal can be used for the detection of vocal fold pathology and its quantitative information plays a prominent role to understand the process of vocal fold pathology formation. In the last three decades, several research works have been carried out on the automatic detection and classification of vocal fold pathologies by means of acoustic analysis, parametric and non-parametric feature extraction methods, automatic pattern recognition or statistical methods [2–14]. A large amount of acoustic parameters have been proposed and its effectiveness has been proven by experimental researches. The important parameters are pitch, jitter, shimmer, harmonics-to-noise, normalized noise energy, Mel-frequency cepstral coefficients (MFCCs) wavelet/wavelet packet based features, non-linear dynamic analysis (approximation entropy, correlation dimension, Lyapunaov exponent etc.) and higher order spectral (HOS) analysis [2,4–9,15–18].Most of the earlier systems developed for detecting vocal fold pathology use high quality voice samples, which requires 5–10MB of storage space. The high quality voice samples need to be compressed, in order to store them occupying the minimal storage space and to share/transmit the recorded high quality voice samples among different research laboratories over telecommunication networks. Hence, reliable methods are to be developed to detect the vocal fold pathology using the voice samples which are compressed in mp3 format at different bit rates (160, 96, 64, 48, 24, and 8kb/s). In [19], researchers have pioneered to investigate the effect of the Moving Pictures Expert Group (MPEG) audio compression on the automatic detection of vocal fold pathology using a wide variety of acoustic parameters extracted from the Multi-Dimensional Voice Program (MDVP) of Kay Elemetrics Corp. Nicolas Saenz Lechon et al. have proposed a system to investigate the effects of audio compression in automatic detection of vocal fold pathologies [20]. They used Mel-frequency cepstral coefficients along with their derivatives and noise parameters to characterize the voice signals. The classification was performed using Gaussian mixture model and support vector machine. They concluded that there was no performance degradation for the compressed voice samples with binary rates of above 64kbps. Moran et al. [21,22] have developed a system for the detection of vocal fold pathologies using voice samples which were transmitted over a telephone line. They employed classical acoustic perturbation parameters and used a simple linear discriminant classifier to classify the voice samples into normal or pathological ones. The performance of the system was only around 85%, which was very less compared to results using high quality voice samples.From the previous works, it has been observed that the performance of the system degrades severely when the voice samples were compressed by using bit rates lower than 64kbps using the conventional acoustical parameters since the compression at lower bit rates diminishes the fidelity and introduces some significant alterations in harmonic structure of the voice samples [19]. This paper focuses on the development of hybrid expert system approach for efficient detection of vocal fold pathology using the compressed voice samples. The proposed hybrid expert system approach has the following stages: voice compression using Audacity 2.0.1 [23], feature extraction using wavelet packet transform, clustering based feature weighting methods and classification. Wavelet packet transform based features were chosen since they have been successfully applied by many researchers not only in the area of automatic detection of vocal fold pathologies [5–7] but also in various applications [24–26]. They achieved accuracy up-to 100% approximately under different experimental conditions and their results highly depend on the optimal selection of wavelet packet based features using feature selection/transformation and optimization techniques. In this paper, three clustering based feature weighting methods were proposed such as k-means clustering, fuzzy c-means clustering and subtractive clustering to improve the robustness and discrimination ability of the wavelet packet transform based features. Voice samples from Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary (MEEI) voice disorders database [27] and MAPACI speech pathology database [28] were used, in order to gauge the robustness and independence of the algorithms to the database. In this work, the efficiency of the wavelet packet transform based raw and weighted features of compressed voice samples were tested using LS-SVM, kNN, PNN and CART. LS-SVM offers high classification accuracy in the previous works and is easy to handle compared to other classification techniques [5,7,16,29]. kNN classifier has some advantages like easy to understand and implement, no training is required, robust to the search space, can be updated online at very little cost and few parameters to tune such as distance metric and k[30]. PNN is useful for classification problems since its high speed of learning, simple learning rule, and single pass training compared to multi-layer perceptrons [11,12,31]. CART is a non-parametric classifier and provides easily comprehensible decision strategies, scalable to large problems, can handle large number of variables, and insensitive to outliers [32–34]. Two schemes of data validation methods were used (Conventional Validation – ConV and 10-fold cross validation – CrossV), in order to demonstrate the consistency of the classification results. Two projection based dimensionality reduction methods such as principal component analysis (PCA) and linear discriminant analysis (LDA) were used to form a small uncorrelated feature set.The organization of the paper is as follows: the dataset used in this paper is explained in Section 2. A detailed description of the methodology adopted in this paper is described in Section 3 which includes feature extraction, feature weighting methods, dimensionality reduction methods and classifiers. Section 4 explains the interpretation of the results and discussion. Section 5 concludes the paper.In this paper, two databases were used such as MEEI voice disorder database and MAPACI speech pathology database. MEEI voice disorder database contains 53 normal and 657 pathological voice samples. The voice samples were the sustained phonation of the vowel /ah/ (1–3s) long and reading (12s) of the “Rainbow Passage” from patients with normal voices and a wide variety of organic, neurological, traumatic, and psychogenic voice disorders in different stages. All the voice samples were collected in a controlled environment and sampled with a sampling rate of 25 or 50kHz and 16 bits of resolution. A subset of 226 voices samples of sustained phonation of the vowel /ah/ (173 pathological+53 normal) were used according to [35]. In MAPACI speech pathology database, all the voice samples were recorded using a Senheiser headset microphone at 44,100Hz during the lifetime project of MAPACI (2003). This database consists of 24 male voice samples (12 normal+12 pathological) and 24 female voice samples (12 normal+12 pathological). The details of recordings (Range, average and standard deviation in years) used in this paper were tabulated in Table 1. Compressed voice datasets were created by compressing the high quality voice samples with a bit rate of 8kbps, an output sampling rate of 24kHz and 16-bit resolution using Audacity 2.0.1. A bit rate of 8kbps was chosen since the harmonic structure of voice samples was severely affected and it is a challenge for researchers to propose robust features for efficient detection of vocal fold pathology using such compressed voice samples. Figs. 1 and 2show the uncompressed and compressed pathological and normal voice samples (MEEI voice disorder database and MAPACI speech pathology database) respectively. From the Figs, it can be observed that a normal voice sample has regular/periodic oscillation due to the symmetrical vibration of the vocal fold and a pathological voice sample has irregular/aperiodic oscillations due to the asymmetrical vibration of the vocal fold. It can also be seen from the figures that the structure and quality of the original audio signals have been severely affected after compression.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In the area of automatic detection of vocal fold pathology, the performance of classification algorithm degrades smoothly due to the irrelevant and noisy features which were extracted from the voice samples. The proposed study shows the effectiveness of the clustering based feature weighting/preprocessing methods for improving the discriminative ability of the raw features, which improves the performance of the classifiers. Among the three clustering based feature weighting methods, we obtained a maximum average classification accuracy of 99% for the compressed voice samples of MEEI voice disorder database and above 97% for the compressed voice samples of MAPACI speech pathology database using FCM clustering feature weighting under all the experiments. Among four different classifiers, LS-SVM outperformed kNN, PNN and CART in terms of classification accuracy and time taken for classification under all the experiments. From the results, it can be concluded that the proposed feature weighting methods/data preprocessing methods could be applied prior to classification process to improve the robustness of the features. The proposed hybrid expert system approach could be used in remote diagnosis of vocal fold pathology from the voice samples which were transmitted over narrow-band communications channels.