@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Improving hybrid ad hoc networks: The election of gateways

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Intelligent selection of a gateway in ad hoc networks based in performance metrics.Selection method based on a fuzzy system optimized by a genetic algorithm.The fitness function of the genetic algorithm is designed with another fuzzy system in order to accomplish it optimization task.This system over-performs other similar systems in the Internet gateway election problem.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Ad hoc routing,Ad hoc load balancing,Hybrid MANET,Fuzzy logic routing,Genetic-algorithms,Multi-objective optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The selection of an appropriate and stable route that enables suitable load balancing of Internet gateways is an important issue in hybrid mobile ad hoc networks. The variables employed to perform routing must ensure that no harm is caused that might degrade other network performance metrics such as delay and packet loss. Moreover, the effect of such routing must remain affordable, such as low losses or extra signaling messages. This paper proposes a new method, Steady Load Balancing Gateway Election, based on a fuzzy logic system to achieve this objective. The fuzzy system infers a new routing metric named cost that considers several networks performance variables to select the best gateway. To solve the problem of defining the fuzzy sets, they are optimized by a genetic algorithm whose fitness function also employs fuzzy logic and is designed with four network performance metrics. The promising results confirm that ad hoc networks are characterized by great uncertainty, so that the use of Computational Intelligence methods such as fuzzy logic or genetic algorithms is highly recommended.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Mobile Ad hoc Networks (MANET) is a main interest area in ad hoc technologies that tries to deal with new trends in wireless communications. MANETs can reduce the impact of problems like deployment and maintenance costs of conventional wireless networks whereas they need more complex link management and routing. MANETs are composed of heterogeneous nodes that move in a confined space without a central infrastructure. Those nodes are interconnected through a multi-hop scheme that usually relies on routing protocols such as AODV or OLSR. Nevertheless, in current personal communications, the main interest of the users in a MANET is to find a reliable means of accessing the Internet through the available gateways in the network. Thus, those MANETs that have active connections to a public network are part of a type of ad hoc network called a hybrid MANET (H-MANET). In addition, the minimal infrastructure needed by MANET networks and their accessibility and adaptability [1] make them suitable to address the new scenarios for mobile communications.In H-MANETs, the number of active gateways can vary, and they can be placed everywhere. Therefore, due to the heterogeneity and movement of the nodes, some of those gateways might need to manage higher traffic rates than others; that would cause a faster depletion of their batteries [2]. Moreover, the overload in the radio interface would increase packet losses due to signal interference, and the selection of one path to a gateway from another could seriously affect packet delay. Both problems, losses and delay, could have a direct effect on the user experience. Therefore, it becomes necessary to use traffic-engineering techniques to handle the load balancing between different gateways and to achieve better performance and resource optimization of H-MANETs [3]. Moreover, the resulting paths must be as stable as possible to avoid unnecessary control traffic required to reconfigure the entire MANET.Unfortunately, most ad hoc routing protocols do not implement any load-balancing techniques [4]. A review of the load-balancing techniques employed in MANET shows that minimum-hop routing protocols tend to designate most centralized nodes with a high number of paths. Thus, only a few nodes must bear most of the network throughput, which translates into an increase in congestion and other undesirable effects such as battery depletion, high delays and routing overload.Furthermore, load balancing can be associated with two separate ideas: pure load balancing and multipath routing techniques. Multipath routing does not show a significant improvement in mobile wireless networks because the majority of paths between any origin and destination share a significant number of nodes [4]. Therefore, if one of those path nodes failed, there would be a high probability that most possible routes to the Internet would be affected.The protocols used in ad hoc multipath networks that address the interconnection between them and the Internet usually employ different adaptations of the Neighbor Discovery Protocol (NDP) [5]. The interconnection is achieved by sending Modified Router Advertisement (MRA) messages [6], which are an adaptation of the Router Advertisement messages sent by NDP. There are three different techniques to send these messages: proactive, reactive and hybrid methods. The proactive method consists of sending MRA messages periodically to the entire network whereas in the reactive technique, a route is only established on demand. The hybrid method creates two zones within the network. One of those areas is the proactive zone, delimited by the TTL of the IP packets, whereas outside that zone, a hybrid method is employed.Note that the optimization of only one metric, such as load balancing, to improve network performance is likely to cause degradation in other metrics that affect the efficiency of the network [7]. Therefore, it is important to employ a multi-objective technique that considers different parameters or metrics of the system under study to achieve an optimum global solution [8]. However, multi-objective optimization in ad hoc networks is complex to achieve because the information needed for it is not always available in one node, or the signaling cost required to inform every device is not affordable. Thus, ad hoc networks and, more specifically, MANETs, must address a high degree of uncertainty [9], which makes them suitable to employ Computational Intelligence (CI) techniques. Some of the main causes of the uncertainty in MANETs include the following:•Mobility of the nodes that makes their position unpredictable. Furthermore, links between nodes change continuously, which implies route actualization and side effects of fluctuating latency or delays within communications.Device heterogeneity: ad hoc networks can be formed by a wide variety of devices with, for example, different transmission power, signal sensitivity and available energy.Topology control is difficult to achieve due to the intrinsic mobility of MANET and to the limited number of control packets that can be sent in ad hoc networks to avoid battery depletion of nodes [10].Obstacles, diffraction and fading of signals in indoor environments and weather conditions in outdoor communications [11].Therefore, to cope with the problem of uncertainty in MANETs and achieve steady load balancing that does not degrade other network performance metrics, this paper presents a new distributed method for gateway election by mobile nodes based on CI techniques such as fuzzy logic and genetic algorithms. Thus, the proposed method, Steady Load Balancing Gateway Election (SLBGE), which represents our main contribution, selects the best path to the right gateway in a MANET, considering only network status and performance variables that can be obtained autonomously by each node. The cost of each route is inferred by Fuzzy Inference System (FIS) based on multiple optimization objectives and stored in the routing table of the node. The cost for each path is actualized periodically with MRA arrivals.Due to the mathematical complexity of precisely defining the right fuzzy sets of the input variables of the fuzzy system, they have been processed through the Genetic Algorithm (GA) whose novel fitness function is also based on a FIS.The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents a review of the most important related work that addresses the gateway selection problem. The method presented in this paper is described in detail in Section 3, whereas Section 4 shows the results obtained through a comparison with other, similar algorithms. To conclude this paper, the conclusions and future work are presented in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The movement of the nodes that form an ad hoc network makes the measurement of most of their features completely unpredictable a priori. Thus, it is impossible to employ techniques based on analytic methods to improve their performance.For that reason, techniques based on Computational Intelligence, despite its complexity, can be successfully applied to those processes that imply a significant degree of uncertainty, such as mobile ad hoc networks, achieving significant improvements in results.This paper presents the first approach to a method for the election of a gateway in H-MANETs through a multi-objective optimization process that employs metrics obtained autonomously by individual nodes. The selection of the gateway is achieved by a FIS that calculates the cost of a path to the Internet based on variables that are closely related to network performance.Another contribution of this paper is that the proposed fuzzy system is optimized by a genetic algorithm whose fitness function is also tuned by another fuzzy system. Thanks to that fitness function, a unique value can be used to compare the performance of the network obtained by other algorithms because the obtained paths are more stable due to the multi-objective optimized cost. Likewise, those paths that cause fewer route updates have a longer lifetime, hence delivering the best performance of all the metrics analyzed. Thus, the proposed fitness function FIS-G takes into account the metrics that can affect the gateway election problem but without the constraints of defining the exact value for a coefficient. Moreover, the flexibility of knowledge base definition allows a better tuning process giving response for the variability of the metrics under study in a MANET whose values effect in very different ways the performance of the system. Therefore, this multi-objective method can be adapted progressively to different environments modifying only some parts of the knowledge base of FIS-G.Moreover, the experimental results considerably improve on those obtained by the other three presented algorithms currently proposed for ad hoc networks.Now we are making new tests with the same optimized fuzzy sets in different scenarios to try to extend the obtained results and to check their effectiveness. These new tests are based on scalability (nodes and gateways) and they used different mobility models and dimensions of the boundaries of the network.Future work can be aimed at achieving an effective learning process for the fuzzy rules that are employed in the system. Moreover, the inclusion of other input variables that model new network metrics could be studied to improve the performance of the entire system.This work is supported by the Telematics System Engineering Research Group of the University of Jaen (E. P. S. of Linares), ID TIC220 of “Consejeria de Economía, Innovación, Ciencia y Empleo” of the “Junta de Andalucía”.Table 8.Tables 9–24.