@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fusion of voice signal information for detection of mild laryngeal pathology

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Various information are extracted from a voice signal for the task of detecting mild disorder of human larynx.Feature-level and decision-level fusion is explored using SVM and RF classifiers, wrapper-based AMDE feature selection is also investigated.We contribute to feature set decomposition approaches by introducing a simple feature oriented technique for ensemble design, which is based on partitioning the feature set by k-means clustering.Results indicate that ensemble of RF classifiers, induced using the proposed technique, significantly improve decision-level and outperform feature-level fusion.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Random forest,SVM,Angle modulated differential evolution,Feature selection,Ensemble of classifiers,Pathological voice,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Detection of mild laryngeal disorders using acoustic parameters of human voice is the main objective in this study. Observations of sustained phonation (audio recordings of vocalized /a/) are labeled by clinical diagnosis and rated by severity (from 0 to 3). Research is exclusively constrained to healthy (severity 0) and mildly pathological (severity 1) cases – two the most difficult classes to distinguish between.Comprehensive voice signal characterization and information fusion constitute the approach adopted here. Characterization is obtained through diverse feature set, containing 26 feature subsets of varying size, extracted from the voice signal. Usefulness of feature-level and decision-level fusion is explored using support vector machine (SVM) and random forest (RF) as basic classifiers. For both types of fusion we also investigate the influence of feature selection on model accuracy. To improve the decision-level fusion we introduce a simple unsupervised technique for ensemble design, which is based on partitioning the feature set by k-means clustering, where the parameter k controls the size and diversity of the prospective ensemble.All types of the fusion resulted in an evident improvement over the best individual feature subset. However, none of the types, including fusion setups comprising feature selection, proved to be significantly superior over the rest. The proposed ensemble design by feature set decomposition discernibly enhanced decision-level and significantly outperformed feature-level fusion. Ensemble of RF classifiers, induced from a cluster-based partitioning of the feature set, achieved equal error rate of 13.1±1.8% in the detection of mildly pathological larynx. This is a very encouraging result, considering that detection of mild laryngeal disorder is a more challenging task than a common discrimination between healthy and a wide spectrum of pathological cases.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Identification of laryngeal disorders in clinical practice is a rather complex diagnostic procedure, involving evaluation of patient's complaints, case-record, and data of instrumental as well as histological examination. Complaints are generally summarized by answers to the questionnaire, while the instrumental examination results into a sequence of laryngeal images and/or voice recordings. Non-invasive measurements, such as questionnaire data or voice recordings, can facilitate early detection of potential larynx-related disorders and therefore be of great value in the preventive care as well as for voice quality assessment.The validity of acoustic analysis approach rests on the complex relationship between physiological function of human larynx and the concomitant properties of voice signal. Voice production is an elaborate process that involves muscle movements, respiration, and the brain control as well as hearing sensory system feedback. Properties of pathological voice are generally induced by mass increase, a lack of closure, or elasticity change of the vocal folds. The result is that the movement of the vocal folds is not balanced and an incomplete closure of the vocal folds may appear in glottal cycles. The subglottal airstream is modulated by this unbalanced vocal fold movement. Irregular air pulses emerge from larynx, propagate through pharynx and oral and nasal cavities, and radiate from the mouth and nose. The resultant acoustic signal is thus affected by a physiological disturbance in the larynx, and this information may be used to measure the disturbance [1].Laryngeal pathologies are relatively common (affecting ∼5% of the population [2]) and are found in varying degrees of progression and severity. Severity of laryngeal pathology could range from a very low to an extremely high, where the mild pathology is hardest to distinguish, and the more severe cases are easier to diagnose. Exclusively resorting to discrimination between healthy and mildly pathological voices is interesting from the preventive care perspective as well as more challenging in pattern recognition sense. Detection of pathological larynx from acoustic analysis of voice can be summarized in the following 2 steps:1.extraction and pre-processing of meaningful features from the signal;using features to distinguish between healthy and pathological cases.Various machine learning approaches proved to be useful for such a task. Researchers apply either generative methods, like Gaussian mixture model (GMM), hidden Markov model (HMM), linear and quadratic discriminant analysis, or discriminative methods, like decision tree, k-nearest neighbors (k-NN), multi-layer perceptron (MLP), and support vector machine (SVM). Ensemble methods, which combine separate classifiers into a multiple classifier system (MCS), are also sometimes used.A previous study on the older version of the same database we use here introduced several diverse subsets of acoustic features, applied wrapper-based feature selection and explored various combination strategies for committees of k-NN and SVM classifiers [3]. In the current study context is narrowed by constraining exclusively to healthy and mildly pathological observations, information abundance is considerably increased by expanding the feature set, influence of feature selection on information fusion with RF and SVM classifiers is investigated and, to improve the accuracy of detector, feature set decomposition technique for ensemble design is proposed.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Abundance of features, extracted from the voice signal, can be successfully exploited by RF and SVM classifiers, and especially their ensembles, to develop an accurate detector of mild laryngeal disorder.Experiments demonstrate that information fusion, even a simple feature-level fusion by a single classifier, outperforms classifiers built on the best individual feature subset. Decision-level fusion success over the feature-level fusion depends on the diversity of the ensemble, where the initial ad-hoc decomposition, induced by the predefined feature subsets, may be suboptimal. Therefore, a feature oriented self-decomposition technique for ensemble design was introduced. The full feature set was partitioned using the unsupervised k-means algorithm and resulting feature subsets subsequently were used by the base classifiers. Accuracy of the ensemble was demonstrated to depend on the choice of parameter k. Results indicate that ensemble of RF classifiers, induced from 50 clusters, outperform both types of fusion, and the improvement was found to be statistically significant.By employing feature oriented cluster-based partitioning, we achieved an EER of 13.1±1.8% in the detection of mild laryngeal disorder. This is a very encouraging result, having in mind that detection of mildly pathological larynx is a more complex problem, compared to the widespread discrimination between healthy and various pathological cases (including subjects with pronounced severity).