@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Health parameter monitoring via a novel wireless system

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study presents a remote health care system.The IPSO is used to build a personal physiological signal sensing system.This study uses WSNs technology to transfer physiological data to the cloud for analysis, processing and data storage.This research toward reduces the hardware cost with to enhance the system security.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
WSNs,RFID,IPSO,Remote healthcare system,Inertial weight adjustment,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study develops a novel remote healthcare system based on Wireless Sensors Network System (WSNs) and Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) technologies. Cloud equipment is used as sensing cloud architecture to create the system database, and Improved Particle Swarm Optimization (IPSO) is applied to build a personal physiological signal sensing system. The collected personal physiological signals are analyzed, and RFID technology is used to create an administrator identity and database. The integrated physiological instrument measures/monitors blood pressure, heart rate, blood oxygen content, body weight, BMI and cardiogram. This system can be applied to, say, employees, nursing-home residents and the elderly. Physiological changes are identified at any time via a self-health examination, promoting early diagnosis and treatment. The current ZigBee technology, which has many advantages, is used in medical institutions, industry, and agriculture, and for automated control and building monitoring. This study uses WSNs technology to transfer physiological data to the cloud for analysis, processing, and storage. The client-side and appropriate medical personnel are notified by e-mail and short messages via the Internet, such that they can provide timely diagnosis and deploy treatment. The IPSO scheme is used to increase the efficiency and accuracy when searching for at-risk groups, searching data, and defining and summing the weights of physiological data. If the first 10% of users with high weight values are a risky population that must be treated immediately, this system informs medical personnel immediately, potentially improving medical service quality and application of medical resources.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The World Health Organization indicated that worldwide mortality caused by chronic disease increased continuously during 2000–2011. Chronic disease is a disease that cannot be fully cured. Once a chronic disease is diagnosed, there will be a long period of treatment. If a condition is serious, treatment cost may be considerable. When a chronic disease is diagnosed early, a patient's condition may be controlled due to its early discovery. Physiological medical equipment is employed in this study for periodic examination of a population prone to developing chronic disease such that chronic disease can be diagnosed as early as possible.To reduce care costs and increase care efficiency, healthcare services are often transferred from a hospital to a patient's home; this is called “home care.” At present, home care in Taiwan is characterized by patients leaving a hospital and staying at home with their families; however, they remain in contact with healthcare units and continue receiving care. Home care has four major advantages: (1) care one would experience at the hospital is received at home continuously, and complications caused by long-term hospitalization are eliminated; (2) family relationships are free from the reciprocation between hospital and home, reducing economic burden on a family; (3) expenditures related to hospital resources are reduced, and the range of services can be expanded; and (4) a patient's medical status is known, such that a hospital can diagnose diseases, and patients can track their illness state. Currently, with the development of technology, medical technologies for home care have developed toward microminiaturization, portability, wireless, customization, and humanization [1].This study designs a physiological system that acquires physiological data by measuring oxygen concentration, blood pressure, body weight, BMI, and heart rate. The physiological data are transmitted by the ZigBee IP-Link 2250 wireless transmission module developed by Helicomm, and the ZigBee IP-Link 5501 wireless receiver module then displays the received data on a Visual Basic graphic user interface at the PC-side. The received data are integrated efficiently, and the user's rights are protected by RFID. The data are input into a personal case database for collective management. Under normal conditions, measurements are sent in messages via GSM to the user's mobile phone. However, under abnormal conditions, the user's emergency contact is informed by text messages. Finally, the IPSO is used to identify the most serious condition in physiological data of multiple patients, such that medical teams can implement treatment immediately and accurately.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This work uses ZigBee technology to build a wireless transmission system for physiological healthcare. The proposed system is applied to individuals or groups, such that they can identify their general conditions at any time. It is also applied for long-term tracking and for preliminarily diagnosis. The proposed system can be used for daily measurement of patients in a hospital, and it can be used for self-examination and tracking of nurses to reduce the incidence of fatigue-related mistakes.This system can be applied for health examinations of employees in any industry, and can be applied to the elderly. Patients are monitored, and early warnings are issued rapidly, such that medical resources can be deployed in a timely fashion. Physiological data can be analyzed instantly and analytical results can be transferred to a medical center for further monitoring. Finally, physiological data can be stored in a cloud for medical care personnel or users to download.