@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A method for discovering clusters of e-commerce interest patterns using click-stream data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
User’s browsing behavior is a comprehensive reflection of their interests.A novel method is proposed for discovering clusters of interest patterns.A novel rough leader clustering algorithm is developed for large dataset clustering.A case study is conducted based on near 3,000,000 clickstream data.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Click-stream data,User interest,Behavior analysis,Leader clustering algorithm,Rough set theory,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Having a good understanding of users’ interests has become increasingly important for online retailers hoping to create a personalized service for a target market. Generally speaking, user’s browsing behaviors (when looking at websites) represent a comprehensive reflection of their interests. Users with various interests will visit multiple categories and research various items. Their browsing paths, the frequency of page visits and the time spent on each category all vary widely. Based on these considerations, a novel approach to discovering consumers’ interests is proposed and is systematically studied in this paper. The browsing behavior of a number of consumers – including their visiting sequence, frequency and time spent on each category – are mined via the click-stream data recorded on an e-commerce website. Given this behavioral data, we construct an improved leader clustering algorithm and leverage it with a rough set theory in order to generate users’ interest patterns. Furthermore, a case study is conducted based on nearly three million click-stream data, which was collected from one of the largest Chinese e-commerce websites. Using this data, the parameters of the algorithm are tested and optimized to make the algorithm more effective in terms of large data analysis and to make it more suitable for discovering users’ multiple interests. Using this algorithm, three typical user interest patterns are derived based on a real click-stream dataset. More importantly, further calculations based on different click-stream datasets verify that these three interest patterns are consistent and stable. This study demonstrates that the proposed algorithm and the derived interest patterns can provide significant assistances on webpage optimization and personalized recommendation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
To attract more customers, e-commerce companies are continuously diversifying their products and increasing their category range. Large e-commerce organizations frequently see more than a million customers per day log on to their websites. Those potential customers view hundreds of thousands of catalog items every day. As a result, a specific challenge arises for these e-commerce companies; namely how to discover the website users’ interests and promote sales by effectively managing an ever-increasing number of categories and products.Most of the existing techniques used to measure consumer interest mainly rely on customer ratings. Whether or not a user rates an item indicates, at least to some extent whether they are interested in it. The rating values themselves represent how much the users like the target items (Zhao et al. 2013, Cleger-Tamayo et al. 2012). However, ratings information is too limited to describe users’ website navigation processes. Besides, a product rating is a final comprehensive evaluation which incorporates users’ perceptions of price, service and logistics. The rating is provided by and relates more closely to the e-business company than the products themselves. In addition, ratings from new customers are insufficient for reference purposes, while experienced customers may not be willing to give ratings every time they use a website. These factors make it more difficult to discover the users’ true interests based on ratings alone.Some scholars studied the topic of users’ interests in social network media (Zeng et al. 2008, Li et al. 2012). They found that users’ interests are frequently reflected by the posts they visit and those posts to which they reply. This idea can be similarly applied to an e-commerce website. Users will look at the items that interest them and attract their attention (Xing et al. 2007, He et al. 2012). Users with a variety of interests will visit different categories and multiple items. For different types of users, their browsing paths, the frequency with which they visit web pages and the time spent on each category will all vary. Compared with user ratings, this more detailed information can be used to describe users’ interests far more precisely.Thanks to the development of information technology, the internet allows for the real-time, low cost and unobtrusive collection of detailed information regarding individuals’ activities. The record of an internet user’s actions online has come to be known as click-stream data (Bucklin and Sismeiro 2009). Click-stream data captures a wide variety of information in a complete, timely and accurate manner. This data covers user activities such as browsing paths, purchased products and clicked banner ads. Click-stream data is becoming one of the most useful resources for researchers and practitioners attempting to understand individuals’ behaviors in terms of choice. Up to now, many researchers have explored the click-stream data from websites that sell a single type of product, such as automotive products (Sismeiro and Bucklin 2004), books (Moe and Fader 2004), digital music (Aguiar and Martens 2013), wine (Van den Poel and Buckinx 2005) and nutrition products (Moe 2003). Unlike the click-stream data taken from these single-category product websites, the click-stream data mined from a comprehensive e-business website will be far more complex. The e-commerce website data will usually encapsulate considerably more details of an individual’s behavioral history. This excessive detail makes the dataset itself large and cumbersome, and consequently leads to difficulties in data mining.In this paper, with the aim of finding users’ interests based on their click-stream data, a novel approach to discovering user interests is developed and studied systematically. Meanwhile, large amounts of real click-stream data are collected and utilized to validate the effectiveness of the newly-devised approach. The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: In Section 2, the related literature regarding click-stream data mining and clustering algorithms is thoroughly reviewed. Section 3 describes the website topology structure of various product catogeries and defines the indicators for measuring user interest. In Section 4, a rough leader clustering algorithm is developed and analyzed in detail. In Section 5, a case study is conducted to test the effectiveness of the method. In addition, the pre-processing of the click-stream data is elaborated upon, and the parameters of the algorithm are optimized. In Section 6, the performance of the proposed algorithm is discussed, based on the comparative study of a number of other algorithms. The stability of the interest patterns are also verified through different click-stream datasets. Moreover, some managerial suggestions are proposed. Finally, Section 7 presents the paper’s conclusions and makes suggestions for the direction of future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
