@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Using meta-regression data mining to improve predictions of performance based on heart rate dynamics for Australian football

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Performance of football players was correlated with heart rate data collected before a game.Performance measures were derived from GPS devices worn by players during the game.Feature selection and meta-regression techniques were used.Best result gave a correlation coefficient of 0.86 (p<0.05).Potential benefit to team coaches for player selection.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Feature selection,Regression,Meta regression,Data mining,Heart rate dynamics,Australian football,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This work investigates the effectiveness of using computer-based machine learning regression algorithms and meta-regression methods to predict performance data for Australian football players based on parameters collected during daily physiological tests. Three experiments are described. The first uses all available data with a variety of regression techniques. The second uses a subset of features selected from the available data using the Random Forest method. The third used meta-regression with the selected feature subset. Our experiments demonstrate that feature selection and meta-regression methods improve the accuracy of predictions for match performance of Australian football players based on daily data of medical tests, compared to regression methods alone. Meta-regression methods and feature selection were able to obtain performance prediction outcomes with significant correlation coefficients. The best results were obtained by the additive regression based on isotonic regression for a set of most influential features selected by Random Forest. This model was able to predict athlete performance data with a correlation coefficient of 0.86 (p<0.05).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
This paper reports on the prediction of performance of elite athletes during games of Australian Rules Football (AFL). The prediction is based on a variety of measures derived from weekly ECG recordings, playing field dimension and temperature for the day of the game. The performance of players is expressed using variables derived from geographical positioning system (GPS data) of football players during the games. The success of sophisticated soft computing techniques to predict player performance during matches is demonstrated in this work. The outcomes are models that may provide the team coaches with a new tool for selection of players for any particular match based on physiological performance of players in preceding weeks. The coaches may also use such models to plan and implement training regimes that focus not only on the individual player but also on characteristics of the match that is being targeted. For example, coaches may be able optimise capacity for running at greater speed, which is associated with better and more ball control and therefore a better score.The prediction of athlete performance follows a history of performance analysis of athletes, which has been the focus of research for decades with an emphasis on motor skills and other physical factors [1]. The application of the information sciences to sport started with statistical analysis and calculations based on biomechanical data [2]. Since then the concept of sports informatics has grown to include modelling and simulation, databases, soft computing, pattern recognition and visualisation. Recently the advent of light weight mobile technological devices such as heart rate monitors, global positioning system units and other sensor devices have led to increased opportunities for the partnering of Information Technology with Medical and Sports Science. A number of recent studies have explored the application of these technologies to a range of sports including rugby and soccer, in order to more accurately understand player performance, conditioning and recovery [3,4].High-performance sport such as football requires athletes to be at their optimal performance for a substantial part of the year, with the rest of the year being taken up with player selection and preseason training. Major factors are mental exhaustion, physical injury and over-training. Therefore it is important to have information for the coach that reduces the risk of physical and mental exhaustion and injury, whilst maintaining a high performance level. Currently the football club at the centre of this study collects biometric data that is analysed either by sports exercise experts within the club or by third parties, neither of which have advanced knowledge of data processing or soft computing. There is a good opportunity for advanced regression techniques to contribute to novel advances in this area.AFL is played with an oval ball on an oval field with a free flowing pace. Fig. 1shows a diagram of the field along with the most important features, including the long and short dimension of the field. AFL stands in contrast to more structured styles of football, where a game is divided into well-defined phases, marked by a particular formation [5]. AFL is a fast moving game where speed and good ball handling and kicking skills determine the outcome. AFL adds extra variables to the analysis of fitness data because there is no standard size for the playing field, although the length is generally 135–185m and the width 110–155m. In this work the actual dimensions of the field for each game were recorded and used as one of the potential predictors of athlete performance. This is an important point because athletes have to make a different effort depending on the field that they find themselves playing on at any particular occasion. The prediction of athlete performance at any match is potentially confounded by this variable, so it should be included in regression models.Player performance has also been reported to change throughout a playing season in the game of soccer [6]. This variability may be related to training status, perceived wellness and environmental conditions [7]. With respect to the latter, there have been reports of a greater incidence in injuries in football played in warmer and/or drier conditions [8]. Changes in core body temperature may also be a factor in performance but has only been studied under warmer conditions [9]. Our study therefore includes match temperatures as an additional variable.There are numerous physiological variable measures in high performance sport. Heart rate is one known to be associated with fitness and performance. Heart rate variability (HRV) is based on data describing the time interval between successive heart beats. HRV is an indicator of the regulation of the heart [10]. A standard ECG signal is shown in Fig. 2. This type of signal has been extensively studied and the diagnostic value of the different features is well established. ECG features are referred to using letters. The large spike is referred to as the QRS complex, with R being the peak of the wave or fiducial point, while the smaller peak to the left is the P wave and to the right of the QRS is the T wave. The signal is degraded by the presence of noise, so that the most reliable feature that can be obtained from low quality recordings (and therefore the most easily obtained measurement) is the interval between successive R peaks, known as the RR interval or inverse of the heart rate. This can be expressed as millisecond intervals and varies considerably between individuals. The inverse being heart rate is typically 60–80 beats per minute.The natural rhythm of the human heart is subject to variation that is believed to indicate the health of the cardiovascular system in that too much or too little variability between beats increases the risk of arrhythmia. RR intervals are obtained from the recorded ECG and subjected to further analysis through a variety of algorithms in order to yield variables with good discriminant power [10]. However, the RR interval can also be obtained from a simple and cheap chest strap device or incorporated into the playing jersey (garment), which makes it particularly suitable as a non-invasive test which allows data to be easily collected from players.As the electrical system of the heart is a complex and adaptive system, variation between beats can also be used to assess the health of elite athletes. The response of the cardiac autonomic nervous system can be assessed non-invasively using a number of measures based on HRV [11], all of which can provide useful information regarding the functional adaptations to a given training stimulus. As heart rate increases due to exercise, HRV tend to decrease. This is known as the sympathetic effect and is manifest in lower frequency changes in heart rate. Conversely, during rest the heart rate slows and higher frequency variation predominates. This is known as the parasympathetic effect. High and low frequency domain parameters are obtained by fast Fourier transform from the RR intervals of the biosignal. The extent of variability in the frequency domain can therefore be used as an indicator of cardiac modulation by the autonomic nervous system and an indicator of general health of the athlete or level of stress.HRV is rapidly becoming more accessible with the availability of wireless sensors at low cost. HRV has been conventionally analysed with time- and frequency-domain methods, which measure the overall magnitude of fluctuations around the mean or the magnitude of fluctuations in some predetermined frequencies. More recent nonlinear analysis has shown an increased sensitivity for characterising beat-to-beat fluctuations. These methods use fractal and entropy based measures to extract further information from HRV. For example, detrended fluctuation analysis (DFA) has been shown to be effective in detection of Diabetic Autonomic Neuropathy [12] and the Renyi entropy measure has provided good results in the detection of abnormal cardiac rhythms [13].Out of many measures that can be derived from HRV, it is not known which ones affect the match performance, or by how much. This work involves analysis methods that are the domain of data mining, which are able to identify important factors that can predict match performance, and to identify variables that have the most influence over performance. The authors were able to identify correlations between player measures prior to game and performance measured during the game.Regression analysis is a common method used for prediction and may be in a parametric or nonparametric form. All the methods used here employ advanced regression algorithms based on machine learning methods. In this paradigm, a model of the form y=f(x) is fitted to the data, where y is a match performance variable, and x is a vector of measures derived from data collected prior to the game. Regression is a process whereby the parameters of the model are tuned to minimise some error measure. A number of methods were attempted and some promising results provide evidence that such predications are possible. The potential value of regression modelling is the possibility of predicting the likely performance of individual players before each match. This can be of assistance to the coach in choosing players to be fielded for a particular game, or in crafting the pre-match training load.The questions addressed in this work are:1.What is the best correlation that can be obtained using any method?Does subset selection improve the correlation result?Can meta-regression improve the results of standalone regression algorithms?This study uses data collected from elite Australian football players during training and daily data collection at rest to predict in-game performance recorded for 12 games of a football season. The athletes participating in the study were professional AFL players who trained for a minimum of 15h per week during the study. The study period included 9 weeks of training each followed by a game, and 40 athletes participated. Not all the athletes participated in all the games. HRV data were collected at the same time each day to avoid any circadian changes in heart rate [14]. Heart rate data was collected from players on waking in the morning, using chest strap sensors. Measures were derived from HRV using time- and frequency-domain and non-linear methods.Time domain measures include the minimum, maximum and mean of the RR interval recorded. The number of pairs of successive intervals that differ by more than 50ms divided by the total number of intervals is a parasympathetic measure known as pNN50 and is also a time domain measure. The HRV triangular index is based on estimating the density distribution of RR intervals. The maximum value of this curve is the mode amplitude (AMo), which indicates the stability of the heart rhythm. The area under the curve (integral) provides the number of all intervals and is divided by the maximum value of the distribution [10]. The triangular interpolation of the interval histogram (TINN) is the estimated width of the density distribution. This is also known as the index of control systems pressure and is believed to be sensitive to physical and emotional load, or to intensifying of the sympathetic nervous system tone.The Poincaré plot is a visual representation of the time series and is constructed by plotting each consecutive RR interval as a point where y=RR(t) and x=RR(t−1). Fig. 3illustrates this. An ellipse is fitted to the resulting cloud of points and the major and minor axes of the ellipse are estimated as SD1 (short term correlation) and SD2 (long term correlation) [15,16].Frequency domain methods divide the spectral distribution into regions labelled as very low, low and high frequency (Fig. 4). Low frequency power (LF) is believed to be indicative of sympathetic activity or sympathovagal balance. High frequency (HF) is indicative of parasympathetic activity. Very low frequency (VLF) amplitude is closely connected with psycho-emotional state and functional condition of the brain [17]. Other work [18] has shown the important meaning of VLF – range analysis, and that the capacity of VLF fluctuations of HRV is a sensitive indicator of management of metabolic processes and reflects deficit energy states. VLF is also used as a reliable marker of blood circulation and provides information on the degree the autonomous (segmental) level and supra-segmental regulation levels are functionally synchronised via neuronal output. To be normal VLF is between 15% and 30% of the total spectrum power and can be measured from the RR intervals associated with the ECG, which is regulated by supra-segmental and segmental neural modulatory systems including the cardiac autonomic nervous system innovation. The peak value of the frequency distribution is expressed as Hz while the power is expressed as ms2. The logarithm of HF and LF is also calculated as it allows the definition of a new index based on HF and LF energy which appears relevant to measure HR regulation and corrects for data not normally distributed [19]. The ratio of low to high frequency components is also calculated for our analysis as well as the total power [10]. Other measures used in this study are proprietary to the club, but are derived from commonly available ECG data. These are the independent variables of the regression models.In addition, the AFL Club collects detailed quantitative data on player performance. Data were collected from each match, using GPS sensors worn by players during the game. From these data, two measures were used to assess match performance: B3 – the time spent running at speeds of 18 and 24km/h, and B4 – the time spent running faster than 24km/h. These are the dependent variables of the regression models, which will be predicted.Additional measures were obtained from knowledge of the game location:•long dimension of the playing field;short dimension of the playing field;minimum temperature (24h);maximum temperature (24h);average temperature (24h).These are added to the other independent variables, to be used as predictors of the performance measures or class variables. Bespoke software was prepared to combine data from these different sources into one file suitable for input to WEKA for analysis of data using regression algorithms and data mining methods. The complete data file for analysis comprised 250 records. The predicted or “class” variables used in our experiments were the B3 and B4 attributes in the database, referring to GPS data of running at low speed and running at high speed, respectively.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
