@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Selection of optimal electronic toll collection system for India: A subjective-fuzzy decision making approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Present study deals with selection of optimal ETC system for India.A fuzzy-aid subjective decision making approach is employed.An optimal technology is selected under techno-socio-economic constraints.RFID-based ETC is found to be the most promising for Indian roads.Our results are in good agreement with the reports by “Government of India”.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Selection,Electronic toll collection,India,Fuzzy,MADM,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Present study deals with the adoption of newer technologies for developing nations. Most of the developing countries due to lack of resources perform techno-socio-economic analyses on the already existing models of the developed ones. Such adopted technologies may not perform effectively because of unlike socio-economic factors. Hence, it becomes important to select new technologies based on appropriate and suitable criteria with respect to a particular country. In this paper, we have demonstrated selection of optimal electronic toll collection (ETC) system for India. In this context, we have considered thirteen crucial parameters for selection of appropriate ETC system. Cost is found to be the pivotal selection criterion in India. Further, fuzzy logic based MADM (multiple attribute decision making) approach is employed for selection of optimal ETC system for India. RFID-based (radio frequency identification) ETC is found to be the most suitable alternative among all considered ETC technologies. Our results are in strong agreement with the report of apex committee, appointed by “Government of India (Ministry of Road Transport & Highways)” for implementation of ETC in India.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The most influential factor towards techno-socio-economic conditions of any country is the formulation of newer policies. An inappropriate decision can adversely affect the future scenarios of a nation. The major part of new policy formulation of the most of the countries is devoted to adoption of newer technologies. In this context, comprehensive investigation of all past, present and future technological, social, economical and environmental aspects is mandatory. A developed country follows the same protocol. On the other hand, third world countries (due to lack of resources) adopt the technologies which are already successfully implemented in the developed ones. It is to be noted that they ignore the key point of distinct resources, infrastructure, psychology of the people and many other socio-economic factors. Thus adoption as well as implementation of advanced technologies has become the most frightening as well as issue of prime concern in recent time. Present study addresses such an issue – “selection of an optimal electronic toll collection system for India”. In last few years, an exponential increase in number of automobiles is noticed in India [1–5]. This can also be easily observed at Toll Plazas. Other important observations are contribution towards pollution and increasing road congestion. These cause time wastage, accidents and unnecessary quarrels. World Bank's report in 2009 reflects the seriousness of the issue [6]. They have reported a loss of “six billion USD” every year in India only because of road congestion and adverse environmental impact caused due to it. In order to overcome this problem either we have to widen the road network or need to adopt comparatively better tolling systems. Widening of road network is quite difficult due to constraints of space and infrastructure. Thus we are left with the only solution that is adaption of better electronic toll collection systems (ETC).The most promising feasible ETC technologies in the world are based on (1) DSRC (dedicated short range communication) which covers barcode and RFID (radio frequency identification) [7–11], (2) video tolling that includes ANPR (automatic number plate reader) [12–15], (3) global positioning system (GPS) or geographic information system (GIS) or vehicle positioning system (VPS) and (4) infrared short range communication (ISRC) based on calm active infrared [16–21]. Barcode-based ETC has a bar-coded sticker attached to the vehicle and is read by a laser scanner when it passes through the toll plaza. It is the simplest as well as the oldest technology. It is widely used in various applications such as in library for managing book record, shopping plazas to take an account of sale and purchase, food industry to store food details and many more. Despite of these all it also has several drawbacks in order to be used for toll collection system such as lack of reliability (as can be easily imitated), less accuracy in bad weather, lack of flexibility, slow data read rate, less storage information and easy to be theft. Second technology is RFID-based ETC system [16,18], which has an In-vehicle unit (IVU) installed on the front windshield of the vehicle. This IVU interacts with the RFID frequency reader or antenna at toll plaza and transaction is done accordingly. It contains a cash card for payment of road tax which can either be prepaid or postpaid. It contains more information in comparison to barcode, has faster reading rate, tough to be fraudulent and also comparatively more reliable. It is also observed that sometimes it shows the problem of interference among frequency of devices (mobile phones, other IVU, walkie-talkies, FM radio or other electronic gadgets) in vicinity of the toll plaza or passing vehicles. Angle of installation and alignment plays an important role for reliability and high accuracy of these systems. Third important technology is ANPR [18,22]. It utilizes a stationary camera to record and identify the number plate of vehicles passing through toll plaza. The identified license numbers are matched in the database (connected with transport office) and toll is deducted. If the recorded number is not read properly or not found in the records, it issues an enforcement violation alarm to the alert the authorities. In this way, it simultaneously solves two objectives; identification of vehicle for deduction of toll tax and issuing/recording violation enforcement alert. The Indian government has started issuing “high security number plates”, which is tough to be falsified. Thus this technology will also be helpful to detect the stolen vehicles and vehicles with fake number plates. It also has constraints of high cost and reduced accuracy under tempestuous environment conditions. Calm active infrared [23–25] is a relatively new technology. It is similar to RFID system, the only difference is that it has an active infrared unit installed on vehicle which contains all the information. In comparison to RFID, it has a faster data reading rate, reliability, accuracy, efficiency and it works well in all environment conditions. It also comes over the problem of interference. Lack of interoperability, vendor support and high cost are the roadblocks in usage of this technology. Apart from these, it is still under research and many other aspects need to be studied yet. Fifth technology in this list is VPS. VPS-technique [8,26,27] consists of worldwide satellite navigation system incorporation with a communication mechanism. It works with the help of a global positioning system (GPS) unit installed on vehicle attached to an on board unit (OBU), which stores the coordinates of the vehicle and send the transaction information to the toll authorities via GSM (global system mobile communication). This system is highly reliable, accurate and efficient. The efficiency of this system is not affected by environmental conditions. It provides a payment option only for the distance travelled and is highly flexible in generating the corresponding payment details. It can also be used by the police petrol for highway surveillance and theft prevention of automobile. The associated shortcomings for this system are its excessively high installation, running and maintenance cost, careful handling, requirement of extra power and other accessories.It is clear that there are no clear trade-offs among the above mentioned technologies. Due to this, it becomes an important task to decide the best option among the existing ones. In such a state of ambiguity when one is not even able to choose the best among the existing alternative, there is no space for the question of adopting a hybrid technology. It also demotivates the policy makers to adopt newer advanced technologies. A single wrong decision can bring up loads of problems for coming generations with huge wastage of money and time. Therefore, it becomes essential to predict the best solution in terms of best alternative for such problems using a highly subjective decision making technique. Such problems can be tackled using multiple attribute decision making (MADM) techniques. A variety of methods are reported under MADM category. These methods include simple additive weighting (SAW), analytic hierarchy process (AHP) [28], graph theory and matrix approach (GTMA) [29], VlseKriterijumska Optimisacija I Kompromisno Resenje (VIKOR) [30], technique for order preference by similarity to ideal solution (TOPSIS) [31] and many others. These have been successfully applied to various fields such as manufacturing processes [32], supply chain management [33], social science decisions [34], financial decisions [35] and engineering problems [36,37]. These methods are also used by our group in last few years and found to be efficient and effective [38–47]. MADM models are used to select best alternative from the large number of alternatives for a set of selection criteria. Moreover, these also tell about the degree of closeness in terms of rank index. The above mentioned MADM approaches work on crisp values of attributes. However, in case of selection of advanced technologies, most of the attributes/parameters depend on views of various decision makers (such as user, operators, government, distributors, technical and economy experts etc.). There are no clear boundaries among the views of these decision makers. Such selection issues can be dealt with fuzzy set theory aid with MADM approaches. The aim of present work is to select the optimal ETC technology for Indian roads under fuzzy environment using fuzzy VIKOR methodology. The present study is one of the first efforts for selection of optimal ETC.We have identified the following parameters for the selection of optimum ETC system for Indian roads. These are based on our discussion with toll authorities, operators and users (daily users as well as occasional users); and reports published by various researchers and experts [18,26,48–54] about pros and cons of various technologies.ParameterDescriptionCost (C1)It is the prime factor for investing in any new technology. It includes cost of installation, running and maintenance. Before adopting a newer technology countrywide it is crucial to estimate about budget and this became vital in case of third world countries. So we have to make some compromises according to our financial aids.Reliability/accuracy (C2)It questions the ability of system not to create any confusion regarding vehicle identity and payment options. As almost in every country different category of vehicles (e.g. two-wheelers, SUV, buses, trucks, multi-axle vehicles etc.) have to pay different amount of toll fees for the same travelled distance. So there must not be any ambiguity in vehicle detection and corresponding money deduction.Negative environmental impact (C3)It describes the extent to which the technology is safer for environment. The main aim of adopting an advanced technology in present case is to reduce the losses due to environmental pollution and road congestion.Flexibility (C4)It is to be noted that sometimes apart from the main objective the same technology may also serve in several other manners. So it is always suggested to take an account of possible future prospective with a small compromise in current assets. Utilization of ETC systems for navigation, theft prevention of automobiles and traffic surveillance are well known examples of such secondary objectives.Congestion reduction (C5)Our main objective behind implementation of ETC system is reduction in road congestion. It is well known that ETC has two most popular versions namely: with or without gating system depending on AVI (automated vehicle identification) technology used. Again here arise many questions like what is the congestion rate at present; how much is required presently and in future; what is the cost for different congestion levels as well as reduced congestion levels (using ETC) in terms of fuel, environmental impact and amount spent for the technology. It is quite tedious to understand, and requires knowledge of both economic and technological issues.Data rate (C6)It is the rate at which the adopted system can read, detect and covey the information of vehicles passing through the toll plaza under normal conditions. It is influenced by many factors other than the capability of adopted system such as weather condition, mist, dust, presence of metals, positioning angle of tag and receiving antenna/camera.Acceptance (C7)It describes the willingness of people to accept the technology (users, operators, authorities and government). This varies man to man depending on their psychology and understanding.Implementation (C8)It judges the feasibility of implementation as per present infrastructure and economy of the country. We cannot impose huge changes in the infrastructure for just adopting a new technology thus it plays a crucial role in adoption of a newer technology.Theft detection (C9)There may be cases of fraudulence with the units installed on vehicles in order to get rid of road tax as there will be no regular manual checking. Therefore, the mechanism must be rigid enough against any kind of cheating. Still, if anyhow, it is cheated than it should be smart enough to alarm for any kind of counterfeiting.Maturity (C10)One should make sure that the technology is well known for its positive as well as negative aspects. If it is not so and some shortcomings are identified later than it will be problematic for all. Simultaneously, such circumstances will lead to wastage of huge amount of time and money.Ease to use (C11)Customers and operator both prefers handy technology and hence is one of the important criteria.System complexity (C12)ETC is not only a system but a network which connects a number of points including user, automated vehicle identification unit, vehicle classification unit, toll operator, transaction unit, violation enforcement, helpline and governing body. These all are interrelated. If any problem occurs in the network than it has to be resolved as soon as possible, which depends on simplicity of the system. It is observed that sometimes a small fault can affect the efficiency of complete system adversely.Access rate (C13)It defines the capability of a system (detection unit at the toll) to identify the number of vehicles at a time. It varies time to time depending on the congestion. During peak hours when congestion is high it is natural that it may not detect/miss a few vehicles due to very less spacing between consecutive vehicles or miss-alignment between transmitter and receiver. Similarly, an automobile at very high speed may be missed due to limitation of the installed devices. Thus the access range of detecting automobiles at peak hours and at high speed is termed as access rate.It is a fact that all the parameters have different impact for selection of an appropriate technology for a country and hence cannot be assigned equal weights. So it becomes vital to find out the priority of each parameter as per the assets (like economic condition, infrastructure, public and government convenience etc.) of a country. MDL is one of the well known techniques to estimate the weights under such conditions [55]. It includes expert opinion to assign initial priorities as 1, 2 and 3 for less, equally and more important parameters, respectively. Based on the expert opinion decision table is formed under pair-wise comparison. Prior to formation of the MDL table, one need to estimate the number of possible positive decisions as N=n(n−1)/n, where n is the number of attributes/technological parameters. Further summation of all positive decisions (P) for a particular parameter on normalization leads to final weight (Wj) as:(1)Wj=Pj∑j=1nPjThe VlseKriterijumska Optimisacija I Kompromisno Resenje (VIKOR) method is a compromise approach MADM model [30]. The analysis of VIKOR is highly accurate and provide close to real solution. It makes the use of utility weight, thus enabling the different users to apply expert opinion. The normalization norms used in VIKOR are linear.Fuzzy approach was introduced to tackle the problems with lack of precision [56], where there are no clear boundaries between the system and surroundings. It also deals with the problems where it is tough to distinguish between member and non-member objects of a set. Belleman and Zadeh [57] employed fuzzy approach for multiple criteria decision making. It emphasizes on the possibility rather than the probability. It is based on fuzzy set theory. Bevilacqua et al. [58] defined fuzzy set as a set comprised of a membership function within the interval [0,1], which describes the extent of relevance of an element for being member of the set. In this approach, initially all comparisons are done using linguistic variables. Further, these linguistic variables are assigned fuzzy values in order to have comparable numerical values without any ambiguity using appropriate membership function.In current study, we have used trapezoidal fuzzy numbers (a1, a2, a3, a4) for {a1, a2, a3, a4∈R;a1≤a2≤a3≤a4}. It is one of the simplest and most commonly used kinds of division for fuzzy numbers. The membership function μa(x) of trapezoidal fuzzy number is defined as(2)μa(x)=x−a1a2−a1,x∈[a1,a2]1,x∈[a2,a3]a4−xa4−a3,x∈[a3,a4]0OtherwiseFig. 1graphically illustrates trapezoidal fuzzy number.In this section, we have proposed the subjective fuzzy–VIKOR approach. This technique is used in the present study for selection of electronic toll collection system for Indian roads. We have used MDL for inter-comparison among all parameters leading to their corresponding subjective weights. Further it is followed by fuzzy VIKOR to obtain the best existing technology as per Indian economy and infrastructure. It includes following steps:Step 1Calculation of MDL weights.As discussed in Section 3 MDL weights (Wj) are calculated for each technological parameter. This judges the inter-criteria (parameter) comparison for each alternative (technology).Define linguistic terms, relevant membership function and corresponding fuzzy numbers.A set of fuzzy rates is required in order to compare all the alternatives for each criterion. These fuzzy terms are assigned by the policy/decision makers and responsible for intra criterion comparisons of the alternatives.Construction of decision matrix.Let n be the technological parameters (criteria) and m be the technologies (alternatives). For k number of decision makers in the purposed model the aggregated fuzzy rating for Cj criterion is represented as xijk={xijk1, xijk2, xijk3, xijk4}. For i=1,2,…m; j=1,2,…n and k=1,2,…k, xijkis calculated as [33,59]:(3)xij1=mink{aijk1}xij2=1k∑aijk2xij3=1k∑aijk3xij4=maxk{aijk4}Thus the obtained decision matrix (D) is shown as:D=x11x12⋯x1nx21x22⋯x2n⋮⋮⋱⋮⋮⋮⋱⋮xm1xm2⋯xmnNormalizationThe first basic necessity of any comparison is that all quantities being compared must be on the same scale. Therefore, our next step is normalization of aggregated fuzzy rating. Here, we can have two situations. One is properties with higher desired value (benefit criterion) and other is properties with lower desired value (cost criterion). For both the cases, normalization is done using the following Eqs.:(4)μij=xij1xij1+,xij2xij2+,xij3xij3+,xij4xij4+,j∈J(5)μij=xij1−xij1,xij2−xij2,xij3−xij3,xij4−xij4,j∈J′wherexij4+=max(xij4),j∈Jandxij1−=min(xij1),j∈J′; J corresponds to benefit criterion and J′ corresponds to cost criterion.Defuzzification.Defuzzification is performed to obtain the crisp values for each criterion corresponding to each alternative. This provides a quantitative value for the linguistic variables and fuzzy numbers assigned based on the verbal reasoning of the decision makers. Following equations lead to the crisp values:(6)fij=Defuzz(xij)=∫μ(x).xdx∫μ(x).dx=∫xij1xij2((x−xij1)/(xij2−xij1))⋅xdx+∫xij2xij3xdx+∫xij3xij4((xij4−x)/(xij4−xij3))⋅xdx∫xij1xij2((x−xij1)/(xij2−xij1))dx+∫xij2xij3dx+∫xij3xij4((xij4−x)/(xij4−xij3))dx=−xij1xij2+xij3xij4+(1/3)(xij4−xij3)2+(1/3)(xij2−xij1)2−xij1−xij2+xij3+xij4These crisp values, thus obtained are incorporated with MDL weightage to calculate final ranking using VIKOR approach as discussed below.Determination of ideal and negative ideal solutions;The ideal solution f* and the negative ideal solution f− are determined as:(7)f*={maxfij}(8)f−={minfij}Calculation of utility and regret measures;(9)Si=∑j=1nWj(fj*−fij)(fj*−fj−);∀i(10)Ri=MaxjWj(fj*−fij)(fj*−fj−);∀iwhere Siand Rirepresent the utility and regret measures, respectively and Wjis the relative weight assigned to the jth parameter using MDL.Determination of VIKOR index;(11)Qi=νSi−S*S−−S*+(1−ν)Ri−R*R−−R*;∀iwhere, Qirepresents the ith alternative's VIKOR value, ν is the group utility weight, it is generally considered as 0.5 (unsupervised) and;(12)S*=Mini(Si);(13)S−=Maxi(Si);(14)R*=Mini(Ri);(15)R−=Maxi(Ri);The alternative with least value of VIKOR index Qiis preferred.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
MADM methods are employed for selection of optimal electronic toll collection (ETC) system in India. Modified digital logic (MDL) method is used to calculate weightage of all influential parameters for evaluation of ETC system in India. Cost and flexibility are found to be the most and least critical parameters, respectively. Further priority order of ETC-technologies is determined using fuzzy VIKOR approach incorporation with MDL weights. RFID-based ETC system is found to be the most appropriate for Indian roads. ANPR and VPS are found to be at second and third positions respectively. The present study proposes the feasibility of fuzzy VIKOR method in policy formulation and adoption of optimal technologies as per infrastructure and economic conditions of a nation.