@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Nonlinear multiscale Maximal Lyapunov Exponent for accurate myoelectric signal classification

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We use nonlinear and non-stationary features of sEMG to identify various gestures.In order to reduce the complexity of EMD nonlinear MLE method is used.In order to improve characteristic stability we use a method based on nonlinear MLE.The proposed method classifies six different hand gestures up to 97.6% accuracy.The method can be used for prosthetics and other rehabilitation applications.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Empirical Mode Decomposition (EMD),Flexible Neural Trees (FNT),Hand gesture recognition,Maximal Lyapunov Exponent (MLE),Principal Component Analysis (PCA),Surface Electromyography (sEMG),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Surface Electromyography (sEMG) is a non-invasive, easy to record signal of superficial muscles from the skin surface. The sEMG is widely used in evaluating the functional status of the hand to assist in hand gesture recognition, prosthetics and rehabilitation applications. Considering the nonlinear and non-stationary characteristics of sEMG, hand gesture recognition using sEMG signals necessitate designers to use Maximal Lyapunov Exponent (MLE) or ensemble Empirical Mode Decomposition (EMD) based MLEs. In this research, we propose a hand gesture recognition method of sEMG based on nonlinear multiscale MLE. The aim is to increase the classification accuracy of sEMG features while reducing the complexity of EMD. The nonlinear MLE features are classified using Flexible Neural Tree (FNT), which can solve highly structured dependent problems of the Artificial Neural Network (ANN). The testing has been conducted using several experiments with five participants. The classification performance of nonlinear multiscale MLE method is compared with MLE and EMD-based MLE through simulations. Experimental results demonstrate that the former algorithm outperforms the two latter algorithms and can classify six different hand gestures up to 97.6% accuracy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Over the years, Myoelectric Control Systems (MCSs) have been extensively used for controlling assistive and rehabilitation devices by conducting the classified patterns of Surface Electromyography (sEMG) signals [1]. Surface EMG also known as myoelectric signal is an electrical potential which is generated by the muscle cells when these cells are electrically or neurologically activated [2]. It is detected from superficial muscles by using surface electrodes and deep layer muscles by using needle electrodes. The sEMG has various applications, for instance, doctors in hospital use sEMG for the diagnosis of neurological and neuromuscular problems, biomedical engineers use sEMG as a control signal for prosthetic devices including prosthetic hands, arms, lower limbs and intelligent wheelchairs. Also, sEMG has been widely used to detect medical abnormalities, activation level, and recruitment pattern to analyze the biomechanics of human or animal movement [1].In the biomedical research community, it is a well-known phenomenon that interference and cross-talk introduces non-linearity into the biomedical signals [3,4]. Most of the existing techniques used for sEMG feature extraction are generally based on the linearity of the signal; however, sometimes, this assumption may be compromised due to cross-talk and interference from the adjacent muscles. Moreover, the sEMG signal is extremely complex as it is influenced by several factors in the electrophysiology and the recording environment [3,4]. Numerous research studies have been conducted to investigate the complexity and non-linear nature of sEMG signals. Meng and Liu [5] studied the nonlinear determinacy of sEMG signals and concluded that EMG obeys a certain nonlinear and chaos characteristics within the signal. Padmanabhan and Puthusserypady [4] explored nonlinear chaotic method to study the nonlinear characteristics of sEMG signals, including correlation dimension, Lyapunov spectrum, Kaplan–Yorke dimension and recurrence plots. In a more recent study Ai et al. [6] have used Local Lyapunov Exponent (LLE) and Artificial Neural Network (ANN) to classify six different gestures. Although the results are satisfactory, the method suffers from issues such as training of data and classification errors.Non-linear time series methods such as phase-space reconstruction, chaotic characterization, non-linear prediction and Maximal Lyapunov Exponent (MLE) have not been used widely with sEMG signals. The MLE is based on a phase space, a construct which demonstrates the changes of the dynamical variables of the system. The sensitivity of a dynamical system to small problems can be quantified by MLE, which exemplifies the average rate of discrepancy in pseudo-periodic practices [7]. Although MLE is capable of modeling the local stability of the nonlinear system in space by analyzing the time-dependent behavior of kinematic variance about a target trajectory, some inherent defects still exist [8,9]. The MLE based methods including LLE, Wolf Lyapunov Exponent (WLE), Rosenstein Lyapunov Exponent (RLE), Kantz Lyapunov Exponent (KLE) and Ensemble Empirical Mode Decomposition (EEMD) based MLE are usually employed in biomechanics and human movement science [8]. LLE has high sensitivity to initial conditions and noise, whereas WLE, RLE and KLE are not easily affected by topology complexity and have certain anti-interference ability. However, WLE is susceptible to multi-parameter situations and requires a long data length [10]. Moreover, none of the above mentioned MLE methods can recognize the multiscale characteristic of fractional Brownian motion [3]. On the other hand, Empirical Mode Decomposition (EMD) based MLE method possesses the recognition ability of multiscale characteristic in fractional Brownian motion and has demonstrated higher sEMG classification accuracy [11]. But EMD based decomposition techniques have drawbacks, such as multiple dimensions, which cannot be reduced automatically [12].This research proposes a new technique based on nonlinear multiscale MLE. The motivation to use the nonlinear multiscale MLE for sEMG analysis is due to its ability to estimate the amount of chaos in a system. The nonlinear multiscale MLE differs from the traditional MLE or EMD – based MLE by more accurate and reliable recognition measurements of seems signals, more simplified EMD decomposition process and Intrinsic Mode Functions (IMFs) dimension reduction process.In this research, sEMG features were extracted using nonlinear multiscale MLE, and classified using Flexible Neural Tree (FNT). The advantage of using FNT is that it can solve structure dependent problem of the ANN. The recognition performance of the proposed nonlinear multiscale MLE myoelectric scheme is also compared with MLE and EMD-based MLE via simulations. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: the EMD, PCA, MLE and FNT principles are briefly summarized in the first part of the paper. The method, feature extraction and selection are then explained in detail. The classification and evaluation of the proposed method are explained in the third part. Final part of the paper discusses the outcome of the proposed research and discusses about future directions of the research.In order to explain the concept of NMMLE method, first of all it is imperative to briefly highlight the fundamental theory of MLE.EMD is a single-channel technique that decomposes any complicated time series data into a finite set of oscillatory modes called IMFs, and obtains instantaneous frequency data. EMD is the fundamental part of the Hilbert–Huang Transform (HHT), which was proposed by Huang et al. [13]. The definition of an IMF guarantees a well-behaved Hilbert transform of the IMF. This decomposition method operating in the time domain is adaptive and highly efficient. Since the decomposition is based on the local characteristic time scale of the data, it can be applied to both nonlinear and non-stationary processes.PCA is one of the widely used dimensional reduction technique. It is a mathematical procedure that uses an orthogonal transformation to convert a set of observations of possibly correlated variables X into a set of values of uncorrelated variables Y called Principal Components (PCs). PCs are guaranteed to be independent only if the data set is jointly or normally distributed. If a multivariate dataset is visualized as a set of coordinates in a high-dimensional data space (1 axis per variable), PCA can supply the user with a lower-dimensional picture and this is done by using only the first few PCs so that the dimensionality of the transformed data is reduced [14,15].In mathematics the Lyapunov exponent of a dynamical system is a quantity that characterizes the rate of separation of infinitesimally close trajectories. In general, spectrum of Lyapunov exponents is equal in number to the dimensionality of the phase space. The largest among them is the MLE, which determines a notion of predictability for a dynamical system. Because of the exponential growth rate, the effect of the other exponents (Lyapunov exponents) will be eliminated over time, and hence, the MLE does not use the Lyapunov method. The MLE is generally used for machine fault diagnosis, physiological rhythm measurement, muscle contraction and muscle activity detection. MLE can be defined as follows [16]:(1)λ=limt→∞limδZ0→01tIn|δZ(t)||δZ0|where δZ0 represents the initial separation and the limit δZ0→0 ensures the validity of the linear approximation at any time.A nearest neighbor based method for estimating the largest Lyapunov exponent was proposed by Sato et al. [17]. The calculation of this algorithm is simple and is similar to WOLF algorithm. The MLEs of the whole set of IMFS can be obtained by using SATO's method, where the distance of the adjacent orbits has typically multiplied by forecasting error on a log scale [18]. It can be defined as:(2)p(k)=1NTs∑n=1N1b||Xn+k−Xnn+k||||Xn−Xnn|where Tsis a sample period which can be obtained by Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) algorithm. N is the amount of phase points. In the path of phase space, ||Xn−Xnn|| is the distance between Xnnand Xn. Xnnis the nearest point from Xn. ||Xn+k−Xnn+k|| represents the distance between Xnnand Xnwhich is after k evolutionary step length. In the p(k)−k graph line, the slope of straight line is MLE.The FNT is a fuzzy model which was proposed mainly for solving highly structure dependent problems of the ANN. The FNT has been applied in many areas such as face recognition and microarray-based cancer classification [19]. In comparing models for the non-linear function approximation, it has lower Mean Square Error (MSE) than back-propagation and fuzzy clustering techniques [19–21]. The function instruction operators F and instruction terminals T used for evolving a FNT model with instruction set S are described as:(3)S=F∪T={+2,+3,…,+N}∪{x1,x2,…,xn}where +i(i=2, 3, …, N) denote instructions of non-leaf nodes which take i arguments, ∪ represents joining function (joins F and T), and x1, x2, …, xnrepresent instructions of leaf nodes which take no other arguments. It is shown clearly that the output of a non-leaf node +n, which is also known as a flexible neuron operator, is calculated as a flexible neuron model with n arguments.In the FNT construction process, when a non-leaf instruction +i(i=2, 3, …, N) is selected, i real values are evolved automatically and used for demonstrating the connection strength between the node +iand its children. The output of a flexible neuron +ncan be calculated as:(4)netn=∑j=1nωjxjwhere xj(j=1, 2, …, n) are the inputs to node +nand ωjis the weight connection between xjand +nIn flexible activation function f(ai, bi, x), two adjustable parameters aiand biare randomly created as flexible activation function parameters. When flexible activation function is determined, the output of the node +nis calculated by:(5)outn=f(an,bn,netn)=e−((x−an)/bn)2where anand bnthe parameters are adjustable parameters. The FNT model can be created and evolved using the existing or modified tree-structure-based approaches, which include Probabilistic Incremental Program Evolution (PIPE) and Ant Programming (AP). Normally, the fitness function used for the PIPE and Simulated Annealing (SA) can be given by Mean Square Error (MSE) or Root Mean Square Error (RMSE). The FNT model is computed as an irregular flexible multi-layer feed-forward neural network. Based on the pre-defined instruction/operator sets, a flexible neural tree can be created and evolved. In this approach, over-layer connections, different activation functions for different nodes and input variables selection are allowed.The proposed method incorporates both optimization techniques. Starting with random structures and corresponding parameters, it first tries to improve the structure and then as soon as an improved configuration is found, it fine tunes its parameters. It then goes back to improve the structure again and fine tunes the configuration and rules’ parameters. This loop continues until a satisfactory solution is found or a time limit is reached. The FNT model works well for generating an approximating model of the static non-linear system [22,23].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, a hand gesture recognition method of sEMG based on nonlinear multiscale MLE and FNT is proposed. The nonlinear multiscale MLE method was adopted to extract features of sEMG signals and separate the main potential changes and these effects. FNT was used for hand gesture recognition based on feature values of sEMG signals. The study produced two important results.The hand gesture recognition model, based on sEMG signals by using the nonlinear multiscale MLE method and FNT, is a novel sEMG signal action recognition model. It can adapt to the nonlinear and non-stationary characteristic of sEMG and can increase the classification accuracy of sEMG-based gestures. The nonlinear multiscale MLE method proved to be a good substitute for the EMD-based MLE method in bio-signal application as the former method can reduce dimensions of EMD decomposition automatically.In conclusion, the nonlinear multiscale MLE method can obtain multiple characteristics of sEMG signal in the multiple scales and characterize the corresponding actions better. The FNT model is generated and evolved based on the pre-defined simple instruction sets, which can solve highly structure dependent problems of the ANN. The recognition model is able to classify six different hand gestures with higher classification accuracy. Future research will be to develop a real time myoelectric system based on the proposed scheme and test the robustness of the individual features such as electrode shift, electrode size and orientation, on amputees. Furthermore, the proposed technique could be tailored with more functional prosthetic arms using current machine learning approaches and most efficient rehabilitation programs.