@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Hybrid intelligent modeling schemes for heart disease classification

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new hybrid intelligent modeling scheme for classifying heart disease was proposed.The proposed schemes integrate the framework of logistic regression, MARS, ANN and rough set techniques.Numerical results reveal that the proposed hybrid schemes are more efficient than the existing single stage methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hybrid,Logistic regression,MARS,Artificial neural network,Rough sets,Heart disease,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Heart disease is the leading cause of death among both men and women in most countries in the world. Thus, people must be mindful of heart disease risk factors. Although genetics play a role, certain lifestyle factors are crucial contributors to heart disease. Traditional approaches use thirteen risk factors or explanatory variables to classify heart disease. Diverging from existing approaches, the present study proposes a new hybrid intelligent modeling scheme to obtain different sets of explanatory variables, and the proposed hybrid models effectively classify heart disease. The proposed hybrid models consist of logistic regression (LR), multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS), artificial neural network (ANN), and rough set (RS) techniques. The initial stage of the proposed process includes the use of LR, MARS, and RS techniques to reduce the set of explanatory variables. The remaining variables are subsequently used as inputs for the ANN method employed in the second stage. A real heart disease data set was used to demonstrate the development of the proposed hybrid models. The modeling results revealed that the proposed hybrid schemes effectively classify heart disease and outperform the typical, single-stage ANN method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The heart can be viewed as the body's engine: it is responsible for pumping life-sustaining blood via a network of vessels. Although most people know that the heart must be properly cared for, heart disease has risen steadily over the last century and has become the leading cause of death for people in the United States [1]. In addition, due to the necessity for the prevention of heart disease, the UK government provides 169 million European dollars to fund research on coronary heart disease [2].Several studies have been devoted to using some single classification algorithm for the classification of eye diseases [3] and of brain diseases [4,5]. Different from most studies, this paper aims to propose a novel hybrid scheme for the classification of heart diseases. The heart disease data sets used in the present study were real data obtained from a UCI machine learning benchmark repository [6]. Due to its importance to mankind, many studies [7–9] on modeling procedures for heart disease classification have been conducted. Although heart disease data sets have 75 explanatory variables and one dependent variable (i.e., the presence or absence of heart disease), almost every study uses 13 explanatory variables to predict or classify the dependent variable. Although one can use the aforementioned variables to classify heart disease through the use of logistic regression (LR) techniques or machine learning approaches, the true relationship between these measurements and heart disease is not easy to determine. Besides, by using a single technology to address all of the classification problems may not always be possible [10–13]. To overcome the aforementioned limitations and maintain the classification accuracies of existing approaches for heart disease, the purpose of the present study was to determine the classification performance of hybrid modeling schemes that integrate the techniques of logistic regression, multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS) and rough sets (RS) with artificial neural networks (ANN).The LR model is a forecasting or classification technique that is widely used in many practical applications. However, the LR model is sometimes criticized for its strong assumptions such as variation homogeneity. As a result, the LR model has limited applications. MARS is typically able to effectively reveal important data patterns and relationships within the complex data structures that often hide in high-dimensional data. In addition to LR and MARS techniques, ANN has become a fruitful alternative in modeling classification problems due to its ability to capture complex nonlinear relationships among variables. Consequently, ANN has superior classification capabilities compared to regression techniques [14–23]. However, ANN is criticized for its long training process in the design of optimal network topologies and difficulties in identifying the relative importance of potential input variables [24,25].Rough set theory is a new effective classification tool for dealing with vagueness and uncertainty information [26]. Attribute reduction is one of the most important concepts of rough set theory. Irrelevant and redundant attributes are removed from the decision without any a priori information. Meanwhile, the knowledge mined by rough set theory can be expressed and saved as a rule. Due to these advantages, rough set theory has been widely used in many fields [26]. Although rough set theory has been successfully used to find data dependencies and feature subsets in various works, its running time, which is polynomial, is relatively long.The procedure for hybrid modeling is to initially use LR, MARS and RS techniques to model heart disease data sets. Because there is no theoretical approach for determining the best input variables for an ANN model, LR, MARS and RS can be implemented to determine a good subset of input variables when many potential variables are considered as input vectors of the designed ANN model. The resulting fewer but more significant explanatory variables are used as inputs to the ANN model. In terms of classification capability, the present study compares the traditional single stage of the MARS model, RS model, ANN model, and the proposed hybrid model for heart disease application. The superior classification capability of the proposed hybrid approach is addressed.The remainder of the study is organized as follows: the methodologies of LR, MARS, RS and ANN are discussed in Section 2, and a literature review is provided, as well. The designed LR, MARS, RS and ANN models are presented in Section 3, and a real heart disease data set is used to verify the proposed and typical models. The final section addresses the research findings and concludes the present study.Heart disease is one of the most serious diseases for human beings; thus, heart disease classification is an important issue. In the present study, we employed the techniques of LR, MARS, RS, and ANN and the proposed hybrid LR–ANN, MARS–ANN and RS–ANN models to classify heart disease. These methodologies are addressed in the following sections.LR is one of the most common statistical methods for modeling real applications. The modeling process involves the setup of relationships between one dependent or response variable and several independent or explanatory variables. The performance of LR is typically acceptable, as long as the required assumptions have been met. However, the assumptions of the LR model (for example, variation homogeneity) often confine its application.The framework of LR can be simply described as follows. Let Yirepresent dependent variables in case i and let Yi=0 or Yi=1, where 0 denotes the absence of heart disease and 1 denotes the presence of heart disease. Let(1)Pr[Yi=1|X1i,X2i,X3i,...,Xni]=πiPr[Yi=0|X1i,X2i,X3i,...,Xni]=1−πibe the probabilities of Yi=1 and Yi=0 under a set of given independent variables (X1i, X2i, ..., Xni). Therefore, the logistic regression model has the following form:(2)lnπi1−πi=β0+β1X1i+...+βnXniA collinearity diagnosis should be initially implemented to exclude variables exhibiting high collinearity. Consequently, the remaining variables can be employed for LR modeling. In addition, the Wald forward method was used to recognize explanatory variables with significant influence.MARS has been generally applied in many fields [25,27–34]. The general MARS function can be represented as follows [34]:(3)f^(x)=b0+∑m=1Mbm∏k=1KmSkm(xν(k,m)−tkm)where b0and bmare parameters, M is the number of basis functions (BF), Kmis the number of knots, Skmtakes on values of either 1 or −1 and indicates the right or left sense of the associated step function, ν(k, m) is the independent variable, and tkmis the knot location.The optimal MARS model was chosen using a two-stage process. First, we set up a large number of basis functions to fit the data. Second, the basis functions with the least contributions were deleted using generalized crossvalidation (GCV) criterion. A measure of variable importance can be obtained by observing the decrease in the calculated GCV values when a variable is removed from the model. The GCV can be expressed as follows:(4)LOF(fM^)=GCV(M)=1/N∑i=1N[yi−fM^(xi)]2[1−(C(M)/N)]2In recent years, ANN has been widely applied in engineering, education, social science, medical research, business and forecasting [35–41]. ANN nodes are divided into three layers, including the input, output and hidden layers. The structure of ANN can be briefly described as follows. For each neuron j in the hidden layer and neuron k in the output layer, the net inputs are given as:(5)netj=∑iwji×oi,andnetk=∑jwkj×oj,where i (j) is a neuron in the previous layer, oi(oj) is the output of node i (j) and wji(wkj) is the connection weight from neuron i (j) to neuron j (k). The neuron outputs can be described as:(6)oi=neti(7)oi=11+exp−(neti+θi)=fi(neti,θi)(8)ok=11+exp−(neti+θi)=fi(netk,θk)where netj(netk) is the input signal from the external source to node j(k) in the input layer and θj(θk) is a bias. The transformation function shown in Eqs. (7) and (8) is a sigmoid function and is the most commonly utilized function to date. Thus, the aforementioned sigmoid function was used in the present study.The concept of rough set was introduced in the early 1980s [26,42]. Rough set theory is an extension of the set theory used for the study of intelligent systems characterized by inexact, uncertain or vague information and can serve as a new mathematical tool for soft computing [43]. General elements engaged in rough set theory can be described as outlined in the following section.We can define an information system as a set of objects represented in a data table, where the rows in the table are considered the objects of analysis, and the columns represent measurable attributes of each object. Thus, an information system, I=(U, A), can be treated as a system, where U is a finite set of objects, and A is a finite set of attributes. Moreover, the attributes in A can be further classified into disjoint condition attributes C and decision attributes D, such that A=C∪D and C∩D=∅.Let I=(U, A) be an information system. For every subset of attributes B of A, an indiscernibility relation on U is denoted and defined as:INDA(B)={(x, y)∈U×U: for all a∈B, a(x)=a(y)}, where a∈A and B⊆A.If (x, y)∈INDA(B), then object x and y are indiscernible from each other when considering subset B of attributes [44]. This is known as equivalence relation, and every subset of A induces a unique indiscernible relation.By giving I=(U, A) and placing INDA(B) on universe U with respect to attribute set B⊆A, a B-lower approximation of X (B_X) and a B-upper approximation of X (B¯X) were defined as follows for a given set X⊆U:B_X={x:[x]B⊆X}andB¯X={x:[x]B∪X≠∅}where [x]B denotes the equivalence class of B containing x for any element x of U. The lower approximation consists of objects that definitely belong to X, and the upper approximation contains objects that possibly belong to X. Consequently, X is classified as a rough set if its B boundary region,BNB(X)=B¯X−B_X, is non-empty. In other words, there is a region of uncertainty regarding set membership. This uncertainty may be quantified for individual points x by assessing the degree of overlap between the indiscernibility class [x]B and the rough set X. In this manner, classifications maintain a global sense of knowledge.To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach, a real heart disease data set was used to verify the proposed and typical models. The data set consisted of the records of 899 people. Each record consisted of 14 variables, and the data are summarized in Table 1(readers can refer to the web site of University of California, Irvine [6] for more details on the data set).The response variable of the LR model was defined as Y. The first step in processing the raw data was to clean the data, and cases with missing measurements were deleted. As a result, the sample size became 280 cases. Among the 280 cases used in the present study, the first 168 cases (approximately 60% of the total cases) were selected as the model building set (training sample), while the remaining 112 cases (approximately 40% of the total cases) were retained as the validation set (testing sample).The neural networks simulator Qnet97, which was developed by Vesta Services Inc., was used to develop the ANN models and the two-stage hybrid classification models. Qnet97 is a C-based simulator that provides a system for developing backpropagation neural network (BPN) configurations using a generalized delta learning algorithm. The LR model was implemented using SPSS. The MARS model was constructed using MARS, which was developed by Salford Systems. The RESE (rough set exploration system) created by the research team supervised by Professor Andrzej Skowron was applied to construct the rough set model used in the present study. This software system implements the basic elements of rough set theory and rule discovery techniques. The detailed modeling and forecasting results using the aforementioned techniques are described in the following section.In this study, the single-stage modeling involves LR, MARS, RS and ANN. The Wald forward method was used to select significant explanatory variables. We needed to compute the variance inflation factor (VIF) to examine the presence of collinearity. If the value of VIF was greater than 10, we deemed the existence of serious multicollinearity in the model [45].In the present study, the maximum VIF for the LR model was 1.79, which is less than 10. The selected variables are listed in Table 2. The explanatory variables chosen in this stage were used as inputs for the ANN employed in the hybrid model.The MARS selection results are shown in Table 3. In the selection process, six significant explanatory variables were chosen, and the corresponding relative importance indicators are listed in the last column of Table 3. The structure of the proposed ANN is described in the current section. More than 75% of neural network applications use the backpropagation neural network (BPN) structure; thus, the BPN was used in the present study to construct the ANN forecasting model. When using ANN in the single stage, we employed 13 input nodes and one output node in the ANN structure. The hidden nodes were set up to be n±2, where n is the number of input variables. Thus, in the initial phase, the hidden nodes were chosen as 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15.According to previous findings [46], the learning rates were set as 0.01, 0.005 and 0.001. After performing ANN modeling, we found that the {13-13-1} topology with a learning rate of 0.01 provided the best results and a minimal testing RMSE. Here, {ni–nh–no} stands for the number of neurons in the input layer, hidden layer and output layer, respectively.Variable selection was also achieved by applying rough set theory, which compares equivalence relations generated by sets of variables. Variables were removed so that the reduced set provided the same quality of classification as the original set. Using the greedy heuristics algorithm in RESE software, we performed variable selection on the heart disease data set. The results showed that 10 out of 13 variables were selected. The selected variables were X2, X3, X4, X6, X7, X9, X10, X11, X12 and X13. All of the variables were used as inputs to ANN in the hybrid model.While most studies use all 13 variables (refer to Table 1 for more details) as explanatory variables to classify heart disease, the aim of the present study was to develop hybrid models with less input variables and still maintain good classification capability. Because ANN is not suitable for initial variables selection, this study employs the other 9 possible hybrid modeling schemes; namely, LR–ANN, MARS–ANN, RS–ANN, LR–MARS, RS–MARS, LR–RS, MARS–RS, MARS–LR and RS–LR, respectively. LR, MARS and RS models were used to obtain 12, 6 and 10 important explanatory variables to classify heart disease. As a result, these 12, 6 and 10 explanatory variables were used as inputs to the hybrid classifiers.For the hybrid LR–ANN model, we set up 12 input nodes in the input layer, and the number of hidden nodes was set to 10, 11, 12, 13, and 14. The learning rates were identical to those used in the single-stage ANN model. That is, the learning rates were 0.01, 0.005, and 0.001, respectively. Again, the network topology with the lowest testing RMSE was considered the optimal network topology. The {12-12-1} topology with a learning rate of 0.01 provided the best results for the hybrid LR–ANN model. For the MARS–ANN hybrid model, we used 6 input nodes in the input layer. The number of hidden nodes was set to 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8. Accordingly, the {6-5-1} topology with a learning rate of 0.01 provided the best results. For the RS–ANN hybrid model, we used 10 input nodes in the input layer. The number of hidden nodes was set to 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12. The {10-10-1} topology with a learning rate of 0.01 provided the best results.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Heart disease classification is an important issue for human health. The purpose of the present study was to propose a hybrid classification model for heart disease. The rationale of the proposed scheme was initially to obtain fewer significant explanatory variables by performing LR and MARS modeling. The resulting significant independent variables were used as inputs for the designed ANN model. According to the experimental results shown in Table 4, the proposed two-stage hybrid approaches were most appropriate for classifying heart disease. Moreover, the proposed hybrid MARS–ANN model was the best alternative because it contained the least number of explanatory variables and provided the best classification accuracy.Artificial intelligence methodology is very useful in many aspect of application such as engineering [48–51], credit risk modeling [52], medicine [25] and behavior modeling [53–57]. Among the established artificial intelligence techniques, the multi-stage hybrid procedure is a commonly used method. This study develops several two-stage hybrid approaches for heart diseases classification. To achieve higher classification of heart disease, one may collect more important variables. In addition, the proposed hybrid model is not the only classification technique that can be employed. For instance, one can combine other artificial intelligence techniques, such as decision trees or genetic algorithms, with neural networks or support vector machines to refine the structure further and improve the classification accuracy. The possibility to apply the same procedure to combine other methods as are the evolving systems of [58–63] deserves further research. It is worthy of further investigation in the future.