@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Simulation based neuro-fuzzy hybrid intelligent PI control approach in four-area load frequency control of interconnected power system

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel control approach of hybrid neuro-fuzzy for load frequency control of four area power system is presented.This controller can handle the non-linearities at the same time it is faster than other existing controllers.The effectiveness of proposed controller is to damps out local and inter area modes of oscillation.Performance evaluation is carried out by using fuzzy, ANN, ANFIS and conventional PI and PID control approaches.The intelligent HNF controller is having improved dynamic response and faster than other controllers.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Load frequency control (LFC),ANFIS,ANN and fuzzy,Area control error (ACE),MATLAB/Simulink,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a novel control approach of hybrid neuro-fuzzy (HNF) for load frequency control (LFC) of four-area power system. The advantage of this controller is that it can handle the non-linearities, and at the same time it is faster than other existing controllers. The effectiveness of proposed controller in increasing the damping of local and inter area modes of oscillation is demonstrated in four area interconnected power system. Area-1 and area-2 consist of thermal reheat power plant whereas area-3 and area-4 consist of hydro power plant. Performance evaluation is carried out by using fuzzy, ANN, ANFIS and conventional PI and PID control approaches. The performances of the controllers are simulated using MATLAB/Simulink package. The result shows that intelligent HNF controller is having improved dynamic response and at the same time faster than ANN, fuzzy and conventional PI and PID controllers.subscript referring to area (i=1, 2, 3, 4)nominal system frequencyinertia constantincremental load changeincremental generation changeDi=ΔPDiΔfisteam governor time constantreheat constantreheat time constantsteam turbine time constantgovernor speed regulation parameterfrequency bias constant2Hi/f×Di1/Difeedback gain of FLCwater starting timearea control errorpowergenerated voltageterminal voltageangle of the voltage (V)change in anglechange in powerchange in supply frequencyspeed changer positionspeed regulation of the governorgain of speed governortime constant of speed governor1/B=power system gain2H/Bf0=power system time constant

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The main objective of automatic generation control (AGC) is to balance the total system generation against system load losses so that the desired frequency and power interchange with neighboring system is maintained. Any mismatch between generation and demand causes the system frequency to deviate from the nominal value. This high frequency deviation may lead to system partial or complete collapse. AGC comprises a load frequency control (LFC) loop and an automatic voltage regulator (AVR) loop interconnected power systems regulate power flows and frequency by means of an AGC. LFC system provides generator load control via frequency zero steady-state errors of frequency deviations and optimal transient behavior are objectives of the LFC in a multi-area interconnected power system [1]. Load frequency control (LFC) is being used for several years as part of the automatic generation control (AGC) scheme in electric power systems [2–5]. A control strategy is needed that not only maintains constancy of frequency and desired tie-power flow but also achieves zero steady state error and inadvertent interchange. Among the various types of load frequency controllers, the most widely employed is the conventional proportional integral (PI) controller. The PI and PID controllers are very simple for implementation and gives better dynamic response, but their performances deteriorate when the complexity in the system increases due to disturbances like load variation boiler dynamics [6,7]. Therefore, there is need of a controller which can overcome this problem. The artificial intelligent controllers like fuzzy and neural control approaches are more suitable in this respect. Fuzzy system has been applied to the load frequency control problems with rather promising results by Nanda [8]. The literature survey says that by the application of conventional controllers such as PI and PID, though the steady state error is minimized to zero but it fails when the system complexity increases due to many interconnections and non-linearity. The performance of fuzzy controllers is much better than the conventional controllers [9–13]. The salient feature of these techniques is that they provide a model-free description of control systems and do not require model identification. The controllers based on ANN technique further improve the performance once it is trained by taking a suitable number of neural network and plant identifications [12,13]. The state of art provided by the authors mentioned in [14–16] reveals that conventional and intelligent controllers designed for AGC; however a better track on the frequency deviation can be provided by the intelligent control approaches. The variable structure control also reduces some of the oscillations in frequency and tie-line power changes.In this paper an attempt has been made to apply hybrid neuro-fuzzy (HNF) controller for automatic load frequency control for the four-area interconnected power system. With the help of MATLAB a class of adoptive network that are functionally equivalent to fuzzy inference system have been proposed. The proposed architecture referred to as ANFIS. The performance of the hybrid neuro-fuzzy controller is compared with the Fuzzy, ANN and conventional PI and PID controller to show its superiority.Interconnected power system consists of many control areas connected by tie-lines. Power system has had complex and multi-variable structures. Also they consist of many different control blocks. Most of them are non-linear time variant and/or non-minimum phase systems. All the generators are supposed to constitute a coherent group in each control area. From the experiment on power system, it can be seen that each area needs its system frequency and tie line power flow to be controlled. Frequency control is accomplished by two different control actions in interconnected four-area power system: primary speed control and supplementary or secondary control actions. The primary speed control makes the initial coarse readjustment of the frequency. By its action, the various generators in the control area track a load variation and share it in proportion to their capacities. The speed of the response is limited only by the natural time lags of the turbine and the system itself. The secondary loops takes over the fine adjustment of frequency by resetting the frequency error to zero through integral action. The relationship between speed and load can be adjusted by changing a load reference set point input. In practice, the adjustment of load reference set point is accomplished by operating the speed changer motor. The output of each unit at a given system frequency can be varied only by changing its load reference, which, in effect, moves the speed droop characteristics up and down. This control is considerably slower and goes into action only when the primary control has done its job. For power and load sharing among generators connected to the system, speed regulation or droop characteristic must be provided [2]. The speed droop or regulation characteristic may be obtained by intelligent controllers. The four-area hydro-thermal power system interconnected with tie-lines is shown in Fig. 1.In this paper, the performance evaluation based on ANN, Fuzzy and ANFIS control technique for four areas interconnected thermal-hydro power plant is proposed. The sliding concept arises due to variable structure concept. The objective of VSC has been greatly extended from stabilization to other control functions. The most distinguished feature of VSC is its ability to result in very robust control systems and external disturbances [17–19]. The aim of control areas is as:(i)Each control area as for as possible should supply its own load demand and power transfer through tie line should be on mutual agreement.Each control areas should controllable to the frequency control [18].In an isolated control area case the incremental power (ΔPG−ΔPD) was accounted for by the rate of increase of stored kinetic energy and increase in area load caused by increase in frequency. The MATLAB model of four-area hydro-thermal reheat power system simulated is shown in Fig. 1.The stat variable for each of areas are ΔPi(i=1, …, 4) and state space equation related to the variables are different for each areas.(1)ΔP1(k)=ΔP12(k)+a41ΔP41(k)(2)ΔP2(k)=ΔP23(k)+a12ΔP12(k)(3)ΔP3(k)=ΔP34(k)+a23ΔP23(k)(4)ΔP4(k)=ΔP41(k)+a34ΔP34(k)Tie-line bias control is used to eliminate steady state error in frequency in tie-line power flow. This states that the each control area must contribute their share to frequency control in addition for taking care of their own net interchange.LetACE1=area control error of area 1ACE2=area control error of area 2ACE3=area control error of area 3ACE4=area control error of area 4In this control, ACE1, ACE2 and ACE3 are made linear combination of frequency and tie line power error [2].(5)ACE1=ΔP12+b1Δf1(6)ACE2=ΔP23+b2Δf2(7)ACE3=ΔP34+b3Δf3(8)ACE4=ΔP41+b4Δf4where the constant b1, b2, b3 and b4 are called area frequency bias of area 1, area 2, area 3 and area 4 respectively. Now ΔPR1, ΔPR2, ΔPR3 and ΔPR4 are mode integral of ACE1, ACE2, ACE3 and ACE4 respectively.Control methodology used is mentioned in the next preceding sections.The task of load frequency controller is to generate a control signal Uithat maintains system frequency and tie-line interchange power at predetermined values. The proportional and integral control scheme is shown in Fig. 2[18].(9)Ui=−Ki∫0T(ACEi)dt=−Ki∫0T(ΔPTiei+BiΔFi)dtTaking the derivative of Eq. (9) yields(10)Ui=−Ki(ACEi)=−Ki(ΔPTiei+BiΔFi)Fuzzy logic is a thinking process or problem-solving control methodology incorporated in control system engineering, to control systems when either all the inputs are imprecise or the mathematical models are not present at all. Fuzzy logic can process a reasonable number of inputs but the system complexity increases with the increase in the number of inputs and outputs; therefore, distributed processors would probably be easier to implement. Fuzzification is process of making a crisp quantity into the fuzzy [20,21]. They carry considerable uncertainty. If the form of uncertainty happens to arise because of imprecision, ambiguity, or vagueness, then the variable is probably fuzzy and can be represented by a membership function.Defuzzification is the conversion of a fuzzy quantity to a crisp quantity, just as fuzzification is the conversion of a precise quantity to a fuzzy quantity. There are many methods of defuzzification, out of which smallest of maximum method is applied in making fuzzy inference system. The Fuzzy logic control consists of three main stages, namely the fuzzification interface, the inference rules engine and the defuzzification interface [22–24]. For load frequency control the process operator is assumed to respond to variables error (e) and change of error (ce). The fuzzy logic controller with error and change in error is shown in Fig. 3.The variable error is equal to the real power system frequency deviation (Δf). The frequency deviation Δf, is the difference between the nominal or scheduled power system frequency (fN) and the real power system frequency (f). Taking the scaling gains into account, the global function of the FLC output signal can be written as.(11)ΔPc=F[nee(k),ncece(k)]where neand nceare the error and the change in error scaling gains, respectively, and F is a fuzzy non-linear function. FLC is dependant to its inputs scaling gains [15]. A label set corresponding to linguistic variables of the input control signals, e(k) and ce(k), with a sampling time of 0.01s is given. An attempt has been made to examine with seven number of triangular membership function (MFs) namely negative big (NB), negative medium (NM), negative small (NS), zero (ZO), positive small (PS), positive medium (PM) and positive big (PB) are used. The range on input (error in frequency deviation and change in frequency deviation), i.e., universe of discourse is −0.25 to 0.25 and −0.01 to 0.01. The numbers of rules are 49 (Table 1).ANN is an information processing system, in this system the element called as neurons process the information. The signals are transmitted by means of connecting links. The links process an associated weight, which is multiplied along with the incoming signal (net input) for any typical neural net. The output signal is obtained by applying activations to the net input. The field of neural networks covers a very broad area [25,26]. The structure of artificial neuron network is shown in Fig. 4.Neural network architecture the multilayer perceptron as unknown function are shown in Fig. 5, which is to be approximated. Parameters of the network are adjusted so that it produces the same response as the unknown function, if the same input is applied to both systems. The unknown function could also represent the inverse of a system being controlled in this case the neural network can be used to implement the controller [27].The ANN controller architecture employed here is a non-linear auto regressive model reference adoptive controller. This controller requires the least computation of the three architectures. This controller is simply a rearrangement of the neural network plant model, which is trained offline, in batch form. It consists of reference, plant out put and control signal. The controller is adaptively trained to force the plant output to track a reference model output. The model network is used to predict the effect of controller changes on plant output, which allows the updating of controller parameters. In the study, the frequency deviations, tie-line power deviation and load perturbation of the area are chosen as the neural network controller inputs [27–29]. The outputs of the neural network are the control signals, which are applied to the governors in the area. The data required for the ANN controller training are obtained from the designing the reference model neural network and applying to the power system with step response load disturbance. After a series of trial and error and modifications, the ANN architecture provides the best performance (Tables 2 and 3).The proposed network has been trained by using the learning performance. Learning algorithms cause the adjustment of the weights so that the controlled system gives the desired response [29].The ANFIS controller combines the advantages of fuzzy controller as well as quick response and adaptability nature of ANN. Fundamentally, ANFIS is about taking a fuzzy inference system (FIS) and tuning it with a back propagation algorithm based on some collection of input–output data. This allows fuzzy systems to learn. A network structure facilitates the computation of the gradient vector for parameters in a fuzzy inference system. Since ANFIS is much more complex than the fuzzy inference systems discussed so far, all the available fuzzy inference system options cannot be used. Specifically, ANFIS only supports Sugeno systems subject to the following constraints [30]:•First order Sugeno-type systems,Single output derived by weighted average defuzzification,Unity weight for each rule,AND method: prod,OR method: max,Implication method: prod,Aggregation method: maxOn the other hand, users can provide to ANFIS their own number of MFs (num MFs) both for input and outputs of the fuzzy controller, the number of training and checking data sets (numPts), the MF's type (mfType), the optimization criterion for reducing the error measure (usually defined by the number of the squared difference between actual and linearized N curve) [30,31] (Fig. 6).Assume that the fuzzy inference system has two inputs x and y and one output z. A first-order Sugeno fuzzy model has rules as the following:(12)Rule1:IfxisA1andyisB1,thenf1=p1x+q1y+r1(13)Rule2:IfxisA2andyisB2,thenf2=p2x+q2y+r2The great advantage of neuro-fuzzy design method comparing with fuzzy design method consists in the small number of input and output MFs (usually 2…4), which implies the same maximum number of rules. Thus, the rule base and the occupied memory became very small. The ANFIS Architecture is shown in Fig. 7[32].From the proposed ANFIS architecture, it is observed that given the values of premise parameters, the overall output can be expressed as linear combinations of the consequent parameters. More precisely, the output f in this figure can be rewritten as:(14)f=w1w1+w2f1+w2w1+w2f2=w¯1fi+w¯2f2=(w¯1x)p1+(w¯1y)q1+(w¯1)r1+(w¯2x)p2+(w¯2y)q2+(w¯2)r2Wiis the normalized firing strength from layer 3. (pi, qi, ri) is the parameter set of this node. These are referred to as consequent parameters. The ANFIS architecture has following three layers of operation:Fuzzification layer; (ii) fuzzy rule layer; (iii) defuzzification layer [32].Adaptive network is in fact a superset of all kinds of feed forward neural networks with supervised learning capability. An adaptive network, as its name implies, is a network structure consisting of nodes and directional link through which the nodes are connected. Moreover, part or all of the nodes are adaptive, which means their outputs depends on parameter(s) pertaining to these nodes, and learning rule specifies how these parameters should be changed to minimize a prescribed error measure. Since the basic learning rule is based on the gradient method which is notorious for its slowness and tendency to become trapped in local minima, here a hybrid learning rule is proposed which can speed up the learning process substantially [31,32].•Steps for designing ANFIS controllerThe basic steps followed for designing the ANFIS controller in MATLAB/Simulink is outlined:(i)To draw the Simulink model with fuzzy controller and simulate it with the given rule base.The first step for designing the ANFIS controller is collecting the training data while simulating the model with fuzzy controller.The two inputs, i.e., ACE and d(ACE)/dt and the output signal gives the training data.To use ANFISEDIT to create the ANFIS .fis file.To load the training data collected in Step (ii) and generate the FIS with gbell MF's.To train the collected data with generated FIS up to a particular no. of epochs.To save the FIS. This FIS file is the neuro-fuzzy enhance ANFIS file [31,32].The great advantage of neuro-fuzzy design method comparing with fuzzy design method consists in the small number of in put and output MFs (usually 2…4), which implies the same maximum number of rules. Thus, the rule base and the occupied memory became very small. MATLAB structure of ANFIS with two inputs and four MF is shown in Fig. 8.The number of epoch is determined according to the above parameters and to the excepted error measure fixed by the user. The training and checking data are given below (Table 4).The range of error is as below:10.0005279790.0047035320.0006113680.00492588The gbell MFs is taken. The frequency deviation Δf, is the difference between the nominal or scheduled power system frequency (fN) and the real power system frequency (f).A hybrid neuro-fuzzy automatic generation control is designed following the procedure presented above. The proposed scheme utilizes Sugeno-type fuzzy inference system controller, with the parameters inside the fuzzy inference system decided by the neural network back propagation method. The ANFIS is designed by taking ACE and rate of change of ACE as input. The parameters used for simulation are given in Appendix. Four types of Simulink models are developed using fuzzy, ANN, PI and ANFIS controllers to obtain better dynamic behavior. Frequency deviation plots for thermal and hydro cases are obtained separately for 1% step load change in system frequency, and tie-line power is shown in preceding graphs (Figs. 9–11).The developed model with PI controller has been simulated and responses obtained above graphs reveals that PI controller reduces the steady state error in frequency deviation and also maximum peak over shoot. The settling time is limited to 64s in case of frequency deviation of thermal plant and 70s for hydro plant. The deviation in the tie-line power is also limited to 70s. Maximum overshoot in frequency deviation is −0.055pu for thermal plant and −0.067pu for hydro plant and power deviation is −0.014pu for thermal plant and −0.05pu for hydro plant. The dynamic responses of four areas power system using PID controller is given below.The developed model with PID controller has been simulated and responses obtained above in Figs. 12–15reveals that PID controller reduces the steady state error in frequency deviation and also maximum peak over shoot. The settling time is limited to 60s in case of frequency deviation of thermal plant and 60s for hydro plant. The deviation in the tie-line power is also limited to 60s. Maximum overshoot in frequency deviation is −0.049pu for thermal plant and −0.057pu for hydro plant and power deviation is 0.005pu for thermal plant and −0.0042pu for hydro plant. The Number of oscillations is also reduced.Dynamic responses of four areas power system using fuzzy controller is given below.The developed model with fuzzy controller has been simulated and responses obtained in Figs. 16–19reveal that fuzzy controller further reduces the steady state error in frequency deviation and also maximum peak over shoot. The settling time is limited to 45s in case of frequency deviation of thermal plant and 48s for hydro plant. The deviation in the tie-line power is also limited to 45s. Maximum overshoot in frequency deviation is −0.059pu for thermal plant and −0.06pu for hydro plant and power deviation is 0.005pu for thermal plant and −0.012pu for hydro plant. The settling time and peak over shoot is much lesser than the PI and PID controller. Dynamic responses of four areas power system using ANN controller is given below:The developed model with artificial neural network (ANN) controller has been simulated and responses obtained in Figs. 20–23reveal that ANN controller further reduces the steady state error in frequency deviation and also maximum peak over shoot. The settling time is limited to 40s in case of frequency deviation of thermal plant and hydro plant as well. The deviation in the tie-line power is also limited to 30s. Maximum overshoot in frequency deviation is −0.038pu for thermal plant and −0.055pu for hydro plant and power deviation is 0.006pu for thermal plant and −0.013pu for hydro plant. The settling time and peak over shoot is much lesser than the PI, PID, fuzzy and ANN controllers. Dynamic responses of four areas power system using ANFIS controller is given below.The developed model with ANFIS controller has been simulated and responses obtained in Figs. 24–27reveal that ANFIS controller further reduces the steady state error in frequency deviation and also maximum peak over shoot. The settling time is limited to 18s in case of frequency deviation of thermal plant and 17s for hydro plant. The deviation in the tie-line power is also limited to 15s for thermal and 27s for hydro plant. Maximum overshoot in frequency deviation is −0.061 pu for thermal plant and −0.059pu for hydro plant and power deviation is −0.052pu for thermal plant and −0.045pu for hydro plant. The settling time and peak over shoot is much lesser than the PI, PID, fuzzy and ANN controllers.The above simulation results show that the proposed ANFIS based controllers tracks the load changes and achieve good robust performance than conventional PI, PID and other intelligent control (fuzzy and ANN) approach with 1% load variation in power system. Conventional PI and intelligent (fuzzy and neuro-fuzzy) control approach with inclusion of slider gain provides better dynamic performance and reduces the steady state error and oscillation of the frequency deviation and the tie line power flow in each area in hydro-thermal combination of four area interconnected power system. Settling time and maximum peak overshoot in transient condition for both change in system frequency and change in tie-line power are given in Tables 5 and 6respectively.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, automatic generation control of four area interconnected hydro thermal power system is investigated. In order to demonstrate the effectiveness of proposed method, the control strategy based on neuro-fuzzy, ANN and conventional PI and PID technique is applied. The performance of proposed controller is evaluated through the simulation. The results are tabulated in Tables 5 and 6 respectively. Analysis reveals that the proposed technique gives good results and uses of this method reduce the peak deviation of frequencies, tie-line power, time error and inadvertent interchange. It can be concluded that ANFIS controller with sliding gain provides better settling performance than fuzzy, ANN and conventional PI and PID. Therefore, the intelligent control approach using neuro-fuzzy concept is more accurate and faster than the fuzzy, ANN, PI and PID control scheme even for complex dynamical system.