@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Discernible visualization of high dimensional data using label information

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Visualization methods could significantly improve the outcome of automated knowledge discovery systems by involving human judgment.Star coordinate is a visualization technique that maps k-dimensional data onto a circle using a set of axes sharing the same origin at the center of the circle.We propose a novel method toward automatic axes adjustment for high dimensional data in Star Coordinate visualization method.This method finds the best 2-dimensional view point (discernible visualization) that minimizes intra-cluster distances while keeping the inter-cluster distances as large as possible by using label information.The label information could be provided by the user or could be the result of performing a conventional clustering method over the input data.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Visualization,Star Coordinate,High dimensionality reduction,Fisher‘s discriminant form,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Visualization methods could significantly improve the outcome of automated knowledge discovery systems by involving human judgment. Star coordinate is a visualization technique that maps k-dimensional data onto a circle using a set of axes sharing the same origin at the center of the circle. It provides the users with the ability to adjust this mapping, through scaling and rotating of the axes, until no mapped point-clouds (clusters) overlap one another. In this state, similar groups of data are easily detectable. However an effective adjustment could be a difficult or even an impossible task for the user in high dimensions. This is specially the case when the input space dimension is about 50 or more.In this paper, we propose a novel method toward automatic axes adjustment for high dimensional data in Star Coordinate visualization method. This method finds the best two-dimensional view point that minimizes intra-cluster distances while keeping the inter-cluster distances as large as possible by using label information. We call this view point a discernible visualization, where clusters are easily detectable by human eye. The label information could be provided by the user or could be the result of performing a conventional clustering method over the input data. The proposed approach optimizes the Star Coordinate representation by formulating the problem as a maximization of a Fisher discriminant. Therefore the problem has a unique global solution and polynomial time complexity. We also prove that manipulating the scaling factor alone is effective enough for creating any given visualization mapping. Moreover it is showed that k-dimensional data visualization can be modeled as an eigenvalue problem. Using this approach, an optimal axes adjustment in the Star Coordinate method for high dimensional data can be achieved without any user intervention. The experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach in terms of accuracy and performance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Our 3-dimensional perspective limits our conceptual experience of higher dimension space. Nevertheless our interaction with high dimension spaces is getting more and more inevitable. Increasing development of science and technology has led to substantial growth in data production beyond any human being conception capability. Billions of Web pages in cyberspace, huge geographical information, large amounts of biological data and numerous amounts of business databases are just small portions of the available data.This has been the main motivation of obtaining geometric models (like graphs where there are 2 or 3 variables) of multivariate relationships arising in analyzing large sets of high dimensional data. Consequently numerous “visualization” approaches are proposed that try to achieve the best map from k-dimensions to 2 or 3 dimensions which is discernible for the human brain, effortlessly.Unprecedented growth of data production and the limited ability of the human brain have made data visualization an interesting subject in computer science during recent years. As Card et al. described, visualization is “the use of computer-supported interactive, and visual representation of abstract data to amplify cognition.” Visualization is considered as one of the most intuitive methods for cluster detection and validation, and especially is performing well for the representation of irregularly shaped clusters [27,32].Other approaches of overcoming the problems of high dimensionality are dimension reduction [4,20] and feature selection [24]. Data sampling and data summarization could also help to cope with large amount of data records [17,28]. Scientists interested in these fields face a similar problem in exploratory analysis or visualization of multivariate data.Star Coordinate is a visualization technique for mapping k-dimensional data into Cartesian coordinates, in which the coordinate axes are arranged on a circle of a two-dimensional plane with the origin at the center of the circle. It is proved that in this mapping technique, a cluster can always be preserved as a point-cloud (or cluster) in the visual space through linear mappings. But the main problem arises when these mapped point-clouds overlap one another, making their boundaries indistinguishable. Therefore the user is given the ability to push and pull or rotate the axes until the desired outcome is achieved. However, an advantageous adjustment is difficult or even impossible for the human agent to achieve, when visualizing high dimensional data. As a result, some researchers have proposed various dimension reduction methods, as pre-processing steps before applying the Star Coordinate visualization technique.In this paper, we focus on the problem of automatic axes adjustment in Star Coordinate technique for improved visualization results. Our goal is to find the best projection possible that can represent the original data topology in k-dimensional data especially where k is greater than 50, effectively making manual axes adjustment impossible. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1.1 presents a discussion of related work. The main features of the Star Coordinate algorithm are briefly discussed in Section 1.2. Then, the proposed method is introduced in Section 2. In Section 3, we present the experimental results that validate the cost model. Section 4 presents a discussion of the experimental results. Finally, Section 5 concludes the presented approach.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
