@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An interactive genetic algorithm with the interval arithmetic based on hesitation and its application to achieve customer collaborative product configuration design

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An interactive genetic algorithm with the interval arithmetic based on hesitation is proposed.An interval number derived from user's evaluation time is adopt to express an individual's fitness.The interval probability dominant strategy is proposed to compare advantages and disadvantages of evolutionary individuals.The proposed algorithm is applied to the design system of the car console configuration.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Product configuration,Genetic algorithm,Interval fitness,Customer demand,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Complex product configuration design requires rapid and accurate response to customers’ demand. The participation of customers in product design will be a very effective solution to achieve this. The traditional interactive genetic algorithm (IGA) can solve the above problem to some extent by a computer-aided user interface. However, it is difficult to adopt an accurate number to express an individual's fitness because the customers’ cognition of evolutionary population is uncertain, and to solve the users’ fatigue problem in IGA. Thus, an interactive genetic algorithm with interval individual fitness based on hesitancy (IGA-HIIF) is proposed in this paper. In IGA-HIIF, the interval number derived from users’ evaluation time is adopted to express an individual's fitness, and the evolutionary individuals are compared according to the interval probability dominant strategy proposed in this paper. Then, the genetic operations are applied to generate offspring population and the evolutionary process doesn’t stop until it meets the termination conditions of the evolution or user manually terminates the evolution process. The IGA-HIIF is applied into the design system of the car console configuration, and compared to the other two kinds of IGA. The extensive experiment results are provided to demonstrate that our proposed algorithm is correct and efficient.The reason why many manufacturing enterprises cannot succeed in promoting their new products into the market is not because there is some drawback in their technique but customers’ requirement for their innovative design of new products becomes more and more rigorous in most cases, which might lead to the lack of market for new products. Therefore, in order to quickly and accurately gain customers’ preference and requirement [1], many enterprises invest much funds to innovatively study on products [2–5], which is the most important link in the design process of new products.Many manufacturers have researched on the traditional market to gain customers’ requirement [6,7], but they do not obtain satisfying results in that the task is too tedious, multiple and complex. Moreover, the completion becomes more and more intense in product market, so complex product configuration design for product customization requires rapid and accurate response to customer demand [8–10]. Thus, it is important to gain customers’ real time requirement to establish customer response model in product optimization design [11–13,9].How to use the Computer-aided user interface [14] to realize the interaction with customers will have a huge boost to the product design and production. Through the computer aided design (CAD) [15], users can get the relevant information and virtual experience about products in both 2D and 3D manners [16]. It not only provides a way to independently design products for users, but also can help the enterprises to gain the customer's preference, for new product development and design according to the customer demand information. Evidently, customer participation in product design [17] will become the most direct and effective method for obtaining the demand information.Interactive genetic algorithm (IGA), a kind of evolutionary algorithm, simulates the natural evolutionary process to search the optimal solution. It has no requirements for the continuous and differentiable of the objective function. Differing from the traditional genetic algorithm (GA), which counts individual fitness by fitness function, IGA typically integrates human intelligence, and obtains individual fitness designated by users in light of users’ preference. Thus, IGA has aroused numerous scholars’ wide interest since its appearance. Now, it has been applied into robot control [18], picture processing and retrieval [19], language and voice processing [20], art creation [21], education and entertainment [22] and other areas. In the field of industrial design [23,24], IGA can successfully integrate customers’ requirement for products, and it is very adaptive to solve product configuration problems and realize computer aided design. However, there are several limitation and obstacles in the use of IGA, which are listed in the following: (1) Users’ fatigue in IGA, is the key problem to solve since it is proposed. Although the approaches [25,26,21] could reduce users’ fatigue to some extent, it is still worth further studying. (2) At present, most of the interactive genetic algorithms represent the individual fitness [27–29] by precise value; however, due to the changes in users’ emotion and their different cognition about individuals, the fitness often deviates the true value.In this paper, an interactive genetic algorithm with the interval arithmetic based on hesitation is proposed, and applied to achieve customer collaborative product configuration design. The significance and innovation is illustrated in the following. First, the algorithm proposed provides a different concept of IGA, which integrates the interval optimization into evaluation process of individuals’ fitness. The feasibility and efficiency in reducing users’ fatigues verified. Second, the research on IGA used in car configuration design is very few. In this paper, in order to illustrate the application of this algorithm in the field of industrial design, the car console configuration design is taken for instance and supplies a competitive product configuration solution. The experimental results demonstrate that the algorithm can be effectively used to develop and design new products such as cars. Third, the study focuses on how IGA is used to carry out the product configuration design. This method could not only quickly respond to customers’ requirement but also satisfy their individualized product demand.In the next section, we will review the relevant researches on product configuration and IGA. In addition, the relevant concept about the interval number is proposed to better indicate the individuals’ fitness value. Section 3 is the body of the paper, in which the IGA with the interval arithmetic based on hesitation is firstly put forward, the theory, flowchart and steps of the algorithm are then illustrated to the great extent. Section 4 is the proposed algorithm applied into car industry by taking the conceptual design of car console for instance. The experimental results verify the performance of IGA and its improvement compared with the other two algorithms. Finally we draw some conclusion and state briefly the method of IGA with the interval arithmetic based on hesitation, full of prospect, will be widely used into car manufacturing enterprises in Section 5.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
