@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
REFORE: A recommender system for researchers based on bibliometrics

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present REFORE, a quality-based fuzzy linguistic REcommender system FOr REsearchers.The recommended resources are the most recent research papers extracted from WOS by Thomson Reuters.The system quantifies the quality of items and users using bibliometrics measures: Journal Citation Report and h-index.We incorporate a re-ranking process in order to guarantee the quality and novelty of the recommended items.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Recommender systems,Item quality,Fuzzy linguistic modeling,Digital library,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Recommender systems (RSs) exploit past behaviors and user similarities to provide personalized recommendations. There are some precedents of usage in academic environments to assist users finding relevant information, based on assumptions about the characteristics of the items and users. Even if quality has already been taken into account as a property of items in previous works, it has never been given a key role in the re-ranking process for both items and users.In this paper, we present REFORE, a quality-based fuzzy linguistic REcommender system FOr REsearchers. We propose the use of some bibliometric measures as the way to quantify the quality of both items and users without the interaction of experts as well as the use of 2-tuple linguistic approach to describe the linguistic information. The system takes into account the measured quality as the main factor for the re-ranking of the top-N recommendations list in order to point out researchers to the latest and the best papers in their research fileds. To prove the accuracy improvement, we conduct a study involving different recommendation approaches, aiming at measuring their performance gain. The results obtained proved to be satisfactory for the researchers from different departments who took part on the tests.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Research is a key task in society nowadays. Science is going through difficult times at the moment giving the current crisis facing significant budget cuts in modern economies [47]. However research has a direct impact on society, countries that support research can achieve higher Gross Domestic Product (GDP) [17], e.g., 73% of the papers cited by U.S. industry patents are public science, authored at academic, governmental, and other public institutions [48]. Therefore, the use of scientific knowledge by setting up a sustainable industry/science cooperative environment positively affects innovation performance [37].Nowadays, where the amount of information available is exponentially growing, the information overload represents a real challenge [19] to the academic world [58]. The spectacular growth of sources providing new information introduces noise to our method of finding relevant information for research, but what certain users consider noise could be relevant for others. For example, in the same area of research, a researcher may not be interested in a specific type of publication but another may find this publication very useful. This fact can make users let through suitable information thinking that is not relevant [42]. In the academic world, research is a field of key importance in society, where the knowledge in one single area is vast and quite specific. At present, scientific databases such as Web of Science (WoS) [3], Scopus [2] or Google Scholar [1], support the research in fields where the volume of publications is vast. However, the ever increasing number of resources in a simple area might make the information consumers misunderstand the relevance of certain research resources, at the risk of missing important information.The number of different journals in WoS is more than 12,000 (120,000 if we speak about conference proceedings) [3]. A researcher is typically focused on more than one category, which might include up to 700 journals potentially harboring valuable information, e.g., a combination of relevant sub-categories of Computer Science, Engineer and Maths. Staying in the loop of all new papers being published in all the new journals could be troublesome and cause problems of information overload.In this sense, it is essential to have tools that allow researchers to meet this objective: access to updated and personalized information according to our interests. When a researcher tries to obtain useful information related to his/her research through a searching tool, the retrieved results might be irrelevant and contain unnecessary information even after applying the different embedded filters available. Hence, users need easier access to the large amount of resources that are available hidden among the rest [42].Mostly, in the Web we can find two different tools to facilitate the access to the information: information retrieval systems [34] and recommender systems [25]. The former are focused on information search in a known content repository, scientist repositories mentioned above, while the latter are focused on information discovery in partially known frameworks. A recommender system seeks to discover information items (movies, music, books, news, images, web pages, papers, etc.) that are valuable to the user. Recommender systems are especially useful to identify information a user was previously unaware of. Besides that, recommender systems may be considered personalized services because they have an independent profile for each user taking into account the particularities of each of them. Due to these reasons, these kinds of systems are becoming popular tools for reducing information overload and to improve the conversion rate in e-commerce web sites [12,31]. Personalized recommendations rely on knowing users characteristics, which might be tastes, preferences about items as well as the ratings of previously explored items. The system has to maintain user profiles updated in order to provide good recommendations. The way of acquiring this information may vary from implicit information, that is, analyzing users behavior, or explicit information, where users directly provide their preferences. In the literature, we can differentiate between two main categories:1.Content-based recommender systems. The recommendations are generated taking into account the items features and the user past experience dealing with similar items.Collaborative recommender systems. The recommendations to a user are based on other user recommendations with similar user profiles, taking into account the ratings provided by the users.All approaches have their advantages and disadvantages, so that a widely used solution is the hybrid approach. The hybrid approach consists of a combination of the best features of each approach to minimize the disadvantages while maximizing the benefits. The representation of user preferences as well as other characteristics of some items present subjectivity and uncertainty making the process a complex task. In order to deal with that, fuzzy linguistic modeling has been proved as an efficient tool to face the problem. In the literature we can find different approaches of fuzzy linguistic modeling in the problem of computing with words: classical, type-2, ordinal and 2-tuple.In [58] we presented a quality-based recommender system to disseminate information in a University Digital Library (UDL) where we combined the quality of an item with the user preferences to predict which ones are relevant for the user generating more useful and accurate recommendations. Capitalizing on the improvement we reached with our system in the scope of UDL to tackle the information overload issue, we want to expand the scope to the much larger research domain. The heterogeneity of information sources from elements coming from a much larger set of databases is going to be a bigger challenge compared with the work done for the UDL.Hence, a first step to expand the recommendations in research based on quality is to change not the scope but the database. Instead of using a UDL we are going to use the papers indexed by WoS, which could be considered the most important bibliographic database in a UDL. A second step is to change the old concept of quality applied in [58] and how to evaluate it. With that, we will test a recommender system for researchers and the use of a way to measure the items quality to increase the accuracy of the recommendations. By the use of this new concept, the problem of cold start is reduced since the content based approach along with the filters that take into account the quality comprise a large portion of the final list. The use of a hybrid recommendation scheme proved positive in [58] combining two different approaches. For this reason, we propose a combination of both. On the one hand, content-based, where we are going to deal with the quality of items, and on the other hand, the quality of authors according to the collaborative approach. That is, we are going to compute the relevance of an item and of a user to do a re-ranking of the recommendations. As test users we are going to engage with some members of Departments of Computer Science and Civil Engineer at the University of Granada and Computer Science from TU Delft.In this paper, we present a new recommender system which incorporates methods, algorithms and filters for all the steps in the recommendation process focused on the re-ranking stage, called quality-based fuzzy linguistic REcommender system FOr REsearchers (REFORE). REFORE allows the user to be up-to-date regarding all articles that might be relevant for him related to the topics the user manifested interest at a particular moment in a real time window. In addition to the articles that are identified to be of interest for the user, a set of high-quality articles with a certain overlap with the researcher topic are also provided to open up new possibilities and therefore enrich the on-going research. Furthermore, the main elements of the system are listed below:•The system implements a hybrid recommendation strategy based on a switching hybrid approach [11], which combine a content-based recommendation approach and a collaborative one to share the user individual experience and social wisdom [56] and to present the best recent papers in each are area for each user.The system uses fuzzy linguistic modeling to improve the representation of user preferences and facilitate user-system interactions [8].The system implements a two-phase feedback process, which can say if a paper is relevant or not, that means evaluate the recommendation, and then when they read the paper they can evaluate their quality giving it different relevance for the collaboration step.The resources recommended in our system are now the most recent research papers from one of the most important international science database, WoS by Thomson Reuters, where we can find the best journal and conference essentials for the daily work of a researcher. The items recommended fulfill the necessities of the users since the quality and novelty of the items are guaranteed by the system.The system incorporates a re-ranking process which takes into account the estimated relevance of an item along with the item quality as well as the users quality to re-order the list of possible items to be recommended. This is done taking into account not only these factor but also others to ensure the items are interesting for the researcher but also with a small innovative percentage allowing to see the different application of one singular topic.The method of measuring quality in previous proposals [13,14,58] implies users interaction and is based on the feedback given by them. So, we propose a new way to evaluate the quality of research resources and researchers based on the different rankings provides in the international community by experts, in our case we use the Journal Citation Report (JCR) provided by Thomson Reuters11http://thomsonreuters.com/journal-citation-reports/.for the items, and also the h-index [5] for the quality of the users given that the system is developed for researcher.This system improves the generated recommendations, by including more quality papers and accurate recommendations, increasing its information discovering properties in the recommendations and updating the users with the newest papers of each topic being the most relevant for the users.The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, the background is presented, that is the basis of recommender systems, the fuzzy linguistic modeling to represent information and the aspects of quality evaluation in research environment. Next in Section 3, we describe REFORE together with its main characteristics, functionalities, architecture and technologies used. Section 4 presents the evaluation of the system and the experimental results. Finally, some concluding remarks are pointed out in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
