@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Prediction of cutting temperature in orthogonal machining of AISI 316L using artificial neural network

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Exp. (experimental) and num. (numerical) cutting forces were obtained by the exp. studies and FEM analysis.The best convergence between exp. and num. cutting forces was provided.Num. cutting temperatures were predicted by ANN within very low error interval.Exp. cutting temperatures were obtained using exp. cutting forces.Exp. temperature results were quite satisfactory.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
ANN,Finite element model,Cutting temperature,Orthogonal cutting,Cutting forces,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this study, an approach based on artificial neural network (ANN) was proposed to predict the experimental cutting temperatures generated in orthogonal turning of AISI 316L stainless steel. Experimental and numerical analyses of the cutting forces were carried out to numerically obtain the cutting temperature. For this purpose, cutting tests were conducted using coated (TiCN+Al2O3+TiN and Al2O3) and uncoated cemented carbide inserts. The Deform-2D programme was used for numerical modelling and the Johnson–Cook (J–C) material model was used. The numerical cutting forces for the coated and uncoated tools were compared with the experimental results. On the other hand, the cutting temperature value for each cutting tool was numerically obtained. The artificial neural network model was used to predict numerical cutting temperatures by means of the numerical cutting forces. The best results in predicting the cutting temperature were obtained using the network architecture with a hidden layer which has seven neurons and LM learning algorithm. Finally, the experimental cutting temperatures were predicted by entering the experimental cutting forces into a formula obtained from the artificial neural networks. Statistical results (R2, RMSE, MEP) were quite satisfactory. This demonstrates that the established ANN model is a powerful one for predicting the experimental cutting temperatures.yield stress (MPa)output valuealuminum oxidenumber of patternartificial neural networkabsolute fraction of variancehardening modulus (MPa)root mean square errorback propagationscaled conjugate gradient learning algorithmstrain rate sensitivity parametertemperature of work material (°C)cutting toolsroom temperature (°C)main cutting force (N)melting temperature of work material (°C)feed force (N)cutting temperature (°C)feed rate (mm/rev)titanium carbo-nitridetransfer functiontitanium nitrideheat transfer coefficient of work material (kW/m2°C)target valueprocessing elementscutting speed (m/min)shear flow stress of chip (MPa)the weights of the connections between ith and jth processing elementsLevenberg–Marquardt learning algorithmthe weights of the biases between layersshear friction factorthe output of the jth processing elementthermal softening coefficientyield stress (MPa)absolute mean error percentage (%)strain rate (sn−1)the weighted sum of the input to the ith processing elementreference strain rate (sn−1)strain hardening indexequivalent plastic strain rate (sn−1)number of processing elements in the previous layershear stress at the tool–chip interface (MPa)

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Stainless steel is a material which has rapidly become widespread in recent years. This material can be used in a variety of areas as it resists corrosion excellently, can be used at low and high temperatures, is easy to shape and has a pleasant aesthetic appearance. The major factors which affect the machinability of this kind of material negatively are its lower thermal conductivity and the presence of strengthening elements such as chrome, nickel and molybdenum in its chemical composition. Because of chip removal process is a complex process, a theory that fully discloses the cutting process is not easy to suggest. Therefore sometimes, it is not possible to measure experimentally each case which occurs during cutting. Especially, finite element method is a numerical analysis method that is widely used to predict some data (such as cutting force and cutting temperature) during cutting. However, finite element solutions result in more realistic and closer to the experimental data depend on to used material model and friction conditions being close to the friction conditions in the actual cutting conditions [1]. When the studies done in this regard subject to an overall evaluation, it will be seen that Johnson–Cook material model used is more suitable in simulations of the cutting processes [2–4] because, Johnson–Cook material model is able to express analytically the material behaviour at high strain rates and temperatures. Umbrello et al. [5], in their study, investigated the variation of the cutting temperature and the cutting forces using the five different Johnson–Cook material models for AISI 316L stainless steel. The closest results to cutting temperature and the cutting force values that experimentally measured, material model developed by Tounsi et al. [6] was prepared. For this reason in this study, this material model was used.Since the metal cutting process is complicated, it is not easy to offer a theory which precisely clarifies the procedure of cutting. While many studies performed in this area exist, there still are differences between theory and practice. Many experimental and numerical studies to identify the optimal conditions for the cutting process have been carried so far [7–11]. Yaldiz et al. [12] dealed with a comparison of experimental results and consistent fuzzy rule-based model for estimating the cutting forces in turning. In cutting experiments, AISI 1040 steel was used as the workpiece material. Feed force, radial force and main cutting force were measured for three combinations of cutting speeds, feed rates and depth of cuts. The difference between experimental and predicted results was obtained as around 99.6%. These results demonstrate the potential of this approach for monitoring the cutting forces. Ucun and Aslantas [13] conducted the numerical simulations to determine the effect of coating type on the cutting forces, the tool stresses, and temperatures. The Lagrangian thermo-viscoplastic cutting simulation of AISI 4340 steel was conducted using two different coating types (TiCN+Al2O3+TiN and Al2O3) and uncoated carbide tool having same geometry. The predicted results indicated that Al2O3 coated tool showed minimum tool temperature value due to its decreasing thermal conductivity with increasing temperature and that the tool stress within the coating increases along the thickness with increasing cutting speed and feed rate.Since the design of cutting tools, coating characteristics, the properties of workpieces and the cutting conditions are influential on the cutting temperature, the experimental and numerical approaches are not very appropriate for predicting it. In addition, as experimental studies require a lot of time and experiment sets are expensive, different approaches such as the artificial neural network which precisely predicted desired values have been preferred in studies in the recent years. The artificial neural network, which has been developed taking the working principle of the human brain as an example, can learn through examples and solve nonlinear problems. The ANN can be used in solving problems which cannot be modelled mathematically or are very difficult. The nonlinearity of artificial neurons allows for the ANN to be applied to many problems [14]. Nalbant et al. [15] conducted orthogonal cutting experiments for AISI 1030 steel at different parameters with coated (PVD-CVD coated cemented carbide) and uncoated inserts. The effects of cutting method, coating material, feed rate and cutting speed on the surface roughness of the workpiece are investigated. Surface roughness values are predicted by use of an ANN approach. Eventually the surface roughness values reached through the ANN (R2=0.99985 for the training data and R2=0.99983 for the testing data) are found to be very close to the results obtained by the experimental study. Kurt [16] investigated the variation by cutting parameters of the tool stresses occurring during the machining of the nickel-based super alloy Inconel 718. The cutting forces were measured experimentally and the stress distributions on the cutting tools were analysed by use of the finite element method (ANSYS). In addition, an ANN model is developed for predicting all cutting tool stresses. The R2 value after the ANN training is very close to 1. Studies in the literature demonstrate that the ANN is a very powerful modelling technique [17,18]. Panda et al. [19] predicted flank wear in drilling using back propagation neural network (BPNN) and radial basis function network (RBFN). It has been observed from the present study that both BPNN and RBFN can predict the drill flank wear reasonably well. In addition to BPNN can predict the wear more accurately compared to RBFN. While the error in prediction is more in RBFN compared to that in the case of BPNN, RBFN can learn the pattern much faster compared to BPNN and could be used advantageously in online tool wear monitoring. Ravi et al. [20] presented the detailed study of thermally enhanced machining (TEM) of high chrome white cast iron (HCWCI) in which the effect of cutting parameters and surface temperature of the stock material on machinability characteristics (cutting forces and surface roughness) are analyzed using ANOVA and the ANN. The results show that TEM causes easy shearing of the material, leading to the reduction in cutting forces with expected improvement in tool life and surprisingly good surface finish. The confirmation tests suggest both second-order regression and ANN which are better predictive models for quantitative prediction of TEM of HCWCI, and ANN is more accurate of the two.The objectives of this study are to predict experimental cutting temperatures using numerical cutting temperatures generated by means of FEM at different combinations of cutting tools, cutting forces and cutting parameters and to obtain experimental cutting temperatures using experimental cutting forces and the mathematical model derived by ANN.Orthogonal turning tests using AISI 316L steel (see Table 1) as the workpiece material were carried out on a Johnford T35 CNC lathe with 10kW spindle power and a maximum spindle speed of 6500rpm (Fig. 1). Bars with 60.3mm diameter and 240mm cutting length were turned with two different coated and uncoated carbide cutting tools. The workpiece and cutting tool used in orthogonal cutting tests are shown in Fig. 2. A Kistler piezoelectric dynamometer model 9257B with a load amplifier connected to a computer was used for the acquisition of the cutting force (Fc) and feed force (Ff). The orthogonal cutting tests were carried out at feed rates of 0.05, 0.1 and 0.2mm/rev, the cutting speeds of 75, 100, 150, 200 and 250m/min. and a constant depth of cut of 2mm (see Table 2). General properties of cutting inserts produced by Iscar used in the machining of AISI 316L are given in Table 3. Inserts have −6° rake angle, 5° clearance angle and 0.8mm nose radius.There are two material models which are commonly used in modelling of the cutting procedure. They are the ones developed by Oxley [21] and Johnson and Cook [22]. Oxley's yield stress data produce very good results in modelling of steels which contain up to 0.52% carbon. For this reason, Oxley's theory is not appropriate for high carbon steels and alloys. Since Oxley's theory is limited, Johnson and Cook's cutting theory has a wide range of usage. The Johnson–Cook model can be applied for deformations of many materials at high speeds. This model includes the stress–strain data acquired for different temperatures and strain rates. The yield stress is defined by the Johnson–Cook model as follows:(1)σ¯=A+B(ε¯)n⋅1+Clnε¯˙ε¯˙o⋅1−T−TrTm−TrmThe workpiece is modelled as rigid, perfectly plastic material where the material constitutive model of this deformable body is represented with the Johnson–Cook material model (Table 4).In numerical simulations, two-dimensional thermo-viscoplastic cutting simulations were conducted for the three cutting inserts using commercial implicit finite element software, Deform-2D. In the cutting simulations, the chip formation was performed as plastic flow and continuous remeshing technique was used. The finite element model is given in Fig. 3. The bottom surface of the workpiece is fixed in all directions. The cutting tool is modelled as a rigid body. A very fine mesh density is defined at the tip of the tool and at the cutting zone to obtain fine process output distributions. In the finite element model, each of the coating layers (TiCN, Al2O3 and TiN) are represented by separate thin layers of their respective thickness of TiCN(2μm)+Al2O3(2μm)+TiN(1μm) and Al2O3(5μm) on top of the carbide substrate, as shown in Fig. 3. The machining simulation is performed at ambient temperature, assuming the initial temperature is equal to 20°C. The heat losses to the environment from the free surface of the workpiece material are determined by the heat flux.(2)Q=h(T−T0)where h=45kW/m2°C is the heat transfer coefficient of the work material. Heat transfer by radiation is considered insignificant and is not therefore taken into account. In the cutting simulation, the tool–chip friction was modelled with coulomb-type behaviours. The constant coulomb friction model is the most widely used in the simulation of the metal cutting process. According to this theory, the relationship between shear factor and shear strength of the work material is below.(3)τ=mkpwhere τ is the shear stress at the tool–chip interface and m is the shear factor. kpis the shear flow stress of the chip in the primary shear deformation zone. In the machining simulation, the shear factor varies from 0.4 to 0.8 [23,24]. In this study, in order to determine an appropriate shear factor for the carbide cutting tool, preliminary simulations were carried out. It was found that using m=1 gave the best results in the view of cutting forces.The ANN is one of the powerful computer analysis techniques. The main feature which distinguishes the ANN from classical computer programmes is that it can store, process and interpret the data which it is given and contemplate about events which it has not been shown previously. With regard to its ability to store and interpret, it is a very simple imitation of the human brain.The ANN is constructed by aggregation of neural cells (neurons). This aggregation is not random and usually takes place in layers [25]. The ANN consists of three main layers: input, hidden and output layers. The neurons (the processing elements) in the input layer transfer data coming from the external world into the hidden layer [25]. Data in the input layer are not subjected to processing unlike in the other layers. In the hidden layer, outputs are produced using data from neurons in the input layer and bias, and summation and activation functions. The summation function is a function which calculates the net input of the cell. Summation function used in this study is given in Eq. (4).(4)NETi=∑j=1npwijxj+wbiActivation function provides a curvilinear match between input and output layers. In addition, it determines the output of the cell by processing net input to the cell. Selection of appropriate activation function significantly affects network performance. The common transfer functions in ANNs are linear, step/signum, threshold, logistic sigmoid, hyperbolic tangent sigmoid functions, etc. Recently, logistic sigmoid transfer function has been commonly used as an activation function in multilayer perception models, because it is a differentiable, continuous and non-linear function. For this reason, the logistic sigmoid transfer function was used as the activation function in this study. This function produces a value between 0 and 1 for each value of net input. The logistic sigmoid function of the ANN model in this study is given in Eq. (5).(5)f(NETi)=11+e−NETiThere may be several hidden layers in network architecture. But minimum number of hidden layers and neurons in each hidden layer are preferable. Therefore, in network proposed in this study, one hidden layer with has seven neurons which produces optimal predictions was used. In the output layer, data from the hidden layer are processed and thus the output of the network is produced and is sent to the external world.According to trial results conducted to construct optimal network structure, the ANN architecture with five neurons in the input layer, seven neurons in hidden layers and one neuron in output layers obtained better predictions for cutting temperatures and is shown in Fig. 4.There are many learning algorithms in order to determine weights in ANN. One of the most common learning algorithms is back propagation (BP). The back propagation method updates the weights in accordance with the difference between available data and network output. The learning parameter used in the method has a great importance in order to reach the optimal results. The learning parameter can be constant or dynamically updated in the model. The most important factor which determines the success in practice, after the selection of ANN architecture, is the learning algorithm. In order to obtain the output values closest to the numerical values, the best learning algorithm and the number of optimum neurons in the hidden layer are determined. In the training stage, to obtain the output precisely, the number of neurons in the hidden layer was increased step by step (i.e. 3–15). For this purpose, both SCG and LM learning algorithms were used in the built network structure and between 3 and 15 neurons were used in the hidden layer. As a result of the conducted trials for predicting the cutting temperature, the best learning algorithm and the number of optimum neurons in the hidden layer are found as the LM learning algorithm and seven neurons, respectively (Table 5).Determination of percentages of training and testing data has an important role for building of ANN architecture. In this study, 60 numerical data computed through finite elements analyses are prepared for the training and testing data of the ANN. The ratio for training and testing data was selected as 80%:20%. 12 and 48 of the numerical data are randomly selected, respectively, for the testing data and the training data, respectively.In this study, the input and output values were normalised between 0.1 and 0.9 to obtain the optimal predictions. Coating type, cutting speed, main cutting force, feed force and cutting temperature were normalised by dividing with 5, 350, 1800, 1400 and 1500. Feed rate was also normalised by multiplying with 2.5. The digits for the cutting tools to be entered into the artificial neural networks were determined as uncoated cutting tools=1, TiCN+Al2O3+TiN coated cutting tools=2 and Al2O3 coated cutting tools=3 because they do not have numerical values.The BP training algorithm is a ramp descent algorithm. The BP algorithm minimises total error by changing the weights through its ramp and thus tries to improve the performance of the network. The training of the network is stopped when the tested values of RMSE reduction standing when begin to increase. In order to understand whether an ANN is making good predictions, the testing data that have never been presented to the network are used and the results are checked at this stage. The statistical methods of RMSE, R2 and MEP values have been used for comparisons. The error identified during the learning process is called the RMSE and is defined as follows:(6)RMSE=1p∑jtj−oj21/2where t is the target value, o is the output and p is the number of samples. The parameter tjrepresents the predicted output from the neural network model for a given input while ojis the desired output (i.e. exact data) from the same input that was produced by the set-up. The absolute mean error percentage, which shows the mean ratio between the error and the experimental values, is determined from:(7)MEP(%)=∑j(tj−oj)/tj×100pThe absolute fraction of variance ranges between −1 and +1. R values closer to +1 indicate a stronger positive linear relationship, while R values closer to −1 indicate a stronger negative relationship [26]. This value is calculated with the following formula:(8)R2=1−∑j(tj−oj)2∑j(oj)2

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, an ANN model was proposed to predict the cutting temperatures significantly affecting tool life and wear. Firstly, experimental measurements of the cutting forces were performed by means of a dynamometer and then numerical cutting forces and cutting temperatures were analysed via the finite element model. The validity of FEM was confirmed by experimental results. The findings of the study are as follows:•It can be said that the finite element model gives reasonable results with experimental results in view of main cutting force and feed force. Therefore, the finite element model and material model can be used to predict the cutting temperature.It is observed that the cutting temperature values obtained for the Al2O3-coated cutting tool is higher compared to other tools. Al2O3 coating results in an increase in heat flow to the chip and workpiece due to its thermal conductivity properties. Therefore, the temperature in the primary deformation zone increases.Lower thermal conductivity results in an increase in the temperature in the lower side of the chip. Therefore it can be said that the lower thermal conductivity results in a decrease in the chip curl radius.As a result of the conducted training trials for prediction of the cutting temperatures, the best results for cutting temperatures were obtained by the LM learning algorithm and the network architecture with seven hidden neurons.The ANN model was evaluated in terms of its prediction capability. The predicted values were found to be close to the numerical values. R2 is 0.99994% for training data and 0.999793% for the testing data in the ANN model. It was found that MEP was within acceptable error limits (±5%).To confirm the validity of predicted cutting temperatures, predicted and numerical cutting temperatures were compared using the best convergent numerical and experimental cutting forces. The results were quite satisfactory. They showed that the learning capacity of the ANN is quite powerful in predicting the cutting temperatures. Therefore, the use of ANN is highly recommended for prediction of cutting temperatures without conducting the complicated, expensive and time-consuming experimental studies.Consequently, this study showed that ANN was a good alternative for other conventional modelling techniques in prediction of cutting temperatures.