@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An adaptive image steganographic scheme based on Noise Visibility Function and an optimal chaotic based encryption method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We improve the quality and provide an acceptable payload using NVF.NVF estimates each area's complexity to embed more data in complex areas.The secret image security is ensured by an optimal chaotic based encryption scheme.An optimal secret key is found by a hybrid GA/PSO algorithm to increase the quality.The proposed scheme can resist against the well-known RS-steganalysis.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Image steganography,Noise Visibility Function (NVF),Hybrid GA/PSO algorithm,Human Visual Sensitivity (HVS),Least Significant Bit (LSB),Cryptography,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Steganography is the science of hiding secret message in an appropriate digital multimedia in such a way that the existence of the embedded message should be invisible to anyone apart from the sender or the intended recipient. This paper presents an irreversible scheme for hiding a secret image in the cover image that is able to improve both the visual quality and the security of the stego-image while still providing a large embedding capacity. This is achieved by a hybrid steganography scheme incorporates Noise Visibility Function (NVF) and an optimal chaotic based encryption scheme. In the embedding process, first to reduce the image distortion and to increase the embedding capacity, the payload of each region of the cover image is determined dynamically according to NVF. NVF analyzes the local image properties to identify the complex areas where more secret bits should be embedded. This ensures to maintain a high visual quality of the stego-image as well as a large embedding capacity. Second, the security of the secret image is brought about by an optimal chaotic based encryption scheme to transform the secret image into an encrypted image. Third, the optimal chaotic based encryption scheme is achieved by using a hybrid optimization of Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) and Genetic Algorithm (GA) which is allowing us to find an optimal secret key. The optimal secret key is able to encrypt the secret image so as the rate of changes after embedding process be decreased which results in increasing the quality of the stego-image. In the extracting process, the secret image can be extracted from the stego-image losslessly without referring to the original cover image. The experimental results confirm that the proposed scheme not only has the ability to achieve a good trade-off between the payload and the stego-image quality, but also can resist against the statistics and image processing attacks.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the rapid growth of network and Internet communications, information security becomes an important topic in real-time data transmission. In order to increase security, it is necessary to develop solutions protecting data, especially secret data. Information hiding has emerged as an effective scheme which makes private communication secure.Steganography is a branch of information hiding carried out by embedding important data (e.g. text and image) in multimedia such as images, audios or videos. Since the digital images are the most widely used medium on the Internet and take advantage of human limited visual perception of colors and also provide a larger embedding capacity ratio, they are considered to be good carriers for steganography schemes. The image in which secret image will be inserted is called “cover image”. The image that carries secret image is called “stego-image”.In order to enhance the security, many steganography schemes have been developed which encrypt the secret data by employing a data encryption scheme before hiding it [1–7]. Data encryption is used to protect secret data against illicit access by transforming it into an unrecognizable form using a particular cipher algorithm along with a secret key to obtain the cipher data [8]. In the decryption stage, only the user who has the key can retrieve the secret data from the cipher one. In general, the main purpose of a cryptography scheme is to make the secret data unreadable by a third party without hiding the existence of it. Steganography, in contrast, attempts to make data invisible to the unauthorized users. In this way, they are unable to notice the existence of the hidden data. Despite the differences among steganography and cryptography, combining them seems to allow a better private communication.A steganography scheme is usually evaluated based on three parameters: embedding capacity (payload), visual quality, and security. The first parameter, payload, is determined by the amount of data concealed into a cover image. Higher payload allows inserting more data into the cover image. However, the embedding capacity can be increased insofar as the security of the secret data can still be ensured after embedding. The second parameter, visual quality, is considered to be good when the difference between the cover image and the stego-image can be perfectly imperceptible by Human Visual Sensitivity (HVS). Unfortunately, the fact is that there is an inverse relationship between the visual quality and the embedding capacity. This means that achieving just one requirement will totally sacrifice the other. The most straightforward solution to deal with this trade-off is to establish a balance between both of them. Finally, security preserves the secret data from being stolen by attackers. The major concern of this study focuses on increasing both the visual quality and the security of the stego-image while the capacity of the embedded secret image is kept at an acceptable level.Typically, image steganography can simply be grouped into two types. The first type is an irreversible image steganography scheme which embeds the secret image into the cover image to achieve the stego-image. The advantage of an irreversible image steganography scheme is that it provides a high embedding capacity, although the stego-image cannot recover the cover image losslessly when the secret image is extracted from the stego-image. The second type is the reversible steganographic scheme which can produce a lossless recovery of the cover image from the stego-image when the secret image is extracted. It is appropriate for the applications (such as military maps, remote sensing images, medical images, etc.) where the cover image must be exactly reconstructed. However, we follow the first type schemes and propose an irreversible steganography scheme in order to achieve higher embedding capacity than the reversible schemes do.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
