@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An ant colony system based control of shunt capacitor banks for bulk electricity consumers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We have designed a low cost embedded device that would reduce the penalty billing of the consumers who fail to maintain the desired power factor.The analysis is made keeping in mind the concern for those bulk consumers of electricity (i.e. 11kV and downwards) in rural and sub-urban areas of India dealing varying load patterns.Switching of shunt capacitor banks though economical but often fail to give satisfactory compensation for varying load patterns. Hence combination of shunt capacitor banks intelligently would give a better solution to this problem.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Ant Colony System,DSP,Genetic algorithm,Optimized switching of SCBs,True power factor,Total harmonic distortion,VAR control,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The present work focuses on the formulation of an optimization algorithm based on Ant Colony Search (ACS) technique operational from a Blackfin DSP microcontroller platform. This intelligent algorithm enables switching of appropriate Shunt Capacitor Banks (SCBs) in installations of bulk consumers of electricity to improve their power factor. The application is mainly targeted on cold storages, rolling mills, traction substation and steel plants in India, where SCBs are installed over a long period in an unplanned manner. Unawareness of the impact of energy savings coupled with the fiscal incapability of these users make them unable to install costly power electronic devices for p.f. control ACS based embedded controller is sensitive to unpredictable load changes and selective capacitors switching cause optimal VAR control with minimum stress to the system. Employing the distributed computational model based on ACS becomes an ideal tool for the combinatorial optimization problem to select a best combination within a bank of varying sizes and varying status signifying dynamically changing search space. This low cost device will reduce the penalty billing of consumers by improving the p.f. and improved metered reading. The use of this device will lead to permeation of technology to the strata which needs it most making energy management possible without any human intervention.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Optimizing the reactive power injection is an important aspect for the electric power system's economical and safe operation. Reasonable distribution of reactive compensation capacity in the form of switched capacitor banks, static var controllers is the precondition of realizing voltage and reactive VAR controlling. It can reduce the power loss, improve the power factor and improve the voltage quality, and is helpful for improving the stability of the system. Conventionally, Static Var Compensators (SVCs) have been used in conjunction with passive filters at the distribution level for reactive power compensation and mitigation of power quality problems. SVCs using shunt capacitor banks are installed in substations near the loads are economical reactive power compensators with fast switching speed using current limiting reactors which minimize the switching transients [1]. This switching strategy of shunt capacitor banks at the consumer end will help the consumer and utility simultaneously keeping the VAR requirement from the utility to the minimum. With an improved p.f. and voltage profile, in a dynamically changing load environment by utilizing the available resources (i.e. SCBs) an efficient utilization of electrical energy is possible. Transients generated due to switching of capacitor are difficult to analyze using phasor analysis or other simplified analysis due to system frequency dependencies and non-linearities [2]. The high inrush currents can cause damage to the capacitors of the capacitors bank and weld the contacts of the switch together. The problems of the capacitive inrush currents and ways to reduce the magnitude of the inrush current are major concern during switching of capacitor banks [3]. The process of optimization of reactive power compensation using shunt capacitor banks is a non-linear integral programming problem [4] dealing with the control of dispersed variables [5].The electricity consumers connected to the Distribution System to the State Electricity Boards in Hooghly and Burdwan district of West Bengal, India comprise of rolling mills, cold storage and furnaces with dynamic load pattern. Lack of awareness of energy savings and inadequate finance make them unable to install costly thyristors or insulated gate bipolar transistor (IGBT) based reactive power devices. Several industrial visits to Traction Substations, Steel Plants have ensured the need of a low cost, intelligent and robust power factor control device. For bulk consumers of around 500kVa, penalty due to low power factor have been imposed and therefore the must convenient solution for them is to use SCBs. It has been also endorsed by the State Electricity Board that a large number of small scale industry consumers do incur heavy penalty losses as they fail to install costly thyristors or IGBT based reactive power compensating devices. According to the surveyed data, in Hoogly District, West Bengal, a distribution system is connected to 60MVA load and 65% of 348 bulk consumers have not installed any facility to improve the system power factor. At least 113 of these 226 bulk consumers are charged penalties, for their inability to keep power factor within acceptable limits, totaling to Rs. 678,000/- per month. Among the rest, 35% of the consumers, majority has resorted to static VAR compensation techniques which however has resulted in over compensation related problem.The present scenario of load forecasting suffers from the disadvantage that it considers the load pattern over a period of time. In due course of time this load pattern changes and so does the load forecast. Hence such a method of Static Var compensation using shunt capacitor banks suffers from an inherent drawback of not being able to supply required var with changing load pattern. Thus selection of those shunt capacitor banks that would contribute for a present var requirement without injecting excessive leading var ensures better control.It is found that for a small value of imbalance, a surplus reactive power can cause an unacceptable variation of voltage level and erodes the absorbing reactive power reserves of rotating units and also increases line losses. If such a localized voltage problem persists the sustained over voltage may lead to insulation failure. It is therefore necessary to accurately meet a particular var requirement by an optimized combination of capacitor banks ensuring better control and would prevent the consumers from incurring large amount of penalties [6]. The algorithm that has been studied which can appropriately address this varying VAR profile by selecting the optimum combination of SCBs is Ant Colony System (ACS). ACS as proposed by Dorigo [7] is inspired from the self-organizing and co-operative behavior of real ants by using a chemical called pheromone. Ants use an indirect form of communication called stigmergy that enables them to find the shortest path between the food source and their nest. ACS based methods provide some distinct advantages like positive feedback, distributed computation, which ensures faster operation as in the present case which is in the range of few milli seconds.The effectiveness of the algorithm lies in successful identification of the combination of shunt capacitor banks whose capacity is equal or near equal to the reactive power demand. This however depends on the value of the N number of individual units of different ratings (i.e. capacitor banks) installed in the premises of the consumer. With the high value of N the search space also increases and the use of ADSP-BF533 enhances the computational speed of the algorithm resulting in accurate combinatorial selection of shunt capacitor banks. In the present day VAR compensation has emerged from a local control to a global control strategy [8] in the distribution management system (DMS) software. The algorithm developed using ACS algorithm and tested on bulk installation can be extended to capacitor switching for feeder health control in an automated Distribution Management System, using the same optimization technique but different optimized parameters.Optimization may be defined as the science of determining the ‘best’ solutions to certain mathematically defined problems, which are often models of physical reality. It involves the study of optimality criteria for problems, the determination of algorithmic methods of solution, the study of the structure of such methods, and computer experimentation with methods both under trial conditions and on real life problems. The 1940s and 1950s saw the introduction and development of the very important branch of the subject known as linear programming [9]. All these methods however had a fairly restricted range of application, and again in the post war period methods of wide applicability which did not rely on any special structure in the problem were developed. The latter methods were at first very crude and inefficient, but the subject was again revolutionized in 1959. In the classical way of optimization it is essential to derive the gradient of the function to be optimized and then employ gradient descent or quasi Newton Method. While metaheuristics [10] is a set of algorithmic concepts that can be used to define heuristic methods applicable to a wide set of different problems. The use of metaheuristics has significantly increased the ability of finding very high quality solutions to hard, practically relevant combinatorial problems in a reasonable time. This method do not use the gradient or Hessian matrix so their advantage is that the function to be optimized need not be continuous or differentiable and it can also have constraints. Metaheuristics make few or no assumptions about the problem being optimized and can search very large spaces of solution. It is used for combinatorial optimization in which an optimal solution is sought over discrete search space. Popular metaheuristics for combinatorial problems include simulated annealing by Kirkpatrick et al. [11], genetic algorithms by Holland et al. [12] and ant colony optimization by Dorigo [7]. Simulated annealing method is easy to code, capable of dealing with arbitrary system and guarantees finding of an optimum solution on the other hand genetic algorithm is modular, supports multi objective optimization and the concept is easy to understand. Ant colony optimization has an advantage over simulated annealing and genetic algorithm approaches that is when the graph of the search space changes dynamically, the ant colony algorithm may still run continuously and adapt to the changes in real time. Hence ant colony optimization may be considered for problems with hidden dynamics. ACS handles history in a very flexible way by storing the already visited nodes details in its memory for future reference. This is very much suitable for our problem while optimizing with regard to the parameters defining a changing search space.ACS is a metaheuristic search algorithm which was started from the Ant System (AS) proposed by Marco Dorigo in 1992 is inspired from the self-organizing and co-operative behaviour of real ants by using a chemical called pheromone. Ants use an indirect form of communication called stigmergy that senses the intensity of pheromone which enables them to find the shortest path between the food source and their nest without using any visual cases. Real ants are capable of finding the shortest path from food source to their nest, without using visual cases, but by exploiting pheromone information. While walking, real ants deposit a certain amount of pheromone trails on the ground and each ant probabilistically prefers to follow a direction rich in pheromone, deposited by earlier ants rather than a poorer one as in Fig. 1In recent years, the interest of the scientific community in ACS has risen sharply. In fact, several applications of ACS to a wide range of different optimization problems are now available. In power systems, the ACS has been applied to a variety of subjects, from which, application in fault section estimation in power systems [13], in capacitor location allocation problems [14] and in Economic dispatch [15] can be named. In the work by Abou-El-Ela et al. [16], ACS has been used for Optimal Reactive Power Dispatch to minimize the Transmission Line Losses. Divya et al. [17] worked on the application of ACO to solve reconfiguration of a distribution system for loss minimization The main advantages of ACS algorithm are positive feedback, distributed computation and the use of a constructive greedy heuristic. Positive feedback accounts for rapid discovery of good solutions, distributed computation avoids premature convergence, and the greedy heuristic helps to find acceptable solutions in the early stages of the search process.The objective of this work is to develop an algorithm that can appropriately address a varying var profile due to a changing load pattern by selecting the optimum combination of SCBs using Ant Colony System (ACS) combinatorial algorithm. The ACS system used in this paper uses artificial ants which have memory, thus live in a discrete environment and cooperate in solving the problem. In our analogy of ACS during problem formulation and with respect to Fig. 2, the present VAR position is the nest & the desired VAR is the food source, with the existence of a no. of paths, between the nest and the food source each path connecting various nodes (or varying rating of SCBs) and ultimately reaching the food source (desired VAR). The objective is to choose the shortest path to the food source, the minimum distance defining the minimum cost function to reach the objective.For this application in the process of finding out the most pheromone rich path or the least cost function path or selection of appropriate nodes is governed by the following constraints. Therefore it may also be ascertained that the work is an application of multi-criteria or multi-attribute optimization.•Appropriate selection of capacitor banks that meet the VAR requirement.Minimum number of shunt capacitor banks are to be switched on to ensure least stressing of the electrical system and minimal harmonic injection.The immediately deselected or switched off banks should be allowed a discharge time before it can be reused in the system [6].The percentage voltage rise to the system (signal 3 w.r.t Fig. 3) after any selected combination is switched ON should not exceed 115% of the rated voltage [6].In case the harmonic contents in the capacitor current (signal 2 w.r.t to Fig. 3) crosses safety limit i.e. 135% of the rated nominal r.m.s value [6] the capacitor banks are to be switched off.Capacitors should not be switched during load injection and rejection in a short period of time, a phenomenon commonly called hunting; as VAR swing is a common occurrence in certain industries. The switching ON/OFF command is depicted as signal 4 in Fig. 3.The selection of capacitor banks combination should be so that it does not lead to the leading zone to prevent risk of overvoltage and its associated effects.The effect of voltage and frequency are considered on VAR calculation and selection of SCBs [18].(1)KVAR={2ΠfC(KV)2}×10−3The thyristor switches (Circuit Breakers (CBs) already installed) to the banks are to be switched on at voltage zero crossing for minimum transient inrush [6,19]. Recommendations for proper Surge Arrestors are to be made where CBs are installed. The effect of back to back capacitor bank switching [3] is well taken care by selecting the appropriate moment of switching using the hardware circuit.Therefore for satisfying the above criteria an algorithm that takes into account all the parameters and converges to an optimum decision in a very short time and also optimizes the computational power and memory space of the embedded system used is desirable.For a harmonic free environment the displacement power factor is also equal to the true power factor of the system. However, in the presence of harmonics, the true power factor of the system is defined [20] given in Eq. (2), which includes the contribution of not only the fundamental component but also the harmonics.(2)pftrue=1/T∫V(t)i(t)dtVrms×irmshere V(t) and i(t) signifies instantaneous voltage and current within the time period T. Though true power factor is being monitored yet the switching action of capacitor banks is carried out considering the displacement power factor, as the utility monitors only the displacement power factor.The presence of high harmonics, in addition to causing excessive current and thermal overloading, can also add significantly to peak voltages across the capacitor, causing internal and partial discharges and rapid deterioration of the dielectric. Hence monitoring of THD becomes absolute necessary for measurement of harmonic content in the system and is given by (3)(3)THD=∑k=2nIk2Ifhere n being the highest value of the harmonic component present in the signal and Ifis the fundamental component and Ikis the kth order harmonic component of i(t) respectively. The voltage and current signals are sampled at 1.1kHz using two dedicated 500ksps, 16 bit, serial ADC (AD7689) [21]. Such high sampling rate ensures that information up to 11th harmonics can be safely extracted without aliasing. The schematic block diagram is shown in Fig. 3. The embedded device developed also indicates the above parameter as a power quality index, which is also taken into account while calculation of the fourth constraint. This index is also annunciated to the user.In ACS based approach all available capacitor banks are considered to be the nodes which defines the size of the search space as in Fig. 2. In the present method searching the solution space for the shortest path to the food source which is analogous to the desired VAR position is done subjected to the nine constraints mentioned in the previous section. The shortest path determined connects the nodes whose accumulated weight is equal or near equal to preset VAR demand. This VAR demand has been generated in order to keep the electrical system within its desired p.f. limit. The difference between VAR required and VAR supplied has to be minimum, which is determined by cost function (CF) defined as,(4)CF=VAR_REQ−∑i=1lWi(sys_volt,sys_freq)(5)Wi=Wn−ΔkVARHarmHere, the terms VAR_REQ, sys_volt, sys_freq represents the amount of VAR required to meet the desired power factor, system voltage and system frequency respectively. Wnis the rating of the nth capacitor banks and l being the total number of banks in the selected combination. Wirepresents the kVAR available from the ith bank for supplying reactive VAR to the system whileΔkVARHarmrepresents the extra kVAR loading on the nth capacitor bank due to presence of harmonics. VAR_REQ depends upon the difference between VAR position at the measured p.f. and that required to meet the desired p.f. If CF is negative, i.e. ∑Wiis more than VAR_REQ, then we have to check whether ∑Wi>VAR_UPF(lag), which will make the system reach leading p.f. condition, ∑Wiis the contribution of the banks selected.If Eq. (6) is satisfied, then the system will operate in the zone 2 condition as shown in Fig. 4. This is the condition for minimum cost function or most pheromone rich path. If ∑Wi<VAR_REQ, then various paths of varying VAR difference values are to be traced to satisfy the criterion for Eq. (5) and concentration of pheromone deposition τ will depend on the difference value; being the maximum for the minimum difference.(6)VAR_DESIRED=VAR_UPF(lag)−VAR_REQInitially with the 1st iteration only, the probabilityp0y0of selecting the yth node by the mth ant from the nest or 1st node having a pheromone trail of τoyis given by Eq. (7)(7)p0y0=[τ0y]α∑z∈available[τ0z]αHere τozis the pheromone deposition on the paths from nest to all the available z no. of nodes. Instead of random distribution of ants to the nodes, initially one ant travels to each available node making the number of ants used for searching the optimal solution, equal to the number of available nodes/capacitor banks present. In a practical system number of banks used rarely exceeds 15. This ensures that such an assumption does not significantly increase the memory requirement. This therefore relieves the DSP from indulging itself into redundant computation for random number generation, required for initial distribution. This not only decreases the computational time but further facilitates connection of new banks to the system without readjustment of the parameters. Thereafter the ants’ decisions are probabilistically driven. The probability of selection of node y by the mth ant from z no. of available nodes during its kth tour from the present location x is given by (8).(8)τxyk(m)=[τxy]α×[μxy]β∑z∈available[τxz]α×[μxz]βτxzand μxzare the pheromone concentration on the paths and amount of reduction in cost function considering all available nodes in the given search space respectively. The difference in the selection rules defined by Eqs. (7) and (8) is the trade off between cost function reduction information and the trail intensity. It is already defined that probability of selecting a new node is dependent on pheromone concentration τxyof the path that connects the nodes x and y and also on μxywhich represent the amount of reduction in cost function by including node y. It is to be considered that pheromone concentration τ on the paths taking all the nodes in the given search space is uniform during the initial condition of the algorithm. The parameters α and β control the relative significance between pheromone and reduction in cost function and the values assigned to both are equal to unity. μxyis the heuristic value enhancing the local search of the ant to find out node to be visited to effect Eq. (4). This trail concentration and heuristic value both decides which node to be visited next. μxy=1/dxywhere d is the difference in functional values of the nodes x and y and food source when the ant is at node x.After completion of a tour the pheromone trail on every path connecting two available nodes is updated. The pheromone update rule on path connecting nodes x and y after kth tour by the ith ant is given by (9)(9)τxyk+1=(1−ρ)⋅τxyk+Δτxykwhere ρ and Δτxykrepresents the evaporation factor and the amount of pheromone deposited on path connecting x and y nodes by the ith ant on kth tour respectively. The evaporation factor also controls the exploration rate of the search space and is considered to be 0.3. For convergence, only the path of minimum CF should have deposition of highest amount of pheromone. Thus the pheromone updating rule can be represented in the form given by (10)(10)τxyk+1=(1−ρ)⋅τxyk+RVAR_REQ−∑i=1lWiwhere R is the amount of pheromone deposited by an ant after its complete tour and is assumed to be 1. It has been observed that with the changing load pattern and with changing capacitor switching statuses, the search space varies dynamically and ACS adapts to these modifications at run time. Hence ACS is capable of handling problems with hidden dynamics.The cost function is a pointer to the distance between the food source and the nest. The first constraint as discussed in Section 3 is implemented by modifying the definition of the cost function of the mth ant to a more general form given by (11) to enable least stressing to the system. The parameters S1 and S2 in the equation, control the relative importance between the two variables. For the present case S1=1 and S2=0.7 is used.(11)CF(m)=s1×VAR_REQ−∑i=1lWi+s2×(no_of_node)The cost function (CF) is a pointer to the distance between the food source and their nest. The core timer block of BF533 [21] is used for implementation of the second constraint. The ACS based algorithm is operational from Analog Device BF533 DSP based platform. A suitable number of interrupts are counted and accordingly the states of the capacitor banks are updated. The voltage rise constraint is implemented simply by counting the number of interrupts generated or the period for which the voltage rise crosses the limit and accordingly changing the status of a bank from ON to OFF. If for any selected combination, kVARcap is the amount of reactive VAR injected to the system through a transformer having a rating of kVAtran and pu impedance of zpu then the percentage voltage rise in the system voltage is given by(12)%volt_rise=kVARcap×zpuKVAtranThe third constraint is implemented by simply modifying the value of Δτxyk. The definition used in the present problem is of the following form(13)τxyk=RCFk(m)for%volt_rise<110%(14)τxyk=0for%volt_rise<110%where CFk(m) is the cost function for the mth ant on completion of kth tour and R is a parameter that defines the amount of pheromone deposited by a single ant over the whole tour. The fourth constraint is implemented using the rms values of different harmonics. All the capacitor banks are deselected if the Eq. (3) for THD for current crosses 5%. The event of hunting occurs specially in the traction substation and steel plant, when the load changes necessitate a specific VAR injection or rejection for a short period of time. This leads to unnecessary strain on the capacitor banks, the algorithm does not recommend switching of capacitor banks during hunting condition. In general two types of conditions may prevail in any reactive power compensation problemGenerally, industrial loads are inductive in nature and are the cause for lagging power factor. Permanently connected shunt capacitor banks generate VAR which is beneficial to the system during the peak hours as it improves the power factor. However, during lean or off-peak period, the industrial or reactive load falls considerably to low values and this unrestricted generation of VAR may lead to over compensation unless the capacitor banks are disconnected from the system. Further the reactive power demand for industry depends on several parameters like product mix, market demand, etc. At any point of time there can be either deficit of VAR especially during the change of shifts in factories drawing heavy lagging loads.Hence, ACS based method is capable of taking into account all such situations and considers them as the exhaustion or shifting of a local food source and therefore depending upon the no. of capacitors in circuit the search space modifies itself inherently as a part of the dynamic algorithm to bring the power factor within the desired range given by Eq. (15) with reference to Fig. 4.(15)Var_desired≤Var_required(Var_upf(lag))On rejection of a large amount of lagging load the VAR balance of the system is disturbed and shunt compensation exceeds the reactive power requirement at that instant. The VAR balance may be restored by switching off selected minimum numbers of SCBs to reduce no of switching introduced in the circuit. The problem is analogous to what would happen when the ant colony in the double bridge experiment, is offered after convergence a new shorter connection between nest and food. The condition that governs the deselection of the capacitor banks with reference to Fig. 4 in order to bring the power factor within the desired range is given by (16) and by selecting a higher exploration rate. Parameter set for ACS algorithm given in Table 1ais found to give optimum result with least computational time and burden.(16)Var_upf(lead)≤Var_rejection(Var_desired)In order to identify the optimum values of the parameter set {ρ, α, β}, the performance of the ACS algorithm is tested for different combinations of ρ, α and β. Table 1bshows the effect of varying the parameters of ACS algorithm for a demand (REQ_VAR>0) of 806 kVAR. The values of α and β are varied from 1 to 5 in steps of 1. On the other hand, the value of evaporation factor (ρ) is also varied from 0.25 to 0.4 in steps of 0.05. It can be observed from Table 1b that number of iterations required for convergence is minimum for parameter set {ρ, α, β}={0.25, 1, 1}, {0.25, 1, 2}, {0.3, 1, 2}. However Columns 7 and 8 of Table 1b shows that the cost function, which is the difference between REQ_VAR and that supplied by selected capacitor banks, corresponding to the parameter set {ρ, α, β}={0.25, 1, 1} and {0.25, 1, 2} are 36. The capacitor banks selected for these parameter sets are found to be 8,7,2,3 and 5. This is due to the fact that a low evaporation factor (ρ=0.1) reduces the overall explorative capability of ACS algorithm of the search space and as a result gets stuck to a sub-optimal path containing the above mentioned capacitor banks for parameter sets {ρ, α, β}={0.25, 1, 1} and {0.25, 1, 2}. Increasing the evaporation factor to a relatively higher value causes identification of the correct capacitor banks (as ACS now does a proper explorative search of the search space). However, (as can be observed from Table 1b) increment in the value of ρ also tends to increase the number of iterations required for convergence for a given value of α and β. On the other hand, the value of cost function for parameter set {ρ, α, β}={0.3, 1, 2} is observed to be 6 and the capacitor banks selected are 9, 7, 8 and 3. The pheromone trail detail for the parameter set {0.3, 1, 2} is illustrated in Fig. 10. It is understood that this parameter set strikes a balance between two important statistical parameter of the ACS based algorithm, namely: exploration of search space to identify optimum solution and convergence in minimum number of iterations. Hence, in the present work, the optimized value of the parameter set {ρ, α, β} is assigned a value of {0.3, 1, 2}. It is worth mentioning here that similar analysis carried out for VAR surplus situation where VAR has to be rejected (REQ_VAR<0) suggests that optimum result with least computational time and burden can be obtained by increasing the evaporation factor to 0.43 while keeping the values of α and β same. Thus, in the present work the optimum parameter set for VAR deficit and VAR surplus condition are considered to be {ρ, α, β}={0.3, 1, 2} and {ρ, α, β}={0.43, 1, 2} respectively.Genetic algorithms proposed by Holland [12] are a family of computational models inspired by evolution. These algorithms encode a potential solution to a specific problem on a simple chromosome like data structure and apply recombination operators to these structures so as to preserve critical information. The search space formed by the available number of capacitor banks is searched by the genetic algorithm. Unlike ACS based approach there are many iteration numbers in basic Genetic Algorithm, also it costs long time to calculate, so it can hardly satisfy actual operation optimization. The BF533 DSP based hardware platform took 37s to generate the initial population members of the first generation. To reduce computational burden of the DSP based hardware tournament selection [24] with q=2 is implemented for the present case.Since the number of capacitor banks used, for the present case is eight in number, the chromosome length used to encode one possible solution is taken to be equal to eight. After an exhaustive search of the different values of the parameter set and its resulting effect on the performance of the GA based algorithm, the parameter set shown in Table 2is found to give the optimal combination offering least computational burden and time.Table 3summarizes the performance of the two algorithms discussed above when implemented in the Analog Devices BF533 DSP based hardware platform. The detail of the hardware implementation is discussed in the following section. It is seen from the observation; the ACS based method is superior than the GA based method from both operational time and memory requirement point of view. Fig. 5(a and b) is a detailed block diagram of the ACS algorithm that helps in optimum selection of capacitor bank combinations.Another work by Galal et al. [23] intends to present a new hybrid algorithm for solving optimal power flow under fuzziness. The proposed approach integrates the result of both Ant Colony Optimization and Genetic Algorithm to develop a robust algorithm to represent an optimal Power Flow.The ACS based algorithm is operational from Analog Device BF533 DSP based platform. The hardware is composed of a BF533 EZ KIT-LITE board and two ADCs. The voltage and current waveforms are sampled using these two 16 bit ADC (AD7689). SPI interface is used for interfacing the ADC chips [21]. The voltage and current signals are sampled at 1.1kHz to retain information up to 13th order of harmonics. Fig. 6shows the experimental setup of the proposed method. One of the three available general purpose timer TIMER0, is used to generate a pulse at 1.1kHz which is used by the SPI master to sample the voltage and current signals using the two AD7689.This section clearly discusses the scope of improving the system, from its existing condition by intelligent use of the existing resources [24]. The present provides an economic solution for small scale industries to improve the power factor and thereby reduce the penalties charged.The ACS based algorithm has been tested for industrial systems like traction substation and steel plants. The simulation is carried out in PSCAD/EMTDC environment. The first one is the 21MVA traction substation of Eastern Railway, located at Barasat and is capable of injecting 1.32 capacitive MVAR in the system i.e. the present system is capable of compensating up to a maximum of 1320 KVAR. The total capacity of 1.32 MVAR is divided into 8 SCBs for implementation of the algorithm. The ratings of the SCBs are given in the following Table 4.Figs. 7 and 8show the digital model and load demand of a span of 21h for a day in the substation respectively. It is observed from Fig. 8 that during lean period 12 am to 5 am and 6 pm to 10 pm, the VAR requirement of the load for a particular day, falls. Static var compensation in these areas would lead to overcompensation resulting in leading power factor as shown in Fig. 9.Table 5shows the combination predicted by the ACS algorithm for load profile shown in Fig. 8. The combination predicted is implemented in the PSCAD/EMTDC model yielded a power factor profile shown in Fig. 9. It is evident from Table 5 that the algorithm works perfectly for both the situations when there is a demand of Var in the system and also when there is an excess of Var in the system. Switching of the capacitor banks is done considering the desired range of pf to be within 0.9 to 1.0. As seen for the 3rd and 4th hours of the day no switching of capacitor banks are required after a set of capacitor banks have been made ON i.e. 3rd, 4th, 8th and 9th capacitor banks remains ON because the power factor is already in the desired range and system jerks are avoided by unnecessary switching. In the 5th hour, when leading p.f. is observed only 8th capacitor is switched OFF leaving behind 5, 4, 9 capacitor banks. Fig. 10is a snapshot that elaborates on the process of pheromone deposition leading to convergence in selection of nodes. Here the starting node i.e. node 1 is considered as nest, hence the capacitor banks are numbered as node 2 to node 9. As no. of ants is equal to no. of nodes in the given search space, hence there are 8 ants starting from ant 1 to ant 8. Clearly a significant improvement is achieved with dynamic compensation, in comparison to static compensation with no overcompensation or voltage rise in Fig. 9, is observed for the same VAR injection capacity of the station. It is clear from the snapshot that the algorithm converges in the second iteration when the memory contents of ants 1to 8 are the same i.e., 9, 7, 8, 3 nodes are visited as the pheromone updation being maximum on the paths connecting nodes 8 and 3 and nodes 9 and 7.The Ladle Heating Furnace (LHF) as well as other mills located in Rourkela Steel Plant (RSP) does not have local VAR compensating facilities. As mentioned before a total capacity of 82 MVAR is injected centrally to cater the VAR requirement of all the units operating under RSP. The Thyristor Controlled Reactors (TCR) that were used to drain out excess amount of kVAR generated is presently not in service and is the cause for RSP to suffer not only from low power factor but also from severe overcompensation resulting in power factor as low as 0.75(leading). Inspite of high cost installation RSP is incurring a penalty of Rs.9,00,000/- per month for low power factor. The load requirement of LHF is periodic and the entire load profile in Fig. 11repeats itself after every 21min obtained from the field data Figs. 12 and 13shows the system reactive power profile and the power factor profile after compensation by different methods respectively.Hence from Fig. 13 it may be observed that by implementing the proposed algorithm not only improves the lagging power factor but it efficiently takes care of the leading power factor as well. The reason of TCR to remain inoperative is mainly due to inability to replace costly and faulty IGBT's for financial constraints. Such situation may be improved by considering the need of compensation of individual mills as the load profile may vary from one mill to another by installing a bank of SCBs along with an intelligent control in each mill. This is indeed a very modest compensation technique both in price and technology. This standalone control methodology can at any point of time be integrated with the plant Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
