@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Investigation of heat waves with fuzzy methods

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Heat waves are considered as a global warming parameter.Investigation of heat waves with fuzzy methods.Developed software works on real data.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Heat index,Heat wave,Fuzzy expected value,Clustering,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The paper concerns influences of global warming on health of the population. We consider an important parameter of global warming – a heat index – that is a characteristics of a human thermal comfort and represents a combination of air temperature and relative humidity. Based on the heat indexes, we propose a new approach – the fuzzy methods – to investigate heat waves which, if defined properly, can be used to assess the potential impacts of climate change on human health, e.g., in the heat-health warning systems. We find typical characteristics of heat indexes during different time periods, using most typical fuzzy expected values. We use these typical characteristics to process heat waves. Our results are applied on the data collected in the Ministry of Preservation of the Environment of Georgia during 1955–1970 and 1990–2007 years as well as free accessible meteorological data of air temperature and relative humidity during August 2003 in Paris (France) and Tbilisi (Georgia).The global warming is a well-known problem that has a great impact on human health. Among several parameters that allow to estimate this effect (among others, for example, variation on the intensity of solar radiation, wind speed, etc.) a heat index (HI) is often used. HI is usually defined as a combination of air temperature and air humidity. HI determines the human-perceived equivalent temperature. A good example of the difference between HI and a true temperature would be comparing the climates of Miami and Phoenix. Miami averages around 90°F in summer due to the easterly trade winds coming from the Atlantic Ocean, but it has a high humidity (e.g. 75%). Phoenix averages around 104.5°F in summer, but typically has a low humidity (e.g. 10%). According to HI, the relative temperature in Miami will be 109.5°F, but the relative temperature in Phoenix will be lowered due to the lower humidity, around 98.6°F. Given sunshine, Miami is likely to feel hotter than Phoenix.There are several ways to estimate HI: by special formulae (for example, Steadman [30]) or by special tables where empirical data are collected. For example, Fig. 1shows dependencies, i.e., HI, between relative humidity and air temperature in °C (modified from [3]). The data in this table are subjective estimations of the human thermal comfort in Celsius. In general, in applications, HI is measured in Fahrenheit.A heat wave notion is closely related to HI. In a general sense a heat wave (HW) can be defined as a prolonged period of excessive heat. Similarly to the descriptions of HI there is no universal and rigorous descriptions of HW: subjectiveness and uncertainty is a part of existing definitions. We list some examples below.Recently, continuing reports of human mortality because of the effects brought on by extreme heat events worldwide support the necessity for research of HWs. However, defining HW as a hazard is not universal over space because of the differences in climate norms and different types of uncertainty in the estimations.American Meteorology Society [4] defines HW as a period of abnormally and uncomfortably hot and unusually humid weather. Typically HW lasts two or more days.In [5] HW is defined as consecutive days with temperature above 30°C.The ICARO Project [2] defines HW by means of a temperature threshold of 32°C combined with a minimum duration of 2 days. This definition is similar to a definition used in the United States: 90°F (32.2°C) and a minimum duration of 2 days.There appears to be no official Australian definition of HW [2]. The difficulty in defining HW in Australia has been in establishing an appropriate HI with an acceptable event threshold and duration, and relating it to the climatology of the area under investigation. Various heat or thermal comfort indices have been developed to evaluate heat-related stress (e.g., Temperature Humidity Index [35]), combining air temperature, humidity, and, additionally, in some cases, wind, direct sunlight and nighttime recovery. Two of the most widely used indices in Australia are the apparent temperature (work of Steadman [30]) and the Relative Strain Index, derived by authors [7] and discussed in the Goldfields-Eucla climatic survey [1].Temperatures that would indicate whether a specific location was under the effect of HW would be in the top 5% for a continuous three-day period. The United States National Weather Service uses the measure of apparent temperature, which is also based on the work of Steadman [30,31].In [28] HW was defined as a period of at least 48 hours during which neither the overnight low nor the daytime high HI falls below the National Weather Service heat stress thresholds (40°C and 105°F, respectively), except at stations for which more than 1% of both the annual high and low HI observations exceed these thresholds, in which case the 1% values are used as HW thresholds.In the work [8] the author defines the notion of HW based on a heat stress. In turn, a heat stress is based on the 24-hour period estimations of HI, and is represented by a value that identifies by summed heat values above 32.2°C(90°F) and 40.6°C(105°F) subtracted the number of hours of recorded thresholds (32.2°C(90°F), 40.6°C(105°F) and above) times these thresholds. Then accumulated values (Table 1) describe five Categories of a heat stress: each day is assigned a number from 0 to 5, 0 means no stress (Category 0 is not included into Table 1). In order for HW to be identified, consecutive days must be classified as Category 1 or higher. To classify each HW as individual hazards, the logical solution was to assign the highest value from recorded values of heat stress during the consecutive days. Named as an event, HW with daily categories listed as 1-2-2-3-2-2, for example, would be a 6-day event registering as Category 3HW.Let us again underline that there is no unique definition of HW, all existing definitions are imprecise.In this paper, we propose a new approach to define and investigate HW.Extreme heat is a hazard that is capable of causing economic problems and potentially high mortality rates across several regions simultaneously [8]. We should be able to define what does it mean that a period of time was undertaken by HWs or, in spoken words, that some days, weeks or even months were extremely hot or very hot. This definition can not be based on the value of one HI (for example, in a day), because the frequency, magnitude and duration of the HIs as well as day-to-day magnitude variability, overall frequency of HIs, seasonal timing of events are important characteristics to define HW. Thus, the problem is to define how hot was this or another period of time, which criteria to choose: maximum value of HIs, or the number of days with a high HI, or an intensiveness, or a relativity of HIs, or may be something else?To combine different parameters as well as to capture above mentioned subjectiveness and imprecision in perception of a heat we propose a new methodology. We used methods based on fuzzy set theory. We chose two methods, the method of fuzzy expected value (FEV) and the method of clustering fuzzy expected value (CFEV) [16,29,37], compared them. The last one we have adapted due to our practical demands.Roughly our new methodology can be described as follows: we ask experts to define “hot weather” and a corresponding fuzzy set. Then we calculate, using real values of HI, the most typical value of the fuzzy set for these values during a particular period, say August (notice, that shorter or longer period can be taken as well). Our results allow to say that this month was extremely hot, very hot, hot, very warm, warm or normal. If obtained characteristics are “very hot” or “extremely hot”, we conclude that this month was impact by a severe HW or an extreme HW. Analogically, “hot” corresponds to strong, “very warm”, corresponds to a moderate HW and “warm” to a mild HW (see Table 2). Notice, that linguistic terms normal, warm, very warm, hot, very hot, extremely hot we use to deal with HIs, they are defined as shown in Fig. 4, whereas words mild, moderate, strong, severe, extreme are applied for HWs. We use different sets of linguistic words to be able to differ two notions: HI and HW.Different characteristics of HI (e.g., frequency, magnitude and duration) are included in the most typical values. The most typical values allow to see tendency of appearing of HWs in Georgia and it can be used for prognosis in the future. Notice, that we illustrated our approach on the data from a long time-period available for Georgia. But due to its flexibility, our methodology can be easily applied for other regions where measured data are available and experts work out the same problems.The paper is organised as follows. In Section 2 we shortly describe the data available for investigation, how they are organised and how HI is calculated. Notice, that we use the meteorological data of Georgia as well as free accessible data of air temperature and relative humidity during August 2003 in Paris. In Sections 3 and  4, FEV and CFEV approaches are applied to our problem. In Section 5 we compare these two approaches. In Section 6 we illustrate our methodology on real data for different regions of Georgia. In Section 7 we compare August 2003 in Tbilisi and Paris. In Section 8 we compare the existing methodologies and approaches with our investigation. The final remarks and conclusions are collected in Section 9.A simple dependence between air temperature and air humidity does not exist. In our investigation we have used the calculations based on the work of Steadman [30]: the author proposed a formula for approximating the HI in degrees Fahrenheit. This formula is useful only when the air temperature is at least 80°F and the relative humidity is at least 40% (this is a case for Georgia):HI=c1+c2T+c3R+c4TR+c5T2+c6R2+c7T2R+c8TR2+c9T2R2where HI is a heat index (in degrees Fahrenheit); T is an ambient temperature (in degrees Fahrenheit); R is a relative humidity (in percent); c1=−42.379; c2=2.04901523; c3=10.14333127; c4=−0.22475541; c5=−6.83783×10−3; c6=−5.481717×10−2; c7=1.22874×10−3; c8=8.5282×10−4; c9=−1.99×10−6.The results of HI calculation for Tbilisi in August are presented in Fig. 2(down the map).Investigations of HI are mainly carried out in the following directions:•influence of HI onto human health;HI prognoses in countries under global warming circumstances.For example, impacts of HI (shade values), published on the website of the Pueblo, CO United States National Weather Service, are presented in Table 3.Methods used for HI estimations and predictions, usually depend on data available. From this point, data collected in Georgia are immense and allow a wide spectrum of experiments.We have investigated these empirical data and results of our investigation are presented in this paper. We have deduced typical characteristics of HI for each month (for available data) and on its base have concluded about HWs in Georgia.Observations of the global warming influence on the climate change have been started in Georgia since middle 50th [36]. Since that time empirical data are collected. We chose information about air temperature and air humidity collected in four main cites of Georgia: Tbilisi, Poti, Lentekhi, Dedoplistskharo during the two periods (1955–1970 and 1990–2007), and only five months are taken into consideration (May, June, July, August, September). These data are a privilege of Ministry of Preservation of the Environment of Georgia and they have been used for preparation of the Second Communication of Georgia to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).Another source of data, used in this work, is free available data from Russian's Weather Server where meteorological data for many countries are collected.A special program was written to use these data flexibly. It means the data can be visualised graphically or in the form of tables, and different manipulations – such as automatically calculation of HI of each month, each year, each period; finding minimal and maximal values of HIs of a period, etc., – are implemented (e. g., see Fig. 2).Having HI at hand, a question is how to characterise a period of time (week, month, etc.) – hot or not hot, normal, very hot and so on – thus, to give characteristics that used by people for estimations. Based on these characteristics we can estimate a tendency of HI developing in Georgia and, the next step, to estimate an influence of HWs on the human health.One can use a maximal value of HI during the period, or a number of days with a high HI, relative frequencies of HIs and some criteria else. The difficulty is that each of these characteristics alone do not reflect the influence of HI on the human health in all complexity.To capture the majority of the HI characteristics an approach based on fuzzy sets have been chosen. For an estimation we have taken the fuzzy expected value and clustering fuzzy expected value approaches [16,37].The notion of a fuzzy expected value (FEV) is closely related to the Sugeno integral [33] for a fuzzy set with respect to a fuzzy measure. The FEV indicates the most “typical” grade of the membership in a given fuzzy set and the corresponding element from the universe [16,29].Definition 1[13] Let X be a non-empty set,Xbe a Borel field (σ-algebra) defined on X. A fuzzy measure μ defined on the measurable space(X,X)is a set functionμ:X→[0,1]verifying the following axioms:1μ(∅)=0; μ(X)=1;ifA,B⊂X, A⊂B then μ(A)<μ(B);if {Ak|1<k<∞} is a monotone sequence,∀Ak∈X, thenlimk→∞μ(Ak)=μ(limk→∞Ak)Definition 2The FEV of the fuzzy set A with respect to the fuzzy measure μ is the Sugeno integral over X:(1)FEV(A)=def∫XA∘μ=defsupα∈[0,1]{α∧μ(Hα)}It follows [29] that FEV somehow “averages” the values of the function A not in the sense of statistical average, but by cutting subsets of the α level, whose values of a fuzzy measure μ are either sufficiently “high” or sufficiently “low” (see, for example, Fig. 3, μ(Hα) is a continuous function, α∈[0, 1]).Definition 3Let μ be a fuzzy measure on X={x1, x2, ..., xn} (discrete case), A:X→[0, 1], Xi={xi, …, xn}. Let membership degrees be ordered as follows: A(x(1))≤A(x(2))≤…≤A(x(n)). Let μ be a fuzzy measure defined over the subsets of X. Then the fuzzy expected value FEV of A is defined as follows(2)FEV(A(x1),…,A(xn))=def⋁i=1n(A(x(i))∧μ(Xi)}RemarkThe FEV(A) may be calculated as the median of the set, ordered from low to high values, {A(x(1)), A(x(2)), …, A(x(n)), μ(X1), …μ(Xm−1)}, whereμ(Xi)=1N∑j=i+1mnj, 1≤i≤m−1,N=∑i=1mniand niis a finite population.For more details about FEV a reader is referred to the corresponding sources [12,16].Let us consider an example. Let HI (in Celsius) each day a month (Fig. 5(a)) be given. A fuzzy set hot weather is given as shown in Fig. 4(a). Notice, that a user (in particular, an expert) can choose another type of a membership function (this will be discussed later). Using the fuzzy set hot weather, each HI of a day is assigned a membership degree in the fuzzy set hot weather. For example, HI of the second day is 41°C (Fig. 5(a)). The membership of this value in the fuzzy set hot weather due the diagram (Fig. 4(a)) is 0.71. Analogically, for the whole month such fuzzification is done and the corresponding results are shown in Fig. 5(b).Notice, that the fuzzy set hot weather is separated into segments, and each segment has a linguistic name (normal, warm, very warm, hot, very hot, extremely hot) and is drown by different colours (Fig. 4(a)).Based on this separation the fuzzified HI values are also divided graphically into different colour-segments, that show the ranges of HI (Fig. 5(b)).Results from Fig. 5 are summarised in Table 4.The first column of Table 4 is a linguistic name of a segment from the fuzzy set hot weather: normal, warm, very warm, hot, very hot, extremely hot; the second column shows segments’ interval representation; the third column shows the number of HIs from the corresponding segment; the forth column represents membership degrees. Let us call the elements from the last column thresholds. As can be seen, we have five different thresholds: 0.22, 0.45, 0.56, 0.64, 1.0. The last, fifth column shows how many fuzzified HIs are above or equal to the corresponding threshold.The next step (in the process of finding FEV for the fuzzy set hot weather for this month) is to check how many fuzzified HIs are above each threshold (in percentage terms, (2)), N is the number of all days, in our case N=31. As can be seen, 31 days (or times) HI is above or equal to 0.22; 14 days HI is above or equal to 0.45; 4 days HI is above or equal to 0.56; 1 day HI is above or equal to 0.64. Pairing the data and rearranging it by increasing order of the membership grade, due to (2), we obtain the following four pairs:(0.22;1.00)(0.45;0.45)(0.56;0.13)(0.64;0.03)Now, the minimum value of each pair is min(0.22;1.00)=0.22; min(0.45;0.45)=0.45; min(0.56;0.13)=0.13; min(0.64;0.03)=0.03 and, therefore, following (2), the FEV, which is the maximum of all these minima, ismax(0.22;0.45;0.13;0.03)=0.45Thus, the FEV is 0.45. From this result and the corresponding linguistic descriptions (Fig. 4) we can state that the month was very warm and a corresponding HW is moderate. At Fig. 6examples of FEVs for Tbilisi in August (for periods 1955–1970 and 1990–2007) are presented.Construction of the fuzzy set hot weather needs some clarifications. The intervals ≤4.2°C, [4.2°C, 26.6°C), [26.6°C, 32.2°C), [32.2°C, 40.5°C), [40.5°C, 54.4°C), ≥54.4°C (Fig. 4) and their corresponding linguistic notations normal, warm, very warm, hot, very hot, extremely hot (Table 4) as well as membership degrees for elements from each interval (corresponding thresholds are 0, 0.22, 0.45, 0.56, 0.64, 1, see Fig. 4) are defined by an expert (in our case the representative of the Ministry of Preservation of the Environment of Georgia). The choice of such step-wise membership function is based on the real data available for our research (HI values for each day during long periods of time) and the method applied for FEV calculation. Thus, due to the expert opinion certain partitions of X and Y axes for a fuzzy set hot weather has been chosen (see Fig. 4).It is important, that for different regions the appropriate membership functions have to be constructed. Because what is warm in one region, for example, can be normal in another. Let us illustrate the last sentence by examples. On Fig. 8two different partitions of the vertical axis are chosen – two different sets of thresholds – that correspond to the different fuzzy sets, let say hot weather1 and hot weather2, (see Fig. 7) which, in turn, represent different heights for segments normal, warm, very warm, hot, very hot, extremely hot (compare with Fig. 4). Then the “green” branch for Tbilisi on Fig. 8(a) is from 0.2 to 0.3, the “green” branch for Tbilisi on Fig. 8(b) is from 0.4 to 0.5. It can be seen that the same periods of time are classified as “normal” based on a particular threshold, and “warm” due to another threshold (compare Fig. 8(b) and (a)), i.e., due to the different choice of the corresponding membership function.It has been suggested that FEV “may occasionally generate improper results” [37]. This can be explained because the computation of FEV suggests that the “opinion” of people and the “percentage” of people having those opinions are related by the definition of the fuzzy measure to produce a typical opinion. In the paper [37] authors critically view the approaches to the most typical value – FEV and weighted fuzzy expected value (WFEV) – “to replace the FEV whenever it fails to function” [11]. They consider cluster fuzzy expected value (CFEV) as an alternative to WFEV. We adapted CFEV introduced in [37] for our practical task and compare results of FEV and modified CFEV for the problem of HI investigation in Georgia.Clustering fuzzy expected value tool is used for computing the most typical fuzzy expected value of a membership function in a fuzzy set [37]. CFEV is based on grouping of individual responses that meet certain criteria, to clusters. Each cluster is considered as a “super response” and contributes to the result proportionally to its relative size and the difference in opinion from the mean of the entire sample. In so doing, CFEV represents the opinion of the majority of the population, but it also respects the opinion of the minority [37].CFEV consists of two parts: forming of clusters and a combination of means of each cluster in a particular way [37]. We have modified this approach due to our needs, in particular, we adjust parameters of expressions (3)–(5)[37] due to available data, and we adapt Clustering Algorithm (see below) for our task.Let s be the maximum allowable distance between the first and the last element in a cluster, cijbe j element in cluster i, d is the maximum allowable distance between two consecutive elements within a cluster(3)|cij−1−cij|≤d(gap)(4)|ci1−cin|≤s(size)Clustering algorithm•Step 1. We fuzzify HIs during a month by means of the fuzzy set hot weather similar to the procedure described for FEV: given HI values Fig. 5(a) one assigns a membership degree calculated from the fuzzy set shown in Fig. 4(a) to a HI value, and obtains fuzzification values as presented in Fig. 5(b).Step 2. We calculate a difference between maximum and minimum of the obtained fuzzified values and assign this value to s. d is a value that is equal to s×10/N, where N is equal to 30 or 31. Applying this formula, we guarantee, that values in the same clusters will be different from each other by decimal category, because we are working with decimal numbers from 0 to 1.Step 3. A cluster is constituted which elements are restricted by d. It means that an element is chosen for the cluster by inequality (3). This process continues till first and the last element do not satisfy inequality (4). In this case a cluster is built and the process is finished if there are no elements more.Notice, that by means of the data available and the algorithm described above, each month HI are splited into 5–7 clusters.To calculate CFEV we use the following formula [37]:(5)CFEV=WA+∑i=1mNiN2(WAi−WA)whereWAiis the mean of each cluster Ai, WAis the mean of the entire set, m is the number of clusters, Niis the number of elements in i-cluster. Thus, a cluster with a mean smaller than of the entire fuzzy set reduces the mean of the fuzzy set by a factor proportional to the distance between the two means and the ratio of the size of the cluster to that of the entire fuzzy set. On the other hand, a cluster with a mean larger than that of the entire fuzzy set increases the mean of the fuzzy set by a factor which is also based on the distance and ratio of the cluster and the fuzzy set [37].Notice that the fuzzy set is finite and the algorithm terminates. At Fig. 9(a) examples for the CFEV for July in Tbilisi during the periods of time are presented.Let us now compare FEV and CFEV.FEV shows the most typical value for a fuzzy set very well, but it is sensitive to the small change of the number of elements in the population [37]. FEV does not take into consideration the order of elements in the population.Consider an example. In the case of HI investigation assume that among 31 days in May, 12 days have HI that belong to the risk group. Let us consider two cases. The first case is when days with high HI are disposed one after another and the second case is when between these days there are normal days (i.e. the days with HI do not belonging to the risk groups).It is clear that both cases are dangerous for the human health because so many days are with high risk factor. But in the first case the density of days with high HI is higher and, consequently, a HW is stronger, and, consequently, the negative influence of the case to the human health is bigger. FEV does not make difference between these two cases, it shows the same results for both cases, whereas the CFEV defines the first case as a more dangerous one.Two values CFEV and FEV for Tbilisi, during the periods, in July are presented at Fig. 9.Table 5shows the HIs for Tbilisi, Poti, Lentekhi, Dedoplistskharo, during the periods, classified into five groups.Comparing the behaviour of HI for Tbilisi, Poti, Lentekhi, Dedoplistskharo, it has been concluded that most typical values of warm HIs (weak HWs) increase during the last 15 years, very warm HIs (average HWs) increase in Tbilisi, Poti and Dedoplistskharo, but decrease in Lentekhi. Significant increasing of HIs is observed in Tbilisi, whereas in Lentekhi the total number of dangerous days is decreased.As an example, Fig. 10(a) and (b) shows FEVs and their tendencies in Dedoplistskharo and Poti in July during two periods of time (1955–1970 and 1990–2007).We have 10–12 measurements of temperature and relative humidity during each day within August 2003, for Paris and 8–10 analogical measurements for Tbilisi (Russia's Weather Server: Climate Data). First, we calculated the average temperature and the average relative humidity for each day for Paris as well as for Tbilisi and calculated the corresponding HI for Paris and HI for Tbilisi based on the these average data. We obtained the following results: during this month HI was increased during three periods of time:1from 2nd till 13th•in Paris: from 25°C till 33°C;in Tbilisi: from 24°C till 29°C.•18th and 19th: till 28°C in Tbilisi, and then it has stabilised;20th till 22nd in Paris: from 26°C till 27°C.•from 27th till 30th in Tbilisi: from 27°C till 29°C;from 30th till 31nd in Paris: from 29°C till 34°C.The corresponding FEV for Paris is 0.4, CFEV=0.469, for Tbilisi FEV=0.4 and CFEV=0.476.We also calculated HIs for each day for Paris and Tbilisi and corresponding CFEV and FEV are presented in Fig. 11.Based on these results we can conclude that Paris and Tbilisi were undertaken by an average HW and increasing of HI was first in Tbilisi and then in Paris (a difference is 1–2 days). Is it a tendency – more data is needed to answer this question.It is clear that the data for Georgia (different regions during the long periods of time) allow to do prognosis and comparison, we can see the tendency of a HI (and correspondingly, HWs) in different regions of Georgia. One month data for Paris and Tbilisi allow only illustration and possibility to show ways of applications.Although the importance of a problem for better understanding of HWs was already recognised long time ago [9,14], the methods for investigation are still disputable. Analysing the HW on a daily basis can reveal how fast people responded to the conditions, and that identifying the magnitude of an event by daily intensity would be necessary.Predictive models, based on the empirical-statistical models allow exploration of HW-disease relationship in time (e.g., monthly temperature and food-poisoning in a population); to estimate change in temperature-related cases under future climate change [25]. Qualitative or quantitative measurements describe basic climate–health relationships, e.g. correlation of interannual variation in malaria incidence with minimum September temperature; analogue of a warming trend, e.g. association of changes in malaria incidence in highland areas with a trend in temperature; impacts of extreme event, e.g. assessment of mortality associated with a heatwave; geographical analogue, e.g. comparison of vector activity in two locations, the second location having a climate today that is similar to that forecast for the first location [10].Most approaches are based on the simple definitions of HW as an event of high HI during several days [1,4,7,15,17,22,26,27,35,38]. An intention of researches is to discover whether there is a trend in the number of HWs in different parts of the world and the duration of HWs over the past years and, if so, what the magnitude of the trend is [34]. But certainty that aspects of the future will not be direct extensions of the past or present, ensures that our knowledge base is incomplete for predicting the range, timing and magnitude of future health impacts of HWs. Uncertainties in modelling are therefore unavoidable, and explicit caveats must be stated [6,23,24]. Increasing scientific effort is underway to develop integrated mathematical modelling that takes account of many of these aspects. In [8] uncertainty in the representation of HWs is captured by interval, where different categories of HWs are defined. But intervals are defined rigorously, and the natural question arises (see Table 1): if strong heat stress is estimated by ≥120 units, what about 119 units?To the best of our knowledge, fuzzy methods for HWs investigations were not yet applied. From this point of view our approach can be considered as an innovative one in the definition and investigation of the HWs. FEV and CFEV approaches are chosen due to their appropriateness for the available real data as well as their awareness in capturing the subjectiveness in the description of HWs.Some remarks can be still done concerning the applied methods.Investigation of HWs in our approach are based on the notion of HIs. We do not restrict the duration of HW to a particular number of days with high HIs. Contrarily to the approach in [8], for example, the user of our software decides him/herself what period of time he/she wants to investigate with respect to HWs, such that the questions “was it very hot during July–August 1969 in Tbilisi?” or “was it hot during Jul 1958, first week, in Poti?” are eligible.In our work, we deal with linguistic description [39] of the HIs and HWs. The representation of the fuzzy set “hot weather”, described above, is taken for granted, i.e. we do not describe a formal method to obtain such a function. We relay on the opinion of the experts [36], on the common sense as well as availability of the data – because of these such step-wise function was chosen (see Fig. 4(a)). Due to the recent developed methodologies (see, e. g., [18–21]) this approach can be further modified and formalised, and the opinion of the different experts, concerning the estimation of the hot weather in the particular region of Georgia can be constructed. If the initial fuzzy sets describing different characteristics of a HW would be represented as triangular or trapezoidal fuzzy sets, and an expected values for each fuzzy set would be calculated, the accumulated information based on. e.g., OWA operator (and those operators, belonging to its family[20]) can help us to classify the HWs into different categories (e.g., mild, moderate, strong, severe, extreme). But it is the topic for ensuing research. In our work we have chosen these categories to distinguish HW from HI, to show what the relationships between these two notions exist and how they can be classified.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The paper concerns influences of global warming on a climate of Georgia and health of the population. In particular, one important parameter of a human thermal comfort – a heat index (which represents a combination of the air temperature and relative humidity) – has been investigated and its connection to HW is established.The research has been done in close cooperation with the Ministry of Preservation of the Environment of Georgia. The data – temperature and relative humidity – were available. The received information has been classified and ranged, and on its base the software has been created (by means of C#). The software enables to see both numerical and graphical representation of the HIs, and also the following operations are possible:•by means of the radio-buttons, allocated on the map of Georgia, it is possible to select an interesting city in Georgia (Tbilisi, Poti, Lentekhi and Dedoplistskharo);during input of daily average temperature and relative humidity, HI is automatically calculated;it is possible to consider a graphical image of a daily average air temperature, a relative humidity and HI of each month, each year and each period;to define and count up HIs for an appropriate interval (a month, or other periods);graphically view the tendency of HIs of each month for the first and second period for the purpose of forecasting;to select the maximum and the minimum value of temperatures, relative humidity and HI of a day, a month, a year and other periods;some other functions.On the base of HIs, we propose a new approach to define and investigate HWs. Definition of HWs is based on most typical fuzzy expected values. Relaying on the search of the appropriate scientific literature we have revealed that fuzzy methods for HWs’ investigations were not yet applied. From this point of view our approach can be considered as an innovative one in the definition and investigation of HWs. FEV and CFEV approaches are chosen due to their appropriateness for the available real data, as well as their awareness in capturing the subjectiveness in the description of the HWs.Both approaches have been updated for the research problem of HI and applied to the available data. Matching results has shown, in which cases it is better to apply FEV and CFEV. For example, CFEV defines a case of days with high HI, which are disposed one after another, as a more dangerous one, than a case, when between these days there normal days are present.FEV and CFEV are the numerical characteristics of a fuzzy set. Using these values for one month, we can see if this month was hot or not. If it was hot then we conclude the availability of a strong HW during this month. A question for investigation is if we calculate FEV(CFEV) for each day (as was a case for Paris and Tbilisi during August, 2003), what combination can be taken to discover HW?The software and methods for estimation of the results have been used in the preparation of the Second Communication of Georgia to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.A variety of methods are required to assess the potential impacts of HWs on human health, including predictive modelling and expert judgement. The results presented in the paper reveal another (not applied yet) streams for future research: on the base of numerical data available to build fuzzy rules describing the influence of the HW on the human health in Georgia. This problem belongs to the linguistic interpretation of the time series (see, for example, [32]) and will be considered in sequel.