@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Improved subband-forward algorithm for acoustic noise reduction and speech quality enhancement

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a new subband implementation of the Forward BSS algorithm.We proposed a new two-channel variable step-size techniques adapted to the proposed FBSS algorithm.The new FBSS algorithm is used to separate speech form noise and therefore enhance the speech signal intelligibility.The new algorithm improves the steady state values of the cross adaptive filters which are used by the FBSS algorithm.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Subband structures,Acoustic noise reduction,Speech enhancement,Signal-to-noise ratio,Cepstral distortion,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper addresses the problem of speech enhancement and acoustic noise reduction by adaptive filtering algorithms. Recently, we have proposed a new Forward blind source separation algorithm that enhances very noisy speech signals with a subband approach. In this paper, we propose a new variable subband step-sizes algorithm that allows improving the previous algorithm behaviour when the number of subband is selected high. This new proposed algorithm is based on recursive formulas to compute the new variable step-sizes of the cross-coupling filters by using the decorrelation criterion between the estimated sub-signals at each subband output. This new algorithm has shown an important improvement in the steady state and the mean square error values. Along this paper, we present the obtained simulation results by the proposed algorithm that confirm its superiority in comparison with its original version that employs fixed step-sizes of the cross-coupling adaptive filters and with another fullband algorithm.decimation factorinterpolation factorindex varied between 0 and N-1decimated time indexanalysis and synthesis filters lengthsreal and adaptive filters lengthsdelay indexsubbands numbertime indexsmall positive constantsmall positive constantsmall positive constantfast transversal filterfast Newton transversal filtertwo-channel fullband backwardtwo-channel subband forwardacoustic echo cancellationacoustic noise reductionaffine projection algorithmblind source separationForward blind source separationBackward blind source separationfixed step-sizeimpulse response(s)least mean squaresnormalized LMStwo-channel Forward NLMSrecursive least squaresubband adaptive filteringsymmetric adaptive decorrelatingsystem mismatchsignal-to-noise ratiosegmental signal-to-noise ratiocepstral distancemean square errorvoice activity detectorvariable-step-sizedecibelvoice activity detectorsingular value decompositiondiscrete wavelet transformpacket wavelet transformexpectation operatorsmoothed parameteroriginal speech signalnoisecross-coupling IRsnoisy speech signalsKronecker impulseanalysis filterssynthesis filtersnoisy speech sub-signalsestimated speech sub-signalsestimated noise sub-signalssymmetric adaptive filtersenhanced speech signalestimated noiseLagrange multiplierssampling frequencyfixed step-sizesminimal step-sizesmaximal step-sizescontrolled step-sizescross-correlation factorsfunctionsdeviation vectors

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Adaptive filtering is frequently employed in signal processing, control, communications and in many other applications because of its simplicity [1–3]. Noise reduction and speech enhancement applications have largely used adaptive filtering algorithm [4–8]. Several adaptive filtering algorithms have been proposed to enhance speech signal and cancel the acoustic noise. From these algorithms we have the recursive lest square (RLS) algorithms and its derived versions [8–10], the fast transversal filters and its derived versions as the fast Newton transversal filter (FNTF) [11–13], the fast sub-sampling Fast Transversal Filter (FTF) and FNTF algorithms [14], the affine projection algorithms and its fast versions [15], etc. However, the most popular adaptive filter is the least-mean square (LMS) algorithm and its normalized version (NLMS) [8–10]. It is well known that the stability of this algorithm is controlled by a step-size parameter and the good choice of this parameter reflects a compromise between fast convergence rate and small misadjustment such as required in most adaptive filtering applications [18].Recently, a very important amount of papers have investigated the combination of the so called Forward and Backward blind source separation structures (i.e. FBSS and BBSS structures, respectively) with these different algorithms family to improve the behaviour of speech enhancement and noise reduction by these two structures [1,5–7,19–21]. The smart combinations between the two FBSS and BBSS structures and the adaptive filtering algorithm families have given a new insight in the field of acoustic noise reduction and speech intelligibility enhancement. For example in [19], authors of this paper used the Symmetric Adaptive Decorrelation (SAD) algorithm for signal separation. A several algorithms have been proposed and implemented with the two FBSS and BBSS structures [12,16,17]. In [5–8], several two and multi-sensors techniques have been proposed to separate the sources, which are mixed by a convolutive model [22].Recently, several works have been conducted to increase convergence rates and reducing the steady-state estimation error (low misadjustment) of these different adaptive filtering algorithms in acoustic noise reduction and speech enhancement applications [23–38,1,39]. Furthermore, in the same direction, many variable step-size adaptive filtering algorithms for speech enhancement application have been also proposed [23–38,1,39]. For example, in references [23–26], variable step size LMS (VSS-LMS) algorithms were proposed to improve the performance of the fixed step size LMS algorithm by using particular recursive formulas. Others variable step-size normalized least mean square (NLMS) algorithms have been proposed to resolve the problem of the conventional NLMS algorithm in the steady state regime when a degradation of the final mean square error (MSE) occurs [27–29]. Another useful method to accelerate the convergence speed characteristic of the adaptive algorithm is to use the variable step-size affine projection algorithm family (VSS-APAs) [30–32]. However, in all these algorithms, the selected variable step-size can modify the convergence rate and the steady-state mean square error properties (fast convergence rate and low steady-state or MSE).In addition, the subband and fullband implementation techniques are lastly used in speech enhancement application to accelerate the acoustic noise reduction [33,34]. Another efficient method that is largely used in literature to improve these performances is the use of the Forward and Backward BSS structure combined with recursive and nonrecursive algorithms [35–38,1,39,40]. One of these efficient algorithms is the affine projection algorithm, and its Gauss–Seidel version that is recently proposed to be used in speech enhancement and acoustic noise reduction application [39–41]. In the literature, we can find other speech enhancement algorithms based on SVD techniques [42,43]. Further enhancement possibilities are allowed by using DWT and PWT to transform the noisy signals and to be enhanced in other orthogonal data-basses, these techniques are very promising and lead to important improvement in comparison with the classical speech enhancement and noise reductions algorithms [44–46].Recently in [1], we have proposed a new two-channel subband implementation of the FBSS structure, this new algorithm is called two-channel subband Forward algorithm and is denoted by 2CSF. We proposed the use of this 2CSF algorithm in two-channel acoustic noise reduction and speech enhancement domain. The major benefit of this algorithm is to improve the convergence behaviour of the classical FBSS in acoustic noise reduction application with less output speech signal distortions. An important parameter of this 2CSF algorithm is the fixed step-size. The stability of the conventional algorithms is controlled by this parameter, which is time-independent. A compromise should be made in the selection of this important control parameter. A tradeoff between small steady state misadjustment (MSE) and fast speed of convergence rate must be made in the choice of the fixed step-size parameter of this 2CSF algorithm. However, A large value of the fixed step-size implies fast convergence rate and tracking, while a small value leads to low misadjustment and good robustness features again residual noise components. For example, in acoustic echo cancellation (AEC) there is a need for all these performance criteria, as a consequence, the step-size should be well controlled.In this paper we focus on the FBSS structure and their implementation in subband approach (i.e. the 2CSF algorithm). We propose a new two-channel subband FBSS structure with variables step-size property that allows to resolve the problem and the drawbacks of the fixed step-size property of the 2CSF algorithm published in [1]. All the drawbacks of the previous 2CSF algorithm are resolved by the step-size techniques that we propose in this work. In the sequel of this paper, we show the efficiency of the new proposed variable step-size algorithm in comparison with fixed step-size ones, as the two-channel fullband normalized least means square (2CFNLMS) algorithm, and the two-channel subband forward BSS (2CSF) one [1].The presentation of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the convolutive mixture model is presented. In Section 3, we recall the formulation of the two-channel subband forward (2CSF) algorithm. In Section 4, a full derivation of the new proposed variable step-sizes 2CSF (VSS-2CSF) algorithm is shown. Sections 5 and 6 are reserved for simulation results analysis and the conclusion, respectively.The simplified two-channel convolutive mixing model that we use in this paper is shown in Fig. 1. We use two original signals (speech signal s(n) and noise b(n)) that are convolutedly mixed with the two impulses responses h12(n) and h21(n) respectively. The impulses responses h12(n) and h21(n) represent the path between the source signals and the sensors. We observe two convolutive mixing signals p1(n) and p2(n) in the output of this model. The noisy observations are given by the following relations [1,6,19,32]:(1)p1(n)=s(n)+b(n)*h21(n)(2)p2(n)=b(n)+s(n)*h12(n)where h12(n) and h21(n) represent the cross-coupling effects between the channels; and (*) represents convolution operator.In this section, we will slightly describe the block diagram and the detailed scheme of the 2CSF algorithm which are given respectively by Figs. 2 and 3[1].This algorithm can be used either in noise reduction and acoustic echo cancellation applications. In this paper, we use this structure in noise reduction and speech enhancement as an application for a blind source separation approach. The block scheme of the proposed 2CSF algorithm is given by Fig. 2. In this scheme, analysis filter banks are used to transform the mixing signals into a set of N subband mixing signals. After this first step, we decimate the partitioned sub-signals according to the number of the used subbands. Then we applied the forward BSS structure to these subbands and decimated signals to estimate the outputs signals of the forward BSS structure. However, and in order to reconstruct the estimated signals, we applied synthesized filter banks to the output sub-signals to transform the subband resulting signals into their fullband form. The detailed scheme of the 2CSF algorithm is given and shown in Fig. 3.From Fig. 3, we can see the parameters of each block diagram of Fig. 2. The first analysis filters are usually low- and band-pass filters. However, the mixing full-band signals p1(n) and p2(n) are partitioned into N subbands by mean of analysis filters h1(n), h2(n), …, hN(n). The output signals of each subband of p1i(n) and p2i(n) with i=0, 1, …, N−1 are then decimated by a factor (D=N) that leads to generate the new sub-signals p1i,D(n) and p2li,D(n) respectively. These two steps of subband partitioning and decimating of the fullband mixing signals are followed by the estimation of the output signals u1i,D(k) and u2i,D(k). After this step, we applied synthesized filters bank g1(n), g2(n), …, gN(n) to this output signal before its use in an interpolation procedure to get the fullband form of the final estimated signals u1(n) and u2(n). The formulation of the two-channel subband forward 2CSF algorithm is presented in the following section.We can see from Fig. 3, that there is two outputs of the 2CSF algorithm to be formulated (u1(n) and u2(n)). As the forward BSS structure is symmetric, we will first focus our derivation on the output u1(n) then we will extrapolate our analysis to the second outputu2(n). According to Fig. 3, the decimated filter output at each subband can be written as follows:(3)y2i,D(k)=y2i(kN)where y2i,D(k) can be expressed more explicitly by the following relation:(4)y2i,D(k)=∑m=0M−1w21(k)p2(kN−m)=w21T(k)p2i(k)The output decimated sub-signals u1i,D(k) are estimated as follows:(5)u1i,D(k)=p1i,D(k)−w21T(k)p2i(k)withi=0,…,N.In [1], we used the two following criteria to be minimized in same time:(6)Jw21(k+1),λi,N=w21(k+1)−w21(k)2+∑i=0N−1λi[p1i,D(k)−w21T(k)p2i(k)]where λiare the Lagrange multipliers pertaining to multiple constraints. This multiple-constraint optimization criterion, adapted to the forward BSS structure, is based on the principle of minimal disturbance, where the multiple constraints are imposed on the updated subband filter outputs. We note that in the optimal and permanent regime, we get w21(k+1)=w21(k), subject to the set of N constraints imposed on the decimated filter output:(7)w21T(k+1)p2i(k)=p1i,D(k)In order to get the recursive solution to the updating step of the adaptive filter w21(k+1), a full analysis is given in [1] and the final adaptive filtering relations are given as follows:(8)w21(k+1)=w21(k)+µ21∑i=0N−1p2i,D(k)α+p2i(k)2u1i,D(k)(9)w12(k+1)=w21(k)+µ12∑i=0N−1p1i,D(k)α+p1i(k)2u2i,D(k)where α is a small scalar used to avoid division by zero. The parameters μ21and μ12 are fixed step-sizes that control the convergence speed of the adaptive filters w21(k) and w12(k) respectively.A full analysis of the stability condition and the convergence rate of the 2CSF algorithm in term of the step-sizes μ12 and μ21 are given in [1], where the real values of the two fixed step-sizes are exactly given by the following relations:(10)0<µ12<2∑i=0N−1E(ε1T(k)p1i(k))u2i,D(k)p1i(k)2∑i=0N−1Eu2i,D2(k)p1i(k)2(11)0<µ21<2∑i=0N−1Eε1T(k)p2i(k)u1i,D(k)p2i(k)2∑i=0N−1Eu1i,D2(k)p2i(k)2where E represents the expectation operator. We defined the weight-error vectors as ɛ1(k)=h12−w12(k) and ɛ2(k)=h21−w21(k), where(ε1T(k)p1i(k))and(ε2T(k)p2i(k))present the free-noise error signals for the ith subband according on the two adaptive filters w12(k) and w21(k) respectively.In 2CSF algorithm, the output signals u1(n) and u2(n)are estimated in each subband configuration, whereas the coefficients of the two adaptive filters w12(k) and w21(k) are explicitly adapted in fullband forms by using the multiplexor operator (Mux). The 2CSF algorithm has shown superior performance in comparison with its classical fullband version (fast convergence rate), but the only drawback of this algorithm is the degradation of the final values of: (i) the output segmental signal-to-noise ratio (SegSNR) and (ii) the cepstral distance (CD) performance criteria. To resolve this problem, we propose to apply a new variable step-sizes technique to the original 2CSF algorithm. The block diagram of the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm is presented in Fig. 4. In this new algorithm, we propose to control the two step-sizes μ12(k) and μ21(k) by the cross-correlation estimation between the estimated speech sub-signals u1i,D(k) and the estimated noise sub-signals u2i,D(k). The detailed schemes and the mathematical formulations of the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm are presented in several steps as explained in this section.Step 1First, in the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm, the two adaptive filters w12(k) and w21(k) relations are given respectively by the following formula, where the fixed step-sizes are replaced by variable ones, i.e. µ12→µ12(k), and µ21→µ21(k):(12)w21(k+1)=w21(k)+µ21(k)∑i=0N−1p2i,D(k)α+p2i(k)2u1i,D(k)(13)w12(k+1)=w12(k)+µ12(k)∑i=0N−1p1i,D(k)α+p1i(k)2u2i,D(k)where k is the new decimated time index, N presents the number of subband, and μ12(k) and μ21(k) are the variable step-sizes of the adaptive filters w12(k) and w21(k) respectively.In a second step, we propose to estimate the optimal values of the variable step-sizes μ12(k) and μ21(k) by using the cross-correlation function between the estimated sub-signals u1i,D(k) and u2i,D(k). The new proposed VSS μ12(k) and μ21(k) are given respectively by:(14)µ12(k)=µ12,maxf1(ψ12(k))(15)µ21(k)=µ21,maxf2(ψ21(k))The two new introduced scalar parameters μ12,max and μ21,max are bounded in the range 0 and 2, i.e. 0<µ12(k)<µ12,max and 0<µ21(k)<µ21,max. However, the two parameters ψ12(k) and ψ21(k) are the cross-correlation between the estimated sub-signals u1i,D(k) and u2i,D(k).In the third step, we evaluate the parameters ψ12(k) and ψ21(k) that are introduced in relations (14) and (15) respectively. These last parameters are evaluated by the following relations:(16)ψ12(k)=∑i=0N−1E[u2i,D(m)u1i,D(m−k)],withm=0,1,2,…,M−1(17)ψ21(k)=∑i=0N−1E[u1i,D(m)u2i,D(m−k)],withm=0,1,2,…,M−1However, the two functions f1(•) and f2(•) are selected to control the relation between the behaviour of the adaptive filters, w12(k) and w22(k), and their variable step-sizes μ12(k) and μ21(k), respectively. For example, if we want that the enhanced output speech signal is retrieved from the first voice and the noise is retrieved from the second voice, we have to update the two adaptive filters, w12(k) and w21(k), alternatively, i.e. in the speech signal periods, we adapt only w12(k), and then in the presence of noise signal periods, we adapt only the adaptive filter w21(k).In order to improve the behaviour of the 2CSF in the only-noise periods, we propose, in the fourth step, to use the following functions f1(•) and f2(•), respectively:(18)f1(ψ12(k))=ψ12(k)2ψ12(k)2+ξ(19)f2(ψ21(k))=ψ21(k)2ψ21(k)2+ξwhere ξ is a positive constant. By inserting the two relations (18) and (19) in relations (14) and (15) respectively, we obtain the final formula of the new variable step-sizes μ12(k) and μ21(k) that are given by:(20)µ12(k)=µ12,maxψ12(k)2ψ12(k)2+ξ(21)µ21(k)=µ21,maxψ21(k)2ψ21(k)2+ξA further modification that can be introduced on the cross-correlation parameters estimation is to make them computed recursively as follows:(22)ψ12(k)=φψ12(k−1)+(1−φ)∑i=0N−1E[u2i,D(m)u1i,D(m−k)]u1i,D(k)2+α,withm=0.1,2,3,…,M−1(23)ψ21(k)=φψ21(k−1)+(1−φ)∑i=0N−1E[u1i,D(m)u2i,D(m−k)]u2i,D(k)2+α,withm=0.1,2,3,…,M−1whereu1i,D(0)=[u1i,D(k), u1i,D(k−1), …, u1i,D(k−M+1)] andu2i,D(k)=[u2i,D(k), u2i,D(k-1), …, u2i,D(k−M+1)]. The parameter α is a small positive constant used to avoid division by zero. The second smoothed parameter φ of relations (22) and (23) is selected to be equal to φ=1/M, where M is the adaptive filter length. This choice is done to have a good smoothing function of the two step-sizes along M coefficients.In this section, we evaluate the computational complexity of the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm in comparison with 2CFNLMS [19] and 2CSF [1] ones. The computational complexity is evaluated in terms of number of multiplications per iteration. The computational complexity of each algorithm is reported in Table 1.In order to show an example of the computational complexity of the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm in comparison with the other ones, we have given in Table 2, an example of complexities for subband configuration N equal to 2 and 4. The length of the adaptive filter is selected to be equal to L=512.From Table 1, we can see that the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm is slightly more complex than the other ones. This property is well observed because we have improved the steady state values of the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm by adding new formulas for the computation of the variable step-size values that depends on the correlation factors of (21) and (23). However, this complexity is acceptable in practice because it is linearly dependant of the adaptive filter length M. We have also noted that the 2CFNLMS algorithm still remaining less complex than other algorithms.From Table 2, we have given an example for the complexity for each algorithm when the adaptive filter length is L=512 coefficients. From this Table, we can confirm the remarks and the observation that we have made basing in Table 1. The complexity of the 2CSF and the proposed VSS-2CSF are more complex than the 2CFNLMS algorithm.Fig. 5In this section, the simulations results of the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm are presented. These experimentations are done to show the performance of the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm in the noise reduction and the speech enhancement application. The mixing model that we have used in these experiments is that of Fig. 1. This mixing model generates noisy observations p1(n) and p2(n) with different input SNRs. In this mixing model, a point noise source b(n) and a speech signal s(n) are used. These two source signals are sampled at 8kHz, coded on 16 bits and given in Fig. 6. The two source signals s(n) and b(n) are mixed and convoluted with the cross-coupling impulses responses h12(n) and h21(n) respectively. We have used the methods described in [1,32] to generate these impulse responses. An example of these impulse responses is given in Fig. 7where the length of the simulated reels filters is equal to 128. We show in Fig. 8, an example of noisy observations (i.e. p1(n) and p2(n)), generated by this model, with input SNR equal to 3dB in the first mixing signal p1(n) and 0dB in the second signal p2(n).In all carried out experiments with the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm, we have used analysis filters bank to decompose the two mixing signals p1(n) and p2(n) into N mixing sub-signals p1i(n) and p2i(n), where i=0, 1, 2…, N−1. In the other side, synthesis filters bank are used to reconstruct the two estimated signals u1(n) and u2(n) into their fullband forms. In all simulation results presented in this section, the number of subbands is 2, and the analysis and synthesis filters length is equal L=16.In Fig. 9, we present the fullband estimated speech signal u1(n) that is obtained by using respectively, the 2CFNLMS algorithm, the 2CSF algorithm, and the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm. The fixed step-sizes of the conventional algorithms (i.e. the 2CFNLMS and 2CSF) are equal to µ12=µ21=0.5. In the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm, the variable step-sizes are bounded as follows:0<µ12k<µ12,maxand 0<µ21(k)<µ21,max where µ12,max=µ21,max=0.5. The others fixed controlled parameters are given by: φ=0.97 and ξ=2. We recall here that all these results are obtained by using a voice activity detector (VAD) mechanism, which allows to the first adaptive filter w12(k) to be adapted only in the speech presence periods and to the second adaptive filter w21(k) to be updated in the speech absence only-periods. For the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm, this VAD is used in combination of the variables step-sizes techniques that allows getting a speech signal much closer to the original one. Basing on Fig. 9, we can conclude that the estimated speech signal u1(n) is enhanced by all the algorithms, i.e. 2CFNLMS, 2CSF and the proposed VSS-2CSF.To evaluate objectively the quality of the output speech signal, and to confirm the good performance of the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm in speech quality improvement term, we present, in the next sections, the comparative results obtained by the proposed and the classical full-and subband algorithms in function of the following objectives measures criteria:(i)The system mismatch criterion (SM), to evaluate the convergence speed of the cross-adaptive filters.The output signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), to evaluate the noise reduction amount at the output.The cepstral distance (CD), to evaluate the spectral distortion of the output speech signal.It should be noted that as we are interesting on the enhanced speech signal quality, we will focus our interest only on the output u1(n) and the adaptive filter w21(k) and this choice is valid in all the simulations parts, with different algorithms, i.e. the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm, the 2CFNLMS algorithm and the 2CSF one.To assess the performance of the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm in terms of acoustic noise reduction level, we have evaluated its convergence speed characteristic by the use of the SM criterion which is computed between the real impulse response coefficients h21 and the estimated ones. The SM criterion is estimated by the following relation:(24)System mismatch SMdB=20log10h21−w21(k)h21Two experiments have been carried out with the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm by considering the SM criterion. In the first experiment of Fig. 10, the input SNRs at the two sensors are selected to be equal to SNR1=3dB and SNR2=0dB, respectively. The length of the two adaptive filters are selected to be M=64 which is the same length of the real filters of the forward BSS structure, i.e. we are in the case of a perfect modelization of the real filters by the adaptive ones. The variable step-sizes μ12(k) and μ21(k) of the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm are bounded as follows: 0<µ12(k)<µ12,max and 0<µ21(k)<µ21,max where µ12,max=µ21,max=0.7. The two control parameters are selected as φ=0.95 and ξ=6. On Fig. 10, we have reported the SM criterion values obtained respectively by the 2CFNLMS and the 2CSF algorithms to be compared with the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm. We have selected two different values of the fixed step-sizes of both conventional algorithms, i.e. 2CFNLMS and 2CSF algorithms; these step-sizes values are µ12=µ21=0.1 [in Fig. 10(left)] and µ12=µ21=0.5 [in Fig. 10(right)]. According to this Fig. 10, we can see well the superiority of the 2CSF algorithm over its classical fullband version (2CFNLMS algorithm) in terms of convergence speed. We also note that the proposed VSS-2CSF improves the steady state of the 2CSF algorithm [1] but they have almost the same convergence speed with 2CSF. We confirm here that the proposed technique of variable step-size combined with the 2CSF algorithm allows important improvement of the steady state values.In the second experiment of Fig. 11, we have repeated the same experiment as in Fig. 10 with the same mixing signals. The difference between these two experiment are in the following parameters: (i) the adaptive and real filters length M=128, (ii) the fixed step-sizes of 2CFNLMS and 2CSF algorithms at selected to µ12=µ21=0.2 [in Fig. 11(left)] and µ12=µ21=0.6 [in Fig. 11(right)], the input SNRs at the two sensors are selected respectively to be equal to SNR1=−3dB and SNR2=−3dB, and finally (iii) In the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm, we have selected these parameters: φ=0.97, ξ=1.5, and µ12,max=µ21,max=0.7. In Fig. 11, we can note an improvement of the final MSE of the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm by about 4dB and 10dB over the 2CFNLMS and 2CSF algorithms, respectively. This improvement is due to the fact that the step-sizes of the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm take important values in the transient phase that allows getting a fast speed in the transient phase. This step-sizes will takes very small values in the steady state, when the algorithm converge to the optimal solution, because the correlation factors (22), (23) that are included in (20) and (21) tend to a small values. However, this automatic mechanism of step-sizes control allows improving the final MSE of the classical 2CSF algorithm. Finally, we conclude, basing on the results of Figs 10 and 11, that the proposed variable step-size 2CSF (VSS-2CSF) algorithm is an efficient approach to improve the steady state values of the classical fixed step-size 2CSF [1].In this section, we have evaluated the output SNR evolution of the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm in comparison with the fixed step-sizes ones, i.e. the 2CFNLMS and the 2CSF algorithms. We have carried out several experiments basing of the output SNR criterion which is estimated as follows:(25)Output SNRi,dB=10log10∑λ=0Q−1s(λ)2∑λ=0Q−1s(λ)−u1(λ)2VADiwhere s(n) is the original speech signal, u1(n) represents the enhanced speech signal and Q is a parameter of the mean averaging value of the output SNR. The VADiis the voice activity detector parameter that takes the value 1 when the speech signal is present, and takes 0 value in the opposite case. We focus our interest on the first output of the full- and subband forward structures of Fig. 5. We have realized two experiments of noise reduction to evaluate the output SNR of the three algorithms by considering two noisy observations which are obtained by the two-channel convolutive model described previously in Section 2 and in Fig. 1.In the first experiment of Fig. 12, we have used the same mixing signals as given in the previous sections. The input SNRs of the two observed signals p1(n) and p2(n) are 3 and 0dB, respectively. The adaptive filters lengths are selected 64 coefficients. As described in Section 5.1, the same fixed step-sizes of the classical 2CFNLMS and 2CSF algorithms are used in this experiment, (i.e. 0.1 [in Fig. 12(left)] and 0.5 [in Fig. 12(right)]), for the two fixed step-sizes μ12 and μ21, respectively. The proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm has variables step-sizes bounded as follows: 0<µ12(n)<µ12,max=0.7 and 0<µ21(n)<µ21,max=0.7, and the control parameters φ=0.95 and ξ=6. The different output SNR criterion evolutions of each algorithm are reported on Fig. 12. From this Fig. 12, we can see that the proposed VSS-2CSF performs the others algorithm in the transient regime when small fixed step-sizes are selected, and achieves the best final output SNR in the other case. However, in practical situation we often select higher step-sizes, in this case, the proposed algorithm will have the same convergence speed performance and a best output SNRs. This good behaviour of the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm is allowed thanks to the variable step-sizes techniques of relations (20) and (21) that takes small values when the correlation between the filtering error is white (in the optimal solution), and tends to high values in the opposite case.In the second experiments, we have used the same experiment signals as given in the first experiments of Fig. 12. The only difference between the two experiments explained as follows: in this experiment a very noisy environment are simulated by selecting a very low input SNRs of the noisy signals, i.e. as SNR1=SNR2=−3dB; the lengths of the two adaptive filters w12(k) and w21(k) are M=128. The fixe step-sizes of the 2CFNLMS and 2CSF algorithms are µ12=µ21=0.2 [in Fig. 13(left)] and µ12=µ21=0.6 [in Fig. 13(right)]. The control parameters φ and ξ of the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm are selected, φ=0.97 and ξ=1.5. The obtained output SNR results with the three algorithms are reported on Fig. 13.According to Fig. 13, we note that the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm still have a good behaviour even in very noisy conditions when low input SNRs are selected. In addition, we have noted that when we want to have a small residual noise at the output, we takes a small step-sizes, in this situations the convergence speed performance is altered for the 2CFNLMS and 2CSF algorithms, this situation is avoided with the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm because the automatic step-sizes of relations (20)–(23) take small values because of correlation factors (22)–(23) that tend to zeros. However, these correlation factor will tends to important values (i.e. ψ12(k)≫ξ and ψ21(k)≫ξ), as a result, high values for the automatic step-sizes (20 and 21) are automatically selected. This automatic selection of the VSS-2CSF step-sizes, leads to an important improvement of the final output SNR [see Fig. 13(left and right)].This is the most important advantage of the proposed variables step-sizes techniques that aim to combine, in the same proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm, the good convergence speed performance of the 2CSF algorithm when the number of subband is selected high (and with high fixed step-sizes [see Fig. 13(right)]), with the good final values of the 2CFNLMS algorithm when the fixed step-size is small. This is the main characteristic of the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm which combines these good characteristics in one algorithm. Moreover, the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm allows getting more noise reduction with small distortion amounts on the output speech signal.The CD criterion is one of the most important criterions which allow quantifying the distortions amounts of processing signals. In this section, we have evaluated this criterion on the output speech signals obtained with the proposed variable step-sizes VSS-2CSF algorithm, and the fixed ones, i.e. the 2CFNLMS and the 2CSF algorithms. The CD criterion is estimated by using the original speech signal and the enhanced one. It is given by the following relation:(26)Cespstral distance CDi,dB=∑λ=0T−1IFFT[log(|S(λ,ω)|VADi)−log(|U1(λ,ω)VADi|)]2where S(λ, ω) and U1(λ, ω) present the short Fourier transform of the original speech signal s(n) and the enhanced u1(n), respectively, at each frame λ, and T is the mean averaging value of the CD criterion. The VADiis the voice activity detector parameter that takes the value 1 when the speech signal is present, and takes 0 in the opposite case. We have evaluated the CD criterion of the two experiments of Section 5.2, i.e. we have reported in Fig. 14, the final CD values obtained with the same algorithms and parameters of Fig. 12. However, we have reported in Fig. 15, the final CD values obtained with the same algorithms and parameters of Fig. 13.According to Figs 14 and 15, we see that the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithms gives lower CD values (about −7dB in Fig. 14, and −8dB in Fig. 15) on all the experiments (high step-sizes, small step-sizes, M=64 or M=128 coefficients). The fixed step-sizes 2CSF algorithm has shown the worst behaviour in the final CD values, this is the most drawback of this algorithm, i.e. it improves the convergence speed but degrades the CD values, which means that it introduces more distortions on the output speech signal. The VSS-2CSF algorithm improves these drawbacks by: (i), keeping the good convergence speed of the 2CSF algorithm, and (ii) getting the best final CD values in comparison with the others algorithms (2CFNLMS and 2CSF ones).As explained before, this good behaviour is allowed thanks to the automatic evolution of relations (20)–(23) of the proposed variables step-sizes techniques in this paper. We can also say that the VSS-2CSF algorithm generates less residual noises at the output, which means high output SNR. The distortion of the speech signal is introduced especially in the steady state when high step-sizes are used. However, this problem is avoided by the VSS-2CSF algorithm because it step-sizes is variables and according to relations (20)–(23), the step-sizes will be small in the optimal solution with small correlation factors (21)–(22). This means that less distortion is introduced by the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm in the output speech signal, which leads to very small distortions at the output. This good behaviour is quantified by the lower CD values that prove the efficiency of the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm.Finally, we conclude that the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm is the best one in comparison with the 2CFNLMS and 2CSF algorithm in terms of the final CD values, the SM vales, and the output SNR values. All these good characteristics of the proposed VSS-2CSF algorithm mean that it maximize the noise reduction and minimize speech signal distortion in the same time.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
