@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Application of computational intelligence technique for estimating superconducting transition temperature of YBCO superconductors

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We developed CIM for estimating TC of doped YBCO superconductors.The developed CIM is characterized with high degree of accuracy.The results of the developed CIM agree well with the experimental results.TC of any doped YBCO superconductor can be accurately estimated using CIM.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Doped YBCO superconductors,Support vector regression,Superconducting transition temperature,Support vector regression computational intelligence based model,Lattice parameters,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Yttrium barium copper oxide (YBCO) is a high temperature superconductor with excellent potential for long distance power transmission applications as well as other applications involving generation of high magnetic field such as magnetic resonance imaging machines in hospitals. Among the uniqueness of this material is its perpetual current carrying ability without loss of energy. Practical applications of YBCO superconductor depend greatly on the value of the superconducting transition temperature (TC) attained by YBCO superconductor upon doping with other external materials. The number of holes (i.e. doping) present in an atom of copper in CuO2 planes of YBCO superconductor controls its TC. Movement of the apical oxygen along CuO2 planes due to doping gives insight to the way of determining the effect of doping on TC using the bound related quantity (lattice parameter) that is easily measurable with reasonable high precision. This work employs excellent predictive and generalization ability of computational intelligence technique via support vector regression (SVR) to develop a computational intelligence-based model (CIM) that estimates the TC of thirty-one different YBCO superconductors using lattice parameters as the descriptors. The estimated superconducting transition temperatures agree with the experimental values with high degree of accuracy. The developed CIM allows quick and accurate estimation of TC of any fabricated YBCO superconductor without the need for any sophisticated equipment.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
YBCO superconductors are antiferromagnetic insulators with half-filled CuO2 planes and characterized with high TC as well as critical current density which make them useful for several practical applications such as magnetic resonance imaging machines. The temperature at which this material exhibits its superconducting nature (that is, carrying current without loss of energy) is known as superconducting transition temperature (TC) and plays a significant role in its applications. YBCO superconductor having high TC indicates that little effort is to be done before putting it into applications. Adequate understanding of their charge reservoir layer and the mechanism of charge transfer is required for improving their superconducting transition temperature [1]. Incorporation of dopants such as B, Ce, Al, Ca, Ag and Ni among others into the CuO2 planes weakens the antiferromagnetic ordering. The concentration of holes in CuO2 planes as well as the level of the charge of oxygen within the plane contribute enormously to the value of the TC of this superconducting materials [2]. Meanwhile, ionic substitution has been established as one of the ways of controlling the level of the charge of oxygen within the planes [2] and affects the TC as a result of the strain and disorder created by the dopants in the lattice [3]. The dependence of doping on the properties paves ways for improving the superconducting properties, in particular, the TC, since the effect of many external materials on the value of TC can be easily observed through change in lattice parameters. However, doping dependence on TC of YBCO superconductors is very difficult to determine since the doping information is not directly contained in their chemical formula. To crown it all, YBCO is characterized with chain and plane sites [Cu(1) and Cu(2) respectively] which makes the distribution of holes between the two sites more difficult to analyze. This present work provides accurate way of determining the effect of dopants on the value of TC through a computational intelligent technique that has demonstrated excellent predictive and generalization ability in the presence of few descriptive features [4,5].The number of holes in every atom of copper in CuO2 planes of YBCO superconductors can be accounted for by comprehending the movement of apical oxygen {O(4)} along the CuO2 planes as consequent upon doping. Increase in the level of doping moves the apical oxygen toward the plane. This observed effect of holes on the apical oxygen is easily determined from bounding related properties such as Raman frequency and bound lengths which are not conveniently measurable. Another bound related quantity that can be conveniently measured with reasonable precision is the lattice parameter which sums the bound lengths Cu(1)O(4), Cu(2)Cu(2) and Cu(2)O(4) together. This present work directly relates the lattice parameters to the TC through computational intelligence technique using SVR. The success of this model paves significant way for quick and accurate estimation of TC of doped YBCO superconductor and eventually eases the usual high demanding experimental procedures that involve the use of expensive cryostat.Support vector regression represents a special class of support vector machines which adopts loss function to control the maximum tolerable deviation of its estimates from the target values. It is characterized with absence of local minima and utilization of kernels. It seeks to optimize the generalization bounds by defining the loss function called epsilon intensive loss function which ignores possible errors located within certain distance of the true value [6]. Its excellent predictive and generalization ability is utilized in solving many non-linear real life complex problems that are difficult to approach using conventional means. SVR has been reported as a novel tool of estimating superconducting properties [5,7] as well as other properties of materials at large [4,8–13]. Application of SVR extends to medical diagnosis [14,15], oil and gas industries [16] and other fields of study [17,18]. The success of SVR in solving many complex problems and the need to have a novel means of estimating the TC of doped YBCO superconductors, serve as motivations for carrying out this research work. The choice of SVR as the computational intelligent technique used in this research work is due to its ability to generalize well in the presence of few descriptive features and data-points since limited data-points available in the literatures [4,6,19–21].The results of our modeling and simulations indicate that the developed CIM is capable of estimating the TC of doped YBCO superconductors with high degree of accuracy as can be deduced from high coefficients of correlation of 96.65% and 95.75% during the training and testing periods of the model respectively.The remaining part of this work is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the proposed computational intelligent technique, the test-set-cross validation optimization technique and the generalization performance evaluation of the developed model. Section 3 contains empirical studies that include the description of the dataset, computational methodology and the effect of SVR parameters on the performance of the developed model. Section 4 presents and discuses results while Section 5 states the conclusions and recommendation.SVR stems from support vector machines which is derived from statistical learning theory and structural risk minimization principle [22,23]. It employs mapping function called kernel function to map non-linear regression to high dimensional feature space where linear regression is conducted. The complete regression function is presented in Eq. (1) with the inclusion of the mapping function K〈xi, x〉.(1)f(x)=∑i=1k(λi∗−λi)K〈xi,x〉+bwhereλi∗and λirepresent Lagrangian multipliers.Eq. (1) is obtained from the optimization problem presented in Eq. (2) subjected to constraint presented in Eq. (3)[10].(2)Minimize12ω2+C∑i=1m(ξi+ξi∗)(3)yi−f(xi,ω)≤ε+ξi∗f(xi,ω)−yi≤ε+ξiξi,ξi∗≥0,i=1,…,mwhere C represents regularization or penalty factor while ξiandξi∗represent the slack variables.Mathematical description of SVR has been presented comprehensively in our earlier works [18,19]. Parameters that describe the performance of SVR include the regularization constant (C), epsilon (ɛ), hyper-parameter lambda (λ) and kernel option which controls the non-linear mapping function that helps high dimensional feature space transformation [10]. Epsilon denotes the maximum allowable deviation of the estimated results from the actual values. The function of the regularization factor in SVR algorithm is to control the trade-off between the flatness of the generated pattern and the amount to which the deviation larger than ɛ is tolerated. SVR model is guided by the hyper-parameter lambda in selecting the hyper-plane where minimum error is ensured [24]. Kernel option determines the structure of high dimensional feature space which in turn governs the complexity of the developed model.The usefulness of optimization techniques cannot be over-emphasized and a lot of research has been conducted in the field of optimization. Among the available optimization techniques in the literature include Cuckoo search algorithm [25,26], immune algorithm and Taguchi's method [27], Particle swarm based approach [28] and artificial bee colony-based approach [29] among others [30–34]. However, the optimization strategy employed in this present work for obtaining the best performance parameters associated with SVR was test-set-cross validation technique [35]. Detailed procedures for the test-set-cross-validation used in optimizing the SVR parameters go thus: for each run of generated training and testing set, values for the assessment criteria (correlation coefficient, root-mean square and mean absolute error) were monitored for a group of parameters C (bound on the Langrangian multiplier), λ (conditioning parameter for the quadratic programing (QP) methods), ɛ (epsilon) and kernel option (η). The performance measures and the corresponding parameter values were noted and recorded. This experiment was then repeated for every SVR kernel function available. The optimal values of the parameters and the kernel function associated with the best performance measure were identified. The procedures can be summarized as follow:Step 1: An initial kernel function was chosen from the available ones.Step 2: Test-set-cross-validation procedure was used to select the best values for C, ɛ, λ and kernel option.Step 3: Steps 1 and 2 were repeated for all the available kernel functions.Step 4: Kernel function and the parameters values corresponding to the best performance measures were noted as the optimum parameters.Step 5: The optimum parameters were then used to train final SVR.Step 6: Performance measures for both the training and testing sets resulting from Step 5 were recorded.The algorithm flow that shows the procedures for the test-set-cross validation technique is presented in Algorithm 1.Algorithm 1Optimization strategy employed for developing CIM.The generalization performance and predictive ability of the developed CIM was evaluated using correlation coefficient (CC), root mean square error (RMSE), mean absolute error (MAE), mean (T¯) and standard deviation of the estimated values. The evaluation parameters are formulated using Eqs. (4)–(8).(4)CC=∑i=1n(Ti(exp)−T′(exp))(Ti(est)−T′(est))∑i=1n(Ti(exp)−T′(exp))2∑i=1n(Ti(est)−T′(est))2(5)RMSE=1n∑i=1nei2(6)MAE=1n∑i=1nei(7)Mean(T¯)=∑i=1nTi(est)n(8)St.deviation=∑(Test−T¯)2nwhere eiand n represent error (difference between the experimental and estimated value of TC) and number of data point respectively. Ti(exp) and Ti(est) respectively represent the experimental and the estimated TC whileT′i(exp)andT′i(est)represent their mean respectively.The development of CIM that estimates the TC of doped YBCO involves thirty-one lattice parameters and their corresponding TC. Table 4 presents the dataset as drawn from the literatures [1,2,18,36–38]. The data-set includes various lattice parameters obtained when dopants such as aluminum (Al), nickel (Ni), calcium (Ca), silver (Ag), boron (B), cobalt (Co) and cerium (Ce) among others were incorporated in the lattice structure of the parent compound YBCO superconductor. The value of the TC of the parent compound (around 90K) is affected by the incorporated dopants and the effect manifests through the variation of lattice parameters along a, b and c axis. The developed CIM utilizes the lattice parameters that can be easily obtained to estimate the TC of doped YBCO superconductors which is experimentally demanding. The results of the statistical analysis carried out on the dataset are presented in Table 1.The presented values of mean, median, maximum and minimum illustrate the average and the range of the values of the dataset. The standard deviation measures discrepancies and deviation in the values of the dataset and further show the closeness of the measured values. We also present the correlation between each of the descriptors (lattice parameters) and the actual TC. The lattice parameter a shows a negative correlation coefficient while the lattice parameter c is positively correlated with TC. The lattice parameter b shows weak positive correlation. These correlation coefficients as well as pairwise correlation cross plots measure the existence and the degree of the linear relationship between the descriptors and TC. The degree of the linear relationship between the lattice parameters and TC is well illustrated in the pairwise correlation plot shown in Figs. 1 and 2.MATLAB computing environment was used for the computations and simulations entailed in this work. Before the commencement of the modeling, the dataset (lattice parameters and experimental values of TC) was randomized and divided into training and testing set in the ratio of 8:2. The essence of randomization is to ensure that each dataset (training and testing dataset) contains YBCO superconductors doped with varieties of materials such that selection into both training and testing sets represent adequately the existing variations in the main dataset and are not lopsided. The training data-set contains twenty-five data points while six data-points were used for the validation. These randomized and partitioned data-sets were used throughout the computational stages of this work. Test-set-cross validation technique was then adopted to select the optimum values of kernel option, regularization factor, and epsilon and hyper-parameter lambda. These optimum values were used to train the model with the aid of the training data-set and the efficiency as well as the future estimation accuracy of the model were assessed and validated using the testing data-set. The stability of the developed model was confirmed by repeating each experiment several times with the same model parameters and the developed model showed consistency in its estimate.The estimation accuracy of SVR depends significantly on the choice of kernel function as well as the value of the regularization factor (C), kernel option, lambda (λ) and epsilon (ɛ). In this present work, these parameters were optimized using test-set-cross validation technique and the optimized values were further implemented for the training task. The generated support vectors during the training stage were utilized during validation. Only Gaussian kernel function works well in this research work. The effects of each of these parameters on the performance of the developed CIM are discussed as follow.The effect of regularization factor (also called penalty factor) on the performance of the developed CIM is depicted in Figs. 3 and 4. In Fig. 3, we present the effect using the correlation coefficient as the measure of estimation accuracy (fitness function). For the training data-set, the correlation coefficient increases from 60% to 84% and maintain a relatively constant value as the value of the regularization factor increases. For the testing data-set, the correlation coefficient increases from 94% to about 97% and further decreases as the value of the regularization factor increases. The optimum value of the regularization factor in which the developed model attains optimum performance was recorded to be 370. Similarly, Fig. 4 presents the effect of the regularization factor on the performance using root mean square error (RMSE) as the measure of the estimation accuracy. In this case, the minimum value of RMSE signifies high level of performance as oppose to the correlation coefficient where high percentage is desired. For both training and testing, the error converges to minimum as the value of the regularization factor increases. Testing data-set has lower RMSE and higher coefficient of correlation. This further confirms the future estimation accuracy of the developed model.After establishing the optimum value of the regularization factor, we further searched for the optimum value of the lambda by keeping the value of the regularization factor at its optimum (370) and vary the value of the hyper-parameter lambda until the model attained its optimum performance. Figs. 5 and 6respectively present the variation in the performance of the model using the coefficient of correlation and root mean square error as the measure of estimation accuracy. For the training data-set shown in Fig. 5, the performance of the developed model increases as we increased the value of the hyper-parameter lambda. In the case of the testing set of data, the performance of the model also show improvement as the value of the lambda increases. The performance of the developed model shows convergence when the value of hyper-parameter lambda reaches 1E-9. Fig. 6 also depicts that high value of lambda optimizes the developed model and shows convergence at 1E-7 value of lambda. At high value of the hyper-parameter, the performance of the model decreases as indicated by higher RMSE shown in Fig. 6 and lower correlation coefficient illustrated in Fig. 5. The value of the hyper-parameter lambda that optimizes the developed model was recorded to be 1E-7.The trend of the variation in the performance of the developed CIM upon varying the value of kernel option is respectively presented in Figs. 7 and 8using correlation coefficient and root mean square error as the measure of the estimation accuracy. Fig. 7 shows high level of performance in the developed model during the training stage when the value of the kernel option is very close to zero. At these values of the kernel option, the developed model performs woefully for the testing data. This shows that the model has over-fitted at this stage and the training performance is deceitful. As the value of the kernel option increases, the over-fitness in the developed model was removed and the true optimum value of the kernel option was observed and recorded as 0.07. Fig. 8 also shows the similar trend and the developed model displays minimum root mean square error at optimum value of the kernel option. The values of the optimum parameters are summarized in Table 2.SVR was modeled to estimate the TC of doped YBCO superconductors by training and testing the model using lattice parameters as descriptors. High correlation coefficients were obtained in the course of training and testing the model. The correlation graphs for both training and testing phases are presented in Figs. 9 and 10respectively. The closeness of the points in both figures indicates minimum deviation of the estimated values from experimental results.The measures of estimation accuracy of the developed CIM are presented in Table 3. The table shows the mean and standard deviation of CC, RMSE and MAE for five different runs. The developed model is characterized with high CC, low RMSE and low MAE in both training and testing set of data.Table 4presents the comparison between the estimated TC and the experimental values. The estimated values agree well with the experimental results in all the doped YBCO superconductors. For the YBCO doped with AlO3, the experimental values of TC for 0%, 0.2%, 0.3%, 0.4% and 0.5% of AlO3 are respectively 90K, 89K, 87.5K, 87K and 86K while the estimated TC using the developed CIM are 89.42K, 89.3K, 88.07K, 87.67K and 86.37K. Coupled with the fact that the developed CIM gives accurate results, the model also show similar trend established using the experimental approach. The estimated results also agree well with the experimental values for YBCO superconductor doped with other materials such as aluminum, oxygen and nickel among others. Therefore, the developed CIM gives accurate estimates of TC of doped YBCO superconductor without the need for sophisticated equipment.We developed CIM for estimating the TC of doped YBCO superconductors by training and testing SVR using optimum parameters obtained through test-set-cross validation technique. High correlation coefficients of 96.65% and 95.75% were obtained in the course of training and testing the model. The estimated superconducting transition temperatures are very close to the experimental results. This suggests that SVR is capable of estimating TC of doped YBCO superconductors with high degree of accuracy and therefore recommended for estimating the TC of doped YBCO superconductors.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
