@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimal allocation of information granularity in system modeling through the maximization of information specificity: A development of granular input space

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A concept of a granular input space in system modeling is introduced.We construct granular input variables maximizing a level of specificity of results.The idea treats information granularity as an essential design asset.Comparative studies based on global sensitivity analysis are completed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fuzzy models,Information granules,Granular input space,Global sensitivity,Interval arithmetic,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this study, we introduce a concept of a granular input space in system modeling, in particular in fuzzy rule-based modeling. The underlying problem can be succinctly formulated in the following way: given is a numeric model, develop an efficient way of forming granular input variables so that the corresponding granular outputs of the model achieve the highest level of specificity. The rationale behind the formulation of the problem is offered along with several illustrative examples. In conjunction with the underlying idea, developed is an algorithmic framework supporting an optimization of the specificity of the model exposed to granular inputs (data). It is dwelled upon one of the principles of Granular Computing, namely an optimal allocation of information granularity. For illustrative purposes, the study is focused on information granules formalized in terms of intervals (however the proposed approach becomes equally relevant for other formalism of information granules). Some comparative analysis with the existing idea of global sensitivity analysis is also carried out by contrasting the essential differences among the two approaches and analyzing the results of computational experiments.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Granular Computing has vividly demonstrated its advantages in modeling and solving complex problem [1,2], for instance, human-centric systems. Human-centered information processing engages a fundamental concept of information granules. In system modeling, Granular Computing contributes in numerous ways to system modeling [2–7]. Those contributions, resulting in some granular models, could be classified as falling into one of the general groups of approaches:A constructed model being endowed with numeric parameters is augmented in the sense its parameters are made granular, viz. information granules are spanned over the numeric values of the parameters. These information granules can be realized as intervals, fuzzy sets, rough sets, etc. The key objective of this construct is to make the resulting granular model to become more in rapport with the real world. Information granularity is sought as a vital design asset and an allocation (distribution) of information granularity is realized in such a way so that a criterion of coverage (inclusion) of data in information granules produced by the granular model is maximized. The approaches falling under this rubric help develop models at higher level of abstraction.Here our focus is on the construction of inputs of the model in the form of information granules with an objective of gaining a better insight into the nature and the role of individual input variables they play in the model. The investigations dealing with the exploration the granular input space and its construction are the subjects of this study.This approach constitutes a combination of the two outlined above as both the parameters of the model and the inputs are made granular. In this sense, we are engaged in the formation and the optimization of the granular space of parameters as well as the granular input space.The granular input space plays a vital role. It becomes obvious that different input variables exhibit a different impact on the outputs of the model. A quantification of this impact relates to some sensitivity analysis. Here we formulate the problem in the setting of information granules. We are interested in the following problem: if we make some input variable to become an information granule, what is its impact on the granularity of the result? Assuming that we have at our disposal a certain level of information granularity (regarded as a useful design asset), the problem is: how this asset becomes distributed (allocated) across all input variables so that the granular output exhibits the highest level of information granularity as possible? In this setting information granules and their level of information granularity (specificity) are important design characteristics to be optimized. Intuitively, one may anticipate that in this allocation exercise, an input variable whose impact on the output is quite limited, comes as an information granule of low specificity. The opposite holds true in case of any input variable, which significantly exhibit the output of the model. Here to retain a high specificity of the output results, this input variable has to be kept quite specific. It is important to note that information granules associated with the certain input variable is a tangible, easily interpretable and practically sound outcome of the process of allocation of information granularity. Consider that we have some limited resources to acquire input data and an acquisition of the input variables comes with a certain cost. The precision of the acquired input variable is related with the granularity of the variable: higher granularity implies higher precision (specificity) of the variable. Our intent is to distribute the resources so that the quality of the granularity of the result produced becomes maximized, viz. its specificity is the highest one.The objective of this study is to establish a systematic way of allocation information to input variables by solving a certain optimization problem of specificity maximization. An overall view of the optimization framework is schematically visualized in Fig. 1. We proceed with an existing fuzzy model (which is a numeric mapping y=f(x)) and establish a way of allocating information granularity across the input variables (making them granular (denoted here byX) so that the granular output of the fuzzy model Y=f(X) exhibits the highest level of specificity. In essence, the optimization problem boils down to a development of a granular input space.In this study, we concentrate on Takagi–Sugeno (T–S) fuzzy rule-based models. The rationale behind this choice is as follows. Rule-based model of this form are commonly encountered in fuzzy modeling and its applications [10–12,17]. There is a plethora of well-established design practices including population-based optimization techniques [13,14] and ensuing verification mechanisms.This study is structured as follows. In Section 2, we briefly cover some prerequisites. The design practices of T–S fuzzy modeling are discussed in Section 3. Then we introduce a concept of a granular input space along with the comprehensive optimization process of allocation of information granularity (Section 4). In Section 5, experiments are reported including both synthetic and real-world data. Conclusions are provided in Section 6.In this section, we briefly cover some useful prerequisites that make the study self-contained and easy to follow.Information granules, no matter how they are realized (say, as intervals, fuzzy sets, rough sets or probability functions) exhibit several important facets such as a level of abstraction (or specificity) at which they are formulated and processed. In the context of our study, we are concerned about a notion of specificity of information granule. In a nutshell, by specificity of a certain information granule A we mean its ability to deliver required abstraction capabilities. Formally speaking, a specificity of information granule A, Sp(A) is a mapping of A onto a unit interval such that the following properties are satisfied: (i) Specificity of a single element information granule {x} is equal to 1, Sp({x})=1. (ii) The larger the information granule (articulated in terms of the inclusion relationship, again specified according to the used formalism in which information granules are expressed), viz. if A⊂B then Sp(A)<Sp(B). (iii) The specificity of information granule defined over the entire universe (space) is equal to zero, Sp({x})=0. In a more descriptive way, specificity relates with the number of elements a given information granule embraces (covers). For instance, in case of interval, say A=[a, b] formed over the spaceX=[xmin, xmax], sp(A) can be defined in the form sp(A)=1−|b−a|/|xmax−xmin| or, more generally, expressed as a non-increasing function of the length of the interval. In case of fuzzy sets, the same definition could be adopted having in mind a representation theorem so that the specificity is defined by taking into consideration the specificity of the family α-cuts of the fuzzy set.In its generic way, a global sensitivity analysis is aimed at the exploration of impact of the variance of outcomes of a certain model attributed to the variability of input variables. As such, this analysis is commonly exploited as a sensitivity analysis along with other approaches including regression method, elementary effect method, meta-model based method and variance-based method [19–22]. The variance-based global sensitivity analysis [20,21,23] is concerned with the relationships assuming the following format(1)y=g(x)g:Rn→Rwhere y is the output of the model,xis the vector of n variables, and g is the model function. The underlying idea is to quantify the variance of the output implied by the variance of different input variables and express an interaction present among the variables. Typically, such calculations rely on the Sobol's sensitivity indexes [21,22]. They describe an impact of the individual variable, pairs of input variables, triples of them, etc. by invoking the following formulas(2)Si=ViV(y),Sij=VijV(y)−Si−Sj,Sijk=⋯(3)STi=Si+Sij+Sijk+⋯=∑Si∼where V(y) is the total variance of the output y, Viis the variance of the output being affected by the ith input variable, and Vijis the variance of the output being impacted by the ith and jth input variable. In other words, the so-called first order index Siquantifies the contribution of a single individual input variable to the variance of the output. The second order index Sijexpresses the contribution of interaction of the ith and jth input variables, and so on for higher order effects (Si∼, which represents the effects indices containing the interaction influence of the ith input variable along with any other variables). Total order effectSTiis used to express the overall output sensitivity variance influenced by the ith input variable, including all variance caused by its interaction with any other input variables. The larger value of the index becomes, the greater impact the input variable exhibits on the output.In this study, we focus on a multi-input single-output (MISO) fuzzy model coming in the form of the Takagi–Sugeno rules [15,16] with local linear model forming the conclusion parts of the rules [17]. The rules forming the model are described as follows,(4)Rulei:ifxisAi(x),theny˜iisfi(x),i=1,2,…,c.x∈Rnwherexis a vector of n input variables, dim(x)=n. Ai(x) is the membership function of the ith fuzzy set defined in the inputs space whereasy˜iis the output of the ith rule. c stands for the number of the rules and fi(x) is a local linear model (function) forming the conclusion part of the rule. More specifically we have(5)fi(x)=wi+aiT(x−vi)i=1,2,…,c.withaibeing a vector of parameters of the ith local function.viis a cluster center (prototype) of the ith rule positioned in the inputs space whereas wiis the prototype of the same rule located in the output space.The construction of the rule-based model is carried out on a basis of some input-output pairs of (numeric) experimental data, say (x1, y1), (x2, y2), …, (xN, yN), where N is the number of the instances. The design process comprises two main phases: (i) structure determination of the model that is completed in an unsupervised mode, and (ii) parameter determination involving a collection of parameters of the local functions.With regard to the first phase, the structure of the data is captured through clustering or fuzzy clustering [8,9,18], say Fuzzy C-Means (FCM). The clustering is carried out for the data positioned in the input-output space producing prototypes [viwi]T. The number of clusters is equal to the number of the rules. As the sum∑i=1cAi(x)attains 1, the overall output of the fuzzy model comes in the form of the following weighted sum of activation levels of the individual rules (fuzzy sets) implied by the inputx,(6)yˆ=∑i=1cAi(x)fi(x)=∑i=1cAi(x)[wi+aiT(x−vi)]With regard to second phase, it is completed in a supervised mode and deals with the determination of the optimal parameters of the local models. In light of a linear format of the local models, this task is easily realized and as a consequence, the optimal parameters of the modelsa1,a2,…,acform a standard solution to a system of associated linear equations.As briefly noted in the introduction, the specificity measures the quality of the outputs being specific rather than general. In other words, the granularity outputs with higher specificity implies higher precision. So, given a fuzzy model, we are concerned with a formation of granular inputs so that the specificity of the resulting granular outputs is maximized. In a concise and formal way, we express the problem in the following way.Given some input dataDand a certain predetermined level of information granularity ɛ, realize an optimal allocation of this information granularity across the input variables so that the specificity of the corresponding output of the fuzzy model is maximized.(7)In what follows, we elaborate on the related details that bring more clarification to the problem.The vector of numeric inputsxis made granular, denoted here byX, viz. the coordinates of the vector become information granules, say intervals, fuzzy sets or rough sets being spanned over the numeric value of the parameter. As mentioned earlier, for illustrative purposes, we concentrate on the interval-valued inputs. This selection of the formalism of information granularity is motivated by the associated illustrative nature of the underlying idea and the simplicity of the associated computing.The granular inputsXare formed by allocating levels of information granularity to the individual coordinates of the inputxso that the requirementε1++ε1−+ε2++ε2−+⋯+εn++εn−=nεis satisfied whereε1+,ε1−,ε2+,ε2−, etc. assume values in the unit interval,εi+,εi−∈[0,1], associated with the corresponding numeric valuesx1,x2, …,xn. We form the granular (interval-valued) inputX=[X1,X2, …,Xt, …,Xn] coming in the following way(8)Xt=[xt−,xt+]=[xt−εt−ranget,xt+εt+ranget]t=1, 2, …, n. The range of the corresponding input is expressed in a standard way(9)ranget=max(xt)−min(xt)The way of forming the interval-valued input (8) can be interpreted as follows: we make it interval-valued with the interval positioned symmetrically around the original input value with the width being a fraction of the range of the corresponding variable. It is apparent that the higher the value of ɛi, the broader the intervalXi.The specificity of the result generated by the granular model is response to the inputX(which is some interval Y=[y−, y+]) is regarded as a decreasing function g of the length of Y, say g(Y). In particular, it could be expressed as exp(−|y−−y+|). Considering the dataD={x1,x2, …,xN} along with their granular counterparts {X1,X2, …,XN}, the optimization problem (7) can be expressed as the maximization of the specificity under the following constraints:(10)Sp=1N∑k=1Nexp(−|yk+−yk−|)maxSp with respect toε1−,ε2−,…,εn−,ε1+,ε2+,…,εn+.subject to constraints:εi−,εi+∈[0,1]and∑i=1nεi−+∑i=1nεi+=nεOne has to remark here that the optimal allocation of granularity is data dependent (as identified in the problem formal problem statement expressed above. The data setDcould be the same as the one used to construct the model. Some other alternatives could be sought as well.The calculations of the granular output of the rule-based fuzzy model require attention. For a givenXk, we determine its membership grade to each information granule (being described by the corresponding prototype) by determining the following bounds,(11)ak,i1=1∑j=1c||xk−−vi||||xk−−vj||2/(m−1)(12)ak,i2=1∑j=1c||xk+−vi||||xk+−vj||2/(m−1)Then the degree of membership (activation level) of the ith rule becomes an interval[αk,i−,αk,i+]with the bounds expressed as follows,(13)αk,i−=min(ak,i1,ak,i2)(14)αk,i+=max(ak,i1,ak,i2)In the sequel the interval-valued output of is computed in the form(15)[yk−,yk+]=∑i=1⊕c[αk,i−,αk,i+]⊗[fi−(Xk),fi+(Xk)]where(16)[fi−(Xk),fi+(Xk)]=[wi,wi]⊕[aiT,aiT]⊗[xk−−vi,xk+−vi]The operations shown in circles indicate that the operations of addition and multiplication are carried out for intervals rather than numbers as the calculations of interval arithmetic.The optimization problem (10) is challenging given the complex dependence of the specificity of the output vis-à-vis the individual levels of information granularity. The use of population-based optimization is a sound alternative worth considering. We exploit here a comprehensive learning particle swarm optimizer (CLPSO), which is simpler and easier to implement than the original PSO algorithm [24,25]. CLPSO can be briefly described as follows. Each particle travels in the 2n-dimensional search space of the levels of information granularityεi−,εi+, organized in some vectorɛ⋅The intent is to maximize a certain fitness function, which is the specificity of the granular output. The positionɛmand velocityvmof the mth particle are updated in the form,(17)εm(s+1)=εm(s)+vm(s)(18)vm(s+1)=ξvm(s)+λ⋅rands⋅(pbest−xm(s))where s denotes the index of the generation of the algorithm.pbest denotes the best performance (the highest value of the fitness function). ξ is the inertia weight, and λ is the acceleration constant whereasrandsis a vector of random numbers coming from the uniform distribution in [0,1].Once the optimization has been completed, the level of granularity associated with the tth input variable can described as the following sum(19)lt=εt−+εt+t=1, 2, …, n. To make this sum independent of the level of information granularity ɛ, we consider the integral It(20)It=∫0εmaxlt(ε)dεwhere ɛmax is the maximal value of ɛ used in the allocation of information granularity, ɛmax<1.In a series of experiments, we consider a synthetic data set as those publicly available. The results are reported for the 10 fold run of the optimization of information granularity. In this case, we report the median value of ltthus (20) is replaced by the integral(21)Ii=∫0εmaxlt−median(ε)dεwhere lt−median is the median of the values of ltobtained for the 10-fold run of the experiment. The dataDconsists of the data used for the training the rule-based model.The experiment involves a two-variable nonlinear function(22)y=sin(0.05x1)+cos(2x2)where x1 and x2 are two independent variables assuming values within the range [−2,2]. The data set is composed of 400 (20×20) data pairs drawn from to a uniform random distribution defined in the Cartesian product [−2,2]×[−2,2]. For each predetermined level of information granularity ɛ the experiment was repeated 10 times. Then we carried out FCM-based clustering for different number of clusters (c) and values of the fuzzification coefficient (m) to develop the fuzzy model. In the sequel, the inputs were made granular realizing a process of optimal allocation of information granularity.The results of optimal allocation of information granularity across input variables obtained by CLPSO are shown in Fig. 2. The boxplot is used to illustrate the results of the 10-fold run of the experiment. And the each row of the plots represents a predetermined values of ɛ⋅ As expected, the length of the interval associated with the input variables increases with the increase of the values of ɛ.Furthermore, even though the main trend of interval aggregations changing is increasing, the boxplots show that the granularity allocation results of input variables of 10-fold tests become scattered. A possible reason behind this phenomenon is that each fuzzy model obtained in the successive folds has similar but not identical clusters distributed in the input and output space, which could have considerable impact on the architecture of fuzzy model. When the number of clusters becomes higher, the difference of the clusters is less, so the scattering of granularity allocation is reduced.Fig. 3displays the values of the integral of the length of the optimal intervals of input variables and Fig. 4illustrates the results of global sensitivity. The results are not surprising: in light of the nature of the function which changes significantly with regard to the second input variable, the length of the interval there is far lower than the one observed for the first input variable. Furthermore the results obtained by the two methods are consistent. They are related in an obvious way: input variable exhibiting high influence on the output is associated with the lower values of the length of the input interval. This is easily interpretable: if the input variable impacts the output to a significant degree, we should restrict their possible values to become positioned in narrow interval. While the measure of the global sensitivity comes as a single number, the approach proposed here offers an associated interval of the input variable.The plots shown in a series of figures, Figs. 5–7contrast the specificity of results obtained by running CLPSO versus a situation when the levels of information granularity are kept the same for the two input variables. The improvement delivered by the CLPSO is evident. As noted before, the results of specificity are impacted by the number of clusters (c) and the values of the fuzzification coefficient (m).The following series of experiments concerns some publicly available data sets, Table 1. As before, the experiments were also carried out in the 10-fold mode.The performance results of the rule-based (expressed in terms of the RMSE) obtained for selected number of rules and m=2 are plotted in Fig. 8.Figs. 9 and 10summarize the results of the integral of optimal granularity interval of fuzzy models and the global sensitivity analysis results for the corresponding data sets.A number of low sensitive input variables are associated with broader intervals. As an example, consider the Airfoil Self-Noise data. The frequency input exhibits higher sensitivity, see Fig. 10(g), thus narrow intervals are allocated to that variable, Fig. 9(g). In contrast, velocity variable has the lowest value of sensitivity and as such comes with the highest value of the integral of granularity allocation. In conclusion, resorting to CLPSO approach, the granularities tend to allocate to the low sensitive input variables to void high influence on the outputs, and vice versa, so that it is helpful to improve the specificity of outputs. Nevertheless, it should be noticed that, the proposed method is used for modeling purpose and allows us to use the data in various resolutions efficiently. Though some significant characteristics of the results obtained by the proposed approach and the standard sensitivity analysis are verified mutually, they cannot be substituted by each other. Because, when the sensitivities of two variables are very close, it is difficult for granularity allocation to distinguish them from each other. Meanwhile, sensitivity is not the only condition of input variables granularity allocation.To visualize some details concerning information allocation, we focus on the first six data sets. A series of plots in Figs. 11–16(a) illustrates the performance of PSO (here the size of the population was set to 50) when optimizing allocation of inputs granularity. Figs. 11–16(b) is shown the specificity versus some predetermined values of ɛ (set as 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, …, 0.9, 1.0).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, we have focused on the concept of the granular input space and its optimization. The direct linkages between the granular space formed in this way and the analysis of impact of input variables in the already developed models have been identified. The granular input space delivers an interesting vehicle to realize a global sensitivity analysis and offer a way of forming information granules of input variables.There are interesting follow-up pursuits of this study. First, as noted at the beginning, the study is concerned with the realization of information granules in the formal setting of interval analysis (and we have pointed out at the strong motivating arguments behind this line of study). Naturally, further studies invoking other formalism of information granules could be a direct follow-up of this paper. Whereas the investigations of the granular parametric space have been carried out in the past, the hybrid approach in which the granular input and parameter spaces are engaged is still to be considered.