@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An enhanced ABC algorithm for single machine order acceptance and scheduling with class setups

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper studies the order acceptance and scheduling problem with class setups in a single machine environment.An enhanced artificial bee colony algorithm is proposed for solving this problem.Experimental results reveal that the proposed algorithm is both computationally efficient and effective.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Order acceptance,Scheduling,Artificial bee colony algorithm,Class setups,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper considers the order acceptance and scheduling problem in a single machine environment where each customer order is characterized by a known processing time, due date, revenue, and class setup time. The objective is to maximize the total revenue. Since the problem is computationally intractable, we first conduct a preliminary study of applying the basic artificial bee colony algorithm to address the problem under study. Specifically, we design appropriate neighborhood operators with respect to the problem. Based on the results of the preliminary study and the problem characteristics, an enhanced artificial bee colony algorithm is developed with a series of modifications. The extensive experimental results indicate that the enhanced artificial bee colony algorithm is both computationally efficient and effective for large sized problem instances.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
This paper is motivated by the problem found in many practical situations where a large number of orders are partitioned into a relatively small number of classes. For example, considering the bottleneck stage of a mechanical manufacturing environment in which orders have to be sequenced for processing on a multi-tool machine. Whenever there is a switch from processing an order in one class to an order in another class, a setup time is incurred in retooling the machine. Operating in such an environment with limited production capacity and tight order due date requirements, many firms give no deliberation to order acceptance decision. Instead, the firms tacitly accept all the potential orders, which may result in reduced revenues and even loss of customers. From the revenue-seeking perspective, it is not beneficial for the firms especially in competitive business environments. Therefore, the firm needs to determine simultaneously which orders to accept for processing and how to schedule these accepted orders to maximize the total revenue.In this paper, we consider an order acceptance and scheduling (OAS) problem in a single machine environment where the orders are partitioned into classes and a class setup time is required when production changes from one class to another. The objective is to maximize the total revenue without consideration of order tardiness. In such an environment, several orders of the same class may be sequenced contiguously as a batch to reduce setup times. On the other hand, the batching of orders may delay some other orders beyond their due dates. The trade-off between achieving batch size efficiency and meeting due dates of orders causes the OAS problem to be very challenging. The class setups environment is also considered in single machine scheduling problem with an objective of minimize the number of late jobs by Bruno and Downey [1], and Crauwels et al. [2]. Bruno and Downey [1] prove that the scheduling problem with class setups is NP-hard. Clearly, the OAS problem under study must be at least as complex as the scheduling problem described above and is also NP-hard.The contributions of this paper are twofold. Firstly, we provide the first description and the study of this order acceptance and scheduling problem with class setups. Secondly, an enhanced artificial bee colony (EABC) algorithm is designed to treat the problem under study. The performance of artificial bee colony (ABC) algorithms typically depends on the efficient neighborhood search mechanism to achieve the best solution. To construct such a mechanism, we design the appropriate neighborhood operators by a careful analysis of the problem characteristics. Apart from that, the EABC algorithm includes some novel and advanced techniques, such as heuristics to generate a few promising initial food sources, a self-adaptive selecting strategy to enhance the learning ability of employed bees and onlooker bees, a local search approach to balance global exploration and local exploitation, a modified abandoning mode for onlookers to lead the algorithm to a promising region. In our experiments, EABC algorithm shows consistently superior performance over different situations of instances that could be encountered in practice.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. A brief literature review is given in Section 2. After presenting the problem definition, Section 3 provides some optimal properties of the problem and presents a mixed integer linear programming (MILP) model. In Section 4, the basic ABC (BABC) algorithm is explained. Section 5 describes the enhanced ABC algorithm. The results of computational experiments and conclusions are given in Sections 6 and 7 respectively.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper aims at studying the order acceptance and scheduling problem with class setups in a single machine environment to maximize the total revenue. In view of the fact that the MILP model only solves the problem with up to 20 orders within a reasonable time, we propose an enhanced ABC algorithm to treat the problem under study. In the enhanced ABC algorithm, the appropriate neighborhood operators are designed. The effective heuristics and a self-adaptive selecting strategy are developed to perform exploration for hopeful solutions. Furthermore, a local search approach is embedded in to intensify exploitation ability and a modified abandoning mode is employed to further search the promising solution space. The computational results demonstrate that the enhanced ABC algorithm is successful in obtaining good solutions for solving large instances of the problem under study.Future research could focus on developing more efficient and effective hybrid meta-heuristics for the OAS problems, since the reasonable hybridization of the ABC search and local search can improve the performance of EABC obviously. Another possible research direction is to analyze whether the design flexibility of ABC neighborhood search mechanism offers any advantage over other meta-heuristics for solving the OAS problems. Furthermore, due to the effectiveness of EABC algorithm, it could be interesting to analyze its performance on the extension of the single machine OAS problem involving different objective criteria, such as those including subcontracting costs.