@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new image encryption algorithm based on non-adjacent coupled map lattices

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose an image encryption scheme based on a new spatiotemporal chaotic system.The encryption scheme is not the one time pad encryption.The proposed image encryption has a large key space and high security.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Non-adjacent,Coupled map lattices,Image encryption,Bit-level permutation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We propose a new image encryption algorithm which is based on the spatiotemporal non-adjacent coupled map lattices. The system of non-adjacent coupled map lattices has more outstanding cryptography features in dynamics than the logistic map or coupled map lattices does. In the proposed image encryption, we employ a bit-level pixel permutation strategy which enables bit planes of pixels permute mutually without any extra storage space. Simulations have been carried out and the results demonstrate the superior security and high efficiency of the proposed algorithm.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the rapid development of computer network, the number of image files transmitted over Internet keeps increasing. As a result, the secure transmission of confidential digital images over public channels has become a common interest in both research and application fields. The image symmetric encryption is different from the text symmetric encryption such as DES and AES [1]. The intrinsic properties of images such as bulk data volume, high redundancy and high pixel correlation between adjacent pixels require more efficient permutations and diffusions algorithms of image encryptions than that of text encryptions. In recent years, chaos-based encryption algorithms that rely on dynamicity have been regarded as a promising research for image encryptions. Since Fridrich [2] suggested that a chaos-based image encryption scheme should compose of the iteration of two processes: permutation and diffusion. Presently, various schemes [2–21] have been proposed.For the permutation phase, bit-level permutation of images is superior to pixel-level permutation due to both the positions and values of pixels changed. In [18], Xiang et al. proposed a selective image encryption scheme that encrypts the higher four bits of each pixel and leaves the lower four bits unchanged. This scheme initiated bit-level permutations in chaos-based image encryptions. Zhu et al. [21] developed a symmetric image encryption scheme using a bit-level permutation. Zhu's method of separation each pixel into groups of bits by calculating percentages of pixel information contributed by different bits is suggested. However, the bits in one bit group cannot be permuted into other bit groups in Zhu's algorithm [21]. Therefore, the statistical information in each bit plane remains unmodified. To avoid this problem, Zhang et al. [20] proposed expand-and-shrink strategy in the permutation phase to significantly reduce the high correlation among the bit planes. However, the expand-and-shrink strategy needs four times extra space for bit-level permutations for breaking the limit of the bit plane. In addition, Zhang's algorithm [20] can only encrypt images of N×N pixels.For the diffusion phase, Kanso et al. [8] employed the well known 3D cat map for diffusion phase. However, Xiao et al. [19] presented in advance that the lack of cat map for encryptions is (0, 0)-pixel value unchanged. Zhu's algorithm [21] and Zhang's algorithm [20] employed logistic map for diffusion phase. Nevertheless, the parameter μ of the logistic map has periodic windows in its bifurcation diagrams. Most of chaos-based encryptions such as Zhu's algorithm and Zhang's algorithm assign the parameter μ of the logistic map close to 4 (μ=3.99999), which can ensure the chaotic behavior of the logistic map. Thus, the limitation in the range of μ indicates that the keystream generated from the chaotic sequences in the logistic map is vulnerable. Besides, in comparison with one dimensional chaotic system, the NCML system contains stronger chaotic behavior, better pseudo random chaotic sequences, wider range of parameters and less periodic windows in bifurcation diagrams. Therefore, the pseudo random chaotic sequences generated from the NCML system is more secure than that from one dimensional chaotic system. Furthermore, it has been verified that spatiotemporal chaotic systems maintain much longer periodicity in digitalization of the computer than one dimensional chaotic systems [22]. Therefore, spatiotemporal chaotic system is gradually regarded with better properties suitable for image encryptions than one dimension chaotic system, such as larger parameter space, better randomness and more chaotic sequences. The researches [3,6,7,9,10,13–18,26] are based on the coupled map lattices (CML) [23] which enhances the security of the encryption algorithms. However, the CML system is coupled by adjacent lattices which is defined as follows:(1)xn+1(i)=(1−ε)f[xn(i)]+ε2{f[xn(i+1)]+f[xn(i−1)]},where ɛ is the coupling parameter, the mapping function f(x)=μx(1−x), and μ∈(0, 4]. The parameter μ still has periodic windows in bifurcation diagram of some lattice. Due to the adjacent lattices coupling, when parameter μ∈(3.87, 3.925) and ɛ=0.1 the system can only generate local chaotic behavior [24] which means that some of lattices are not in chaotic behavior. The number of lattices should be selected carefully for image encryptions. Additionally, the mutual information of chaotic sequences between any two lattices are not zero which indicates that some chaotic sequence of a lattice may be substituted by that of other lattice for potential attacks.In this paper, we propose a new permutation scheme of the aforementioned image encryption algorithm. The permutation in the proposed algorithm makes it possible for any bit in pixels to break the limit of its bit plane without extra space. Additionally, the new permutation scheme can permute the image in size of N×M. Nevertheless, we employ the chaotic system of the non-adjacent coupled map lattices for diffusion in image encryption. We also develop the dynamics of spatiotemporal system of non-adjacent coupled map lattices. Our work also indicates that the spatiotemporal system of non-adjacent coupled map lattices is more suitable for image encryptions than CML system due to its space non-linear coupling between lattices, less periodic windows in bifurcations and larger range of parameters in chaotic dynamics, when the scheme of non-adjacent coupling is properly chosen. Furthermore, the wide range of choices for the initial conditions and control parameters lead to a large key space. The experimental results presented in this paper show the effectiveness of the proposed image encryption algorithm.The logistic map was originally proposed by May [25]. It is a first-order difference equation represented by f(x)=μx(1−x). Non-adjacent coupled map lattices (NCML) that we proposed considers L logistic maps coupled as follows:(2)xn+1(i)=(1−ε)f[xn(i)]+ε2{f[xn(j)]+f[xn(k)]},where i, j, k are the lattices (1≤i, j, k≤L), ɛ is the coupling parameter (0≤ɛ≤1), n is the time index (n=1, 2, 3,…) and f(x)=μx(1−x), μ∈(0, 4]. The relations of i, j and k are calculated by a non-adjacent map usually described in non-linear maps such as Arnold cat map, tent map and standard map without loss of generality, The relations of i, j, k are defined by Arnold cat map as follows:(3)jk=1pqpq+1iimod(L),where p and q are the parameters of cat map.The difference between NCML and CML equations resides in the variables j and k in Eq. (2) which are instead of i−1 and i+1 in Eq. (1), respectively. The CML system is coupled in adjacent lattices, which is a sort of space regular coupling behavior. The parameters p and q turn NCML into diverse dynamics systems due to the use space non-linear map for lattices coupling. When p and q are properly assigned with fixed values, most of these dynamical systems even hold chaotic features while continuously varying the value of μ in the logistic map.One dimension logistic map is not suitable for data encryptions due to its periodic windows in bifurcation diagrams. The CML system are suggested for data encryptions [3,6,7,9,13–18,26] in recent years partially because periodic windows in bifurcation diagrams of the CML system are fewer than that of logistic map. The NCML system is suitable for data encryptions for the same reason. There are less periodic windows in the bifurcation diagram with μ>3.70 for the NCML system than that of CML system for ɛ=0.1, p=23 and q=12, which is shown in Fig. 1. In addition, the NCML system has a positive value of h (Kolmogorov–Sinai entropy density) for a wider range of values of μ which means the Lyapunov exponents density of NCML system is positive, which is shown in Fig. 2. The bifurcation diagram without periodic windows and Kolmogorov-Sinai entropy density diagram in the NCML system when μ>3.70 show the new feature for cryptography that the parameter μ which is used as a secret key has a larger key space than logistic map or the CML system.The mutual information value between most of lattices in the NCML system is zero, which indicates that time series of most lattices in the NCML system are independent. This feature is suitable for cryptography because the chaotic series in a lattice cannot be recovered by other lattices. Fig. 3(a) shows that the values of mutual information between lattices in the NCML system are nearly zero. Fig. 3(b) shows that most values of mutual information between lattices in the CML system are larger than that in the NCML system.For situations when μ=3.8 and ɛ>0.5, μ∈(3.8, 4.0] and all values of ɛ, it is difficult to observe any stable behaviors in any lattice shown in Fig. 4. The chaotic reactions dominate the system behavior. The chaotic diffusions cannot hold the system stable because most of lattices are in chaos and turbulence. However, the patterns of defect chaotic diffusion and defect turbulence in the CML system [24], which are shown in corresponding Fig. 5(a) and b, do not appear in the NCML system because non-adjacent coupling increases the complexity of spatiotemporal dynamical behaviors. In order to guarantee all the lattices in chaotic behaviors, some image encryption schemes [7,9] based on the CML system have to choose μ=4. The new feature of larger parameter space of μ in fully turbulence of the NCML system than that of the CML system is suitable for cryptography algorithm design.This section presents the proposed algorithm for gray image encryption in the framework of symmetric key stream cipher architecture. Firstly, the image sp of size N×M is divided into M components by pixel columns. Afterwards, each component is converted 8 bit groups by bit columns. Then, the so obtained 8×M bit groups are permuted into cp image. Secondly, the obtained cp image is converted into one vector of integers within {0,1,…,255} and length of N×M. The vector will be diffused by chaotic sequences of the NCML system. Finally, the permutation and diffusion phases can be encrypted in many rounds for higher security.The proposed image encryption process utilizes a secret key that is longer than 400 bits. The key K is divided into four components which are 400 bit-long block K1, μ(μ∈[3.87, 4]) and ɛ(ɛ∈[0.1, 1]) shown in Fig. 6. The 400 bit-long block K1 is divided into 40 bit-long units which is given by K1=K10, K11, …, K19. Parameters μ and ɛ refer to the parameter μ and ɛ in Eq. (2).The source gray image sp is divided into M components by pixel columns. Since each pixel is coded with 8 bits, the sp image contains 8×M bit groups where each bit group has N bits shown in Fig. 7. The permutation among bit groups here employs the Arnold cat map as follows:(4)st=Arrmod(8×M)=1vwvw+1rrmod(8×M),where r is the original bit group index in the sp image (r=0, 1, 2, …, 8×M−1); s (s=0, 1, 2, …, 8×M−1) is the location index of r bit group after permutation; t is the number of times of rotation upward in the sth bit group; v and w are the parameters of the cat map which are calculated as follows:(5)v=bin2dec(K10⊕K11⊕K12⊕K13⊕K14)mod(8×M)w=bin2dec(K15⊕K16⊕K17⊕K18⊕K19)mod(8×M).The permutation process has two steps in each bit group permutation. The first step is mapping the r bit group of the sp original image to the destination s bit group in the corresponding permuted image p. The second step is rotating t bits upward in the sth bit group of p image. In the permutation phase, the permutation process repeats 8×M times for the construction of permuted image p.Bit groups in sp image can move from a bit plane to another bit plane in the proposed permutation algorithm. Because of the difference in significant information among bit planes of an image, the proposed permutation algorithm can modified the statistical information in each bit plane of the original image. In macroscopic view, the adversary cannot analyze the information distribution of the original image when receiving the permuted image.The NCML system in Eq. (2) is employed for the diffusion phase. The initial values x1(i) of the NCML system are calculated by 400 bit-long block K1 as the follows:(6)x1(i)=bin2dec(Q(i))240,where i is lattice index, i∈[1, 100] and Q(i) are constructed by K1. In Fig. 8, each Q(i) corresponds one distinct combination of three elements out of ten elements of the set K1. The number of 3-combinations from the given set K1 of 10 elements is 120 greater than the number of Q(i) with the value of 100, which ensures the distinct combination for generating totally different Q(i). Such an arrangement for Q(i) can enhance the sensitivity of initial value of x1(i) for K1.In Fridrich's structure, the diffusion stage here is on the basis of obtained the permuted image p. The ciphered image c in the diffusion phase are calculated as follows:(7)c[h]={p[h]+(xh(m)×1012)+c[h−1]}mod256c[0]=(v+w)mod256,where h is the pixel sequence which is formed horizontally from the upper left corner to the lower right corner, h∈[1, M×N]. In the initial value of c[0], v and w are obtained from permutation phase in Eq. (5). xh(m) is the state value of h iterations in the chaotic sequence of m lattice in NCML system. The parameter m is calculated as follows:(8)m=(c[h−1]mod100)+1.Input: the secret keys where K1 is a 400 bit-long block, μ(μ∈[3.87, 4]) and ɛ(ɛ∈[0.1, 1]). The source image sp. The number of rounds of encryption.Output: Returns ciphered image c.Step 1. The variables of v and w are calculated in Eq. (5) according to K1. The variable r is initialized to zero in Eq. (4).Step 2. The variables of s and t for r bit group of source image sp are calculated in Eq. (4).Step 3. The s bit group of permuted image p is arranged by mapping r bit group and rotating upward t times of the source image sp. The variable r is incremented by one. If r<8×M, we proceed Step 2 until the whole bit groups of p are calculated and mapped. Otherwise, the permutation phase completes.Step 4. Q(i) are calculated in equations in Fig. 8 according to K1.Step 5. The initial values x1(i) are calculated in Eq. (6).Step 6. The 100 chaotic sequences in the NCML system are calculated in Eq. (2).Step 7. The permuted image p is encrypted into the ciphered image c in Eqs. (7) and (8) by using the above chaotic sequences. If the current round is not the final round of encryption, the above steps repeat again. Otherwise, the encryption process completes. Fig. 9shows the process of one round encryption.Input: the secret keys where K1 is a 400 bit-long block, μ(μ∈[3.87, 4]) and ɛ(ɛ∈[0.1, 1]). The ciphered image c. The number of rounds of decryption.Output: Returns the recovery plaintext image d.Step 1. Q(i) are calculated in equations in Fig. 8 according to K1.Step 2. The initial values x1(i) are calculated in Eq. (6).Step 3. The 100 chaotic sequences in the NCML system are calculated in Eq. (2).Step 4. The variables of v and w are calculated in Eq. (5) according to K1.Step 5. The recovery permuted image p is decrypted as follows:(9)p[h]={|c[h]−(xh(m)×1012)−c[h−1]|}mod256c[0]=(v+w)mod256,where h is the pixel sequence in ciphered image c which is formed horizontally from the upper left corner to the lower right corner, h∈[1, M×N]. For calculating the initial value of c[0], v and w are obtained in step 4. xh(m) is the state value of h iterations in the chaotic sequence of m lattice in the NCML system. The parameter m is calculated in Eq. (8). The variable r is initialized to zero in Eq. (4).Step 6. The variables of s and t for r bit group of source image sp are calculated in Eq. (4).Step 7. The r bit group of recovery plaintext image d is arranged by mapping s bit group and rotating downward t times of the recovery permuted image p. The variable r is incremented by one. If r<8×M, we proceed Step 6 until the whole bit groups of d are calculated and mapped. If the current round is not the final round of decryption, the above steps repeat again. Otherwise, the decryption process completes. Fig. 10shows the process of one round decryption.The decryption procedure is the reverse process of the encryption algorithm because the proposed algorithm is a symmetric encryption algorithm. If secret key K1 is assigned the value that each bit in 400 binary digits is 1, μ=3.87 and ɛ=0.1, the results of the encryption and decryption of the 512×512 gray image of Lena are shown in Fig. 11. Fig. 11(a) is the plain-image Lena and Fig. 11(b) is the intermediate image of plain-image Lena which is permuted for one round while Fig. 11(c) is the encrypted image of Lena and Fig. 11(d) is the decrypted image for recovery of plain-image Lena.The NCML system offers better features than the CML system such as lower mutual information between lattices, wider range of parameters and lattices for chaotic sequences. In Lian's scheme [9], the 8 lattices and the corresponding chaotic sequences in CML system are used in the encryption scheme. In Pisarchik's scheme [13], one lattice and its chaotic sequence in CML system are used in the encryption scheme. In Xiang's scheme [18], one lattice in CML system and the corresponding chaotic sequence are used in the encryption. The above CML-based encryption schemes [9,13,18,26] use fixed lattices to generate chaotic sequences for encryptions. Thus, the chaotic sequences do not depend on the content of plaintext images. Ge et al. [7] developed the chosen plaintext attack on the Lian's scheme [9]. Arroyo et al. [3] cracked the Pisarchik's scheme [13] by using ciphertext-only attack. Therefore, one time pad key should be used for security of CML-based encryption schemes. However, in the proposed scheme, we employ NCML system which has lower mutual information between lattices than the CML system. Low mutual information between lattices ensure that chaotic sequences in different lattices can be mixed alternately as a new chaotic stream for encryptions. The specific mixed method depends on the content of plaintext images. Thus, the proposed scheme is not one time pad encryption. The chosen plaintext attack also fails because the new chaotic stream is different when adversary chooses another new plaintext image. Therefore, the NCML system is superior to CML system for encryptions.The simulation results and performance analysis for the proposed algorithm are reported in this section. A good cryptosystem should resist to all kinds of known attacks, such as known-plaintext attack, chosen ciphertext attack, statistical attack, differential attack, and various brute-force attacks. The corresponding security analyses have been performed on the proposed algorithm, including key space analysis, statistical analysis and differential analysis.The key space should be large enough to make brute-force attacks infeasible. Number of control parameters in the secret key: secret key K1 has 400-bit long block, μ has a precision of 10−2 and ɛ has a precision of 10−1. Except μ and ɛ, the key space size is more than 2400≈10120. While the scheme [20] contains the key space of 1084. Therefore, it can be seen that the proposed encryption algorithm is good at resisting brute-force attack.A good encryption algorithm is key-sensitive where a tiny change in the key will cause a significant change in the output. To evaluate the key sensitivity of the proposed encryption scheme, we make one of secret keys with a tiny change and other keys unchanged. For testing sensitivity of K1, we assign K1 the value that each bit in 400 binary digits is 1 andK′1the value of K1−1. The same plaintext image is encrypted by K1 andK′1, respectively, together with μ=3.87 and ɛ=0.1. Fig. 12shows the two ciphered images generated from two security keys with only 1-bit difference in K1. The difference of two ciphered images is 99.5491028%, which justifies the high sensitivity of the key of K1.For testing sensitivity of μ, we assign μ=3.87 and μ′=3.88. The same plaintext image is encrypted by μ and μ′, respectively. together with ɛ=0.1 and K1 assigned the value that each bit in 400 binary digits is 1. Fig. 13shows the two ciphered images generated from two security keys with only 0.01 difference in the secret key of μ. The difference is 99.5723724%, which justifies the high sensitivity of the key of μ.For testing sensitivity of ɛ, we assign ɛ=0.1 and ɛ′=0.2. The same plaintext image is encrypted by ɛ and ɛ′, respectively together with μ=3.87 and K1 assigned the value that each bit in 400 binary digits is 1. Fig. 14shows the two ciphered images generated from two security keys with only 0.1 difference in the secret key of ɛ. The difference is 99.5582581%, which justifies the high sensitivity of the key of ɛ.Generally, an adversary may make a slight change (e.g. only one pixel changed) of the original image, and then observes the change of encryption results. In this way, the adversary may be able to find out a meaningful relationship between two ciphered images and the original image. We employ the NPCR(number of pixels change rate) and UACI(unified average changing intensity) which is defined in Eq. (10) and Eq. (11).(10)D(i,j)=1,c1(i,j)≠c2(i,j)0,otherwiseNPCR=∑ijD(i,j)M×N×100%,(11)UACI=1M×N∑ijc1(i,j)−c2(i,j)255×100%,where c1 and c2 are the two ciphered images.Without loss of generality for the test, we employ four plaintext images which are the original plaintext Lena image sp, the image sp1 of only changing one bit in the pixel sp[511,511], the image sp2 of only changing one bit in the pixel sp[0][0] and the image sp3 of only changing one bit in the pixel sp[256,256]. And then the four images are encrypted with the same secret keys. The NPCR and UACI values of sp and sp1, sp and sp2, sp and sp3 for five encryption rounds compared with the Zhu's algorithm [21] are listed in Tables 1 and 2. In the Zhu's algorithm, the NPCR value is very low (0.004222870) at the first round of encryption. It reaches 0.996051788 only at the third round. Besides, the UACI value is rather low (0.001365662) at the first round. It reaches 0.333999634 at the third round of encryption. Furthermore, only one encryption round is used in our proposed algorithm while there are at least two encryption rounds needed in Zhu's algorithm, which means our algorithm is more efficient.The histogram of an image reveals the distribution information of pixel values. An ideal encrypted image should have a uniform and completely different histogram against the plain-image for preventing the adversary from extracting any meaningful information from the fluctuating histogram of the ciphered image.Fig. 15shows the histograms for the plain-image and ciphered image of Lena. The histogram of the ciphered images is fairly uniform and significantly different from that of the plain-image. Therefore, it is invalid for an attacker to launch any statistical attacks on the proposed cryptosystem.It is known that adjacent image pixels are highly correlated either in horizontal, vertical or diagonal directions. The correlation between adjacent pixels should be significantly reduced in the ciphered image. To test the correlation of plain-text image and ciphered image, the following procedures are carried out. First, randomly select 2000 pairs of two adjacent pixels from an image. Then, the correlation coefficients of adjacent pixels in vertical, horizontal and diagonal directions are evaluated by using the following equations:(12)rxy=cov(x,y)D(x)D(y),(13)E(x)=1S∑i=1Sxi,(14)D(x)=1S∑i=1S(xi−E(x))2,(15)cov(x,y)=1S∑i=1S(xi−E(x))(yi−E(y)),where x and y denote two adjacent pixels and S is the total number of duplets (x, y) obtained from the image. E(x) and D(x) are the expectation and the variance of x, respectively. The calculated correlation coefficients of the plaintext image of Lena and its corresponding ciphered images which are encrypted by the proposed algorithm and the Zhu's algorithm in one round encryption are listed in Table 3.As Table 3 shows, the absolute values of all correlation coefficients in the proposed algorithm are close to those in the Zhu's algorithm. In the plain-text image, the correlation coefficients are always high and are very close to 1, but they are significantly reduced in the ciphered images.The analyses are performed on the encryption complexity of the proposed scheme in comparison with Wang's algorithm [26] and Xiang's algorithm [18]. In the proposed scheme, the computational cost of each round of encryption depends on the permutation operations and diffusion operations. The time-consuming part of the permutation process is the number of bit shift operations. Then, the time complexity in the permutation process is Θ(8×M×N). In diffusion process, the time-consuming part is the number of floating-point operations for the construction of chaotic sequences in Eq. (2). Then, the time complexity in the diffusion process is Θ(100×M×N). Therefore, the total time complexity is Θ(100×M×N). If we decrease the size of lattices L, the proposed algorithm can run faster.Xiang's algorithm and Wang's algorithm do not follow the architecture of permutation and diffusion processes. In Xiang's algorithm, the selection of 8 bits of a pixel can ensure the security of the image encryption. Then, the total complexity of 8TP/v, which is presented in Ref. [18], includes a number of Θ(2×M×N) floating-point operations for the construction of chaotic sequences in the CML system. In Wang's algorithm, the time complexity includes a number of Θ(4×M×N) floating-point operations for construction of chaotic sequences in the CML system and a number of Θ(M×N) operations of circle shift of bits.Compared with Xiang's algorithm and Wang's algorithm, the proposed scheme is slower, because 100 lattices of local maps and two processes of encryptions are employed. However, the proposed scheme can be implemented in a parallel. Fig. 9 indicates that the permutation process and the calculation of chaotic sequences of 100 lattices can be paralleled. Although there are 100 local maps in the NCML system, they are all simple one-dimensional maps and can also be iterated in a parallel. Therefore, the speed of chaotic sequences generation can be made equivalent to that of iterating an individual chaotic map. Besides, the bit rotation and bit group moving operations of the permutation process also take a little time in software implementation. However, this overhead can be eliminated in hardware implementation as these bits matrix can be directly extracted and moved by a specific circuit.Xiang's algorithm can be paralleled in Ref. [18]; however Wang's algorithm cannot be paralleled because each input xi-1(j) for current iteration in the CML system depends on the previous value of ciphered pixels. Therefore, in the view of parallel, the speed of proposed scheme is close to Xiang's algorithm and faster than Wang's algorithm, although the proposed scheme needs more hardware such as a multi-core processor and the specific circuit.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper has proposed an encryption algorithm which uses the spatiotemporal dynamics of non-adjacent coupled map lattices. Due to the given new features in dynamics of NCML system, the coupling structure of NCML system have enhanced the cryptosystem security. A secret key that is longer than 400 bits has been used to generate the initial conditions and parameters of the maps while the proposed algorithm can be easily applied for encryption of color images. The encryption policy is crucial to a chaos-based cryptosystem as well as choosing a suitable chaotic system. The proposed algorithm also employs a new bit-level permutation method which efficiently reduce the intrinsic features of an image and space complexity. The security analyses are given to prove that the key space and sensitivity is good enough to resist to brute-force attacks. Simulations have been carried out in comparison with the former encryption algorithms. The results show that the proposed algorithm is in the high security level in terms of NPCR, UACI. These results justify the superior security of the proposed scheme.