@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Detection of electrocardiogram signals using an efficient method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel hybrid intelligent method for recognition of electrocardiogram (ECG) signals is proposed.A proper set of the higher order statistics features and timing features is proposed.Radial basis function neural network is used as the classifier.Bees algorithm is proposed for optimization of the recognizer.Simulation results show that the proposed system has high recognition accuracy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
ECG beat classification,Higher order statistics,Radial basis function neural network,Bees algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Automatic detection of electrocardiogram (ECG) signals is very important for clinical diagnosis of heart disease. This paper investigates the design of a three-step system for recognition of the five types of ECG beat. In the first step, stationary wavelet transform (SWT) is used for noise reduction of the electrocardiogram (ECG) signals. Feature extraction module extracts higher order statistics of ECG signals in combination with three timing interval features. Then hybrid Bees algorithm-radial basis function (RBF_BA) technique is used to classify the five types of electrocardiogram (ECG) beat. The suggested method can accurately classify and discriminate normal (Normal) and abnormal heartbeats. Abnormal heartbeats include left bundle branch block (LBBB), right bundle branch block (RBBB), atrial premature contractions (APC) and premature ventricular contractions (PVC). Finally, the classification capability of five different classes of ECG signals is attained over eight files from the MIT/BIH arrhythmia database. Simulation results show that classification accuracy of 95.79% for the first dataset (4000 beats) and an overall accuracy of detection of 95.18% are achieved over eight files from the MIT/BIH arrhythmia database.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The analysis of ECG has been extensively used for diagnosing many cardiac diseases. The development of precise and fast methods for automatic ECG classification is very important for clinical diagnosis of heart diseases.There are several methods proposed in the literature for the purpose of automatic arrhythmia classification in ECG signals, and a typical system for such an goal can be divided into three subsequent categories (preprocessing, feature extraction, and classification) as shown in Fig. 1, in which N (normal), L (left bundle branch block), R (right bundle branch block), A (atrial premature contraction) and V (premature ventricular contraction) illustrate heartbeat classes to be analyzed in this study.In the preprocessing step, frequencies of the ECG signal related to artifacts is detected and attenuated. Those artifacts can be from a biological source, like muscular activity, or originated from an external source, such as 50/60Hz electric network frequency. In this study, stationary wavelet transform (SWT) is used for de-noising of ECG signals. The main advantage of SWT de-noising over other de-noising methods such as averaging is that in this method noise is reduced without distortion of the main signal. Also, a signal normalization is performed in the preprocessing step.Feature extraction is the key point for the final classification performance. Features can be extracted directly from ECG waveform morphology in time or frequency domain. Here a proper combination of timing and sophisticated statistical methods has been considered. Higher order cumulants has been used in order to find features less sensitive to noise.The main focus of the paper is on the last step of cardiac arrhythmia analysis, i.e., ECG signal classification. A large number of approaches have been proposed for this task, and one of the most popular ones is radial basis function (RBF) neural network. However, finding the optimum value of its parameters is a challenging problem. They were specified tentatively, that is time consuming and not optimum. Here, Bees algorithm (BA) is used to tune these parameters. BA is a recently proposed optimization method that is fast and easy to implement compared to the other optimization algorithms such as genetic algorithms and ant colony.The rest of paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lists some related works. Section 3 describes the preprocessing part. Section 4 explains the feature extraction. Section 5 presents the classifier and optimization. Section 6 explains the database and performance metrics. Section 7 shows some simulation results. Section 8 discusses the results and finally Section 9 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
