@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Synergic predator-prey optimization for economic thermal power dispatch problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Synergic PPO optimization algorithm is proposed to solve ELD problems.The SPPO blends the psychology with prey's behavior to avoid predator.Small, medium and large size test power system are simulated.Multi-fuel test power system with transmission losses is also tested.Newton–Raphson procedure is applied to obtain transmission losses.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Collective/collaborative intelligence,Economic load dispatch,Heuristic method,Synergic predator prey optimization,Multi-fuel system,Opposition based initialization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper introduces a synergic predator-prey optimization (SPPO) algorithm to solve economic load dispatch (ELD) problem for thermal units with practical aspects. The basic PPO model comprises prey and predator as essential components. SPPO uses collaborative decision for movement and direction of prey and maintains diversity in the swarm due to fear factor of predator, which acts as the baffled state of preys’ mind. In the SPPO, the decision making of prey is bifurcated into corroborative and impeded parts. It comprises four behaviors namely inertial, cognitive, collective swarm intelligence, and prey's individual and neighborhood concern of predator. The prey particle memorizes its best and not-best positions as experiences. In this research work, to improve the quality of prey swarm, which influence convergence rate, opposition based initialization is used. To verify robustness of proposed algorithm general benchmark problems and small, medium, and large power generation test power system are simulated. These test systems have non-linear behavior due to multi-fuel options and practical constraints. The constraints of prohibited operating zone and ramp rate limits of power generators’ are handled using heuristics. Newton–Raphson procedure is exploited to attain the transmission losses using load flow analysis. The outcomes of SPPO are compared with the results described in literature and are found satisfactory.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Economic load dispatch is a constrained optimization task in power system to schedule committed generating units for economical power generation. Practical ELD problem exhibits nonlinear characteristics, because of the multi-fuel options [1], valve-point loading effect, ramp-rate limits, prohibited operating zone (POZ) constraints [2] and transmission losses [3]. Further the spinning reserve requirements are introduced in the ELD problem [4].The conventional optimization techniques [5,6] require completely differentiable and continuous objective function and constraints [7] to solve optimization problems. In the last decade, various researchers have solved ELD problem by conventional techniques after simplifying the ELD problem with number of assumptions. Because of this, conventional techniques are unable to search global optimal solution. The dynamic programming can handle the non-linear and discontinuous optimization problems, but requires large computational time and suffers from the curse of dimensionality [8]. To overcome disadvantages of conventional techniques, various global optimization techniques i.e. genetic algorithm (GA) [9], particle swarm optimization (PSO) [10], simulated annealing algorithm [11], evolutionary programming (EP) [12], biogeography based algorithm (BBO) [13], differential evolution (DE) [14], etc. and their variants are applied to solve the ELD problem. Recently the ELD problem is solved using teaching learning algorithm [15], particle diffusion algorithm [16], social spider algorithm [17], modified artificial bee colony algorithm [18], chaotic teacher learning algorithm [19], etc.Among population based techniques, the PSO introduced by Kennedy and Eberhart [20], is found to be robust in solving nonlinear optimization problems. PSO caught attention of power system community and succeeded to solve many complex power system optimization problems. de Oca et al. [21], presents the basic concepts and variants of PSO [21]. In brief, the advantages of PSO are concluded as: simple concept, easy implementation, computational efficiency in comparison to other heuristic techniques [8,22]. At the same time, the unresolved issues of PSO are: lack of mathematical background, large computational time compared to mathematical approaches, initial point and parameter dependency, optimal design parameters setup, stochastic nature of final solution, inability to handle scattering and premature convergence/partial optimism [22] due to homogeneity of particles.One of a major concern for PSO performance is diversity of particles. The attempts to tackle this crucial issue includes neighborhood topologies [23], adjustment of parameters in standard PSO [24], parameter adaptation mechanism [25], modified models [26]. In another effort to ameliorate the performance of PSO, it is blended with local/global search techniques. The examples are a combination of genetic algorithm and PSO [27], hybrid PSO [28]. These approaches improved the solution quality and convergence behavior, but lead to the drawbacks of algorithmic complexity, computationally onerous [29], and problem specific approach, etc.In the hunt of betterment, usually the existing solution procedures are complexed, although simple natural biological approches exists for such problems, which are often ignored. These approaches usually lacks theoratical background, but are effective in obtaining solution. Among these the introduction of multiswarm systems [30], bio-inspired PSO [31] and predator effects [32] based mechanism are also proposed to improve the performance of PSO. The predator prey optimization (PPO) introduces a second population, called predator, to ensure population diversity. The predator and prey are responsible for convergence and diversification respectively [33]. The predator always targets the best position of the swarm and the preys avoid it by its individual decision. The PPO has better convergence and solution accuracy than PSO [34].The PPO has the capability to solve large scale non-linear optimization problems. The numerical result comparison shows the supremacy of PPO over PSO and its variants [35,36]. In another effort, Costa e Silva et al. [37] have proposed biogeography-based optimization method combined with PPO technique for designing a brushless DC wheel motor. The success of search algorithm requires balanced exploration and exploitation. The PPO's exploitation capability is uncertain as the predator's effect is a random process. In spite of various successful applications of PPO to solve complex optimization problems, the psychology aspect of prey particles lacks exploration. The prey being a part of the swarm, its individual decision-making is partial. The decision of prey for new place must be a group activity as the swarm together influences decision-making. A group tends to make decisions, that are more extreme than those of its individual members, in the direction of the individual inclinations [38].In optimization algorithms, the convergence rate of algorithm is highly corelated to the quality of initial population. The proximity of starting point to the optimal solution, results in a faster convergence and contrary [39]. In the worst-case initialization, the convergence will take much more time or the solution can be intractable. Looking simultaneously for a better candidate solution, in both current and opposite directions may help to solve this problem quickly and efficiently. In opposition-based learning research field, a variety of new models have been studied for dealing with significant problems. Xu et al. [39] provides a detail survey of opposition-based meta-heuristics recently used in engineering applications.In the light of various observations of the literature survey, the author's contributions to ELD solution methodology are summarized as follows:•This paper proposes a new version of the PPO model called Synergic PPO (SPPO). The SPPO blends the psychology of preys along with the mathematical model of the PPO. This results in collaborative intelligence that drives the search variables. The proposed SPPO divides the self-intelligence of the prey into two evolutionary elements, i.e., best and non-best experiences. These elements help in information exchange at a steady rate, which ensures uniform diversity. The prey movement will be guided by the best and non-best experiences along with the predator's effect. The predator always chases the global best prey and the predator's effect depends on the swarm's realization of predator. In this research work, the collaborative predator effect is introduced as a gizmo to counteract search in the initial and final phase. In the initial phase, the predator's effect being small, the search will be more explorative and in the final juncture as the predator's effect will dominate and the search will shift to exploitation.An opposition based initialization of prey particle positions is utilized to start with good candidates of prey particles. As the priori information about the solution is ambiguous, it is better to check the quality of their opposite solutions instead of using random guess.The ELD problem having multi-fuel options considering non-linearity's of generators is solved. A variant of the multi-fuel system with transmission losses is proposed and analyzed. The transmission losses are obtained using Kron's relations as well as load flow analysis.In this paper, five generalized benchmark problems and six power test systems with different cases are considered to prove the supremacy of proposed SPPO based ELD solution approach.The paper is organized into six sections. Section 2 presents the ELD problem. Section 3 presents the constraint handling procedures used in the search process, Section 4 explains the SPPO based solution procedure to solve the ELD test problems. The comparison of results is presented in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes this paper.The ELD problem is defined as to minimize the entire operating cost of a power system and simultaneously meet the system operational constraints. Mathematically, the multi-fuel ELD with generators’ constraints and power generation limitsPjminandPjmaxis stated as below:Minimize the operating cost(1.a)f(Pj)=∑j=1Ng(ajkPj2+bjkPj+cjk+|djksin{ejk×(Pjkmin−Pj)}|);Pjkmin≤Pj≤Pjkmax(k=1,2,…,Nf)Subjected to:(i)Power balance, equality constraint(1.b)∑j=1NgPj−(PD+PL)=0Generators’ operating lower and upper boundaries(1.c)Pjmin≤Pj≤Pjmax(j=1,2,…,Ng)Ramp rate limit constraint(a)As generation increases(1.d)Pj−Pj0≤URj(j=1,2,…,Ng)As generation decreases(1.e)Pj0−Pj≤DRj(j=1,2,…,Ng)Prohibited operating zone constraint(1.f)Pjmin≤Pj≤Pj,1L(j=1,2,…,Ng)Pj,i−1U≤Pj≤Pj,iL(i=1,2,…,Nzj;j=1,2,…,Ng)Pj,NzjU≤Pj≤Pjmax(j=1,2,…,Ng)The transmission loss, PLis represented by Kron's loss formula [3]:(2)PL=Boo+∑j=1NgBjoPj+∑i=1Ng∑j=1NgPiBijPjand Bij, Bjoand Booare the loss coefficients.The loss coefficients are either given or calculated by performing load flow analysis as follows:(3.a)Boo=∑i=1NB∑j=1NBPdiBijPdj(3.b)Bio=∑j=1NB(Bij+Bji)Pdj(i=1,2,…,Ng)(3.c)Bij=Rijvivjcos(θi−θj)cosϕicosϕj(i=1,2,…,NB,j=1,2,…,NB)where θi=δi−ϕi; ϕi=tan−1(θi/Pi); Pi=Pgi−Pdiand Qi=Qgi−Qdi(i=1, 2, …, NB), Pi, Qiis the injected real power and reactive power; Pdiis the load demand and at ith bus; viand δiare voltage magnitude and phase angle at ith bus, NBis the number of buses on the system network; Rij=Re[Zij]; Zijis the impedance matrix. The values of Pi, Qi, viand δiare obtained by performing load flow using Newton–Raphson method.The constrained nonlinear optimization problem can be solved by direct and indirect methods. In the direct methods, the constraints are handled in an explicit manner, whereas indirect method's convert constrained problems into unconstrained minimization problem. The equality constraints are handled by variable elimination method and penalty method as discussed follows.In the equality constrained optimization problem, one variable is theoretically eliminated by using one equality constraint. The variable to be eliminated is called slack variable. Let Ngcommitted generating units are responsible for delivering the power output subject to their respective energy balance constraint and the capacity constraints. Ng−1 variables are searched using SPPO algorithm. Let Psbe the power of a randomly selected slack generator among committed units to meet the energy balance constraint. The power output of the slack unit is computed by rewriting the energy balance Eq. (2). Considering Eqs. (1.b) and (2), a simplified quadratic equation is written as follows:(4.a)XPs2+YPs+Z=0whereX=BssY=∑j=1j≠sNg(Bjs+Bsj)Pj+Bso−1Z=PD+Boo+∑j=1j≠sNg∑i=1j≠sNgPiBijPj+∑j=1j≠sNgBjoPj−∑j=1j≠sNgPjThe positive roots of the equation are obtained as(4.b)Ps=(−Y±Y2−4XZ)/(2X)andY2−4XZ≥0In the process of equality constraint handling, the power of slack thermal unit can violate its boundary. The exterior penalty method is applied to handle the violation. Thus, the augmented objective function becomes:(5)A(P)=f(P)+rk〈Ts〉where〈Ts〉=(Ps−Psmax)2;ifPs≥Psmax(Psmin−Ps)2;ifPs≤Psmin0;ifPsmin≤Ps≤Psmaxand rkis the penalty parameter with high value.The generator ramp rate being an inequality constraint restricts the operating scope of online units between two adjacent points. Mathematically, it is specified by Eq. (1.e) and (1.f). This constraint is undertaken by adjusting the minimum and maximum limit of generator's power as follows [10]:(6)max(Pjmin,Pj0−DRj)≤Pj≤min(Pjmax,Pj0+URj)(j=1,2,…,Ng)The POZ constraints on the system are specified by Eq. (1.f). The operation in these areas is to be avoided for better performance of the system. A heuristic approach is used to adjust the generator's power within a permitted range, in case the POZ limits are breached. The prohibited zone constraint violation is avoided by updating the generation as described under:(7)Pj=Pj,NZ−1L+rand()(Pj,NZ−1U−Pj,NZ−1L)PjNZ−1U;ifPj≤Pj,NZLPj,NZ+1L+rand()(Pj,NZ+1U−Pj,NZ+1L)Pj,NZ+1U;ifPj≥Pj,NZUPjelse(j=1,2,…,Ng)where rand() is uniformly distributed random number in the range [0,1].The power of the generator is updated repeatedly until there is no violation of prohibited zones.Kennedy and Eberhart [20] introduced PSO, which considers that the solution of problem is a population of particles moving through the problem hyperspace with distinct velocities. At each iteration, the velocities of the individual particles are stochastically adjusted according to self and social best experiences decided according to objective function [31]. The movement of each particle naturally evolves to an optimal or near-optimal solution. Higashitani et al. [33] proposed a modification called predator prey algorithm (PPO), to shun the problem of stagnation at local minima of the basic PSO algorithm. PPO offsets exploration and exploitation by using an element called predator. To enhance the computational time to achieve optimal result and secure diversity of prey population in evolution process, the current paper suggests improvements in prey behavior as: (i) opposition based initiation, to ensure good quality solutions at initial state and (ii) collective intelligence based dynamics, to ensure prey dynamism in exploration and exploitation phase. The proposed algorithm named SPPO (flowchart Fig. 1) is discussed in following sections.In Ngdimensional search space, P and v denote prey particle's position and velocity. Therefore, the position and velocity of ith prey at tth iteration is represented asPit=[Pi1t,Pi2t,…,PiNgt]andvit=[vi1t,vi2t,…,viNgt]respectively. The previous best position of the ith prey particle is represented asPiB=[Pi1B,Pi2B,…,PiNgB]. gBrepresents the best prey particle position among all the particles. The preys’ position and velocity are initialized as follows.In SPPO algorithm, the prey particle and predator are two principle components. The prey particle positions’ denote generators’ powers within operational constraints of generators (Eq. (1.c)). The initialization procedure of preys’ and predator is as follows.In the absence of any prior knowledge about the optimal resolution, the power generations, which are treated as prey particle positions (Pijt), are generated randomly using the mathematical relation given below.(8)Pij0=Pimin+rand()(Pimax−Pimin)(i=1,2,…,NP;j=1,2,…,Ng)wherePij0is the initial position of ith prey particle at t=0 iteration representing generation of jth generator, NPis number of prey particles.The computation time to arrive at the optimal solution depends on the quality of initial population of prey particle. If the starting point is close to the optimal solution it can result in faster convergence. On the other hand, if it is very far from the optimal location (opposite location in worst case), the convergence will be slower or even the optimal solution can be optimal untraceable. Therefore, to improve the computational time, it is better to start with better population of prey particles giving quality solutions. An opposition based scheme is applied to the SPPO during the population initialization that selects good candidatures of current population of prey particles. One of the ways to achieve this is to simultaneously generate the initial solution randomly and check its opposite solutions in the specified search range and finally keep best 50% solutions as initial guess out of the total 2NP(random and its opposite) solutions. The main idea is to find better candidate solutions out of an estimate and its corresponding opposite estimate within specified search range. The opposite solutions representing prey position are generated by using Eq. (9)(9)Pi+NP,j0=Pimax+Pimin−Pij0(i=1,2,…,NP;j=1,2,…,Ng)The prey behavior is followed by position and velocity. The limit of prey velocity is given by:(10)vjmin≤vij≤vjmax(i=1,2,…,NP;j=1,2,…,Ng)where[vjminvjmax]=k[pjminpjmax]; k<1.0.The initial velocities are generated randomly as follows:(11)vij0=vjmin+rand()(vjmax−vjmin)(i=1,2,…,NP;j=1,2,…,Ng)The predator position,PPjtand velocity,Pvjthaving dimensions Ngare initialized (at t=0) randomly within the desired operational limits using Eqs. (12.a) and (12.b)(12.a)PPj0=PPjmin+rand()(PPjmax−PPjmin)(j=1,2,…,Ng)(12.b)Pvj0=Pvjmin+rand()(Pvjmax−Pvjmin)(j=1,2,…,Ng)wherePPjmin,PPjmaxare the lower and upper limits on predator position;Pvjmin,Pvjmaxare the lower and upper limits on predator velocity.The heuristic random search strategy is applied to generate feasible solution by varying the thermal generation represented by prey position to satisfy the power balance constraint. The unmatched power is distributed randomly among the committed generators, while satisfying the power generation limits. Mathematically, the operation is represented below. The generators are updated as:(13)Pijt=Pijt+rand()(Pjmax−Pjmin)αit(i=1,2,…,NP;j=1,2,…,Ng)whereαit=1PD∑j=1NgPijt−PD−PLit.The procedure is iterated until the equality constraint given by Eq. (1.b) is satisfied.The modified velocity and position of each prey is calculated using the current position w.r.t. best individual and global experience. One of the usual problems faced by the majority of PSO variants is problem of premature clustering in the early phases of the search operation. This affects in limited positional information exchange in the swarm and hence further improvement of prey positions gets restricted. This phenomenon reduces the capability of preys to explore the search area effectively. This trouble is more prevalent in multimodal problems and absence of any mechanism to pass through vale of multimodal search domain, results in meager convergence behavior of the algorithm. Hence, the algorithm is unable to realize truly global solution. Even the introduction of local search techniques or other adaptations to counter this problem merely increases algorithmic complexity. Hence, it becomes necessary to introduce a simple bio-inspired mechanism that can elevate above stated problem. It is widely accepted fact that bio-inspired techniques have simple mechanism and are able to solve complex problems effectively. This paper presents a modification, called collaborative intelligence of prey swarm to balance exploration and exploitation, which ensure diversity of the swarm. In SPPO, the swarm consists of prey particles moving within search space, whose conduct is regulated by different aspects viz. attraction for the best position, repulsion for the not-best position and fear of the predator. Each individual will contribute to movement decisions in proportion of these effects. These aspects are detailed as follows.Silva et al. [34] proposed a split-up of cognitive behavior of PSO to personal best(PijB)and personal worst position/experience(PijW). In such, the particle has to recall both the best and worst experiences. The adjustment helps to explore the solutions effectively as it aids in preserving diversity. As the iterative process advances, the best situation is improved, but the worst position remains approximately same. Thus, the effect ofPijWto update velocity remains almost negligible and the expected diversity level remains ambiguous. In order to ensure the exploration capability of particles, it is better if the cognitive behavior depends on local best(PijB)and local not-best(PijNB)positions, instead of best and worst positions. Similarly, social behavior depends on global best(gjB)and global not-best(gjNB)positions. Mathematically, velocity is updated by the expression given below:(14)vijt+1=wvijt+c11rand()(PijB−Pijt)+c12rand()(gjB−Pijt)+c21rand()(Pijt−PijNB)+c22rand()(Pijt−gjNB)(i=1,2,…,NP;j=1,2,…,Ng)PijB,t=Pijt;ifA(Pijt)<A(PijB,t−1)PijB,t−1;ifA(Pijt)≥A(PijB,t−1)PvjtgjB,t=gjt;ifA(gjt)<A(gjB,t−1)gjB,t−1;ifA(gjt)≥A(gjB,t−1)gjNB,t=gjt;ifA(gjt)≥A(gjNB,t−1)gjNB,t−1;ifA(gjt)<A(gjNB,t−1)where A(.) is the augmented objective function (Eq. (5)) of the optimization problem to be minimized. C11, C12, C21 and C22 are the acceleration coefficients. The inertia weight, w is calculated by adopting following relation and it shows the decreasing trend w.r.t. iterations:w=fw[wmax−(wmax−wmin)(t/tmax)]Randomness is maintained by applying a chaotic sequence, which is given below:fw=4fw(1−fw)wherefw∉[0,0.25,0.50,0.75,1]Exploration is the process of visiting an entirely new region of the search space, whilst exploitation is the process of visiting those regions of a search space within the neighborhood of previously visited points. Thus, after a few initial iterations, the swarm particles improved andPijNBandgjNBof ith particle loses its dynamic behavior and becomes a static limit and after that as the iterations progresses toward best solution, exploration capability of PSO does not remain affective and the exploitation becomes effective.In order to exploit region of interest, particularly when the particles cluster at a best solution, the purpose of fear factor due to predator becomes significant. The promising candidate region is to be intensely searched to locate optimum precisely. The predator's effect has the ability to perturb the particles. The predator targets the global best prey particle and the prey particle tries to get rid of predator. The predator's positionPPjtand velocityPvjtupdate equations are [33]:(15.a)Pvjt+1=cprand()(gjB−PPjt)(j=1,2,…,Ng)(15.b)PPjt+1=PPjt+Pvjt+1(j=1,2,…,Ng)where cpis acceleration constant for predator.PvjtandPPjtis predator's velocity and position at tth iteration, respectively.In the turbulent environment, because of predator, the prey particles are forced to attain new positions which help in exploitation. This paper treats the effect of predator on prey as a function of cognitive and social behavior of prey. This further is likely to be influenced by two factors: the individual's realization and the swarm's realization of the predator's position. The favorable experiences reinforce the decision, whereas unfavorable aspects have an inhibitory impact on the decision-making. Therefore, the cognitive and social fear of prey depends on best and not-best position of prey, resulting in continuous behavior guided perturbation of dynamic magnitude. Mathematically, velocity of prey particles is expressed by rewriting Eq. (14) as:(16)vijt+1=wvijt+c11rand()(PijB−Pijt)+c12rand()(gjB−Pijt)+c21rand()(Pijt−PijNB)+c22rand()(Pijt−gjNB)+c31rand()×(ae−bβ)(i=1,2,…,NP;j=1,2,…,Ng)whereβ=[w1|PijB−PPj|+w2|PPj−PijNB|+w3|gjB−PPj|+w4|PPj−gjNB|+w5|Pijt−PPj|]and∑k=15wk=1.The weights are set giving equal weightage as w1=w2=w3=w4=0.125 and w5=0.5; nevertheless, random variation may also be applied.As and when convergence happens, the prey particles are nearer to predator and a behavior guided perturbation in the swarm is introduced. FurtherPijNBandgjNBof ith particle loses its dynamic behavior and becomes a static limit and controls the perturbation resulting in better exploitation. On the other hand, when the prey particles are away from predator during exploration process in initial iterations, the predator has small influence on prey particles.Prey position of the swarm is updated as follows:(17)Pijt+1=Pijt+vijt+1(i=1,2,…,NP;j=1,2,…,Ng)In this work, maximum number of iterations is taken as the stopping criterion. If the stopping criterion is unmet, the procedure stated above is repeated as shown in Fig. 1.To analyze the performance of proposed algorithm five generalized benchmark functions and six test power systems are simulated. The cost function with valve-point loading is considered. The test problems have also undertaken the effect of POZ and ramp rate constraint. From practical facet, the transmission loss should also be taken into account. Approximate transmission losses are computed by using B-coefficients. In this paper, load flow analysis is also applied in some cases to get the actual transmission losses. Further, multiple fuel option for generator is also undertaken in problem formulation. The various systems considered for study are summarized in Table 2.The parameters of any global search technique affect the quality of solution, so parameters of proposed technique are set after number of trails. The best parameters of the algorithm used for various problems are tabulated in Table 3.To test the efficiency of SPPO, several functions tabulated in Table 1[45], are simulated to check the convergence speed and robustness. The nature of undertaken functions is uni-modal, multimodal, separable, non-separable, continuous and discontinuous. All experiments are performed for 50 trials on every test problem. The experimental results for each algorithm on each test function are listed in Table 1. The graph, in Fig. 2illustrates the evolution of best fitness curve for different test functions, out of 50 trials. The curves present the convergence in initial 200 iterations, on log10 scale. Table 1 presents the fitness value in terms of best, worst and mean after 1000 iterations. It is observed that the SPPO is able to converge to the expected value in almost all the functions. In the worst performance case also the final fitness value is near to the expected optimal solution. For convenience to show search ability, Fig. 2 is presenting the convergence behavior for 200 iterations, as the major improvement in solution in case of each test function is observed in this region. The convergence behavior shows that in case of Sphere, Griewank and Rastrigin function, the algorithm progresses swiftly and achieves optimal solution, whereas for Rosenbrock and Schwefel function the SPPO is slow to converge, but achieves optimal solution (Table 1) in 1000 iterations. Fig. 3illustrates the convergence behavior of basic PPO of undertaken benchmark problems. It can be clearly observed by comparing Figs. 2 and 3, that for each function SPPO converges gradually, to find the optimum solution.The input data for test system-1, case-1 is referred from Ref. [10]. The operating cost and generation schedule are obtained after solving ELD problem for 6-generator system by applying SPPO and operating cost is compared (Table 4) with other methods such as GA, PSO [10], BBO [40]etc. The operating cost obtained is either better than or equal to existing methods (GA and PSO results). The generation schedule by authors’ problem formulation using improved differential evolution [22], evolution strategy [3] and BBO [40] is unable to satisfy equality constraints. Although, the cost claimed by these references is smaller, it cannot be considered as a better solution. The achieved generation schedule, operating cost and number objective function evaluations (NFE) are shown in Table 5. The convergence characteristics (Fig. 4) illustrates that SPPO converges uniformly faster and obtain final solution ahead of others.The test system-2 is IEEE 30-bus system, 6-generator electric power system having real power demand of 2.834MW [40,41]. The real transmission losses are computed by performing load flow analysis using Newton–Raphson method. The comparability of the result obtained by SPPO approach with others, available in the literature is shown in Table 6. From the table, it is apparent that the generation cost by the SPPO algorithm is at par or better than other recently reported solution techniques. Table 7illustrates the optimal generation schedule and corresponding NFEachieved by suggested algorithm.The 3rd test system explored is a multi-fuel system with 10 generators having six cases. The input data for test system-3 is referred from [42]. The cost comparison of first three cases (Table 8) shows that the cost obtained by SPPO for both the cases-1 and 3, is less than the cost obtained by other algorithms whereas cost obtained for case-2 by SPPO is nearly comparable with the best solutions available in the literature. Table 9, tabulates the obtained optimal generation schedule. In another effort multi-fuel system with transmission losses of distribution network (cases 4–6) are proposed (Appendix A) and simulated. Table 10presents optimal generation schedule for cases 4–6. The results obtained by SPPO are better in terms of solution quality i.e. operating cost than the other applied techniques. The convergence characteristic of test system-3, case-6 (Fig. 5) shows that in the initial phase, the SPPO performance is near to other algorithms, but after a few iterations, SPPO swiftly moves toward the optimal solutions at uniform pace under the influence of collective intelligence based mechanism.The test system-4 has 15 generators with ramp-rate and POZ constarints [3]. The comparison of operating cost and transmission loss for test system-3 with other existing approaches is given in Table 11. The results obtained by the proposed SPPO method are better than the evolutionary strategy (ES) [3] and PSO with chaotic sequence and crossover operator [43] as the actual transmission losses obtained from the depicted power schedule comes out 29.56, 29.75 and 31.40MW in place of reported losses 0.11, 23.85 and 30.66MW, respectively. The number of objective function evaluations (NFE) to obtain power schedule of committed generators and corresponding allocation by SPPO algorithm is shown in Table 12. The convergence characteristic (Fig. 6) shows that the SPPO converges swiftly and avoids stagnation to local solution. The improvement may be due to the effect of collective/synergic intelligence.The test system-5 represents medium size power system problem having 40 generators [44]. The results are compared with two phase neural network [44] and binary successive approximation [3]. The best result known so far from the available literature is 102,355.40$/h. The generation cost obtained by proposed method is 101,143.7$/h with 118.12MW transmission losses. The optimal operating cost, transmission losses, objective function evaluations, and generation schedule obtained are shown in Tables 13 and 14respectively. The convergence characteristics (Fig. 7) show that the SPPO algorithm continues steady improvement in solution quality whereas the contending algorithms cease improvement after few iterations.To test the performance of the proposed technique, a large scale test system having 140 generator with ramp rate limits and POZ constraints is undertaken [43]. The solution comparison (Table 15) shows the better quality of optimal solution and Table 16depicts corresponding generation schedule along with number of fitness function evaluation. The cost versus iteration plot of SPPO (Fig. 8), exhibits steady convergence and shows supremacy to obtain better optimal solution in less number of iterations. Further from the frequency distribution comparison (Fig. 9), it is evident that for most of the random independent trials, the SPPO algorithm was able to obtain the solution in the range near optimal solution as compared to others.a)Parameter sensitivity: To investigate the effect of parameter variation and dependency on initial generated solution, parameter sensitivity and robustness of SPPO algorithm is tested on large-scale power. Table 17shows the experimental study undertaken for parameter sensitivity analysis of test system-6 under investigation. The various parameters of the SPPO are varied by ±2% of the values chosen for investigation. From Table 17, it is observed that the obtained solution varies in the small range around the mean value and relative deviation from minimum operating cost is less that 1%. An almost similar trend has been observed in statistical analysis of other investigated systems.Robustness test: In order to verify the capability of proposed SPPO approach to obtain solution fifty independent trial runs are performed on generalized benchmark problems (Table 1) and test systems 5 and 6. The standard deviation of obtained solution is computed for 50 independent trail runs. It is observed from the results (Table 18), that the operating cost obtained by proposed technique shows minimum standard deviation. So the results obtained by proposed technique have high precision as compared to others. Although the standard deviation for proposed approach is least in comparison (test system 6, case 1), still its magnitude is significant. Therefore, Student's t-test (one sample) two tailed is applied to validate the equality of sample mean and population mean at 5% confidence level. The test statistics are tabulated in Table 19. As the P-value is greater than 0.05, there is very little evidence to reject the null hypothesis, hence the population mean and sample mean are nearly equal. Similarly, the t-test also validates the solutions of test system-3, as shown in Table 19, result statistics.Wilcoxon signed rank test: In order to study the performance of the proposed algorithm SPPO statistically, the simulation experiments are performed for 50 observations, with different initialization. The one-sample Wilcoxon signed rank test has been applied with significance level of 5% to test systems 3 and 6, case-1. The results of the test (Table 20) proved that there is no evidence to reject null hypothesis. Thus, the obtained observations are distributed symmetrically about the median.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, an optimization algorithm SPPO, which is a modification of the basic behavior of PPO, has been presented. The SPPO splits intelligence to the best and the not-best components and fear factor of prey is treated as a collaborative function of cognitive and social behavior of prey particle. The proposed algorithm is presented as an efficient search technique for solving ELD. Moreover, proposed method ensures diversity of solutions during the search and explores the search space effectively. The operating cost functions of generating units are non-smooth and involve complexity because of additional constraints like multi-fuel options, ramp rate limits and prohibited zones. The real transmission network losses are obtained by applying load flow analysis and are considered during the search procedure. The applied approach ensures that prey guiding components do not stay at a particular position for a large number of iterations. Computer simulations are performed to verify the effectiveness of SPPO. The numerical result reveals the better practicability, solution's accuracy, computational time and mature convergence capability of SPPO algorithm. Overall, the SPPO emerges out as an alternative solution procedure for economic load dispatch problem's solution..490.140.150.150.160.170.170.180.190.200.140.160.160.160.170.150.150.160.180.180.150.160.390.100.120.120.140.140.160.160.150.160.100.400.140.100.110.120.140.150.160.170.120.140.350.110.130.130.150.160.170.150.120.100.110.360.120.120.140.150.170.150.140.110.130.120.380.160.160.180.180.160.140.120.130.120.160.400.150.160.190.180.160.140.150.140.160.150.420.190.200.180.160.150.160.150.180.160.190.440