@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Implementing Fuzzy Logic and AHP into the EFQM model for performance improvement: A case study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study introduces a new methodology to practitioners and academics in which fuzzy Logic used, in the performance evaluation using the EFQM excellence model for dealing with imprecision and applying AHP & OR in the priority setting of improvement projects.The study proposes a new integrated approach consisting of two main implications.First one is the use of Fuzzy Logic for EFQM excellence model not only make easier the procedure of performance assessment but also the total score for the organization performance obtained will be closer to the real score.The second is after identifying the strength points and the areas for improvement by defining the scores for sub-criteria, using AHP technique and OR model helps organizational excellence mangers for determining and implementation of performance improvement projects with high priority.The results show that Criterion 2 and sub-criteria, 2a, 2b, 2d, are the criterion and sub-criteria having the areas for improvement with higher priority than other criteria and sub-criteria.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fuzzy Logic,Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP),European Foundation for Quality Management (EFQM),Operations Research (OR),Performance improvement,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In the current volatile and demanding business environment, managers are so eager to demonstrate that their organizations are excellent which can mainly be achieved through continuous performance improvement. The most applicable and suitable tools that by the assessment of organizations shows how successful they are in the organizational excellence path is European Foundation for Quality Management (EFQM) Excellence Model. This study aims at presenting a new integrated approach based on EFQM model using Fuzzy Logic, Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) technique and Operations Research (OR) model to improve the organizations’ excellence level by increasing the quality of business performance evaluation and determining of improvement projects with high priority. A case study in Yazd Regional Electricity Co. in Iran is presented to demonstrate the applicability of the proposed approach. In a way that, primarily, performance assessment by crisp method and the proposed method, Fuzzy method, is carried out. Then, strength points and the areas for improvement are identified by defining the scores for sub-criteria. Next, sub-criteria are prioritized to define the improvement projects by using AHP technique and Operations Research model. Finally, improvement projects with high priority are determined and some action plans for improvement projects are defined.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Each organization, regardless of its activity, size, structure, experience or success to meet its own organizational goals, requires measuring its success to achieve its ideal goals and business strategies. In different organizations, there are various models such as EFQM for evaluating performance. EFQM model was developed in Europe in 1998. At present, it is applied as an executive tool to help organizations to measure how much they are in the path of organizational excellence and evaluate their balanced growth. This model helps organizations to identify discrepancies by comparing their current and ideal positions, define some solutions to optimize their current position, implement them according to these discrepancies, and examine their causes. The aim of self-assessment is to analyze the strength points and the areas for improvement. Therefore, to achieve this goal, EFQM model most applied in the process of self-assessment by organizations, considering a cause and effect relationship between enablers and results criteria. Since the nature of assessment is qualitative, the framework definition by itself cannot solve all assessment problems.Nowadays, decisions are made in increasingly complex environments, as multi-criteria decision-making problems and stakeholders dealt with many issues. For instance, on the one hand, there is not enough precise information about the preferences of decision-makers. On the other hand, the decision-makers are usually unable to explicit about their preferences due to the Fuzzy nature of the decision process; they give point judgments instead of interval ones. Meanwhile, in more and more cases today the use of experts in various fields is necessary, such as self-assessment. As the self-assessment results are partly varied depending on various opinions, thus the scores of various assessors will be different. It sounds that Fuzzy Logic can be an appropriate tool to solve the above problems by providing the flexibility and robustness needed for the decision makers.Leading organizations to stay ahead in today's dynamic competitive business market and in order to continue on the path of excellence require continuous implementation of performance improvement projects. The matter in the first instance through a detailed performance evaluation and then determining and implementation of improvement projects with high priority is possible. In contrast, as mentioned earlier, self-assessment using EFQM model has some shortcomings. According to the literature, it seems that applying Fuzzy Logic in some performance assessment models such as EFQM excellence model has not yet been considered in the literature and particularly, there is no study aimed at evaluating the performance by EFQM excellence model and obtaining the prioritization using Fuzzy Logic, AHP technique and OR model in the related literature. The main purpose of this study is to provide practitioners and academics with a methodology in which Fuzzy Logic used, in the performance evaluation using the EFQM model for dealing with imprecision and applying AHP and OR in the priority setting of improvement projects in order to accelerate achieving the goal. The use of Fuzzy Logic for EFQM excellence model simplifies the process of assessment. Additionally, the results of assessment do not depend on various opinions. Therefore, it can be a definite and comprehensive alternative for evaluating all organizations. Based on Fuzzy Logic, the tasks of assessors for defining the scores for the enablers comprising of the elements of approach, deployment, and assessment & refinement and for the results consisting of the elements of performance, relevance, and usability are facilitated; regarding assessments scores, there are decreased discrepancies among various assessors. Moreover, using AHP technique and OR model leads to considerable savings in the resources of organization caused by improvements in the areas for improvement with low priority. In summary, the proposed method has not only the advantage of mathematically represent uncertainty, and provide a formalized tools for dealing with the imprecision intrinsic to performance assessment process and in the priority setting of improvement projects, but also it can provide the simple, flexible, and adaptable solution for better organizational excellence management. These merits of the approach developed would facilitate its use for making efficient performance improvement projects. The contribution provides originality to this study is not only employing Fuzzy Logic as well as using AHP technique and OR model to improve the excellence level of organizations by EFQM excellence model for the first time, but also releasing a comprehensive literature review of applying EFQM model and its combination with other models, techniques and methodologies, development and using of Fuzzy Logic, studies conducted by using combined Fuzzy Logic and AHP, development of Fuzzy AHP technique and examples of its applications, and using of expert system and its combination with Fuzzy Logic and Fuzzy AHP methods. In addition, by stating the steps of implementing Fuzzy Logic, AHP technique and OR model into the EFQM model clearly and numerically, this study can be a comprehensive guide of the practical methodology to be implemented to other performance improvement projects in any field of study.The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 illustrates literature review. Section 3 presents EFQM excellence model, Fuzzy Logic and Analytical Hierarchy Process. Section 4 describes the proposed method in a way that, primarily, performance assessment is conducted by a Fuzzy method. Next, the order for implementing improvement projects is defined by using AHP technique and OR model. Then, the results for applying this method are provided. Finally, the conclusions and future work directions are discussed in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Organizations need to dramatically boost profits and stakeholders value by ramping up efficiencies and improving performance. The EFQM Excellence Model is a proper practical tool that can be used for carrying out self-assessment as a gate to performance improvement and identifying the areas for improvement. In this respect, in this research a new integrated approach was proposed by implementing Fuzzy Logic, AHP technique and OR model into the EFQM model for performance improvement of Yazd Regional Electricity Co. In the study, first, in the theoretical section of this paper, EFQM excellence model was explained, the concept of Fuzzy Logic was discussed; and the concept of Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) was introduced. Then, criteria and sub-criteria were prioritized for the enablers domain to find the areas for improvement with high priority to define the projects for improvement. Thus, criterion 2 and sub-criteria, 2a, 2b, 2d, were selected as the criterion and sub-criteria having the areas for improvement with higher priority than other criteria and sub-criteria. Next, an improvement project was determined for each of the areas for improvement of the sub-criteria 2a, 2b and 2d. Finally, some action plans for improvement projects were defined.The proposed integrated approach does have interesting and potentially substantive implications for business excellence practice. First, the proposed integrated approach not only mathematically represent uncertainty but also provide a formalized tools for dealing with the imprecision intrinsic to performance assessment process and in the prioritization of improvement projects. Second, the use of Fuzzy Logic for EFQM excellence model not only make easier the procedure of performance assessment; the results of assessment do not depend on various opinions but also the total score for the organization performance obtained will be closer to the real score. The numbers of selectable options (5 Fuzzy selectable options) for assessors is limited by using Fuzzy Logic. Hence, the assessors easily calculate the scores of enablers and results, as hesitancy for selecting proper score is decreased. Moreover, the scores of various assessors will mainly be similar. Therefore, the scores of assessors will be more realistic; the total score for the organization performance, suggesting a higher degree of closeness to the real score, will be achieved. Third, after identifying the strength points and the areas for improvement by defining the scores for sub-criteria, using AHP technique and OR model helps organizational excellence mangers for determining and implementation of performance improvement projects with high priority. Performance improvement of organizations is critically dependent on the implementing of the efficient performance improvement projects. In this regard, by applying AHP technique and OR model, improvement projects are prioritized according to sub-criteria prioritization. Consequently, the optimum order for implementing of the improvement projects is defined. Furthermore, according to the limitations of organizations recourses, organizations mangers would be able to make substantial savings in the resources of organizations caused by improvements in areas for improvement with low priority by determining and implementation of improvement projects with high priority. Fourth, for most of the projects, when assessment and prioritization processes are performed and projects for improvement are defined, there are many problems in the implementation phase, because the organization does not cooperate and rely on the model results (as people are not enough satisfied and assured) and the project stops practically. Hence, to ensure cooperation, the organizational experts’ opinions have also been gained; it is a great help for realizing the project goals. In the innovative method proposed, to integrate the results obtained for the model and people's opinions, a combined weight is generated; a score is given to each sub-criterion. Lastly, a proper prioritization is made according to them. Fifth, the proposed integrated approach has a special flexibility so that some improvements can be made for it. For example, some coefficients can be assigned to the weights of model or organization by considering the organizational conditions and people awareness. These coefficients decrease or increase the importance of each of them. Finally, it contributes to the managers towards the better management in the organizational excellence path by providing the simple, flexible, and adaptable solution, as it is not limited to the applying in a specific enterprise; rather it can be used in all organizations and companies.Some recommendations were provided for Yazd Regional Electricity Company to define more precise and cohesive action plans as follows (with regards to the existing conditions and temporal limitation, it was not possible to define more precise action plans):•To examine which better methods can be used for cooperation with the organization to implement the projects.To create a pattern for monitoring the improvement for projects.To identify the expectation limits and levels of the projects.To identify success indices.To define the schedules and resources of the projects (including financial, educational, equipment, human force, etc.) more precisely.To design and define a clear and systematic mechanism to control and monitor the financial affairs and efficiency during all of project phases and ensure their implementation.To ensure projects activities to be integrated and cohesive with the planning cycle of the company.Considering the mentioned points, Yazd Regional Electricity Company could try to become an excellent organization by developing an organizational culture through involving all people in corrective actions, so that everyone treats the organization as his/her own property and has a positive view to the defined goals; establishing a proper culture for self-assessment, considering self-assessment results, supporting the strength points and improving them continuously, comparing annual performance with the past performance, and studying the performance of similar Regional Electricity Companies.