@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Modeling a mixed-integer-binary small-population evolutionary particle swarm algorithm for solving the optimal power flow problem in electric power systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose the application of a mixed-binary small-population evolutionary PSO to the OPF problem.We have considered in the optimization problem: continuous, integer and binary decision variables simultaneously.A robust constraint handling technique based on heuristic rules is applied to handle the OPF constraints.The methodology presents high adaptability to different problems, focusing the search on the feasible solution space.The methodology is applied to the Chile's Large Northern Interconnected System as application example.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Optimal power flow,Optimal reactive power flow,Evolutionary particle swarm optimization,Correction operator,Sensitivity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This research discusses the application of a mixed-integer-binary small-population-based evolutionary particle swarm optimization to the problem of optimal power flow, where the optimization problem has been formulated taking into account four decision variables simultaneously: active power (continuous), voltage generator (continuous), tap position on transformers (integer) and shunt devices (binary). The constraint handling technique used in the algorithm is based on a strategy to generate and keep the decision variables in feasible space through the heuristic operators. The heuristic operators are applied in the active power stage and the reactive power stage sequentially. Firstly, the heuristic operator for the power balance is computed in order to maintain the power balance constraint through a re-dispatch of the thermal units. Secondly, the heuristic operators for the limit of active power flows and the bus voltage constraint at each generator bus are executed through the sensitivity factors. The advantage of our approach is that the algorithm focuses the search of the decision variables on the feasible solution space, obtaining a better cost in the objective function. Such operators not only improve the quality of the final solutions but also significantly improve the convergence of the search process. The methodology is verified in several electric power systems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The concept of the optimal power flow (OPF) was first proposed by Carpentier [1] in the early 1960's based on the economic dispatch problem. A wide range of models have been developed and adopted to formulate different kinds of optimization problems through different objective functions, different sets of decision variables and different kinds of constraints [2–5].The OPF problem has been largely discussed in the specialized literature and indexed publications since 1962 [1] to 2013 [6,7]. These publications have resulted in the development of numerous algorithms. These algorithms are classified into two categories: classical or mathematical approaches and artificial intelligence methods.These methodologies use mathematical formulation to find the optimal solution [8]. There are many approaches to solve the OPF problem, and some researchers have included several simplifications of the problem such as DC analysis, and continuous function cost, among other considerations. This has reduced the complexity of the problem to obtain lower computation time, when the OPF problem is applied to a large-scale power system. According to the reviewed literature, the most important approaches in this category are the following: linear programming [9], quadratic programming [10], nonlinear programming [11], the gradient-based method [1], the Newton-based method [12,13], and interior point methods [14–16], all of which have been proven capable in this field.In the OPF problem, the decision variables are continuous, integer and binary. Since the late 1980s, the formidable challenge of efficiently handling discrete variables in the OPF problem has received much attention. A wide range of heuristic approaches has been proposed to deal with discrete variables, including round-off techniques [5,17,18], methods handling discrete variables in nonlinear and linear programming by means of the penalty functions [19–21], ordinal optimization [22], mixed-integer linear programming [14,23,24], interior point cutting plane [25], and global optimization methods [15,26–28], among other methodologies.The simplest approach for handling discrete variables is based on the round-off strategy. In this technique, the OPF relaxation is first solved by treating all variables as continuous. Next, the discrete variables are rounded-off to the nearest discrete values. Finally, the discrete variables are frozen and the continuous variables are determined by re-solving the OPF problem. The former approach uses several complicated heuristic rules to drive the discrete variables. Capitanescu et al. [29] show that its convergence may be prohibitively slow when considering larger steps, and sometimes it never even converges.The solution of a highly nonlinear and non-convex problem demands more robust and versatile techniques. To accomplish this task, the heuristic models perform the search with the guidance of logical or empirical rules. Heuristic techniques can be applied without limitation in problems where the objective functions are very complex or when the solution spaces are non-convex and different (real, integer and binary). This characteristic is a powerful incentive for applying heuristic methods to address the OPF problem. Although these heuristic methods do not always guarantee the globally optimal solution, they provide a reasonable solution. According to the reviewed literature, genetic algorithms [26,30–32], particle swarm optimization [32–38], evolutionary programming [39,40] and differential evolution [41–43] have been applied to solve several OPF problems. Very recently, a new algorithm based on a biogeography-based optimization algorithm has been applied to the OPF problem [44].The success of the evolutionary algorithms is heavily dependent on the setting of control parameters and the constraint handling technique.When implementing an evolutionary algorithm such as genetic algorithm or particle swarm optimization (PSO), several factors must be considered to facilitate the convergence and prevent an “explosion” of the algorithm. The performance of the evolutionary algorithms does not depend only on good design and implementation, but is also strongly influenced by the parameter values which determine its behavior. Determining the most appropriate parameters for an arbitrary problem is a complex task, since such parameters interact with each other in a highly nonlinear manner [45].Two techniques have been proposed for setting up the parameter values of an evolutionary algorithm: off-line (called tuning) and on-line strategies (self-adapt parameters). Miranda et al. [46] introduced self-adaptation capabilities to the particle swarm by modifying the concept of a particle to include, in addition to the objective parameters, a set of strategic parameters (inertia and acceleration constants). This hybrid variant of PSO is called evolutionary particle swarm optimization (EPSO), which defines these parameters as the genotype of a moving solution. Several publications on EPSO have shown better performance than other heuristics [46–51].In evolutionary algorithms, the optimization process is solved randomly. Therefore, the constraints may be violated frequently. The constraint handling can be accomplished with several kinds of methods: methods based on preserving feasibility of solutions (heuristic rules or correction operators), methods based on the penalty functions, methods which make a clear distinction between feasible and infeasible solutions, and hybrid methods.In evolutionary algorithms, the most common technique to incorporate restrictions on the fitness function is the penalty functions. However, in the OPF formulation, achieving an optimal penalty value for each constraint (i.e., load balance, active generation limits, reactive generation limits, bus voltage limits, and thermal limit for the transmission lines among other constraints) is a very complex task.The authors have achieved an efficient and very reliable optimization technique for solving the OPF problem based on a small-population evolutionary algorithm. Our approach solves the more complex optimization problem taking into account four decision variables simultaneously: active power generation (continuous), voltage generator (continuous), tap position on transformers (integer) and shunt devices (binary). We have modeled each constraint using the heuristic operators. The advantage of our approach is that the algorithm focuses the search on the feasible solution space, obtaining a better cost in the objective function. The analysis of the literature review can be summarized as follows.•In [35], the authors incorporate the steady-state security constraints into the OPF problem (SC-OPF). In this approach, the number of particles in the swarm is 100. Moreover, the optimization control of the reactive power generation (power generation limits) and the bus voltage constraint are not included in the modeling of the OPF problem, so these results could be used as a reference in our study.In [32], the authors have studied the IEEE 118-bus system. In addition, the number of particles in the swarm is 100. The constraint handling technique used in this reference is based on the penalty functions. Moreover, the reactive power generation constraint and the thermal limit constraint are not included in the modeling; the technical parameters for the generation and transmission system are different. Consequently, the obtained results cannot be compared with this reference, and will be used as a reference in the result section.In [34], the authors have studied the IEEE 30-bus system, and the algorithm computes the fitness function by using the penalty functions for each constraint. The number of particles in the swarm is 50.Our approach cannot be compared to this study because the algorithm does not model either the VAR shunt devices (capacitors and reactors), or the tap position on transformers; i.e., the optimization problem only considers continuous decision variables: active power and voltage generator. Moreover, the thermal limit constraint (the maximal power flow on the transmission lines) is not included in the modeling.In [37,38], the authors use three types of PSO to solve the reactive optimization problem (minimization of the power loss in the transmission lines). The authors have studied the IEEE 30-bus system and the IEEE 118-bus system. Also, the algorithm has modeled the constraints based on the penalty functions. The number of the particles in the swarm is 30.The tap position on transformers and the reactive power output of the shunt VAR compensators (capacitors and reactors) have been considered as continuous variables. Therefore, our study cannot be compared with this reference.In [33], the proposed approach has been examined and tested on the IEEE 30-bus system. In this approach, the number of particles is 50. Also, the constraint handling technique is based on the penalty functions; i.e., the inequality constraints (voltage at load buses, transmission line loadings, and active power generation) have been incorporated in the objective function as quadratic penalty terms.The tap position on transformers has been considered as continuous variables (real space). Moreover, the reactive power generation limits and the VAR shunt devices are not included in the modeling, so the optimization problem has been formulated taking into account only real-valued decision variables: active power, voltage generator and tap position on transformers. Consequently, our results cannot be compared with this reference, and were used as a reference.In [36], the authors present a fuzzy-based hybrid PSO approach for solving the OPF problem with uncertainties. The modeling of the uncertainties (load and wind forecasting) has been carried out using fuzzy sets. To further enhance the efficiency of the PSO algorithm, a technique based on local random search is proposed to improve the performance of the PSO. The number of particles in the modeling is 50.In that study, the tap position on transformers has been considered as a continuous variable, and the VAR shunt devices are not included in the power system, so the optimization problem only considers continuous decision variables: active power and voltage generator. Therefore, the obtained results cannot be compared with this reference.As a conclusion of the entire literature review, there is no strong formulation available for solving the OPF problem, so the contributions of this paper are as follows:1.The optimal power flow problem has been meticulously analyzed, based on information obtained from the review of the technical literature. This analysis complements the state of the art.A different and efficient repair algorithm is developed using correction operators to handle the maximal power flow in the transmission lines and the bus voltage at each generator bus based on sensitivity factors. In the state of the art, these operators have not yet been applied in the evolutionary algorithms.A mixed-integer-binary small-population evolutionary particle swarm algorithm is designed to solve the OPF problem, and overcome some drawbacks of classical techniques (the round-off strategy for modeling the discrete decision variables [29]).The model can produce better solutions (minimal fuel cost of the thermal units and network transmission loss) than mathematical and evolutionary methods. It is quite evident from the comparisons that the proposed methodology is very robust and provides the optimal solution, or very good sub-optimal solutions with a standard deviation close to zero. A small-population and the avoidance of the penalty functions would be helpful to obtain good solutions with better convergence characteristics.A realistic case from Chile has been successfully analyzed.The OPF problem is concerned with the optimization of steady-state power system performance, subject to various equality and inequality constraints. Mathematically, the OPF problem may be represented as:(1)Z=minf(x,u)(2)subject to:g(x,u)=0hmin≤h(x,u)≤hmaxwhere(a)x∈Rn1is the set of dependent variables andu∈Rn2is the set of control variables in the system. The control variables can be adjusted in pursuit of the optimal solution in the OPF. These variables consist of the voltage magnitudes at generator buses, the transformer tap settings, the shunt devices switching and so on. The dependent variables (depend on control variables) include the voltage magnitudes in the load buses, and the voltage phase angles except the angle in the slack bus.f:Rn1×Rn2→Rrepresents a scalar objective function to be minimized, which can be the fuel cost, the total active power network losses, the security degree of a network, among others.g:Rn1×Rn2→Rmdenotes the nonlinear equality constraints, which includes the network power flow equations.h:Rn1×Rn2→Rpis the vector of inequality constraints with lower limithminand upper limithmax. The inequality constraints are incorporated into the OPF problem to prevent unacceptable operation conditions according to the restrictive requirements, such as constraints for generator capabilities, active power flow in the transmission lines, load bus voltage magnitudes, and tap setting on transformers.The optimization problem may be represented by the following objective functions:1.Fuel cost of thermal units: The total fuel cost of the units can be expressed in terms of the real power output.(3)Z=min∑i=1NgC(Pi)The fuel cost can be defined byC(Pi)=ai+bi·Pi+ci·Pi2; where ai, biand ciare the fuel cost coefficients of the ith thermal unit.Real power loss of the network: The total active power loss of the transmission system can be computed as the sum of the loss for each jth transmission line.(4)Z=min∑j=1NlP(j)lossThe optimization problem is subject to the following constraints:1.Network balance: There is a balance for the active and reactive power for each kth bus of the transmission system. The set of the equality constraints represents the load flow equations.(5)PkN=Pk−Pkd(6)QkN=Qk+QkC+QkR−QkdGeneration limits: For all generators, the active and reactive power outputs must be restricted within their lower and upper limits.(7)Pimin≤Pi≤Pimax(8)Qimin≤Qi≤QimaxReactive power shunt limits: The reactive power output of the shunt VAR compensators (capacitors and reactors) must be restricted within their lower and upper limits.(9)QkC≤QkC,max·UkC(10)QkR≤QkR,max·UkRTransmission limits: The power flow through the jth transmission line must be within its capacity limits (thermal limit). Mathematically, these constraints can be expressed as follows:(11)|Sj|≤SjmaxBus voltage limits: The voltage of each load bus (PQ bus) must be within their lower and upper operating limits.(12)Vkmin≤Vk≤VkmaxTap position limits: The transformer tap settings must be within their specified lower and upper limits of the lth transformer.(13)Tlmin≤Tl≤TlmaxZ:objective function of the optimization problem.Ng:number of system thermal units.Nl:total number of lines.C(Pi):fuel cost of the ith thermal unit.Pi:active power supplied by thermal unit i.Qi:reactive power supplied by thermal unit i.Pimin:minimum active power of the unit i.Pimax:maximum active power of the unit i.Qimin:minimum reactive power of the unit i.Qimax:maximum reactive power of the unit i.Pjloss:real power loss of the jth transmission line.Sj:power flow in the transmission line j.Sjmax:maximum power flow of the transmission line j.PkN:net active power injections at bus k.QkN:net reactive power injections at bus k.Pkd:active load of the bus k.Qkd:reactive load of the bus k.UkC:status of the shunt capacitor at bus k (1 is ON or 0 is OFF).UkR:status of the shunt reactor at bus k (1 is ON or 0 is OFF).Vk:voltage of the bus k.Vkmin:minimum voltage of the bus k.Vkmax:maximum voltage of the bus k.QkC,max:maximum reactive power shunt capacitor of the bus k.QkR,max:maximum reactive power shunt reactor of the bus k.Tl:tap position of the lth transformer.Tlmin:minimum tap position of the transformer l.Tlmax:maximum tap position of the transformer l.The PSO algorithm is a modern meta-heuristic optimization technique based on population. The technique is based on two fundamental disciplines: social science and computer science. In addition, the algorithm uses the swarm intelligence concept, which is the property of a system whereby the collective behaviors of unsophisticated agents that are interacting locally with their environment create coherent global functional patterns. The information available for each individual is based on its own experience (the decisions that it has made so far and the success of each decision) and the knowledge of other individuals in its neighborhood.The optimization process is carried out with four basic operations: initialization, constraint handling, actualization, evaluation and selection. Fig. 1shows its flowchart.The swarm size in the PSO algorithm is a control parameter selected by the user, and each particle of the swarm is a vector that contains as many elements as decision variables. The steps of the algorithm to solve the OPF problem are given below:•The initial population is chosen randomly in order to cover the entire search region uniformly. A uniform probability distribution for the decision variables is considered.In order to update the real, integer, and binary variables with the algorithm, the position and the velocity for each particle in the swarm should be updated in different ways. The details of the updating stage are given in the next subsection.The correction operators are used after the initialization and the updating stages. The proposal carried out in this study is that each particle in the iterative process that does not comply with any of the problem constraints must be converted into the feasible solution space through the heuristic operators. In this step, the algorithm must compute the fitness of the decision variables in both optimization problems: (1) the real formulation applied to the DC-OPF problem; and (2) the real, integer and binary formulation applied to the general OPF problem.In the first problem, the active power generation (decision variables in the DC-OPF problem) is computed in order to maintain the power balance constraint and the power flow through the transmission lines within its thermal limit. Firstly, the correction operator for the power balance is obtained through a re-dispatch of the thermal units. Secondly, the correction operator for the limit of active power flows is executed through the sensitivity factors (these factors are formulated based on the DC power flow analysis [8]).In the more complex optimization problem (real, integer and binary formulation), a Newton-Raphson fast-decoupled power flow analysis is computed in order to obtain the state variables of the power system. With the solution of the power flow equations, the active power stage and the reactive power stage are applied with the goal to maintain the decision variables within the feasible solution space.More details about the modeling of the correction operators can be seen in the constraint handling technique section.After each iteration, the decision variables of each particle are used to calculate the objective function value (fuel cost of thermal units or real power loss of the network).Selection is the operation through which better offspring particles are obtained by the evolutionary algorithm. The evaluation function of an offspring particle is compared to that of its parent. If the offspring is more fit than its parent, then the particle is replaced by its offspring.The iterative process continues until reaching a user-specified stop or finalization criterion. In this study, the maximum number of iterations is considered as a finalization criterion.Because of the very complex optimization problem, the authors must conduct a sensitivity analysis in order to obtain the optimal number of iterations and the number of the swarm particles for each optimization problem.EPSO is a hybrid of evolutionary algorithms and PSO concepts. EPSO incorporates a selection procedure, as well as self-adapting properties in their parameters. This rule generates a new individual as a weighted combination of parents: a given individual, its best ancestor, and the best ancestor of the present generation. The general EPSO scheme can be summarized as follows.1.Replication: Each particle is replicated r times, giving place to identical particles. In this study r=1 in order to have the minimal computational time to solve the OPF problem in large-scale power systems.Mutation: The parameters of each individual are mutated (14):(14)ωαβ*=ωαβ+logN(0,1)τwhere ωαβare the strategic parameters, * indicates that these parameters will undergo evolution under a mutation process, logN(0, 1) is a random variable which follows a Lognormal distribution from a Gaussian with zero mean and unit variance, and τ is a learning dispersion parameter that controls the amplitude of mutations. Small values of τ lead to a higher probability of having values close to pivot value. The original EPSO proposes that τ is fixed externally, for instance in [48]τ=0.1, and in [50]τ=0.3. In this study, the optimal value for the OPF problem is τ=0.01, and such parameter is constant in the searching process. This value was obtained based on several simulations considering the real, integer and binary formulation applied to the OPF problem by the EPSO algorithm.Reproduction: In order to update the real, integer and binary decision variables, the position and velocity for each particle in the swarm should be updated in different ways (real, integer and binary updating stage).In the beginning of the algorithm, the PSO works with real decision variables. However, after its successful application to a wide range of optimization problems, it is necessary to work with integer and discrete variables. Researchers are now trying to develop some versions of PSO, which would be able to work directly with integer and discrete decision variables.The binary PSO also introduced by Kennedy and Eberhart, enables the PSO to operate in binary spaces. It is implemented by defining an intermediate variable called a sigmoid limiting transformation. Inostroza and Hinojosa propose a new way to update the position. A particle decreases its speed as it converges toward to solution, thus a great speed in absolute value implies that the particle is far from this and its position state must be changed and vice versa. The results improve substantially when the way to update the particle is changed [51,52].In the state of the art, there are two approaches for handling discrete variables in the optimization problem: (1) In [53], the integer and discrete variables of a problem are directly included in the model based on a real-coded for forming a real-integer-discrete-coded PSO algorithm; and (2) When integer solutions (not necessarily 0 or 1) are needed in the solution of the optimization problem, the solution can be determined by rounding-off the real values to the nearest integer [29]. In a more general case, the results presented by Parsopoulos and Laskari [54], and verified by the authors using the integer PSO algorithm, indicate that the performance of the method is not affected when the real values of the particles are truncated [5,17,18]. Therefore, the authors have decided to apply the second approach in the modeling of the integer evolutionary algorithm; i.e., once the continuous variable is determined, its value in the th-dimension is rounded to the nearest integer value.The mixed transformation process is given in (15):(15)v→α(iter)=ωα1*·v→α(iter−1)+ωα2*·(p→α−x→α(iter−1))+ωα3*·(G→*−x→α(iter−1))x→α(iter)=x→α(iter−1)+v→α(iter)ifx→α(iter)∈Rn1:Realspaceround(x→α(iter−1)+v→α(iter))ifx→α(iter)∈Zn2:IntegerspaceX→α(iter)=1−X→α(iter)ifv→α(iter)>μα∈Zn3:BinaryspaceX→α(iter)otherwisewherev→α(iter)is the speed of the particle α at iteration iter,G→*=G→+ωα4*·N(0,1)is the particle in the neighborhood ofG→, N(0, 1) is a random variable which follows a normal distribution,ωα1is the inertia term,ωα2is the memory term,ωα3is the cooperation term, andωα4is the weight affecting dispersion around the best-so-far. The initial value for each weight parameter in the simulation of the OPF problem is 0.9.In the solution of the OPF problem, the real-integer-binary PSO should find the velocity of each particle usingv→(iter). The initial velocity of each particle is0→.The position will be determined for the real and integer spaces byx→(iter)and for binary space byX→(iter)using (15). The positionx→α(iter)of each particle is the power output generator (real space∈Rn1), the voltage generator (Real space∈Rn1), the tap position on each transformer (Integer space ∈Zn2), and the shunt devices switching (Binary space ∈Zn3). In the binary case, the positionX→α(iter)of each particle is the status of the shunt devices (switching device to 1 or 0).The position value for the decision variables is determined in different ways (real, integer and binary), so the operating constraints may be violated frequently. For each particle, the algorithm has to check that the minimum and the maximum bounds of the decision variables are within their lower and upper limits of the following constraints: (i) the power generation limits; (ii) the bus voltage generator; (iii) and the tap position on each transformer. In the case that the decision variable is outside of the feasible solution space, the algorithm must force the violated limit.Evaluation: Each particle is assessed according to their current position (x→α(iter)andX→α(iter)).Selection: A stochastic tournament is carried out by the algorithm in order to select the best particle to survive to the next generation.Stop criterion: The optimization process is repeated for several iterations while exploring the solution space.The standard PSO algorithm and their extensions have been successfully applied in many fields. This study is based on the application of the EPSO algorithm to the OPF problem. Clerc et al. [55] proposes that the swarm size s – number of the particles – can be computed by a formula based on the dimension of the solution space d, s=10+(2*sqrt(d)).Some researchers use s=[30, 50] as a suggested range [33,34,36,37], whereas the authors in [32,35] use s=100. However, a large population is usually employed to obtain a good solution, and it is quite evident that a large population is not suitable for real power systems due to the long CPU computation time.The small-population technique comes from the micro genetic algorithm [56], and it has been adopted in several PSO approaches [57–60].•In [57], the authors constructs a blacklist to store the converged inferior solutions for the unconstrained optimization problems in its small-population approach. An additional repulsion term is added to the position update formula.Ref. [58] proposed a PSO using small-population for the constrained optimization problems. It used a re-initialization process to maintain diversity of the small-population; i.e., some particles are replaced by randomly regenerated particles (position and velocity) after N iterations. In addition, a mutation operator is introduced in the algorithm to improve the exploratory capabilities of the PSO. The effectiveness of the approaches is only evaluated through several benchmark mathematical test functions.In references [59,60], the authors introduce small-population-based PSO algorithms to obtain the optimal parameters of SVC controllers and power system stabilizers, respectively. The concept of regeneration of the particles is introduced to improve the convergence speed in both approaches. However, the size of the decision variables involved in their approaches is very small (the maximum number of parameters to be optimized is 20). In our study, the maximal number of the decision variables -one hundred and thirty-one decision variables- are obtained in the application of the IEEE 118-bus system.In this study, a small-population PSO algorithm with s=5 is introduced to solve the mixed-integer-binary OPF problem.In evolutionary algorithms (genetic algorithms), and meta-heuristic optimization techniques (PSO, and ant colony optimization, among other population algorithms), the constraints may be violated in the search of the solution. In this paper, the modeling of the constraints was accomplished through the heuristic operators. These operators were applied to force the power balance constraint, the maximum power flow through the transmission lines, the bus voltage range, and the reactive power generation limits.A different and efficient repair algorithm is developed using the heuristic operators in order to maintain the power balance constraint and the power flow through the transmission lines within its thermal limit.In this stage, the total active power from the thermal units is not necessarily equal to the load. Thus, a re-dispatch is required, taking into account the available generation units. Moreover, the algorithm must define two sets that represent the units able to increase its generation value and the units able to reduce its generation value (selection step). Two situations can occur: (i) the power generation is not enough to satisfy the load forecasting, so a thermal unit must be randomly selected to increase the power generation, or (ii) the total power generation is excessive, so a thermal unit must be randomly selected to reduce the generation. In the first case, if the new power generation is greater than the maximum power of the unit, the power will be the maximum value. In the second case, the power will be the minimum value.The next stage is to select a random generation bus to be considered as slack bus (Giref). Afterward, the sensitivity matrix is obtained according to the selected generation bus (a hyper-matrix is created beforehand, which contains the sensitivity matrix of each generation bus). Next, the lines that do not meet the maximum flow constraint (Sj>Sjmax) are established. Using the sensitivity factors (see Appendix A), the generator (Gisens) that is most efficient in meeting the constraint can be determined. The decision is made according to the minimum increase or decrease of power generation. The increase or decrease inGisensmust be compensated by the slack generatorGirefin order to achieve the power balance obtained in the previous step. If the power generation is between the minimum and maximum power constraint, the subroutine ends; otherwise, the algorithm must randomly search for a new generator.The stage must assess the fulfillment of the following constraints: the voltage limits in generation buses and the reactive power generation limits.In the beginning of the subroutine, the proposed formulation performs a Newton-Raphson fast-decoupled power flow. This is done in order to obtain the load voltage, the reactive power generated by the units, and the total losses. Subsequently, the subroutine evaluates the reactive power generation limits for each unit. The units with the reactive power generation outside their operating range will be restricted to the limit; in these cases, the generation buses are transformed from generation bus -PV- to load bus -PQ-, so the variables are changed to dependent variables.The next step must assess the bus voltage constraint in the PQ buses. If the algorithm finds that several buses do not meet the voltage limits, the greatest violation is selected. In this stage, the algorithm makes use of the reactive sensitivity factors, which control the voltage to be corrected with the voltage of the PV buses (control variables). The algorithm has to modify the bus voltage with the reactive power generation from a PV bus. The process is repeated until the voltage in the load buses fulfills the constraint.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper has presented a novel small-population-based approach based on a mixed-binary evolutionary particle swarm optimization to solve the optimal power flow problem in electric power systems. Until now, no evolutionary methodology has solved the optimization problem with different decision variables (real, integer and binary) simultaneously. The solution structure and algorithm engine present high adaptability to different optimization problems, providing a reliable and accurate response in reasonable time. Furthermore, a robust constraint handling technique based on heuristic rules (correction operators) was applied. It is quite evident from the comparisons that the proposed methodology is very robust and provides the optimal solution, or very good sub-optimal solutions with a standard deviation close to zero. Although the solution space has many infeasible solutions, the algorithm focuses the search on the feasible solution space, which explains the better performance. Lastly, the study has demonstrated that the proposed small-population-based EPSO approach is a competitive performer in terms of solution quality as well as computational time to solve the OPF problem in large-scale power systems.•Correction operators: These operators are based on preserving feasibility of solutions, i.e., the operators are strategies to generate and keep control variables on the feasible solution space.Economic dispatch: The economic dispatch is an optimization problem that seeks to assign the power levels that will supply each unit at each hour of the scheduling period, to minimize costs and satisfy the power load, while respecting the operation constraints.Optimal power flow – OPF: An OPF problem seeks to optimize an objective function by adjusting a set of control variables subject to physical, operational and policy constraints. The selection of the objective function depends on the operating philosophy of each power system.Particle swarm: The particle swarm optimization is a modern meta-heuristic optimization technique based on populations. It consists of a stochastic iterative process that operates on a particle swarm, where the position of each particle represents a potential solution of the problem simultaneously satisfying the operating constraints, for both the electrical system and for each generation unit.Shunt devices: The switching of the shunt capacitors and shunt reactors are the principal means of maintaining proper performance in response to daily load cycles.Electric power: Electric power is the rate at which electric energy is transferred by an electric circuit. Electric power (active or reactive) is usually produced by electric generators, and it is generally supplied to businesses and homes by the electric power industry. Active (or real) power, measured in watts, is the component of the current phasor that is in phase with the voltage phasor. Reactive (or imaginary) power, measured in VARS, is the component of the current phasor that is in quadrature (90 degrees leading or lagging) with the voltage phasor.Power flow: The goal of the power flow analysis is to obtain the voltage angle and magnitude information for each bus in the power system. Once this information is obtained, the control variables (active and reactive power flow on the transmission lines, power losses on the transmission network, and reactive power output of the slack bus, among other variables) can be analytically determined.Power generators: Three-phase synchronous generators are used to produce most of the electricity consumed worldwide. Generators are rated in terms of the maximum power output at a specified voltage, which they can carry continuously without overheating. The active power output is limited by the prime mover capability to a value within the power rating. The continuous reactive power output capability is limited by three considerations: armature current limit, field current limit, and end region heating limit [64].Power load: Stable operation of a power system depends on the ability to continuously match the electrical output of generating units to the electrical load on the system. The load is composed of a large number of devices such as fluorescent and incandescent lamps, refrigerators, heaters, compressors, motors, furnaces, and so on. The exact composition of load is difficult to estimate [64].Power losses: Joule heating is the process by which the passage of an electric current through a conductor releases heat. The power losses in the transmission lines are proportional to the square of the current multiplied by the electrical resistance of the wire. This relationship is known as Joule's law.Power transformers: The power transformers are used to transfer power between different voltage levels.Transformer tap: A transformer tap is a connection point along a transformer winding that allows a certain number of turns to be selected. Most transformers come equipped with taps on the windings to adjust either the voltage transformation or the reactive flow through the transformer. Such transformers are called either load-tap-changing (LTC) transformers.Transmission lines: High-voltage transmission lines consist of a group of phase conductors, which are responsible for transmitting the electrical energy. In power system studies it is current practice to model the inductive and resistive effects of multi-conductor transmission lines as a series impedance matrix, and the capacitive effects as a shunt admittance matrix [65].