@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An empirical study of electronic reverse auction project outcomes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We extend and empirically test the model proposed by Amelinckx et al. (ECRA, 2008).We relate electronic reverse auction (ERA) outcomes to ERA project satisfaction.We also relate organizational and ERA project anteceding factors to ERA outcomes.We empirically test the model with 180 buying professionals globally.We find partial support for the hypothesized relationships in the model.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Buyer satisfaction,Electronic reverse auctions,Electronic sourcing,Global field study,Project outcomes,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We extend the conceptual model developed by Amelinckx et al. (2008) by relating electronic reverse auction (ERA) project outcomes to ERA project satisfaction. We formulate hypotheses about the relationships among organizational and project antecedents, a set of financial, operational, and strategic ERA project outcomes, and ERA project satisfaction. We empirically test the extended model with a sample of 180 buying professionals from ERA project teams at large global companies. Our results show that operational and strategic outcomes are positively related to ERA project satisfaction, while price savings are not. We also find positive relationships between financial outcomes and project team expertise; operational outcomes and organizational commitment, cross-functional project team composition, and procedural fairness; and strategic outcomes and top management support, organizational commitment, and procedural fairness.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
An electronic reverse auction (ERA) is “an online, real-time dynamic auction between a buying organization and a group of pre-qualified suppliers who compete against each other to win the business to supply goods or services that have clearly defined specifications for design, quantity, quality, delivery, and related terms and conditions. These suppliers compete by bidding against each other online over the Internet using specialized software by submitting successively lower priced bids during a scheduled time period” (Beall et al. 2003). Over the past two decades, ERAs have been used in various industries, including aerospace, automotive, aviation, chemicals, construction, defense, electronics, machinery, packaged goods, petroleum, and retail (Beall et al. 2003, Ray et al. 2011, Wang et al. 2013). ERAs are increasingly popular among buying organizations, although their use sparks controversy and ethical concerns in the sourcing world (Charki et al. 2010). Indeed, the one-sided focus on price savings in ERAs is considered to be at odds with the benefits of long-term cooperative buyer–supplier relationships (Beall et al. 2003, Hunt et al. 2006). However, several researchers have declared that ERAs are here to stay, as they are relatively easy to install and use and have resulted in positive outcomes across a range of offerings and contexts (Beall et al. 2003, Hur et al. 2006).In prior research work on ERAs, Amelinckx et al. (2008) developed a conceptual model based on an extensive review of the electronic sourcing literature and exploratory research involving multiple case studies. The authors identified operational and strategic outcomes that buying organizations can obtain in ERAs, in addition to financial gains. Furthermore, the authors asserted that the different outcomes can be obtained jointly, through the implementation of important organizational and project antecedents, and as such alleviate the traditional trade-offs between price savings and quality outcomes.The current article extends electronic sourcing theory with two contributions: (1) it integrates satisfaction of the buying organization’s project team with the ERA project in the conceptual model of Amelinckx et al. (2008), and (2) it empirically tests this model in a large field study. While prior electronic sourcing studies have explored satisfaction of the buyer with the price savings resulting from an ERA, the buyer–supplier relationships, and the ERA tools and processes (Hartley et al. 2005, Jap 2002), there is a dearth of research that examines the relationship between multiple ERA project outcomes and ERA project satisfaction. ERA project satisfaction involves a comparison of the actual ERA project outcomes with the expectations of the buying organization’s project team prior to the ERA project (Hawkins et al. 2010, Oliver 1980). It is important to understand how ERA project satisfaction relates to a broad set of ERA project outcomes, as the main expectations of project teams at buying organizations from ERAs may well go beyond price savings, and may alter when conducting ERAs at a more mature stage (e.g., from a focus on price savings to a focus on cycle time improvement) (Jap 2002). Hence, we formulate hypotheses that relate multiple ERA project outcomes to ERA project satisfaction. In addition, we develop hypotheses for the antecedent–outcome relationships, and empirically test the conceptual model, based on input from 180 buying professionals around the world.The balance of this article is laid out as follows. In the next section, we present the model and develop the hypotheses, drawing from the electronic sourcing literature on ERAs. In Section 3, we describe our research method, and we present our results in Section 4. We discuss findings, implications, and limitations of our study in Section 5.We will extend the conceptual model developed by Amelinckx et al. (2008), as shown in Fig. 1. The model is extended with ERA project satisfaction, and a set of hypotheses is developed. Based on a review of studies of the relationships between ERA outcomes and antecedents, which is presented in Appendix 1, we first discuss ERA project satisfaction and hypothesize a positive relationship between ERA project outcomes and ERA project satisfaction (H1). We then formulate hypotheses relating the antecedent factors to these outcomes (H2–H6). For reasons of clarity, the hypothesized relationships between ERA project outcomes and ERA project satisfaction, and between ERA project outcomes and antecedents, are visually combined in Fig. 1.ERA project satisfaction is the extent to which the expectations of the project team, in terms of the ERA project outcomes, are met (Hawkins et al. 2010, Oliver 1980). Although buyer satisfaction with an ERA project is considered key in a buyer’s evaluation of an ERA (Jap 2002), there is a dearth of research that has investigated this. Notable exceptions include Jap (2002), Hartley et al. (2005), and Hawkins et al. (2010).Jap (2002) reviewed when, how, and why ERAs are used and explored satisfaction of the buyer with the auction tool and with the suppliers. Based on an exploratory survey completed by 38 sourcing managers from four buying organizations, Jap (2002) found no significant difference among satisfaction of the buyer with the winning supplier across open- and sealed-bid auctions.1In open bid ERAs, all participating suppliers, as well as the buyer, see each bid at the same time. In sealed-bid auctions, only the bidding supplier and the buyer have access to the details of the supplier’s specific bid (Jap 2002).1However, buyer’s satisfaction with the losing suppliers was higher for sealed auctions than for open auctions. In addition, a correlational analysis indicated that buyer’s satisfaction with the auction tool was negatively associated with the number of invited suppliers, and positively with the extent to which there is competition due to new international entrants in the supply base.While Jap (2002) explored buyer satisfaction with the supplier and the auction tool, the author did not study satisfaction with a broader set of ERA outcomes and ERA project satisfaction in general. Likewise, Hartley et al. (2005) explored three areas of buyer satisfaction with ERAs: satisfaction with the purchase price, satisfaction with the supplier relationship, and satisfaction with the purchasing process (i.e., the planning and bidding process stages). Based on an inquiry of 47 purchasing managers, the authors stated that buyers are more satisfied with the purchase price than with the supplier relationship and the process. Unlike Jap (2002) and Hartley et al. (2005), Hawkins et al. (2010) considered satisfaction in general. In particular, the authors identify, based on case study research, prior ERA sourcing satisfaction as a determinant of the decision to source via ERAs.While the exploratory work of Jap (2002), Hartley et al. (2005), and Hawkins et al. (2010) offer initial insights on buyer satisfaction with the ERA tool, purchasing process, supplier relationships, and purchase price, they do not consider a broader set of ERA project outcomes, and do not investigate how these outcomes are related to ERA project satisfaction.The above definition of ERA project satisfaction is consistent with the expectation–confirmation theory, which considers satisfaction with an information system to be formed by a comparison between what is expected or desired before use and the actual outcomes after using the system (Bhattacherjee 2001, McKinney et al. 2002). Hence, an ERA project team is considered to be satisfied when the outcomes of the ERA project meet or exceed prior project team expectations (Hawkins et al. 2010). The more the outcomes exceed prior expectations, the more satisfied the ERA project team will be (Oliver 1980). In this study, we expand the investigation of price savings and relationship quality outcomes, which have been considered in prior research, with the study of other important outcomes, as proposed by Amelinckx et al. (2008). In particular, Amelinckx et al. (2008) identified three types of ERA project outcomes: financial (price savings), operational (cost reduction, cycle time improvement, quality of the offering), and strategic (relationship quality, project learning, supply base rationalization) outcomes.Price savings refer to the percentage change in contract price compared to the historical price (or, if not available, the estimated market price). Price savings are widely regarded as the key, financial, ERA project outcome for buying organizations (Smart and Harrison 2003). Based on supplier input on 25 ERAs, Jap (2007) reports average price savings of 25%, and a 0–57% price savings range. A buying organization typically sets up a repeat auction after a period of time for an identical or similar offering, especially for products with regularly changing markets (Beall et al. 2003, Jap and Haruvy 2008). For repeat auctions, buying organizations, however, do not expect to obtain the same level of price savings as in a first-time auction, and typically report low levels of price savings (Arnold et al. 2005, Hartley et al. 2005). In keeping with the expectation–confirmation theory, we hypothesize that the extent to which the price savings obtained in the ERA meet or exceed the expectations of the ERA project team, is positively related to ERA project satisfaction.Operational outcomes for the buyer include reductions in cycle time and associated process costs, as well as maintaining or enhancing the quality of the offering (Carter et al. 2004, Hartley et al. 2005). Cycle time refers to the time the sourcing project takes from initiation to completion of the online processes involved; these processes consist of business intelligence, configuration, supplier search, supplier authentication, product authentication, and valuation (Hult 1997, Muylle and Basu 2008). The majority of buyers report that the use of ERAs results in a decrease of cycle time (Carter et al. 2004). Costs related to the buying process include specification, search, comparison, examination, negotiation, and communication costs (Liang and Huang 1998). ERAs are claimed to reduce the negotiation and communication costs (Amelinckx et al. 2008). Another key operational outcome is the impact of the use of ERAs on the quality of the offering that suppliers provide, which is defined as “a perceived fundamental characteristic of products and services which meet or exceed the buying organization’s expectations regarding features and performance as described in the demand specifications” (Calantone and Knight 2000, p. 495). This impact may be detrimental, because a supplier may feel that it has to shirk on quality or reduce value-added services to bear the drop in its margins (Beall et al. 2003, Jap 2002). Therefore, Caniëls and van Raaij (2009) argue that suppliers that aim to compete on quality (instead of price) refrain from taking part in ERA projects. In keeping with the expectation–confirmation theory, we hypothesize that the extent to which the operational outcomes meet or exceed the expectations of the ERA project team, is positively related to ERA project satisfaction.A key strategic outcome of ERA projects is relationship quality, which is defined as “the overall depth and climate of the interfirm relationship” (Bejou 1997, Dwyer et al. 1987, Johnson 1999, p. 6, Morgan and Hunt 1994). In addition to adversely affecting the quality of the offering, the one-sided focus on price competition in ERA projects is widely recognized as severely harming the buyer–supplier relationship (Carter and Stevens 2007, Carter et al. 2004, Jap and Haruvy 2008, Jap 2007, Ray et al. 2011). Two other important strategic outcomes are project learning and supply base rationalization (Amelinckx et al. 2008). Project learning involves a group, rather than individual, perspective of learning and is defined as the knowledge accumulated in a project to the benefit of future projects (Blazevic and Lievens 2004, Dai et al. 2005). Supply base rationalization is generally referred to as supply base reduction (Cousins 1999). The ability to rationalize the supply base as an outcome of conducting ERAs is consistent with the move to a reduced set of stable partnerships through the use of information technology (Clemons et al. 1993, Hitt 1999). We hypothesize, in keeping with the expectation–confirmation theory, that the extent to which the strategic outcomes meet or exceed the expectations of the ERA project team, is positively related to ERA project satisfaction. In summary, we hypothesize that financial, operational, and strategic ERA project outcomes are positively related to ERA project satisfaction:Hypothesis 1 (ERA Project Outcomes)Financial, operational, and strategic ERA project outcomes are positively related to ERA project satisfactionIn what follows, we formulate hypotheses relating the financial, operational, and strategic ERA project outcomes to antecedent factors. Amelinckx et al. (2008) distinguished between organizational and project antecedents. While the first refer to the organizational context in which the ERA project is executed, the latter are specific to the ERA project.From their exploratory work, Amelinckx et al. (2008) identified two antecedent factors at the organizational level: top management support and organizational commitment.Top management support for e-sourcing refers to the degree to which top management understands the importance of, and provides the necessary resources for e-sourcing (Bajwa et al. 1998, Ragu-Nathan et al. 2004). Resources needed for the implementation of e-sourcing involve costs related to software licensing, annual maintenance and hosting, buyer training, auction support staff development, and consulting fees (Hur et al. 2007). Prior research has identified top management support as a critical factor in business-to-business e-commerce adoption and deployment (Gebauer et al. 1998, Phan 2001, Soliman and Janz 2004, Teo et al., 2006). Also, the creation of a vision and guidelines by top management are considered necessary for supply chain and information system success (Fawcett et al. 2006, Kearns 2006).For example, top management support contributed to the successful implementation of e-procurement at Hewlett–Packard, Novo Nordisk, and Skanska AB (Aberdeen Group 2005) and ERAs at Shell Chemicals (Gattiker 2005). Also, Carter et al. (2004, p. 237) suggested a top-down approach to ERA implementation to be “more effective than a bottom-up approach in minimizing resistance from other functional areas in the organization”. Also, Arnold et al. (2005) referred to “the lack of internal acceptance and the lack of attention and support through the top management” as determinants of ERA failure (Arnold et al. 2005, p. 122). In addition, prior research found top management support to be positively related to performance outcomes (Bajwa et al. 2008, Blazevic and Lievens 2004, Ragu-Nathan et al. 2004, Yoon et al. 1995). In keeping with this positive relationship and with the exploratory research findings of Amelinckx et al. (2008), who posited top management support to be an important organizational antecedent in ERAs, we hypothesize that top management support is positively related to financial, operational, and strategic ERA project outcomes. Therefore, we formulate the following hypothesis:Hypothesis 2 (Top Management Support)Top management support for e-sourcing is positively related to financial, operational, and strategic ERA project outcomesOrganizational commitment to e-sourcing refers to internal stakeholders’ attitude towards the changes brought about by the new way of sourcing as well as towards the use of e-sourcing tools for performing sourcing tasks (Tatsis et al. 2006, Wang and Chen 2006). Organizational commitment is considered to be an important determinant of the successful implementation of information systems (Ein-Dor and Segev 1978, Ginzberg 1981, Newman and Sabherwal 1996, Yoon et al. 1995) and is positively related to productive behavior (Reichers 1985). In addition, Amelinckx et al. (2008) identified organizational commitment as a key organizational antecedent for ERA projects. In keeping with the literature and the case study research insights of Amelinckx et al. (2008), we hypothesize that organizational commitment is positively related to financial, operational, and strategic ERA project outcomes:Hypothesis 3 (Organizational Commitment)Organizational commitment to e-sourcing is positively related to financial, operational, and strategic ERA project outcomesAmelinckx et al. (2008) identified cross-functional team composition, project team expertise, and procedural fairness as project-related success factors for ERAs.Purchasing-related tasks are frequently completed by a task force or group of people from a variety of functional areas (Burt 1989, Ellram and Pearson 1993, Trent and Monczka 1998). If personnel from at least three functional areas are brought together to achieve a purchasing-related assignment, this is referred to as a cross-functional sourcing team (Trent and Monczka 1998). This is no different for purchasing via ERAs, which are commonly executed by a cross-functional team, involving multiple organizational functions such as supply management, quality control, operations, and engineering (Beall et al. 2003, Carter et al. 2004, Hur et al. 2006, Wang et al. 2013). Teams are typically formed for each new ERA project, bringing together people from different domains depending on the specialized skills: product knowledge to correctly specify the offering, market research skills to understand the supply base, and cost analysis capabilities to accurately understand profit margins (Beall et al. 2003, Smeltzer and Carr 2002). Not only general sourcing oversight, but also commodity and supply market knowledge, and appropriate technical support are needed (Hur et al. 2007).Cross-functional purchasing teams are generally considered critical in realizing performance benefits in buyer–supplier relationships and in achieving desired outcomes (Chen and Paulraj 2004, Denison et al. 1996, Pinto et al. 1993). In terms of obtaining a broad set of ERA outcomes, Amelinckx et al. (2008) identified cross-functional team composition as a key project antecedent. In keeping with the purchasing literature and the conceptual model developed by Amelinckx et al. (2008), we hypothesize that:Hypothesis 4 (Cross-functional Project Team Composition)Cross-functional project team composition is positively related to financial, operational, and strategic ERA project outcomesProject teams with ERA expertise, which refers to the e-sourcing specific knowledge acquired through experience and training, can be expected to have a better understanding of the ERA processes, and can therefore obtain better results, than less experienced teams (Hur et al. 2007, Smeltzer and Carr 2003, Spence and Brucks 1997). Indeed, ERA use can be optimized through an iterative learning process involving benchmarking, experimenting, and analyzing (Hur et al. 2006, Mabert and Skeels 2002). According to Smeltzer and Carr (2002), not every company is ready to get involved with ERAs: “To wield this strategic sourcing tool, a company must have professionals who understand it and can implement the process correctly (Smeltzer and Carr 2002, p. 51).”The case of Hewlett Packard, for example, described that their workforce expertise resulted in negotiated savings and spend reduction for indirect procurement (Aberdeen Group 2005). Furthermore, Carter et al. (2004) state that there is no initial positive relationship between buyer experience and price reductions in ERAs, due to the tendency of buying organizations to primarily select ‘low hanging fruit’ for ERA projects. However, the authors indicate that the implication of increased ERA learning not only involves the consideration of price savings, but also cycle time and process improvements. Indeed, Amelinckx et al. (2008) found project team expertise to be related to operational outcomes. Hence, we keep with the literature and the exploratory research findings of Amelinckx et al. (2008) and hypothesize that:Hypothesis 5 (ERA Project Team Expertise)ERA project team expertise is positively related to financial, operational, and strategic ERA project outcomesProcedural fairness constitutes another project antecedent factor and encompasses the fairness of the buying organization’s procedures and processes in relation to the suppliers participating in the ERA (Kumar et al. 1995). A buying organization can conduct an ERA in a fair manner by clearly explaining and communicating the auction rules and conditions to participant suppliers, and by adopting objective procedures that do not discriminate between the suppliers participating in the auction (Carter et al. 2004). The buying organization should avoid incomplete or incorrect specifications, unusual auction designs and rules, granting of permission to certain suppliers to rebid after the closing date, or squeezing of suppliers to a point of loss-making, all of which are generally perceived unfair (Arnold et al. 2005, Beall et al. 2003, Tassabehji et al. 2006).Prior research studies have identified procedural fairness as an important issue in ERAs (Amelinckx et al. 2008, Daly and Nath 2005a, Tunca et al. 2013) and examining its role is promising, as it has been shown to be important in studies of other inter-firm relationship settings (Kumar et al. 1995, Luo 2008). Kumar et al. (1995) found that procedural fairness enhances relationship quality between relatively smaller, vulnerable resellers and larger, powerful suppliers. Furthermore, Luo (2008) found that procedural fairness improves both operational and financial cooperation outcomes in alliances. In addition, in the organizational justice literature, procedural fairness is viewed as a means to generate favorable outcomes (Colquitt et al. 2001, 2013, Konovsky 2000). More specifically, procedural fairness is concerned with the fair process effect (Folger et al. 1979), which is as follows: “the more someone considers a process to be fair, the more tolerant that person is about the consequences of the process, such as adversely unfair outcomes that a decision-making process creates when it governs the distribution of outcomes” (Folger and Cropanzano 1998, p. 32). In sum, we draw from the literature to hypothesize that establishing and implementing fair procedures can enact the fair process effect and relate positively to ERA outcomes:Hypothesis 6 (Use of Procedural Fairness by ERA Project Team)The use of procedural fairness by the ERA project team is positively related to financial, operational, and strategic ERA project outcomesWe first describe the data collection and the sample characteristics. We then introduce the study measures, and describe the control variables. We end this section with a confirmatory factor analysis to evaluate the psychometric properties of the constructs in the model.The unit of analysis in the study was a single, completed ERA project, managed by a project team that typically involves different organizational functions, as represented by the procurement department (Carter et al. 2004). The population of interest to this study therefore consisted of procurement professionals in multinational companies, who were co-responsible for ERA projects. Four electronic sourcing consultancy firms and service providers active in Europe and the U.S., and two procurement associations in Europe provided contact data of procurement professionals at customer firms who had engaged in at least one ERA. In total, 851 invitation e-mail messages with an active hyperlink to an online survey were distributed. Usable responses were provided by 180 procurement professionals. This sample size represents an effective response rate of 21.2%, which is generally considered satisfactory for an industrial survey (Erdogan and Baker 2002, Frohlich 2002). Moreover, as data concerning ERAs are regarded as “unique and enormously difficult to obtain” (Jap 2007, p. 147), the sample size of this study can be considered exceptional in the field.We adopted a key informant approach (Campbell 1955), in which only knowledgeable informants who were co-responsible for an ERA project were allowed to participate. Similar to the approach of Doney and Cannon (1997) and Brown et al. (2012), respondents were requested to refer to one specific project and to report on the views of the project team. In addition, the key informant provided factual information with respect to the price savings, as obtained from the auction record. To prevent recall decay bias, the respondent was instructed to complete the questionnaire with reference to a recently completed ERA project (Blazevic and Lievens 2004). We assessed non-response bias by comparing the responses of early respondents with those of late respondents (Armstrong and Overton 1977). No statistically significant differences were found for any of the constructs considered in this study and therefore non-response bias did not appear to be a problem.The ERA projects in this study involved a wide range of industries, from automotive, chemicals and consumer goods, to services, telecommunications, and pharmaceuticals. The market offerings that were auctioned included IT hardware, palm oil, cokes, pallets, packaging material, office cleaning, temporary labor, transportation, car leasing, consultancy, facility management and logistical services. The companies in this study were distributed around the globe, with 77% of the companies being headquartered in Europe, 15% in the US, and the remaining 8% in other regions of the world.The measures in this study were obtained from the literature and the wording of the items was modified for use in an ERA setting. An initial version of the questionnaire was pretested qualitatively with four academics and three domain experts from industry, as well as quantitatively with 24 respondents. Thereafter, minor modifications and refinements in the questions and items were made. The final survey questions are presented in Appendix 2. The multi-item scales all were measured on a seven-point Likert scale. Cost reduction was measured using two items, which were averaged. The scale items of the constructs, their factor loadings and the Cronbach alpha values are shown in Appendix 3, and the cross-factor loadings are presented in Appendix 4.To minimize confounding effects, we controlled for three supplier-related factors that were identified by Amelinckx et al. (2008): supply market competition, supplier e-readiness, and supplier e-sourcing expertise. Supply market competition is the degree to which the buying firm has alternative, qualified suppliers that are able to meet specifications and have a strong interest in winning the contract (Cannon and Perreault 1999, Perdue and Summers 1991). Supplier e-readiness refers to the degree to which suppliers participating in the e-sourcing project are willing and ready to conduct business activities electronically (Barua et al. 2004). Supplier e-sourcing expertise consists of the supplier’s e-sourcing specific knowledge acquired through experience and training (Kuusela and Spence 1998, Spence and Brucks 1997). The relationships between these control variables and ERA project outcomes are expected to be positive (Amelinckx et al. 2008).We evaluated the psychometric properties of the multi-item constructs in our empirical study through a confirmatory factor analysis, using Amos 19.0 (Arbuckle 2010), specifying the relations of the observed measures to their posited underlying constructs (Anderson and Gerbing 1988). The overall fit indices of the measurement model compared favorably against common cut-off criteria (Hooper et al. 2008, Hu and Bentler 1999): χ2(685)=918.03 (p<0.01); CFI=0.94; TLI=0.93; NFI=0.82; RMSEA=0.04. Standardized item factor loadings all exceeded 0.55; well above the 0.4 minimum suggested by Hulland (1999), and t-values for all item factor loadings indicated significance at the 0.01-level (factor loadings are listed in Appendix 3). We retained the items with factor loadings below 0.7 (and above 0.4), in keeping with Baumgartner and Homburg (1996), who recommend to retain items that add substantial meaning to their respective construct in order to increase the probability of tapping all facets of the construct of interest. The Cronbach alpha values for all constructs were above the 0.7 threshold (Nunnally and Bernstein 1991). We assessed convergent validity using composite reliability (CR) (Werts et al. 1974) and average variance extracted (AVE) (Fornell and Larcker 1981). All CRs exceeded the 0.7 criterion, ranging from 0.76 to 0.91, and all AVEs were above the 0.50 recommended level, ranging from 0.51 to 0.73. Discriminant validity for all the constructs in the model was confirmed. The AVE values exceeded the shared variance (squared inter-construct correlations; see Table 1), indicating that all constructs shared more variance with their measures than with other constructs (Fornell and Larcker 1981). Table 1 also reports the means and standard deviations for the multi-item variables.We assessed the likelihood of common method bias by using the procedure suggested by Podsakoff et al. (2003). A confirmatory factor analysis indicated that a single (method) factor did not fit the data, providing evidence that inter-item correlations were not purely driven by method bias (χ2(740)=3471.14 (p<0.001); CFI=0.34; TLI=0.27; NFI=0.30; RMSEA=0.14). Furthermore, a test of the measurement model, including common method bias as a construct, showed that common method bias explains 10% of the variance. Therefore, we consider common method not to have a substantive impact on our model.To test the hypotheses, we specified a model in which the antecedent factors were related to ERA project outcomes, and the outcomes were related to ERA project satisfaction. Furthermore, we included the control variables in the analysis. The model showed good fit statistics: χ2(887)=1459.95 (p<0.01); CFI=0.87; TLI=0.85; NFI=0.73; RMSEA=0.06.Hypothesis 1, on the relationships between ERA project outcomes and ERA project satisfaction is partly supported by the data, as shown in Table 2. This table displays the estimated standardized regression weights and the p-values. In particular, cycle time improvement, quality of the offering, and project learning were positively related to ERA project satisfaction. The R2-value indicates the model explains a considerable portion (64%) of the variance of ERA project satisfaction.To test Hypotheses 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 we examined the factor loadings of the antecedent factors for each of the outcome variables (see Table 3), showing partial support for each hypothesis.In terms of the organizational antecedents, top management (H2) support was positively related to relationship quality and project learning, and negatively related to price savings. Organizational commitment (H3) exhibited a strong positive association with every ERA project outcome, except price savings.In terms of the project antecedents, cross-functional team (H4) composition had a significant positive relationship with cost reduction. Project team expertise (H5) had a positive relationship with price savings, while it was negatively related to cost reductions, cycle time improvement, quality of the offering, and supply base rationalization. Finally, procedural fairness (H6) had a strong positive association with quality of the offering, relationship quality, and project learning. The explained variances of the outcome variables (R2) vary between 17% and 57%.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
