@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Performance-based seismic design of steel frames utilizing charged system search optimization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A performance-based optimal seismic design of steel frames is presented utilizing Charged System Search optimization.A pushover analysis method based on semi-rigid connection concept is employed as analysis and design method.Two numerical examples from literature are studied and the results illustrate significant improvement in structural weight compared to those of the conventional design methods.The capabilities of the CSS are compared to those of the ACO and GA.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Optimization,Charged system search,Pushover analysis,Performance-based design,Frame structures,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a performance-based optimal seismic design of steel frames is presented utilizing Charged System Search (CSS) optimization. This meta-heuristic optimization algorithm has been recently developed and employed in many optimization problems showing a high capability in structural optimization. Here, a pushover analysis method based on semi-rigid connection concept is employed as analysis and design method. Two numerical examples which have been previously considered in literature are studied and the results illustrate significant improvement in structural weight compared to the conventional design methods. The capabilities of the CSS are compared to those of the ACO and GA.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In engineering projects, it is desirable to reduce the project costs to a possible minimum amount. In structural engineering, this goal can be achieved in various stages, for example when the structure is being designed, fabricated, erected, etc. Optimal design of structure is an effort to reduce the project cost at the stage of designing the structure. Therefore, there have been great efforts for optimal design of different kinds of engineering problems, and various approaches were developed. In this way, using meta-heuristic algorithms based on natural events and physical laws are being extended in engineering optimization problems. Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) was proposed by Eberhart and Kennedy, and it has been applied to various optimization problems [1]. El-Maleh et al. proposed a binary PSO and applied it in state assignment for area minimization of sequential circuits [2]. Moreover, several hybrid metaheuristic algorithms have been presented thus far some of which can be found in refs. [3–6]. On the other hand, some new algorithms based on swarm intelligence concept have been proposed. One of these algorithms is known as the Charged System Search (CSS) optimization which was developed by Kaveh and Talatahari [7]. This algorithm is based on the Coulomb and Gauss electrical and the Newtonian laws of mechanics. This method was extensively and successfully applied to structural optimization problems by Kaveh et al. [8–12].Another important point in optimal design is the method of analysis and design. Since seismic loads have unpredictable nature, if a structure is designed such that it remains elastic under a tolerate earthquake effects, weight of the structure resulted from such a design will increase to an uneconomic value. Thus, building codes and design methods consider inelastic behavior of structures in a safe manner. A robust approach for seismic design of structures considering inelastic behavior of structures is the performance-based design of structures which is a multi-level approach to structural design in various seismic levels, and in each level the designer must control appropriate constraints correspond to that level. Nonlinear static analysis, Pushover analysis, is a method for performance-based design of structures. Based on this method, earthquake effects, including displacements or forces, are applied to structure statically in some stages from zero to a proposed value, and in each stage the nonlinear internal forces and nodal displacements are calculated and used for the next stage.Also, another important issue in the structural analysis is the order of the analysis. For example in first order analysis of structures, deflections of members and the geometrical stiffness do not take part in structural analysis, while in the second order they do. A computer-based second order analysis of members including geometrical stiffness and sensitivity matrices for optimization using semi-rigid steel framework concept has been presented by Xu [13]. Hassan et al. applied this method to the pushover analysis for performance based seismic design [14]. Kaveh et al. have implemented performance based seismic design of steel frames using ant colony optimization (ACO) and genetic algorithm (GA) and have compared these two methods of optimization reaching a lower weight [15].In this paper, a method for performance-based optimal seismic design of steel frames utilizing CSS is developed. Results illustrates significant improvement in structural weight compared to the conventional design method and the higher capability of the CSS compared to ACO and GA.In structural design, it is desirable to reach a proposed serviceability level with the least usage of the material. Performance level is the required behavior of a structure in different situations. In this study, four performance levels are considered which are defined as follows:(a)Operational: In earthquake situation with probability of exceeding equal to 50% in 50 years structure life, the structure must maintain elastic and lateral drift in center of gravity at roof level must be lesser than allowable value:(1)ΔOP≤Δ¯OPwhere ΔOP is the lateral drift in center of gravity at roof level andΔ¯OPis the allowable lateral drift in center of gravity at roof level both in operational level.Immediate occupancy: In earthquake situation with probability of exceeding equal to 20% in 50 years structure life, lateral drift in center of gravity at roof level must be lesser than allowable value:(2)ΔIO≤Δ¯IOwhere ΔIO is the lateral drift in center of gravity at roof level andΔ¯IOis the allowable lateral drift in center of gravity at roof level both in immediate occupancy level.Life safety: In earthquake situation with probability of exceeding equal to 10% in 50 years structure life, lateral drift in center of gravity at roof level must be lesser than allowable value:(3)ΔLS≤Δ¯LSwhere ΔLS is the lateral drift in center of gravity at roof level andΔ¯LSis the allowable lateral drift in center of gravity at roof level both in life safety level.Collapse prevention: In earthquake situation with probability of exceeding equal to 2% in 50 years structure life, the structure must remain stable and lateral drift in center of gravity at roof level must be lesser than allowable value:(4)ΔCP≤Δ¯CPwhere ΔCP is the lateral drift in center of gravity at roof level andΔ¯CPis the allowable lateral drift in center of gravity at roof level both in immediate occupancy level.Roof drift of 0.4%, 0.7%, 2.5% and 5% of the height of structure are taken as allowable roof drifts for OP, IO, LS, and CP performance levels in design optimization process, respectively [16,17].Most of the studies in optimization have considered the weight of frame as the cost function since accurate cost data requires information from many factors that are unpredictable and not precisely defined:(5)W(X)=∑j=1neρ⋅Aj⋅Ljwhere W(X) is the weight of frame; X is the vector of design variables taken from W-shaped sections found in AISC design manual [18]; ne is number of elements; ρ is the material mass density; and Ljand Ajare the length and cross sectional area of the member j, respectively.Charged System Search (CSS) optimization is an optimizer algorithm based on Coulomb and Gauss electrical and Newtonian laws of Mechanics [7]. An explanation of the CSS for discrete optimization is as follows [7,8]:In physics, the space surrounding an electric charge has a property known as the electric field. This field exerts a force on other electrically charged objects. The electric field surrounding a point charge is given by Coulomb's law. Coulomb has confirmed that the electric force between two small charged spheres is proportional to the inverse square of their separation distance rij. The forces due to charged particles are schematically illustrated in Fig. 1.This algorithm can be considered as a multi-agent approach, where each agent is a Charged Particle (CP), considered as a charged sphere with radius a, having a uniform volume charge density and is equal to:(6)qi=fit(i)−fitworstfitbest−fitworst,i=1,2,…,Nwhere fitbest and fitworst are the best and the worst fitness of all the particles respectively; fit(i) represents the fitness of the agent i, and N is the total number of CPs.CPs can impose electric forces on the others. The kind of the forces is attractive and can be repulsive, and its magnitude for the CP located in the inside of the sphere is proportional to the separation distance between the CPs, and for a CP located outside the sphere it is inversely proportional to the square of the separation distance between the particles. In continuous problems it is enough to consider all the forces positive but in discrete problems similar to this study repulsive forces are also considered with the probability of ktin order to maintain exploration rate. Therefore, the forces can be obtained as:(7)Fj=qj∑i,i≠jqia3rij⋅i1+qirij2⋅i2⋅arij⋅pij(Xi−Xj)where qjis the volume charge density of the jth particle's defined by Eq. (6), and it has a value between 0 and 1; Fjis the resultant force acting on the jth CP; rijis the separation distance between two charged particles which is defined as follows:(8)rij=||Xi−Xj||||(Xi+Xj)/2−Xbest||+εwhere Xiand Xjare the positions of the ith and jth CPs, respectively; Xbestis the position of best current CP, and ɛ is a small positive number that prevents the fraction to become infinity. The initial positions of CPs are determined randomly in the search space and the initial velocities for charged particles are assumed to be zero.The kind of force parameter, arij, is defined as follows:(9)arij=+1w.p.kt−1w.p.1−ktwhere ktis a predefined probability which controls whether two particles attract each other (arij=+1) or there is a repulsive force between them (arij=−1).pijdetermines the probability of moving each CP toward the others as:(10)pij=1fit(i)−fitbestfit(j)−fit(i)>rand∨fit(i)>fit(j)0elseThe resultant forces and the laws of motion determine the new location of CPs. At this stage, each CP moves toward its new position under the action of resultant forces and its previous velocity as:(11)Xj,new=Fixrandj1⋅ka⋅Fjmj⋅Δt2+randj2⋅kv⋅Vj,old⋅Δt+Xj,old(12)Vj,new=Xj,new−Xj,oldΔtwhere Fix(X) is a function which round each element of X to the nearest possible discrete value;ka=0.5(1+iter/itermax)is the acceleration coefficient and it ascends as the algorithm progresses; therefore, the influence of particles intensifies, and consequently as the number of iteration increases, more local search is provided by the algorithm;kv=0.5(1−iter/itermax)is the velocity coefficient to control the influence of the previous velocity, and it descend as the algorithm progresses; therefore the influence of particles is reduced, and consequently there is more global search at initial stages, and this phase transforms to a local search in the latest iterations; finallyrandj1andrandj2are two random numbers uniformly distributed in the range of (0,1). This process is schematically illustrated in Fig. 2.To save the best design, a memory (Charged Memory or CM) is considered. If each CP violates from the allowable search space, its position is corrected using the Harmony Search handling [19,20]. According to this mechanism, any component of the solution vector violating boundaries can be regenerated from CM as:(13)xij=w.p.CMCR⇒selectavalueforavariablefromCM⇒w.p.(1−PAR)donothing⇒w.p.PARchooseaneighboringvaluew.p.(1−CMCR)⇒selectthenewvariablerandomlywhere xi,jis the ith component of the CP j. The Charged Memory Considering Rate (CMCR) varying between 0 and 1, sets the rate of choosing a value in the new vector from the historic values stored in the CM, and (1−CMCR) sets the rate of randomly choosing one value from the possible range of values. The pitch adjusting process is performed only after a value is choosing from CM. The value (1−PAR) sets the rate of doing nothing. Here “w.p.” means “with probability”. For more details, the reader can refer to [18,19]. The constraint handling approach is the penalty function [23]. A flowchart of the CSS for discrete structural design is depicted in Fig. 3.In this study a pushover analysis based in semi-rigid connection concept is used for the analysis and performance-based design of steel frames. In fact this analysis approach is a second order static nonlinear analysis. Xu [13] modeled semi-rigid moment connection at each end of a planar beam element and introduced the non-dimensional rigidity factor rias follows:(14)ri=11+(3EI/RiL)where Riis the rotational stiffness of connection i, EI and L are the bending stiffness and length of the connected member, respectively. From Eq. (14) the rigidity factor rifalls in the range between ri=1 (Ri=∞for fully rigid connection) and ri=0 (Ri=0 for fully released connection).Monofortoon and Wu [21] employed the rigidity factor concept to develop a first order elastic analysis technique for semi-rigid frames, where the elastic stiffness matrix K of each member with semi-rigid moment connections is found as product of the standard elastic stiffness matrix Sefor a member having rigid moment connection and a correction matrix Ceformulated as a function of the rigidity factor r for the two end connections, i.e.(15)K=SeCeXu [13] further employed the rigidity factor concept to develop a second order elastic analysis technique for semi-rigid frame. Here, for each member with semi-rigid moment connections, the standard geometric stiffness matrix Sgfor a member with rigid moment connections is modified by a correction matrix Cgformulated as a function of rigidity factor r for the two end connections. The member elastic stiffness matrix K accounting for both first order and second order geometric properties is then found using Eq. (15)(16)K=SeCe+SgCgHaving nonlinear moment–rotation relations that characterize the variation in rotational stiffness R of semi-rigid connections under increasing moment, the influence of semi-rigid connection behavior on the overall behavior of a frame structure under increasing loads can be directly accounted for trough an incremental load analysis. Here, for each finite load increment, stiffness R of each connection is held constant at its value prevailing at the beginning of the load step and the conventional displacement method of elastic analysis is applied for rigidity factor r found trough Eq. (14) and member stiffness matrices K found from Eqs. (15) and (16) to find the corresponding increment of moment and rotations of each member.Pushover analysis monitors the progressive stiffness degradation of the frame as it is loaded to a post-elastic range of behavior. Based on semi-rigid and rigidity factor concept described in the forgoing for semi-rigid analysis, Hassan et al. [14,22] proposed to use plasticity factor to monitor the progressive plastification (stiffness degradation) of members under increasing loads. When a member is partially plasticized, it treats as a semi-rigid connection and plasticity factor p is between 0 and 1. Plasticity factor p for a fully elastic member is equal to 1.0 and for a fully plastic hinge at the end of a member is equal to 0.The post-elastic degradation of a flexural stiffness of a frame member begins when the material fibers furthest from neutral axis of cross section experience initial yielding and under increasing moment, continues as plasticity spreads trough the section depth and along the member length to form a fully developed plastic hinge, at which point the flexural stiffness of the member section is exhausted. This degradation in section stiffness beyond the linear elastic range of behavior is characterized by a nonlinear moment-curvature (M−Φ) curve of the form shown in Fig. 4, where Φyis the known curvature when the extreme fibers of a member section experience initial yielding, Φpin the known post-elastic curvature increment beyond Φywhen plasticity first penetrates trough full dept of the cross section, and Φuin the known post-elastic curvature increment beyond Φpwhen the section reaches an ultimate deformation state corresponding to abrupt loss of some or all of its flexural strength. With little error for most section shapes used in building frameworks, it can be assumed that the continuous nonlinear portion of this generic M−Φ curve has an elliptical shape that is defined by the function(17)M(Φ)=My+(Mp−My)2−(Mp−My)(Φ−Φp)Φp2whereMy=SσyandMp=Zσyare first and fully plastic moment capacities of a member section, respectively. (S and Z are the elastic and plastic section modulus, respectively and σyis the expected yield stress of the material); and Φ is the post-elastic curvature increment beyond Φyat any stage between initial yielding (Φ=0) and full plastification (Φ=Φp) of the cross section. From Eq. (17) the post-elastic moment varies in the rangeMy≤M(Φ)≤Mpas the post-elastic curvature increment varies in the range0≤Φ≤Φp.From Fig. 4, for moment levels less than Mythe change in post-elastic curvature dΦ and the post-elastic section flexural stiffnessdM/dΦ=∞. This situation, infinite stiffness, implies that the member section fully preserve continuity of elastic deformation. Conversely, beyond the point in the M−Φ curve where the moment level reaches Mpthe change in post-elastic moment is zero i.e. dM=0. Therefore in the post-elastic beyond Φpthe flexural stiffness is zero(dM/dΦ)=0and this implies that a plastic hinge is developed fully in the cross section. Based on foregoing, the flexural stiffness varies between∞≥dM/dΦ≥0corresponding to the initial yielding of the cross section or My(Φ=0) and fully plastic hinge developed in the cross section or Mp(Φ=Φp).By differentiating Eq. (17) with respect to Φ, the flexural stiffness of cross section is obtained as:(18)dM(Φ)dΦ=(Mp−My)2(Φp−Φ)Φp2(Mp−My)2−((Mp−My)(Φ−Φp)/Φp)2From the forgoing, the mathematical similarity between the model for post-elastic behavior of a plastic hinge section and that for elastic behavior of a semi-rigid connection becomes evident. In fact, upon replacing connection rotational stiffness R with section flexural stiffnessdM/dΦin Eq. (14), the degradation of the flexural stiffness of a member section experiencing post-elastic behavior can be characterized by the plasticity factor, i.e.(19)p=11+(3EI/(dM/dΦ)L)where p varies in the range1≥p≥0.IfM≤Mythen Φ=0; otherwise, ifM≥Mythen Eq. (17) is solved forM(Φ)=Mto find the corresponding value of the post-elastic curvature for the section. The solution is as follows:(20)Φ=Φp−Φp1−M−MyMp−My2The factor p can be also used to estimate the corresponding percentage extent of section plastic behavior through the expression:(21)%plasticity=100(1−p)If in a section we have the combination of bending stress due to M, and axial stress due to N, then the reduction in the moment capacity of the member section because of existing axial force can be accounted for by the following interaction constraint equation:(22)1fs≤MMp+NNpm≤1.0where fsis the shape factor of the member section calculated asfs=Mp/My=Z/S; Npis the capacity of member section carrying axial force in the absence of buckling and other stresses and calculated asNp=σy⋅A, where A is the cross sectional area; and m depends on the section shape.The horizontal ground motion intensity of an earthquake defines the spectral response acceleration Saof a building in the lateral direction, which may be transformed into a total horizontal base shear as:(23)V=SagWwhere g is the gravitational acceleration and W is the total weight of the building. The shear force V must be distributed as lateral inertia forces F applied over the vertical height of building, based on FEMA[16], and it can be defined as:(24)Fx=CxV(25)Cx=wxhxk∑i=1nwihikwhere Fxis the lateral load applied at story level x; and Cxis the corresponding vertical distribution factor; and wxand wiare the portion of the total building weight at story level x and i, respectively.Steps of the pushover analysis are summarized as:1.Find member stiffness matrices from Eq. (16).Consider appropriate Δu and Δf.For all members consider p=1.0 at both ends.i=1Assemble global stiffness matrix K.fi+1=fi+Δfandui+1=ui+Δu(f consists of P, V, and M and u consists of u, v, and θ at both ends of each member).Compute1/fs≤M/Mp+(N/Np)m≤1.0at both ends of members having axial force.IfM≤Mp, find R and p from Eqs. (18) and (19), else R=0 and p=0.ifV<Vb,levelthen i=i+1 and update members stiffness matrices with new values for R and p and repeat steps 5–9; else End.Two numerical examples are considered in this study for optimal seismic design of steel frames using CSS. Both frames have been previously studied in literature. Hassan et al. [14,22] have used these frames to illustrate the pushover analysis. These frames have been proposed for optimal design using ACO and GA by Kaveh et al. [15]. In this study optimal design is performed for these frames utilizing CSS. Results are then compared to those of the conventional design and optimal design using ACO and GA.Assumptions considered in this study are as follows:The expected yield strength of steel material used for column members is taken asσye=57.6ksi(397MPa), whileσye=49.2ksi(339MPa) is considered for beam members. The properties of the different W-shaped sections are available in the manual of the American Institute of Steel Construction (AISC) [12] including modulus of elasticity E, area A, moment of inertia I, elastic section modulus S, and plastic section modulus Z of the cross sections. For pushover analysis the curvature correspond to developing yield stress in full height of the cross section,Φpis assumed as 0.09rad, while Φu, corresponding to the abrupt reduction in section flexural strength is arbitrarily assumed so large that the member section does not experience abrupt failure.Parameter k for lateral distribution of earthquake loads in Eq. (25) is assumed as 2.0. The constant gravity load w is accounted for by a tributary-area width of 15ft (457cm) and dead load and live load factors of 1.2 and 1.6, respectively. Parameter m for computing Eq. (22) assumed as 1.0.A four-bay three-story steel frame is considered for optimal seismic design using the CSS. The configuration, grouping of members and applied loads are shown in Fig. 5. The 27 members of the structure are categorized into five groups, as shown in this figure. The modulus of elasticity is taken as E=29,000ksi (200GPa). The constant gravity load of w1=2.2kip/ft (32kN/m) is applied to the first and second stories, and the gravity load of w2=1.97kip/ft(28.7kN/m) is applied to the roof beams. The seismic weights are calculated as 1054 kips (4688kN) for each of first and second stories, and 1140 kips (5071kN) for the roof story. Structural data and gravity loads are as Table 1and seismic loading data and allowable drifts in each level are presented in Table 2.Results of the four-bay three-story steel frame seismic design using various methods are summarized in Table 3, convergence history of the CSS and pushover curve for designed frame are shown in Figs. 6 and 7, respectively.Results presented in Table 2 indicate a significant improvement in frame weight when it is designed using an optimization algorithm and in this case the weight is approximately 1.5 times lower compared to the conventional design. Another result in Table 3 reflects comparison between various optimization algorithms. From this table, it can be seen that the weight of the frame designed using ACO, GA, CSS, and conventional design is 63.68 kips (238.4kN), 68.32 kips (303.9kN), 56.31 kips (271.23kN) and 92.07 kips (412.9kN), respectively. These results illustrate the higher capability of the CSS in optimal structural design.After performing optimal design of structure, a pushover analysis is applied to the result obtained using the CSS and roof drifts are controlled in various performance levels. Results show that the roof drifts are equal to 0.3642in., 2.7825in., 10.1694in., and 16.4378in. for the operational, immediate occupancy, life safety, and collapse prevention, respectively, which are less than the allowable values indicated in Table 2. The pushover curve shown in Fig. 7 for this example illustrates that in this design method nonlinear behavior of members are fairly used for the design of building. From Fig. 7, it can be seen that until OP level, the structure remains elastic which is desired for a performance-based design, and after that, the stiffness of structure decreases until reaches to the CP level. Thus, one can have a safe behavior of the structure and no abrupt failure and instability will occur.A five-bay nine-story steel frame is considered as the second example for optimal seismic design. Element grouping, load condition and dimensions are shown in Fig. 8. Elements are categorized into 13 groups as shown in this figure. The modulus of elasticity of members material is considered as E=29,000ksi (200GPa); a constant gravity load w1=2.2kip/ft (32kN/m) is applied to the beams of the first to the eight stories, and w2=1.97kip/ft (28.7kN/m) is applied to the roof beams. The seismic weights are considered as 1111 kips (4942kN) for the first story, 1092 kips (5231kN) for each of second to eight stories, and 1176 kips (5231kN) for the roof story. Analysis input data is presented in Table 4, and spectral values, base shears, and allowable drifts for various performance levels considered in this example are shown in Table 5.Results of seismic design of the five-bay nine-story steel frame using different methods are presented in Table 6, and convergence history of the CSS method is illustrated in Fig. 9. The pushover curve of designed frame is shown in Fig. 10. As it can be seen from Table 6, the weight of the nine-story frame is improved significantly when it is designed using an optimization algorithm. The weight obtained for frame using ACO and GA are 348.91 kips (1552.6kN) and 371.03 kips (1651.1kN) which are 16.49% and 11.12% lower than the weight obtained by a conventional design equal to 417.82 kips (1859.30kN), respectively, while the weight obtained using the CSS is equal to 208.16 kips (926.30kN) which is 50.179% lower than the result of the conventional design of frame. This significant improvement in design weight using the CSS instead of ACO and GA is because of an important note: When a structure can have more safe inelastic behavior, the design weight will be lesser. In the previous work in reference [9] the designed frame behaviors was elastic even in LS level and beyond it. But as shown in Fig. 10, the pushover curve for the designed frame in this study illustrates a nonlinear behavior of structure, thus the obtained weight is significantly lesser than other methods [9].Results of the pushover analysis of frame designed using the CSS show that the roof drifts equal to 2.3555in., 10.1374in., 11.296in., and 26.6559in., for performance levels operational, immediate occupancy, life safety, and collapse prevention, respectively, which are less than allowable values provided in Table 5.The results presented in the previous sections are the best ones of the CSS with various values for different parameters. Since there is not a unified approach for determining constant parameters of the algorithm, these are to be chosen from a selection pool. In this section, the performance of the algorithm is investigated with different values for the particles’ radius a, and kt. The result of such study is presented in Table 7for a five-bay nine-story frame. From this table, it can be observed that when the radius of particles isa=0.1(xmax−xmin), the best result is achieved. As shown in Fig. 1, a high value of a leads to a high intensification of the algorithm. The relationshipa=0.1(xmax−xmin)provides a balanced global and local search.The parameter ktdetermines the type of force between particles. Larger value of this parameter provides more repulsive forces and consequently more diversification, and vice versa. Therefore, it is an appropriate mechanism for discrete optimization problems because the probability of being trapping in a local minimum is high, and more diversification is needed to prevent reaching to a local optimization instead of global optimization. It can be observed from Table 7 that the best value for ktis 0.2; higher values reduces the robustness of the algorithm because the particles get far from the best particles which are near to the optimal point, and small values increases the probability of being trapping in a local minimum.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
