@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An agent-based intelligent algorithm for uniform machine scheduling to minimize total completion time

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We consider the problem of scheduling jobs on uniform machines so as to minimize total completion time.An agent-based scheduling algorithm, called ABISA, is proposed.The algorithm shows excellent performance when compared with traditional heuristics.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Uniform machines,Intelligent scheduling,Total completion time,Release dates,NP-hard,Heuristics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper considers the uniform machine scheduling problem with release dates so as to minimize the total completion time. The problem is known to be NP-hard in the strong sense, even when there is only a single machine. An intelligent scheduling algorithm, called ABISA, is proposed, in which agent technology is introduced to realize the robotization process of manufacturing scheduling by means of the intelligence of the machines. Semantic description of two kinds of agent is given, and token-ring mechanism is presented for agent coordination. A lower bound is derived which is used to evaluate the performance of the algorithms. By examining 1800 random problem instances, the algorithm shows an excellent performance in the solution quality. The results obtained by ABISA are better than the algorithms based on traditional heuristic rules, and are closer to the lower bound of the problem.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
We consider the uniform machine scheduling problem with unequal release dates so as to minimize the total completion time. Using the three-field notation given by Graham et al. [1], our problem can be described as Q|rj|∑Cj. That is, a set of jobs with different release dates is to be scheduled on an arbitrary number of uniform machines so as to minimize the total completion time. The problem is known to be NP-hard in the strong sense, even when there is only a single machine [2].We are given a set of n jobs, J1, …, Jn, each of which has to be scheduled on one of the m machines, M1, …, Mm. A job can be processed on only one machine at a time, and a machine can process at most one job at a time. If job Jjis processed on machine Mi, it will take a positive processing time pij. For each job Jj, a release time, rj(rj≥0), is given, at or after which time the job can be processed. The objective is to schedule the jobs so that the total completion time of all the jobs is minimized. In parallel machine scheduling problems, when pij=pjfor all Miand Jj, the machines have the same speed. Thus, the processing time of a job is identical on different machines and the machines are called identical machines. When pij=pj/si, where pjis the processing requirement of job Jjand siis the speed of machine Mi, the machines are called uniform machines. If the pijare arbitrary, then the machines are called unrelated machines. We consider the uniform machines environment. We will introduce agent technology to the problem, and realize the robotization process of manufacturing scheduling by means of the intelligence of the machines.Consider a manufacturing plant that has m machines. Some of the machines are older models that were purchased long time ago, while other machines are newer models that were purchased recently. The newer machines can process jobs faster than the older machines. Thus, we have an uniform machine environment. To process a job Jj, the manufacturer has to wait for the supplier to deliver the materials before it can start processing the job. Thus, each job Jjhas a release date rjbefore which it cannot start processing. The goal is to minimize the total completion time ∑Cj, which is directly related to the average turnaround time of all the jobs. This performance measure yields a higher average satisfaction among all the customers.The purpose of this paper is to attack the above-mentioned problem. Since this problem is strongly NP-hard, it is computationally infeasible to obtain an optimal solution in a reasonable amount of time. Thus, we turn our attention to heuristics. All of the known heuristics for this problem are based on a centralized algorithm; i.e., a single algorithm assigns jobs to each machine and the sequence the jobs are processed on each machine is determined by the algorithm. In this paper we will introduce an agent-based heuristic which is a distributed algorithm. By computational studies, we will show that the agent-based heuristic produces better quality solutions than some centralized algorithms.The contribution of the paper are three-folds. First, we demonstrate that it is viable to use agent-based heuristic to solve Q|rj|∑Cj, which has not been shown before. Second, we show, based on computational studies, that agent-based heuristic is in fact better than centralized heuristics in terms of solution quality. Third, we develop token-ring coordination mechanism for communication, which significantly reduces the burden of the master agent.Our paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the related work on Q|rj|∑Cjproblem and agent-based approaches for classical scheduling problems are reviewed. The structure of agents and the token-ring mechanism for agent coordination are presented in Section 3. Section 4 gives the presentation of our intelligent scheduling algorithm ABISA. To evaluate the performance of ABISA, a lower bound LBMSRPTis proposed in Section 5. The performance of ABISA will be compared with the lower bound to obtain a performance ratio. Section 6 is dedicated to the experimental results. Finally, in Section 7, we draw some concluding remarks.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we have proposed a new algorithm, ABISA, based on agent technology to solve the uniform machine scheduling problem with release dates. The criterion is to minimize the total completion time. In ABISA, agents are implemented to represent machines, and they are coordinated with each other by the token-ring mechanism. Therefore, the robotization of the manufacturing scheduling process is realized by the intelligent machines. The performance of ABISA is compared with the ERT–ECT and the SPT–ECT heuristics, as well as a lower bound LBMSRPT. As shown in the three tables, the solutions obtained by the ABISA algorithm have the best performance and are closer to the lower bound than the ERT–ECT and SPT–ECT heuristics.For future research, it is worthwhile to consider whether ABISA can effectively solve scheduling problems with other criteria such as the maximum lateness Lmax. For the total completion time problem, further evaluation of the ABISA algorithm is needed, especially its worst case performance. In addition, the token-ring mechanism can lighten the burden on the master agent but it decreases the efficiency of the algorithm. Therefore, new coordination mechanisms are needed to balance the conflict between the two sides.