@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Size and growth dynamics of online stores: A case of China’s Taobao.com

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We use the system GMM estimator to analyze the size–growth relationship of 21,948 stores from 14 industries on Taobao.com.Data analysis shows that Gibrat’s law tends to be rejected and the smaller stores grow faster.The applicability of the law is contingent upon store age and size: it tends to hold for larger and older stores but fails for smaller and younger ones.We explain the size–growth relationship from the viewpoints of trust building and store survival.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Consumer-to-consumer,Dynamic panel data model,Firm growth,Gibrat’s law,System GMM,Taobao,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study examines Gibrat’s law regarding size–growth relationships in the consumer-to-consumer (C2C) online marketplace. Using dynamic panel data models, we analyze 21,948 e-merchants from 14 industries on Taobao.com. The data analysis shows that Gibrat’s law holds for large and mature stores when their size and age exceed certain threshold, but it generally fails to apply to stores whose size and age are below certain threshold. For those small stores, they grow faster than large ones in the C2C e-commerce. Results of the study provide insights into the competitive dynamics and industry structure of the C2C online marketplace.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Internet-based third-party platforms where many small businesses and individuals sell goods and services provide the foundation of the online marketplace. Because the online marketplace has grown so rapidly, its growth dynamics are enigmatic.On one hand, e-merchants must build customer trust if they are to survive and grow in a marketplace where transactions are usually among strangers. Sellers’ reputations have a strong, positive impact on consumer trust and subsequent purchase intentions, price premiums, and sales volumes (Ba and Pavlou, 2002; Bente et al., 2012; Kim et al., 2008; Utz et al., 2012; Zhang, 2006). In online markets, early movers and big players tend to enjoy reputational advantages (Ou and Davison, 2009). Thus, older and larger e-merchants should generate more sales.On the other hand, compared with traditional retail, online markets present lower entry barriers and higher profitability (McKinsey, 2013). Small businesses and individuals can launch online storefronts quickly with minimal start-up costs, but competition is intense. Taobao.com is an example of an online market that uses innovative communication technologies and electronic payments such as Wangwang (instant messaging) and Alipay (online payment) to increase transparency, enhance buyer decisions (Holsapple et al., 2014), facilitate buyer/seller trust, and expand subsequent transactions and consumer loyalty (Chen et al., 2009; Ou and Davison, 2009; Ou et al., 2014). In such a hyper-competitive environment, competitive advantages can be transient. Thus, new entrants constantly counteract any size and age advantages.Those contradictions regarding size–growth relationships motivated us to examine the growth dynamics of stores in the consumer-to-consumer (C2C) online marketplace and to seek answers to three research questions: (1) Does size affect growth for e-merchants? (2) Do older and larger e-merchants perform better and grow faster than younger, smaller e-merchants? (3) What drives e-merchant growth in the online markets?Gibrat’s law states that firms’ growth rates are independent of their initial sizes (Gibrat, 1931). It is prominent in economic models explaining growth dynamics and size distributions. Gibrat’s law has been tested in manufacturing and service industries by numerous empirical studies (for reviews see Audretsch et al., 2004; Lotti et al., 2003; Santarelli et al., 2006). Most recent studies in the manufacturing context have suggested the “stylized facts” of reverse size–growth relationship, and Gibrat’s law holds only for mature and large firms (Fotopoulos and Giotopoulos, 2010; Geroski, 1995; Goddard et al., 2002; Sutton, 1997). The small services industry rather than the manufacturing industry is now thought to be more subject to Gibrat’s law (Audretsch et al., 2004; Giotopoulos and Fotopoulos, 2010; Teruel-Carrizosa, 2010). However, online stores are substantially different from traditional manufacturing and service industries in that they present much lower entry barriers, lower operation costs, and higher competition. Although scattered research has addressed the topic, online e-merchants may present different size distribution and growth dynamics.We used GMM (Generalized Methods of Moments) dynamic estimator1We thank two anonymous referees for the suggestion to use dynamic panel data models to investigate size–growth relationships in Taobao stores. Prior studies used Chesher’s (1979) cross-sectional function form (e.g., Almus, 2000; Audretsch et al., 2004; Bentzen et al., 2006; Ganugi et al., 2005; Giotopoulos and Fotopoulos, 2010; Petrunia, 2008).1(Arellano and Bover, 1995; Blundell and Bond, 1998) to examine size–growth relationships of stores in Taobao.com, the largest C2C online marketplace comprising 96.4% of online C2C transactions in China. We collected data for 21,948 Taobao online stores across 14 industries from March 2012 to September 2012. Using dynamic panel data models to test Gibrat’s law, our results suggest that the law generally tends to fail: Taobao stores show negative size–growth relationships. However, the growth patterns differ by store sizes and ages. More specifically, Gibrat’s law fails to apply when sizes and ages are below certain thresholds because smaller and younger stores tend to grow faster than larger and older ones. In contrast, Gibrat’s law tends to hold when store sizes and ages are above certain thresholds because their growth rates are independent of sizes.This study makes two major contributions. First, theoretically, the findings provide new insights into the size–growth relationship of online e-merchants and advance theoretical understandings of market concentration and competition in the online environment. We find a minimum efficient scale (MES) in online markets; that is, the minimum level of size threshold required for establishing consumers’ trust and for surviving. Our findings enrich understandings of Gibrat’s law in online markets: below the threshold, the law tends to fail; above the threshold, it tends to apply. Second, methodologically, this study diverges from prior e-commerce studies (e.g., Li et al., 2008; Lin et al., 2006) by applying dynamic panel GMM estimator to mitigate estimation bias (Nickell, 1981) and control for problems of unobserved individual fixed effects, growth persistence, and endogeneity (Maçãs Nunes and Serrasqueiro 2009).For the rest of this paper, Section 2 reviews literature and theoretical background regarding online markets and Gibrat’s law. Sections 3 and 4 discuss our research method and dynamic panel data models for testing Gibrat’s law in online markets. Sections 5 and 6 discuss results and findings. Section 7 concludes with limitations and directions for future research.This study integrates findings and theories from the literature regarding C2C e-commerce and market structure to examine size–growth relationships of e-merchants in online markets. Prior C2C e-commerce studies have provided insights into the mechanisms of consumer trust building, which drive the e-merchants’ growth dynamics in the online market.First, seller reputation is essential for building consumer trust in C2C markets (Ba and Pavlou, 2002; Kim et al., 2008; Utz et al., 2012). Online reputation systems significantly enhance online sales performance in terms of purchase intentions, price premiums, and sales volumes (Ba and Pavlou, 2002; Bente et al., 2012; Zhang, 2006). However, sellers can use bogus buyers to manipulate their reputations through fake positive feedback. You et al. (2011) analyzed a dataset from Taobao.com and found that transaction indicators (e.g., price, frequency, comment, and connectedness) and individual indicators (e.g., reputation and age) are good sources for identifying collusive traders.Second, prior studies have examined customer attraction and retention in the C2C market from different perspectives. Chen and colleagues (2007) drew on a customer relationship management (CRM) framework and adopted a social network perspective to study the C2C market in China. They concluded that the C2C market is also a social environment and that online vendors can enhance customer loyalty by managing social relationships. Moreover, Lu et al. (2010) viewed C2C sellers and buyers as members of a virtual community, and empirically tested factors contributing to trust among them, which is essential for platform providers. Chen et al. (2009) studied a sample from Chinese C2C Web sites and found that mutual trust among members can boost their trust of a platform provider so that they become loyal buyers and sellers.Economists have long studied market structure, size distribution, and growth dynamics in manufacturing firms. “Gibrat’s rule of proportionate growth,” or Gibrat’s law (1931) explaining that initial size does not determine growth rate has inspired extensive studies on firm growth and market structure.Gibrat’s initial finding has inspired extensive studies on firm growth and market structure. In general, growth dynamics reveal events and trajectories such as new entrants and growth, decline, and exits of incumbent firms, which all contribute to the size distributions of firms (De Wit, 2005). Proportionate growth assumes that size distribution approaches a lognormal distribution, one of the testable assumptions for Gibrat’s law (Ganugi et al., 2005; Reichstein and Jensen, 2005). Nevertheless, the lognormal size distribution is an insufficient but necessary condition for Gibrat’s law (Ganugi et al., 2005). A formal test of the law requires investigating the relationship between size and growth. Firm size distributions are often right skewed, making lognormal distribution a candidate for firm size distributions (Coad, 2009). Other distributions such as power law can provide better fits at least for the upper tail of empirical data (Axtell, 2001; Cirillo and Hüsler, 2009; Gao et al., 2015; Hart and Oulton, 1997).Extensive empirical research has tested Gibrat’s law (for reviews, see Audretsch et al., 2004; Lotti et al., 2003; Santarelli et al., 2006). Tschoegl (1983) indicated that Gibrat’s law is valid only when firm size does not determine growth rates, individual firms do not grow persistently from one period to the next, and firm size does not determine growth variability. Most empirical research tested only the first two conditions by using econometric analysis. Some econophysics studies focused on the relationship between size and growth variances. For example, Stanley et al. (1996) found that the relationship between size and variance of growth rate approximately follows the power law. Riccaboni et al. (2008) further indicated that the size–variance relationship undergoes a slow crossover rather than a single well-defined event.Most empirical investigations of Gibrat’s Law are in the manufacturing context, but the results are mixed. Some studies validated Gibrat’s law or found positive size–growth relationships (Del Monte and Papagni, 2003; Simon and Bonini, 1958; Tschoegl, 1983). Some studies rejected Gibrat’s law and showed negative size–growth relationships (Almus, 2000; Evans, 1987; Fotopoulos and Giotopoulos, 2010; Hall, 1987; Hart and Oulton, 1996). Other studies, such as Geroski (1995), Sutton (1997), Goddard et al. (2002), and Fotopoulos and Giotopoulos (2010), provide a contingency view based on the industry’s minimum efficient scale (MES), defined as the smallest output that a manufacturing firm can produce in order to minimize its long run average costs. According to those scholars, Gibrat’s law tends to hold for mature and large firms whose size is larger than the industry’s MES, but the law does not hold for firms smaller than the industry’s MES: for those small firms, they grow faster than large ones.Economies of scale offer one explanation for the negative size–growth relationship; that is, firms must reach the MES to survive (Audretsch et al., 2004; Geroski, 1995; Sutton, 1997). Smaller firms must grow faster than larger firms do to achieve the MES as soon as possible or else incur higher costs and failure. Therefore, only surviving firms remained in the data sample, they showed faster growth, along with greater failure (Audretsch et al., 2004; Strotman, 2007).A negative age–growth relationship is another factor affecting firm growth (Angelini and Generale, 2008; Choi, 2010; Liu et al., 1999; Lotti et al., 2003; Serrasqueiro et al., 2010). Younger firms grow faster partly because of the MES and pressure for survival (Choi, 2010; Liu et al., 1999; Lotti et al., 2003). Early in a firm’s life cycle, rapid growth is essential for attaining an optimal level of efficiency; later, growth rate diminishes (Serrasqueiro et al., 2010).Gibrat’s law has been tested less frequently in the service industry. Some studies rejected it (Choi, 2010; Oliveira and Fortunato, 2008), but more validated it (Audretsch et al., 2004; Giotopoulos and Fotopoulos, 2010; Teruel-Carrizosa, 2010). In particular, a study of small Dutch service firms revealed no size–growth relationship perhaps because the service sector has lower entry barriers than the manufacturing industry (Audretsch et al., 2004). Greek ICT intensive service industries showed Gibrat’s law in action, but non-ICT service industries did not (Giotopoulos and Fotopoulos, 2010). A study of manufacturing and service industries in Spain indicated that small firms in the service industries grow more slowly mainly because service industries have lower MES and diminished incentives to grow (Teruel-Carrizosa, 2010).When Gibrat’s law was applied to the eBay context and eBay seller reputation was a size proxy, seller reputation followed a lognormal distribution and smaller sellers grew faster, rejecting Gibrat’s law (Lin et al., 2006). A study of both China’s eBay and Taobao showed a negative relationship between growth and seller size (Li et al., 2008). In studies of the size–growth relationship, Lin et al. (2006) and Li et al. (2008) regressed the log size at time t on log size at t−1. Neither study considered growth persistence (Chesher, 1979) or individual fixed effects.Those previous studies offered useful but static insights into the size–growth relationship of e-merchants in online markets. We extend the literature by providing a dynamic view of the size–growth relationship for capturing C2C e-merchant behavior and growth dynamics. We detail our data and research methods in the next two sections.Economics researchers often measure firm size by number of employees, total assets, net assets, sales revenue, and enterprise value (see Coad, 2009; Gao et al., 2015; Segarra and Teruel, 2012). Unfortunately, Taobao does not require stores to release such measures, so they are publicly unavailable. To make the study replicable and comparable, we must use publicly available data as a size proxy.Online seller reputation, a publicly available proxy for store size (Lin et al. 2006, 2007) can be used to indicate size and business capacity of eBay online auction traders (Lin et al., 2006). Sales volume may be a more appropriate size measure for eBay and Taobao stores because it is difficult to obtain traditional size indicators such as revenue and assets from anonymous online transactions, particularly online C2C markets (Li et al., 2008). Consistent with Li et al. (2008), we also used sales volume rather than reputation as the size proxy of Taobao stores.On Taobao, buyers and sellers rate each other after buyers confirm receiving the order. Ratings can be positive, neutral, or negative. By subtracting the number of negative ratings from the number of positive ratings, we obtained the reputation score of a Taobao store. As such, reputation reflects a Taobao store’s cumulative operation since its inception rather than its current operational status. Consequently, older stores tend to have higher reputation scores.By default, if buyers fail to rate sellers within a given period, the Taobao trading system assigns a positive seller rating. Therefore, the system counts all orders. The store’s sales volume equals the total ratings, positive or negative. Moreover, most ratings are positive on Taobao. In our sample, the average ratio of positive ratings is 0.99, with both ratio median and mean over 99%. With such a high percentage of positive ratings, the seller reputation is approximately equal to the cumulative sales volume, which increases monotonically. Other firm size measures, such as number of employees, total assets, net assets, and sales, are not monotonic, but can increase or decrease depending on operational status.Sales volume is a more appropriate size proxy for two reasons. First, sales volume may vary daily, monthly, and quarterly according to types of products, quality of service, and promotion efforts. Whereas reputation reflects cumulative operations, sales volume better captures operational status within a given period. Second, monthly sales volume data is publicly available, so future research can replicate our results. Consequently, we chose monthly sales volume to measure the size of Taobao stores, while acknowledging that the measure is imperfect. If other size proxies were available, they would have provided a more holistic measure.As of December 31, 2010, 5.8 million Taobao stores were registered and assigned unique integer IDs. We used the unique ID to sample store data. However, the largest store ID could be over 90 million and the ID distribution over the range of integers from 1 to 100 million is unknown to the public. Taobao did not assign most integers within this range, so a simple random sampling would have only a 5.8% probability of returning an actual store ID (5.8 million/100 million).To increase sampling efficiency, we developed a two-phase sampling procedure. The first phase was to estimate the distribution of actual store IDs over the range of integers from 1 to 100,000. Specifically, we divided the whole range into 1000 equal-width intervals, and then randomly generated 100 integers from each interval. We validated whether a generated integer was an actual store ID by checking whether the webpage corresponding to the ID was accessible. Next, we obtained the estimated percentage of actual IDs within each interval. Based on the estimated proportion of valid IDs, we started the second phase to draw a sample from each interval with the sample size proportional to the percentage of valid IDs in that interval. As a result, we were able to draw more samples from high-proportion intervals and fewer samples from low-proportion intervals.To ensure that our two-phase sampling procedure produced a good representative sample of the population, we compared the distribution of our sample with Fan et al.'s (2016) dataset that provided percentage distribution for stores in groups of different sizes. By conducting a chi-squared test that treats Fan et al.'s (2016) distribution as the true distribution, we obtained a chi-square statistic 3.1 with a p-value 0.99, suggesting no significant difference between the datasets.Using this sampling approach, we collected a data sample of 70,000 Taobao stores in April 2011. By March 2012, only 55,147 Taobao store websites were accessible; the other stores appeared to have exited the market. We scraped the data of the surviving 55,147 stores on a monthly basis from March 2012 to September 2012, and generated the raw dataset for this study.It’s common for some Taobao stores to have no sales in some months and then generates sales in subsequent months. This sales pattern differentiates C2C stores from traditional brick-and-mortar firms. Among the 55,147 stores scraped monthly from March to September in 2012, only 16,344 had sales in all months of the period, and the remaining 38,803 reported zero sales in at least one month during the period. In addition, we treated the 12,647 stores that had zero sales in all months as non-active, although Taobao listed them as “alive”. They could not have survived if they had gone offline given the high operational costs in the traditional market.The last step is to clean the data so that it meets the requirements of econometric methodology. First, following a common data-cleaning procedure (e.g., Li et al., 2008; Oliveira and Fortunato, 2006a), we excluded observations with missing values or zero sales to avoid taking the logarithm of zeros. Second, we kept only firms with at least five consecutive non-zero sales periods after removing the observations, because the system GMM estimator requires at least four consecutive periods, and we need one extra period to calculate growth rate (Bond et al., 2001). The data-cleaning process produced a final sample of 21,948 stores during the seven-month period from March to September 2012.To investigate the size distribution and size–growth relationship of online stores, we analyzed the data by industries, which is a common practice because different industries may yield different results (Audretsch et al., 2004; Bentzen et al., 2006; Goddard et al., 2006; Lotti et al., 2003; Lotti and Santarelli, 2004; Petrunia, 2008; Teruel-Carrizosa, 2010; Zhang et al., 2009; Liu, 2016). Moreover, separating the data sample by industry allowed us to see whether Gibrat’s law depends on industry for validity.Table 1, which presents the summary statistics of sales volume, shows that the mean values of sales are always substantially larger than median values. This is not surprising given that we expect a skewed firm size distribution. In addition, the skewness measures of logarithmic sales of all industries except Industry 13 are positive, indicating that the logarithmic sales are still right skewed. This suggests that firm size distribution is more skewed than a lognormal distribution in most industries.If Gibrat’s law holds, the size distribution should be approximately lognormal. Based on the results of Jarque–Bera (JB) test in the second-last column of Table 1, we rejected the log-normality hypotheses at the 0.01 significance level for the fourteen Taobao industries and the whole sample. However, as log-normality is a result of proportionate growth, rejecting the lognormal hypothesis is insufficient to reject Gibrat’s law (Sutton, 1997). We also computed the Gini coefficient to measure unequal sales distribution. As the last column of Table 1 shows, all Gini coefficients are greater than 0.7, and most are greater than 0.8, indicating that sales vary significantly among stores within the same industry. That is, a small number of big stores generated most sales.As firms grow, the distribution of log firm size moves toward the right side (i.e., right tail), and the degree of skewness decreases significantly (Angelini and Generale, 2008; Cabral and Mata, 2003). To investigate the size distribution of different age groups, we split the data into two subsamples based on the median age of an industry. Table 2shows some key statistics for the size distribution of the younger and older groups: the mean and standard deviation of the older groups are generally larger than those values of the younger group, with a few exceptions. However, the skewness of the older group is not consistently smaller than that of the younger group. On the contrary, among the fourteen industries, the skewness measures of the eight industries in the older group are larger than the skewness measures of the same industries in the younger group. This result differs from that of offline firms (Angelini and Generale, 2008; Cabral and Mata, 2003) as the skewness of those firms tends to diminish in age (Angelini and Generale, 2008).As to the normality test, our data did not provide sufficient evidence to reject the null hypothesis for four industries in the younger group and three industries in the older group. Even when we found sufficient evidence to reject the null hypothesis, some JB-tests were significant only at the 0.05 significance level, but when both age groups were combined, the null hypotheses were rejected at the 0.001 significance level.Table 3reports the summary statistics of the three key variables—size, growth, and age—used in the econometric analysis for the whole sample. Size is the logarithmic sales; growth is the dependent variable measured by the difference of logarithmic sales in two consecutive periods; age is a variable measured by the number of months since the store’s registration.Gibrat’s law states that the growth rate of each firm in an industry is unrelated to its current size. According to Goddard et al. (2002), the model of firm growth and size is:(1)Growthit=αi+δt+(β-1)Sizeit-1+uit;uit=ρuit-1+εitwhere t and i indicate time period and firm, respectively. Sizeit−1 is the natural log size for firm i at time t−1 and Growthitis the growth rate of firm i at time t measured by the difference between Sizeitand Sizeit−1. δtis time effects, and αiis the unobserved time-invariant individual (firm) specific effects, which allows for the heterogeneity across firms. Parameter β determines the relationship between size and growth. ρ captures serial correlation in uit—the disturbance term of the growth equation. εitis a random disturbance assumed to be normal, independent, and identically distributed (IID) with E(εit)=0 and var(εit)>0.In Eq. (1), the size–growth relationship can be tested based on the estimate of β and the following hypotheses: the null hypothesis (H0: β=1) states that the probability distribution of growth rates is the same for all firm classes. If β⩾1, αi=0 for all i, it implies an explosive growth path: firms tend to grow faster as they get larger. Such a pattern is conceivable for a limited time, but presumably could not continue indefinitely. The variance of the cross-sectional firm size distribution and the level of concentration both increase over time. β=1 implies that the growth is unrelated to firm size. In this case, Gibrat’s law holds, and the mean and variance of growth are independent of size. If β<1, firm size is mean-reverting and small firms tend to grow faster. In this case, αican be considered IID with E(αi)=0 and var(αi)⩾0. If var(αi)=0, individual firm effects are homogenous (all firms tend to revert toward the same mean size); and if Var(αi)>0, they are heterogeneous; that is, the mean size is firm-specific.Even if β is close to unity, Gibrat’s law will not hold if the error terms are serially correlated (i.e., ρ≠0 in Eq. (1)) (Chesher, 1979). Serial correlation in growth rates can be ascribed to the persistence of chance factors that contribute to abnormal growth. A positive value of ρ suggests that an above average growth rate persists from one period to the next, while a negative value of ρ indicates below average to above average growth rates in consecutive periods.By assuming homogeneity between firms, that is, assuming Var(αi)=0, we can re-write αi=α in Eq. (1), reducing it to the cross-sectional function form used in many empirical studies (Audretsch et al., 2004; Bentzen et al., 2006; Chesher, 1979; Ganugi et al., 2005; Lotti, et al. 2003; Petrunia, 2008). However, if heterogeneity is present in αi, firm specific effects αiis subsumed in the disturbance term. In other words, if Var(αi)>0, the cross sectional ordinary least squares (OLS) estimator is inconsistent and may overestimate β whenever β<1. This is a special case of Nickell’s (1981) results.As such, panel data model is appropriate for dealing with firm heterogeneity. Note also that Gibrat’s law is equivalent to the presence of a unit-root in log firm size. Gibrat’s law has been tested with panel unit root tests (Chu et al., 2008; Del Monte and Papagni, 2003; Goddard et al., 2002; Harris and Trainor, 2005; Resende, 2004). As Goddard et al. (2002) suggested, we rewrote Eq. (1) for panel estimation:(2)Growthit=αi+δt+(β-1)Sizeit-1+ρGrowthit-1+γAgeit-1+ηitwhereηit=εit+ρ(1-β)Sizeit-2, soηit=εitunder H0: β=1.In Eq. (2), Ageitis the logarithmic age of Store i in month t. We incorporated age in the right side of Eq. (2) because age and growth often have a negative relation (Angelini and Generale, 2008; Choi, 2010; Liu et al., 1999; Lotti et al., 2003).Eq. (2) is a dynamic panel data model as it contains one lagged dependent variable. To deal with the unobserved heterogeneity (αi), if the within (demeaning) transformation is applied, the results will suffer from “Nickell bias,” particularly under a small number of time periods (T) and a large number of individual units (N) because the demeaning process creates a correlation between the regressor and the error term of the model (Nickell, 1981). The correlation between the regressor and error leads to biased and inconsistent estimates. The degree of bias is of order 1/T. For small T, this can be a big problem. The bias disappears only when T goes to infinity.To deal with this bias, we use the system GMM estimator (Arellano and Bover, 1995; Blundell and Bond, 1998), consistent with some recent studies of Gibrat’s law and firm growth (Giotopoulos and Fotopoulos, 2010; Maçãs Nunes and Serrasqueiro, 2009; Oliveira and Fortunato, 2006a,b). The system GMM estimator uses equations in first-differences, and eliminates individual specific effects by transformation. This estimator deals with endogeneity by using deeper lags of endogenous variables (including the lagged dependent variable and other endogenous explanatory variables in the right side) to instrument the earlier ones. The assumption made on variable endogeneity determines the instruments used in the model. We assumed that firm size is an endogenous variable and firm age is pre-determined. Therefore, we used the deeper lags of firm growth and size to instrument the earlier ones. We then used the Sargan test for the validity of over-identifying restrictions (Arellano and Bond, 1991) to select appropriate instruments for each estimation. Guided by the Sargan test results on a variety of specifications, we used only the second and a varying number of higher-order lags of firm growth and size as instruments in the estimations.To ensure the validity of the results of dynamic estimators, the data must meet two conditions: (1) the restrictions, a consequence of using instrumental variables, must be valid; and (2) no second-order autocorrelations should occur in the first-differenced residuals (Arellano and Bond, 1991). We tested instrument validity by using a Sargan test of over-identifying restrictions, which has an asymptotic chi-square distribution under the null hypothesis that these moment conditions are valid. The Sargan test checks the null hypothesis of validity of the instruments used and consequent restrictions against the alternative hypothesis of non-validity of the instruments used and consequent restrictions. If the null hypothesis is rejected, the system GMM estimator results cannot be considered valid.Testing for autocorrelation of the residuals is another diagnosis procedure in dynamic panel data estimation. As residuals of the differenced equation often have serial correlation, it is important to ensure that the differenced residuals have no significant second-order autocorrelation, because such an autocorrelation will make the second lags of endogenous variables inappropriate instruments for their current values. Hence, to ensure the appropriateness of instruments in the model, we performed the second-order autocorrelation test to check the null hypothesis (absence of second-order autocorrelation) against the alternative hypothesis (existence of second-order autocorrelation). If we reject the null hypothesis, we reject the validity of the GMM estimator system as well. When the assumption of serial independence in the original error term is satisfied, the differenced residuals are unlikely to exhibit significant second-order autocorrelation.In summary, the GMM system gives possibly valid results only if both the Sargan test and the second-order autocorrelation test do not reject their null hypotheses.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
