@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Prediction and reduction of diesel engine emissions using a combined ANN–ACO method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
NOxand soot emissions from a diesel engine are modeled using artificial neural network model.The data used for training and testing the ANN model are obtained through testing a diesel engine.The mass fuel rate, intake air temperature, etc. are optimized using ant colony optimization algorithm.The ACO algorithm gives rise to 32% and 7% reduction in the NOxand soot emissions, respectively.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data modeling,Artificial neural network,Ant colony optimization,Diesel engine emissions,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this study, the combination of artificial neural network (ANN) and ant colony optimization (ACO) algorithm has been utilized for modeling and reducing NOxand soot emissions from a direct injection diesel engine. A feed-forward multi-layer perceptron (MLP) network is used to represent the relationship between the input parameters (i.e., engine speed, intake air temperature, rate of fuel mass injected, and power) on the one hand and the output parameters (i.e., NOxand soot emissions) on the other hand. The ACO algorithm is employed to find the optimum air intake temperatures and the rates of fuel mass injected for different engine speeds and powers with the purpose of simultaneous reduction of NOxand soot. The obtained results reveal that the ANN can appropriately model the exhaust NOxand soot emissions with the correlation factors of 0.98, 0.96, respectively. Further, the employed ACO algorithm gives rise to 32% and 7% reduction in the NOxand soot, respectively. The response time of the optimization process was obtained to be less than 4min for the particular PC system used in the present work. The high accuracy and speed of the model show its potential for application in intelligent controlling systems of the diesel engines.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nowadays, the internal combustion engines are used in a wide variety of applications due to their high power/volume ratio. In addition, diesel engines are recently of great significance due to their high thermal efficiency and low fuel consumption. Using the advantages of these engines requires them to comply with the emissions regulations, which become more and more stringent. In order to follow the emissions regulations, the diesel engine industry has undergone a great technological development during the last few years. Various strategies have been proposed to reduce the amount of emissions exhausted from the diesel engines, especially NOxand soot [1–4]. One of the most efficient and lowest-cost strategies is the use of artificial intelligence (AI) methods in engineering management systems (EMS) [5]. The application of these methods in EMS can be complicated but accurate [6]. In these systems, it is required to employ an accurate model to identify the relationship between the controlling and output parameters, on the one hand, and to have an appropriate algorithm with high accuracy and rapid convergence for optimization of the values of controlling parameters, on the other hand.In recent years, ANN has been considered as one of the promising methods in the context of modeling the complex problems due to their flexibility, accuracy and fast response features [7–9]. Neural network techniques have been used for monitoring and controlling of internal combustion engines [10]. Rutland et al. [11] had some attempts on modeling a diesel engine for prediction of NOxand soot emissions considering the engine speed, fuel mass injected, boost pressure and engine load as controlling parameters and proved that an ANN can accurately model the problem. Arcaklioglo et al. [12] modeled the emissions such as NOxand smoke level and engine performance in terms of engine speed, injection pressure, and throttle position. They concluded that, the network could predict the NOxemissions quite good. However, it was unable to give good results for smoke level due to the complexity of its formation process. The application of ANN and its ability in modeling or prediction of the engine performance and exhaust emissions have also been attempted by Kiani et al. [13]. They showed that, the ANN can predict the engine performance and emission parameters even under the nonlinear and sophisticated conditions.The optimization capability of ACO algorithm in different applications has been elaborately reviewed in [14,15]. Zheng et al. [16] used the combination of the support vector regression model and ACO algorithm to optimize the operating parameters of a power plant boiler, thereby decreasing the NOxemissions. Moreover, the combination of ANN model and genetic algorithm (GA) has been employed by Alonso et al. [17] to predict and reduce the emissions from a diesel engine. In order to take the advantages of strengths of ANN and the extra ordinary convergence capabilities of ACO, Umar et al. [18] have formulated a novel technique called NaACO (neural augmented ACO), which can give the best optimal results in ACO. Finally, Pandian [19] has had a comprehensive study on training neural networks with ACO.The high convergence of the ACO algorithm is well-proved in many works such as [15]. This great feature of ACO persuaded us to employ it in the current application. The engine considered in the present work operates at high speeds. Therefore, having optimum values in a short time entails a method to quickly find efficient and better response at different speeds of the engine. Additionally, this algorithm is a relatively new version of meta-heuristic algorithms employed in optimizing problems in comparison to GA, etc. Also, the efficiency of the ANN and its values directly influence the output results of the ACO. The ANN is just used for obtaining the values that one needs in ACO algorithms to check their probability with the aim of finding the optimized ones. The main reason of using a combination of ANN–ACO method is due to the fact that we are willing to use a new method with higher convergence speed in optimizing non-linear problems in the field of combustion engines along with ANN method, which is able to precisely model the problems that have a complicated nature. ANN and ACO do not have any effect on each other's structures but they work together to optimize the problem with more precise and speed.The literature review shows that, to date no researches have been carried out to use the combined ANN–ACO for modeling and optimization of the operating conditions of direct injection diesel engines. In this study, a direct injection diesel engine was tested to acquire the experimental data to be used in modeling the NOxand soot emissions. In addition, the combination of ANN model and ACO algorithm is utilized to predict the emissions from the engine and to optimize the controlling parameters such as intake air temperature and fuel mass injected for various engine speeds and powers for the purpose of NOxand soot reduction. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 the experimental setup and method is explained. Section 3 deals with the implementation of ANN to model the diesel engine emissions. Finally, in Section 4 the optimization process of the engine controlling parameters using ACO algorithm is discussed to be followed by the conclusions in Section 5.The engine used for the test is MB-OM355, which is a heavy duty 6-inline cylinder four stroke direct injection diesel engine. The engine power is 240hp at the speed of 2200rpm and its total displacement volume is 11,580cc. This engine is widely used in heavy duty transportation systems such as the vehicles of model LK 1924 [20]. The technical specifications of the engine have been presented in Table 1, which can also be found in [21]. The standard procedures have been used for measuring the operating parameters and emissions of the engine. The schematic of the test rig has been demonstrated in Fig. 1[22]. As it can be seen from the figure, the engine is connected to the data acquisition system so that many controlling parameters can be carefully controlled and simultaneously monitored. In order to measure the rate of the fuel mass, the ST10 controlling sensor has been used. A tachometer and a dynamometer are connected to the output shaft for measuring the engine speed, brake power, and torque. The engine speed varies from 591rpm to 2308rpm and the engine output power is recorded in this range of the speeds. Each pair of the engine speed and engine power corresponds to the special rate of fuel mass injected and intake air temperature. The rest of the engine specifications such as air-fuel ratio and the values of the different emissions (NOx, soot, HC, CO, CO2) have been recorded by the digital instruments mounted on the appropriate places on the engine. The measured values of the two challenging emissions from the engine, i.e., NOxand soot have been respectively shown in Figs. 2 and 3as functions of engine speed, intake air temperature, fuel mass injected, and the engine power. The experimental uncertainty arises mainly from the values of NOxand soot emissions not exactly reproducible, which can be due to the accuracy and stability of the measuring devices and the engine type. A typical estimation for the stability of the measurements can be obtained from the calculation of the variance coefficient (VarCoef.) [17],(1)VarCoef.[%]=σY¯⋅100where,(2)σ=∑i=1nYi−Y¯2n−1.Here, σ is the standard deviation, n is the number of tests evaluated for a special case under the same conditions, Y is the variable used for evaluating each repetition in the case andY¯is its average. The values of VarCoef.[%] for the NOxand soot emissions are obtained to be 1.21 and 8.03, respectively. These values show that the stability of NOxis higher than that of soot for the engine under consideration. It may be noted that, in all the tests carried out in the present work, the average values of the emissions are considered as the ultimate one. The measured data of the emissions show that about 98% of the NOxand 52% of the soot values lie above the EURO I standard line (8.0g/kWh for NOxand 0.38g/kWh for soot). So these values have to be optimized, which is the main objective of the present work. The maximum values of NOxand soot emissions for the 294 experimental cases have been obtained at the engine speeds of 640rpm and 602rpm, intake air temperatures of 26.6°C and 27.6°C, fuel mass injected of 0.45 and 0.41g/s and the output powers of 1.5 and 1.3kW, respectively. The minimum and maximum values of the input parameters used in the present work have been given in Table 2.The ANNs, inspired from the brain's biological networks, were first presented by McCulloch and Pitts [23], and are employed in a wide variety of applications such as modeling, controlling, pattern recognition, image processing, etc. [24]. One of the most important privileges of ANNs is their high potentials in modeling the nonlinear complicated relations between the multi-component input and output variables. In addition, they are faster [25], more reliable [26] than the other methods such as conventional computational fluid dynamics methods [17,27].The basic elements of a network are neurons, which consist of weights, biases, summarizers and transfer functions as shown in Fig. 4. Each neuron receives the inputs x1, x2, …, xnweighted by the corresponding wi. The bias bi, which can take a nonzero constant value is then added to the weighted inputs in summarizers. This sum enters the transfer function and the output of the neuron is obtained under the influence of the function. The transfer functions such as tansig, logsig, etc, produce various types and a wide range of outputs. These functions can non-linearize the network to cope with the non-linearity and complicated nature of the system. For instance, the logsig function, which is a mathematical sigmoidal logistic function, produces the values between 0 and 1 in the output according to the following relation:(3)yi=logsig(ui)=11+e−ui.Eqs. (4) and (5) give the output values of summarizers uiand neurons yi, respectively.(4)ui=∑j=1nwijxj+bi(5)yi=f(ui)where, xjis the jth component of the experimental inputs x, and f is the transfer function of the network.According to the Kolmogorov theory, a multi-layer perceptron network (MLP) can approximate a complicated and nonlinear relation between the inputs and outputs of a system. The three-layer perceptron is one of the simplest and most efficient networks, which can be used in many complex systems because it involves few controlling parameters to be adjusted. The back propagation algorithm (BPA), which is widely used in MLP is a network output error minimization method based on the gradient descent procedure with the use of a special training strategy [24]. The training process of the network is performed by adjusting the weights and biases with respect to the corresponding neuron. This is done by a special type of the learning functions. The purpose of the network training is to find some optimum weights and biases so that the network can obtain the output values close to the experimental ones for any set of arbitrary inputs. It may be noted that, the types of the transfer functions and training and learning algorithms play important roles in the network modeling. Therefore, they should be chosen accurately. The performance function of the network determines the accuracy of the network in different iterations of the learning process. More details on the network structure and performance can be found in [24,28].In this paper, the objective of the modeling is to find a relationship between the input parameters involving engine speed, intake air temperature, rate of fuel mass injected, and brake power on the one hand and the output parameters consisting of NOxand soot emissions on the other hand. A program has been written in MATLAB7.8, and 294 experimental patterns have been employed for prediction of the emissions. 90% of the patterns is randomly chosen and used for training and the remaining 10% is used for testing the network. The network structure used for modeling s an MLP network with three layers including input layer, hidden layer and output layer. This network is potentially appropriate for problems with limited number of data. Using an MLP with more layers could increase the risk of finding local minima in the error surface [29]. The simple and detailed presentation of the structure of the ANN employed in this work have been shown in Figs. 5 and 6, respectively. In these figures,(wl)ji, denotes the weight value of the line connecting the ith neuron of a layer to the jth neuron of the next layer. The index l accounts for the weights between the layer l and layer l+1 (l=1, 2 for a network with three layers). The symbol Ъ (see Fig. 6) denotes the number of neurons used in the hidden layer. For l=1, j can take the values of 1,2,…,Ъ and for l=2, i can take the values of 1,2,…Ъ. The number of neurons used in the input and output layers, corresponds to the number of input and output components, respectively. So, the network includes 4 neurons in the input layer and 1 neuron in the output layer. It is worth noting that, for each output component (i.e., NOxand soot emissions) an independent but somehow similar network structure is used. Investigations show that, including too many outputs in the same ANN causes the least accurate variable to drag down the prediction of the other outputs (see [29]). Both the hidden and output layers involve the biases to provide the model with better quality and fewer fluctuations. The number of neurons in the hidden layer is determined by trial and error and it ranges from 7 to 60. For the number of neurons less than 7, the network presents some weak results. Also the number of neurons more than 60 not only has limited effects on the results but also creates a complicated network with severely slow modeling process and response. The logsig transfer function has been employed for both the input and output layers to create a smooth convergence with more stability and to limit the network outputs between 0 and 1.Large differences in the absolute values of the different inputs can complicate the learning process in the network [17]. To overcome this problem, the patterns are normalized before entering to the network using Eq. (6), so that the normalized values of the inputs are lie in the range [0.001,1.00].(6)Vnorm=Va−VminVmax−Vmin×(Vh−Vl)+Vl,where, Vais the value to be normalized, Vmaxand Vminare the maximum and minimum values of the experimental data, respectively and Vhand Vlare respectively the upper and lower bounds of the range considered above. Also, Vnormindicates the normalized value of the data.The performance of the network is evaluated using mean square error (MSE) described as follows:(7)MSE=1Nex∑p∑k(tpk−fpk)2where, Nexrepresents the number of experimental data used in the training and testing process, t and f denote the experimental data and the network output, respectively. The subscripts p and k respectively stand for the pattern number and any element of the output vector [30–32]. The smaller the MSE the better the performance of the network would be in general.The training algorithms such as conjugate gradient propagation (cgp), conjugate gradient back propagation (cgb), gradient descent with momentum (gdm), gradient descent (gd) and Levenberg–Marquardt (lm), which are found in MATLAB software [33], have been separately tested for prediction of NOxand soot emissions. The results have been presented in Tables 3 and 4respectively for NOxand soot emissions. As it can be seen, the best result for NOxemission is obtained at the 3733th epoch using cgb training algorithm with 36 hidden neurons where the values of MSE for the training and testing the network are 0.0019 and 0.014, respectively. The MSE is a criterion used to evaluate the under fitting and over fitting which may occur in modeling [25]. For soot emission, however, the cgp training algorithm with 38 neurons leads to better results (with correlation factor R closer to unity) as compared with the other algorithms shown in Table 4. The values of MSE for training and testing the soot are 0.0010 and 0.0025, respectively. Following Wang et al. [34] the optimum stopping-time mechanism is employed in the present work. According to this mechanism the modeling process is stopped merely when the testing and training MSEs converge to some specified small values [34]. The training and testing results of the network are compared with the corresponding experimental data for NOxand soot through Figs. 7–10. According to Figs. 7 and 8 there are better agreement between the experiments and network outputs for smaller values of the NOxemissions, which may be due to the fact that the density of the experimental data used for training in this region is extremely high. For the soot emission, however, good agreements are found for medium values of the emission (see Figs. 9 and 10). The average deviation of the network outputs from the experimental data is evaluated using correlation factor R. The correlation factors associated with the training and testing for the NOxare 0.986 and 0.989 as shown in Figs. 7 and 8, respectively. Also depicted in Figs. 9 and 10 are the correlation factors R associated with the training and testing the soot emission, which are 0.988 and 0.980, respectively. The predicted results of the NOxand soot emissions obtained from the network are compared with the experimental ones for all 294 input vectors (patterns) as shown in Figs. 11 and 12, respectively. According to Fig. 11 at the engine's medium to high speeds, the network gives rise to good results for NOxemissions. In contrast, good results for the soot emission are obtained at low engine speeds as shown in Fig. 12.The effects of the network parameters on its performance and quality of convergence are briefly discussed below. The effects of different types of training algorithms such as cgb, cgp, gd, gdm and lm are examined in different layers. Also the effects of different biases, transfer functions, number of layers and number of neurons used in the hidden layer on the modeling of the soot and NOxemissions have been assessed and the best ones have been determined by trial and error. According to the results, using cgb algorithm for NOxand cgp algorithm for soot give rise to better results as compared with the other training algorithms. This may be attributed to their fewer instability and more reliability during the network modeling process. Considering the number of neurons used in the hidden layer, it is clear that the soot emission needs larger and more complicated network than the NOxemissions. These may be interpreted by the formation nature of the emissions and through the calculated values of the variance coefficients for them. It is well known that, the process of soot formation in diesel engines is much more complicated than that of NOxformation. In addition, the influence of the type of the learning algorithm is negligible compared with the type of the training algorithm. Therefore, the gradient descent with momentum learning algorithm is used in both the hidden and output layers for its less number of parameters to be adjusted. Applying the same algorithm in the hidden and output layers leads to less over fitting and under fitting in the network. An MLP network with three layers has led to more accurate and more rapid modeling process. A simpler network (e.g., a network with two layers) cannot properly predict the emissions. In addition, a network with more than three layers is so large, unstable, complicated and unreliable in finding the local minima for the errors. Furthermore, a network without biases in the hidden and output layers is unable to approximate the relationship between the inputs and outputs with a desired accuracy. Using logsig transfer function rather than tansig transfer function causes a rapid and smooth convergence and allows the network to have positive values in the output. The optimized values of the weights and biases for the NOxand soot are presented in Tables 5 and 6, respectively.As stated in Section 1, the ACO algorithm is used in the present study for optimizing the controlling parameters of the engine for the purpose of reducing its emissions. This algorithm is inspired from the foraging behavior of ant colony in the wild for finding the shortest path between the food source and the nest [35,36]. The ACO is based on the ant system (AS) algorithm. It starts the optimization by employing two kinds of information sources. The first source is the so-called pheromone intensity of the trail τijand the second one is the visibility ηij, which is related to the heuristic information of the problem. For example, in the travelling salesman problem [37], ηijis the inverse of the distance between two cities. Based on how the amount of pheromone is calculated and updated, many different AS algorithms have been proposed. One of these algorithms is ant colony system (ACS), which has been widely used in practical applications [14]. In the ACS algorithm, the position of each ant is changed in such a way that the balance between the exploration and exploitation is enforced directly. Exploration is to search the new points and solutions while exploitation is to explore the best solution among the different solutions. This algorithm employs the locally updated pheromone in each iteration. Besides, an extra reinforcing pheromone is applied to the globally best solution generated in each epoch. The pheromone intensity of the trail τijwill be updated as follows [38]:(8)τij(t+1)=(1−ρ)τij(t)+∑kΔτij(t);iftheant(i,j)belongstothetrail0otherwisewhere, ρ∈(0, 1] is the evaporation rate of the pheromone, which determines the stability of the pheromone in each iteration. The rate of pheromone evaporation ρ provides the conditions to explore the new paths in all stages of the problem solution, which depends on the objective function and is determined such that the pheromone is updated gradually Δτijis the amount of pheromone laid on the path (i,j) by the kth ant in each iteration and is given by(9)Δτij=QL,where, Q is a controlling constant, which is used to adjust the intensity of pheromone updated in each iteration. L describes the value of the objective function in each iteration. Some kind of daemon action is considered to devote an extra pheromone deposit to the best solution in each epoch of the algorithm. The probability of the change in the position of ants from i to j is given by:(10)Pijk(t)=[τij(t)]α[ηij]β∑k∈allowedk[τik(t)]α[ηkj]β;j∈allowedk0;otherwise.In relation (10),allowedk={M−tabuk}, where tabukis the tabu list of the kth ant stating that this ant cannot pass through a point it had chosen in the previous iteration and M is the number of points that the ants can pass through. α and β are the parameters showing the relative importance of τ and η. For high values of α, the algorithm may show a static behavior before finding the desired solutions and for low values of α the algorithm is unable to find good solutions in a suitable time. ηijshows the desirability of the ant motion form i to j. It describes the heuristic information about the problem and is one of the two information sources used for determining the probability of each motion. This parameter can be omitted from the relation (10) depending on the type of the problem [38,39].The problem studied in the present work, include no heuristic information hence, the parameter η is omitted from Eq. (10). Therefore, the selection probability of a path is a function of only the pheromone intensity τ left on the path. Since there is no restriction on the maximum and minimum values of the deposited pheromone, the model of ant colony system (a type of ACO algorithm) along with a daemon action is used in the present study. The daemon action is an optional step in the algorithm, which involves applying additional updates from a global perspective. The selection probability of any path can then be expressed by,(11)Pijk(t)=[τij(t)]∑k∈allowedk[τij(t)]j∈allowedk0otherwise.In the relation (9), L is replaced by the objective function of the present problem, i.e.,GNOx,sootto give:(12)Δτij=QG(NOx,soot),where, the objective function G is determined based on the relative importance of NOxand soot exhausted from the diesel engine. According to Fig. 3, the soot emission from the tested diesel engine complies with the emission regulations in an extremely wide range of the engine operation conditions. However, merely a very small range of its NOxemissions obey the emission regulations. Therefore, the priority is to reduce the NOxemissions rather than the soot emission. A simple objective function is chosen, where the weighting factors of the emissions indicate their relative importance during the optimization process. The optimization results are affected by the weights assigned to each of the parameters in the objective function. These assigned weights are chosen based on the amount of emissions in the selected engine. The following objective function is proposed for initiation of the optimization process:(13)G=0.3soot+0.7NOxIt may be noted that, the soot and NOxvalues used in Eq. (13) correspond to the average value of these emissions in a cycle of modeling process. In addition, the values of NOxand soot emissions are normalized before they are substituted in to the objective function. This resolves the inconsistency between the absolute values of the two emissions. A simple structure consisting of four separate planes corresponding to the four input parameters has been depicted in Fig. 13. The temperature and mass fuel planes each involves a number of distinct data created with a suitable step starting from the minimum to maximum values of the corresponding parameter. For any pair of the engine speed and power chosen from different experimental cases, the intake air temperature and the rate of fuel mass injected are selected among their different values saved on the corresponding planes. Each iteration can be modeled by selecting four points on the four planes, which describes a path for a special ant. These selected points are adequate for calculating the value of the objective function. In the optimization process, the values of engine speed and power are fixed on their planes for each experimental case. The process follows the strategy of finding optimal values of the intake air temperature and fuel mass injected randomly and targetedly (i.e., considering the selection probability). The selection of the random and more probable data on the planes is carried out using random and cumulative distribution functions, respectively. After selecting the random data from each plane, the selection probability of the path is calculated using relation (11). In each epoch, different paths are selected independently and simultaneously by ants. Therefore, in a special epoch, different paths associated with the ants with different values of pheromone density will be created. Also the path with the lowest value of the objective function receives extra pheromone intensity (daemon action). This will cause the path selection probabilities in the subsequent epochs to differ from those in the current one. It is evident that, the less the value obtained for the objective function of any path, the selection of the path in the subsequent epochs is more probable.The optimization process has been carried out for different pheromone evaporation rates ρ=0.0, 0.02, 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, different controlling constants Q=0.01, 0.1, 0.5, 0.8, 0.9 and various numbers of ants Na=10, 30, 50, 80 using a code written in MATLAB. The initial values of the pheromone and selection probability for all paths have been taken equal to 0.01 and 0.002, respectively. The value of σ should be considered between 0 and 1 in order to prevent the algorithm to remain within the local optimum values and to search and evaluate more paths without intensive increase in the selection probability. Very large values of ρ slow down the convergence process of the algorithm and very small values of it cause the algorithm to diverge. Although increasing the value of the controlling parameter Q causes the rapid convergence, it increases the risk of losing the potentially optimal paths for the initial epochs. Employing large number of ants causes the algorithm to converge at initial stages of the optimization process and may improve the quality of the optimized values for the NOxemissions. However, it remarkably increases the response time of the process. It may be noted that, the best results have been obtained for the values of ρ=0.3, Q=0.1 and Na=50. The response time of the algorithm obtained using these values is 227s under a system with specifications: CPU: Intel, core 2 Duo, E7400 2.80GHz, RAM: 1.99 GB. For a typical engine speed and power, the convergence curve of the optimization algorithm versus different epochs is shown in Fig. 14. As it can be seen, after epoch 150, the algorithm converges to the special value of the objective function and the fluctuations will gradually decrease. At the early epochs of the optimization process, more fluctuations arise in the objective function arise, which may be due to the random nature of the data selection by the algorithm. The algorithm approaches the stable condition as the optimization process proceeds. This may be attributed to the fact that the selection probability plays a more dominant role at the latest epochs. After the epoch 500 where the value of the objective function will approach 4.6g/kWh, these fluctuations are quite small and can be neglected.Table 7shows the values of engine operating parameters after (before) the optimization. For several cases as it was expected, for all cases of the operating conditions the optimized values of the intake air temperature are found to approach the minimum values of the experimental ones. This is consistent with the fact that the values of NOxand soot emissions decrease at low intake temperatures [5]. Decreasing the intake air temperature increases the intake air density and subsequently increases the amount of oxygen in the mixture which is used for oxidation of carbons hence reducing the soot emission. This phenomenon will also decrease the maximum temperature of the combustion process and consequently reduce the amount of NOxemissions.For the case #16 with engine speed of 602rpm and engine power of 1.3kW, a small increase in the value of fuel mass injected at the intake air temperature of 21.3°C is leads to a decrease in the exhaust NOxfrom 47.7 to 26.2g/kWh. Also in this case the amount of the soot has been reduced from 2.12 to 1.89g/kWh. Consider case #58 with the engine speed of 640rpm and power of 1.5kW, which involves the maximum values of NOxamong all the experimental data. It can be seen that, at the temperature of 19.8°C the fuel mass injected assumes a negligible increase; while the NOxvalue reduces from 55.89 to 32.10g/kWh and the soot emission remains almost unchanged. In the case #256 (which has relatively high values of the two emissions) at the engine speed of 2206rpm and power of 81.2kW, the values of NOxand soot have been decreased from 14.38 to 11.77g/kWh and from 1.29 to 0.87g/kWh, respectively. The salient feature of this case is that, the rate of fuel mass injected has been also decreased from 6.74 to 5.18g/kWh. The optimization process carried out for all 294 cases (not shown) shows an average reduction of 32% in NOxand an average reduction of 7% in soot. It may be noted that, in some cases the value of fuel mass injected increases slightly, which is not effective from the of the objective function view point.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this work, modeling and optimization of the NOxand soot emissions from an internal combustion diesel engine are carried out using a combined ANN and ACO algorithm. Controlling parameters considered for the optimization process are the engine speed, intake air temperature, rate of fuel mass injected and engine power. NOxand soot emissions are considered as output parameters. The results reveal that the combination of the ANN model and ACO algorithm can be employed as an efficient and useful technique for optimization of the engine operating conditions thereby reducing the NOxand soot emissions. The convergence speed of this combination of the ANN model and ACO algorithm is higher than the combination of the ANN model and genetic algorithm as used in [17]. The ANN model was found to be of high accuracy and the performed optimization was able to remarkably decrease the values of emissions with appropriate response time. The average reduction in NOxand soot are 32% and 7%, respectively. This method can be used in such applications as electronic control units to automatically decrease the NOxand soot emissions.