@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Drivers of interdependence and network convergence in social networks in virtual communities

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study examined drivers of interdependence and network convergence in social networks in virtual communities.This study used weak/strong tie theory for developing hypotheses.Needs for affiliation, altruism, and social intelligence are related to interdependence and network convergence.Some of the interactions are related to interdependence and network convergence.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Social network,Virtual communities,Need for affiliation,Altruism,Social intelligence,Interdependence,Network convergence,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Social networks proliferate in virtual communities, where interdependence and network convergence among users are key to their development. However, as little is known about the drivers of interdependence and network convergence, this study examines whether individual differences could be one such driver. An online questionnaire was used to collect data and responses from 3086 online gamers, and hierarchical regressions were used for the testing of hypotheses. This study found that the need for affiliation, altruism, and social intelligence are positively related to interdependence and network convergence. Moreover, the need for affiliation interacts with altruism to predict interdependence, and interacts with social intelligence to predict network convergence. This study is the first using the weak/strong tie theory to identify drivers of interdependence and network convergence among users of virtual communities.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Social networks—sets of people or their digital representations bonded by friendship (Musial and Kazienko, 2013)—in virtual communities are widely discussed and influential in various areas, including campaigning (Vergeer and Hermans, 2013), marketing (Wang et al., 2013), revisit intention (Teng and Chen, 2014), knowledge seeking and sharing (Wang et al., 2013), and the spread of information and communication technology products (Lee et al., 2014). Drivers of participation in social networks include trust (Lin and Liu, 2012) and interdependence (Teng et al., 2012). Interdependence (the extent to which individuals depend on each other to make decisions) and network convergence (the extent to which individuals share common friends) are important for developing online social networks (Parks and Floyd, 1996). However, insufficient research has been done into the drivers of interdependence and network convergence in virtual communities. Thus research into this issue should contribute novel knowledge to communication literature and provide insights for electronic commerce managers to form and utilize online customer networks.The purpose of this study is to examine drivers of interdependence and network convergence in social networks in virtual communities. To choose what potential drivers to include, this study reviewed the pertinent literature and one classic theory, i.e., the weak/strong tie theory (Granovetter, 1973). This is among the most well-known network theories (Borgatti and Halgin, 2011) and explains how individuals form strong ties, and how weak and strong ties affect the development of social networks. Thus, this theory was found to be suitable for adoption in the present study.The weak/strong tie theory (Granovetter, 1973) posits that strong ties foster local (i.e., within a group) cohesion while weak ties provide opportunities for integrating individuals into communities. Moreover, interpersonal tie strength grows as associated individuals devote time, emotion, intimacy, and reciprocal services to the tie (Granovetter, 1973). Such commitment may be motivated by an individual’s efforts to satisfy their own needs or those of others in social networks. In social networks, maintaining relationships with others is associated with the need for affiliation (Schultheiss, 2008), while helping others is related to the personality trait, altruism (Rushton et al., 1981). Hence this study considered the need for affiliation and altruism. Whether a commitment of time and emotion can effectively lead to interpersonal tie strength may depend on an individual’s ability to understand others, which is the essence of social intelligence (Yeh, 2013). Therefore, this study also considered social intelligence. In short, this study consulted the weak/strong tie theory (Granovetter, 1973) to identify three potential drivers (i.e., the need for affiliation, altruism, and social intelligence) for the building of social networks.Strong ties foster cohesion within a group (Granovetter, 1973) and such cohesion can be described by the extent to which individuals depend on each other to make decisions, i.e., interdependence (as defined by Parks and Floyd, 1996). Moreover, weak ties provide opportunities for integrating individuals into communities (Granovetter, 1973). When individuals are integrated into close friends’ communities, they share more common friends with these close friends, i.e., increased network convergence (Parks and Floyd, 1996). Therefore, this study aims to examine whether and how the need for affiliation, altruism, social intelligence, and their interactions, are related to interdependence and network convergence.Social networks contain numerous interpersonal ties that link individuals. The strength of such ties develops when individuals devote time, emotion, intimacy, and reciprocal services to the tie (Granovetter, 1973). Although strong ties intuitively contribute to the development of social networks, weak ties transmit crucial information from one network to another (Granovetter, 1973). Therefore, as strong ties foster local (i.e., within a group) cohesion while weak ties provide opportunities for integrating individuals into communities, each contributes to the development of social networks in different ways.The weak/strong tie theory has been widely applied and proposes that intergroup ties consist disproportionately of weak ties (Granovetter, 1973). This proposition and others have been verified by subsequent literature (e.g., Friedkin, 1980). This theory explains the tendency for an individual to have more access to job-opening information via weak ties than via strong ties (Granovetter, 1983). Weak ties also facilitate the provision of useful information among organizational contexts (Constant et al., 1996). Strong ties lead to the receipt of useful knowledge while weak ties provide access to nonredundant information (Levin and Cross, 2004). Although weak ties provide access to useful and non-complex knowledge, strong ties provide access to complex knowledge (Hansen, 1999). Strong ties also motivate people to use more media to communicate than weak ties (Haythornthwaite, 2005), indicating that both weak and strong ties are important and should be included in studies on information and communication systems.The weak/strong tie theory is useful for developing a research model describing social networks in virtual communities, where individuals devote time and emotion, and provide information or services reciprocally to other individuals, i.e., increasing strength of specific ties. Strong ties then contribute to local cohesion, which helps individuals develop social networks (Granovetter, 1973). Individuals in virtual communities typically do not meet in person, but exchange information and make decisions. Therefore, the local cohesion or development of social networks in virtual communities should be measured by how individuals depend on each other to make decisions, i.e., their interdependence (as defined by Parks and Floyd, 1996).Moreover, weak ties contribute to the development of social networks in linking groups, i.e., integrating individuals into multiple communities (Granovetter, 1973). In virtual communities, individuals integrated into a close friend’s community have mutual friends with the close friend, i.e., increased network convergence (as defined by Parks and Floyd, 1996). Therefore, the present study chose to use interdependence and network convergence that should be key to the development of social networks.The need for affiliation is an individual’s desire to belong to a social group (Schultheiss, 2008). Individuals with a strong need for affiliation enjoy establishing and maintaining close relationships with another person or group (Schultheiss, 2008). The need for affiliation motivates an individual to frequently interact with others. In virtual communities, individuals are motivated to engage in social activities (Lee et al., 2012) and social motivation drives individuals to cooperate with others, engage in teamwork, and build interpersonal relationships (Yee, 2006). Such cooperation, engagement, and relationship-building activities require individuals to devote the time and energy that is essential for creating strong interpersonal ties (Granovetter, 1973), or close relationships. Close relationships exist in virtual communities (Huynh et al., 2013) and in such strong (or close) relationships, partners can incur emotional rewards (e.g., care or happiness) and costs (e.g., anger or anxiety) (Guerrero et al., 2012), which impact on the formation of partnerships and cooperation (the interdependence theory, Rusbult, 1980). Hence, those individuals consult each other when making decisions, i.e., they have strong interdependence (Parks and Floyd, 1996), motivating this study to hypothesize a positive relationship between the need for affiliation and interdependence.H1The need for affiliation is positively related to interdependence.The need for affiliation characterizes an individual with the desire to belong to a social group (Schultheiss, 2008), and this need thus motivates the individual to seek out social groups to which they can belong. In online communities, friends’ social groups (e.g., guilds in online games and clubs on social networking sites) are just a click away, enabling frequent interactions with members of friends’ social networks. Frequent interactions typically involve exchanges of ideas and information, and effort, and thus such interaction likely leads to an increased number of acquaintances or weak ties, which help integrate individuals into communities (or social networks) (Granovetter, 1973), i.e., making friends in friends’ social networks. Hence, an individual with a strong need for affiliation likely makes friends through friends’ social networks, resulting in a substantial overlap between the individual’s own social network and friends’ social networks. Such an overlap is called network convergence (Parks and Floyd, 1996). This study thus hypothesizes a positive relationship between the need for affiliation and network convergence.H2The need for affiliation is positively related to network convergence.Altruism is an individual’s tendency to help others (Rushton et al., 1981) when they can choose to help or not (Fritzsche et al., 2000). Altruism is related to helping others via information systems (Lee and Lee, 2010), and community engagement behavior (Lee et al., 2011). Helping others and engaging in community activities require the devotion of time, emotion, and reciprocal services that are essential for forming strong ties (Granovetter, 1973). Strong ties represent strong interpersonal relationships in which partners enhance each other’s wellbeing (Brown and Brown, 2006), indicating that they likely consult each other when making decisions i.e. interdependence (Parks and Floyd, 1996). Therefore, this study hypothesizes a positive relationship between altruism and interdependence.H3Altruism is positively related to interdependence.Altruism is a facet of the broad trait agreeableness (Zeidner and Shani-Zinovich, 2011). Highly agreeable individuals are cooperative, warm, and kind (Saucier, 1994), and thus are typically appreciated and accepted in groups of people, or social networks. Moreover, agreeable online community members enjoy social activities (Graham and Gosling, 2013). Hence highly altruistic individuals enjoy interactions with others. In online communities, it is easy to access friends’ friends, facilitating the interaction of highly altruistic individuals with them. Interactions help individuals to get to know acquaintances or form weak ties, which in turn help integrate these individuals into communities (or social networks) (Granovetter, 1973). That is, highly altruistic individuals likely incorporate friends’ friends into their own social networks, increasing the overlap between their own social networks and those of friends, i.e., increased network convergence (Parks and Floyd, 1996). Therefore, this study hypothesizes a positive relationship between altruism and network convergence.H4Altruism is positively related to network convergence.Social intelligence is the ability to understand others that helps an individual to successfully engage in interpersonal interactions (Yeh, 2013). Social intelligence also helps solve social problems (Beheshtifar and Roasaei, 2012) and when doing so, individuals are required to devote time and emotion that are essential for forming strong ties (Granovetter, 1973). Strong ties represent strong interpersonal relationships in which partners can alter each other’s wellbeing (Brown and Brown, 2006) and thus are likely to consult each other when making decisions, i.e., interdependence (Parks and Floyd, 1996). Therefore, this study hypothesizes a positive relationship between social intelligence and interdependence.H5Social intelligence is positively related to interdependence.Social intelligence fuels successful engagement in interpersonal interactions (Yeh, 2013). Such success can increase the likelihood that friends refer a target individual to their friends for the provision of further help or information. Such referral indicates the opportunity to integrate into friends’ social networks, or have their friends as acquaintances, or build weak ties. Moreover, such success may further encourage individuals to embrace opportunities to engage with, and build new relationships with, the friends in friends’ social networks. That is, individuals having high levels of social intelligence likely have their social networks overlapping with their friends’ social networks, hence convergence (Parks and Floyd, 1996). Therefore, this study hypothesizes a positive relationship between social intelligence and network convergence.H6Social intelligence is positively related to network convergence.The need for affiliation is the desire to belong to a social group (Schultheiss, 2008). Such a desire motivates an individual to frequently interact with others. To engage in frequent interactions, an individual should devote sufficient time and energy that are vital for creating strong ties (Granovetter, 1973) or close relationships. Such close relationships bond members using emotional rewards and costs (Guerrero et al., 2012), inducing members to consult each other when making decisions, i.e., they have strong interdependence (Parks and Floyd, 1996). In the above process, strong ties can be created more effectively when an individual can effectively utilize interpersonal interactions, i.e., the individual has a high level of social intelligence (Yeh, 2013). Therefore, an individual with a high level of social intelligence can effectively build strong relationships (or strong ties), facilitating the formation of interdependence. Hence, this study hypothesizes that the relationship between the need for affiliation and interdependence should be stronger for those individuals having higher levels of social intelligence.H7Social intelligence strengthens the relationship between the need for affiliation and interdependence.In the development of H2, the need for affiliation motivates an individual to make friends and to make friends from friends’ social networks. Since social intelligence is essential for an individual to have successful interpersonal interactions (Yeh, 2013), i.e., skillful exchanges, it can help individuals to get to know acquaintances that are defined as weak ties (Granovetter, 1973). Hence social intelligence can facilitate or hasten the process of making friends. Therefore, individuals with high levels of social intelligence can likely make friends from friends’ social networks more quickly and successfully than those with low levels, increasing the degree to which their social networks overlap with their friends’ social networks, i.e., convergence (Parks and Floyd, 1996). Therefore, this study hypothesizes that the relationship between the need for affiliation and network convergence is stronger for individuals having higher levels of social intelligence.H8Social intelligence strengthens the relationship between the need for affiliation and network convergence.Altruistic individuals enjoy helping others (Rushton et al., 1981), even when they have freedom to help or not (Fritzsche et al., 2000). Helping others requires that an individual devote the time and energy that are the key to creating strong ties (Granovetter, 1973) or close relationships. Close relationships further provide members with the ability to decide on the rewards and costs of other members (Guerrero et al., 2012), thus leading members to consult each other when making decisions i.e., the essence of interdependence (Parks and Floyd, 1996). Therefore, altruism should be positively related to interdependence. In the above process, helping others may or may not effectively create strong ties, depending on whether an individual masters interpersonal interactions, i.e., whether an individual is socially intelligent (Yeh, 2013). A socially intelligent individual can successfully utilize helping behavior to create strong ties, and subsequently formulates strong interdependence. Hence, social intelligence should strengthen the relationship between altruism and interdependence.H9Social intelligence strengthens the relationship between altruism and interdependence.Altruism is one facet of agreeableness (Zeidner and Shani-Zinovich, 2011). In the development of H4, agreeable individuals enjoy engaging in social activities (Graham and Gosling, 2013) with friends from friends’ social networks (i.e., building weak ties), and subsequently are integrated into the friends’ social networks. In the process, socially intelligent individuals can effectively utilize the exchanges to create weak ties, because they understand others and can successfully engage in interpersonal interactions (Yeh, 2013), i.e., skillful exchanges. Thus, social intelligence can be inferred to strengthen the relationship between altruism and network convergence.H10Social intelligence strengthens the relationship between altruism and network convergence.In the development of H1, the need for affiliation motivates an individual to frequently engage in exchanges which in turn lead to the devotion of time and emotion that are essential for creating strong ties or strong relationships (Granovetter, 1973). Strong relationships further fuel interdependence (Guerrero et al., 2012; Rusbult, 1980). In the developmental process, altruism motivates an individual to help others (Rushton et al., 1981), and thus increases the devotion of time and emotion. Such increased devotion speeds up the formation of strong ties and eventually interdependence. Thus altruism is hypothesized as strengthening the relationship between the need for affiliation and interdependence.H11Altruism strengthens the relationship between the need for affiliation and interdependence.In the development of H2, the need for affiliation motivates an individual to seek a sense of belonging in social groups (Schultheiss, 2008). Such an individual seeks opportunities to engage in interactions and exchanges with members of friends’ social networks. Opportunities include those associated with helping such members. Highly altruistic individuals enthusiastically engage in community activities (Lee et al., 2011) and enjoy helping others (Rushton et al., 1981). Therefore, they enjoy taking the opportunity to engage in friends’ social networks, and eventually seamlessly make friends in friends’ social networks, i.e., convergence (Parks and Floyd, 1996). Therefore, altruism likely strengthens the relationship between the need for affiliation and network convergence.H12Altruism strengthens the relationship between the need for affiliation and network convergence.Fig. 1illustrates the framework and the hypotheses.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study found that the need for affiliation, altruism, and social intelligence are positively related to interdependence and network convergence. Moreover, the need for affiliation and altruism interact to influence interdependence. The interaction between the need for affiliation and social intelligence is positively related to network convergence.This study contributes to current electronic commerce literature by identifying novel drivers and their independent and interactive influences on interdependence and network convergence in virtual communities. This study is distinct in its introduction of the weak/strong tie theory to develop the research framework, which in turn proves the ability of this theory to explain the formulation of interdependence and network convergence in virtual communities.This study used the weak/strong tie theory (Granovetter, 1973) as a theoretical foundation to develop all hypotheses. Most of these were supported by the analytical results, indicating the theory’s applicability. That is, this study extends the theory’s applicability to an explanation of interdependence and network convergence formation in virtual environments. Since social issues are current to various academic areas (e.g., Lin and Liu, 2012; Teng et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2013), extension of the applicability promotes the weak/strong tie theory. The introduction of this theory to explaining various social issues can increase the impact of the present study and associated studies.Interdependence in this study can be a proxy for tie strength. Network convergence can be a proxy for neighborhood overlap rate (NOR, for details, see Onnela et al., 2007). The positive correlation between interdependence and network convergence (as in Table 3) thus confirms the positive relation between tie strength and NOR (as in Onnela et al., 2007).In recent literature, Teng et al. (2012) found that achievement- or goal-related factors (i.e., challenges) can directly increase user loyalty (or continuance intention) via increased interdependence. The present study is in line with Teng et al. (2012) in recognizing the critical role of interdependence. However, it is novel in introducing social factors in explaining interdependence. The findings of the present study contribute to the literature by increasing understanding of the formation of interdependence.As a pioneering work on social networks in cyberspace, Parks and Floyd (1996) found that relationships begun online could migrate to the real world. The present study is motivated by their work emphasizing the importance of interdependence and network convergence. Although the two constructs are important in explaining communication in cyberspace, insufficient research had been devoted to fully discovering how to develop or change them. The present study joins the current trend of discussing the significance of interdependence (e.g., Teng et al., 2012). Findings of the present study can remind subsequent researchers of the usefulness of interdependence and network convergence, and thus can promote knowledge development capitalizing on these two important constructs.In the literature describing strong (or interdependent) relationships, Guerrero et al. (2012) posit that partners in strong relationships can incur rewards and costs to each other. The present study agrees with the proposition and uses it to develop a number of hypotheses. Most of these are supported, confirming the proposition of Guerrero et al. (2012). The present study considered the proposition an important component for developing hypotheses.This study identified and verified that some social factors (i.e., the need for affiliation, altruism, and social intelligence) are positively related to interdependence and network convergence. That is, these social factors likely increase the strength with which members in a social network are bound (interdependence) and the density of a network, contributing to the knowledge on social networks. Although this study collected a survey sample from online game social networks, these novel social factors provide insights into the development of social networks among their users, not only to managers of online games, but also to managers of other social media platforms. The reason is that online games are similar to other social media platforms in that members share thoughts, interact frequently, but do not necessarily meet other members in person. For example, users of platforms such as www.patientslikeme.com and www.tuan.com do not necessarily meet other users in person, but they can share thoughts and interact frequently. Therefore, the findings of this study are likely generalizable to other social media platforms.The findings of this study provide valuable insights for managers. First, the need for affiliation is positively related to interdependence and network convergence. The need for affiliation is an individual’s desire to belong to a social group (Schultheiss, 2008). The first finding indicates that some users are motivated by their need to belong to social groups. It is suggested that managers thus appeal to such needs by using corresponding messages such as “you are not alone”, “we are a family” or “together we can make a difference” to attract those who have a strong need for affiliation. Moreover, the findings of this study reveal that affiliation is a powerful force binding users or linking social networks. Hence, it is suggested that managers hold offline or web get-togethers of their users or use other means to enhance user feelings that “I belong to this group”. The findings of this study suggest that the addition of users who have a strong need for affiliation likely contributes to the development of social networks.For example, www.patientslikeme.com is a website that facilitates useful patient interactions and information sharing. Managers of this website could use appeals such as “you are not the only one suffering from the disease”. Knowing that others have the same disease may attract those who have a strong need for affiliation to join the social networks of this website. Moreover, managers can design offline or web get-togethers, or provide convenient platforms for members to hold their own gatherings. Such activities foster the feeling of affiliation, and subsequently contribute to the development of the social network among users of the website.Second, this study found that altruism is positively related to interdependence and social convergence, or the development of social networks. Therefore, it is suggested that managers of virtual communities attract highly altruistic individuals and/or encourage altruistic behavior among users. To attract highly altruistic individuals, managers may use appeals of “people need your expertise” or “your solutions are key to others’ problems”. To encourage altruistic behavior, managers may introduce technical features that instantly remind those who can help in answering specific questions with new inquiries or questions.For instance, www.tuan.com is an unofficial website of Apple users. Managers of this website could use “your solutions are key to other Apple users’ problems” to attract prospective users who are highly altruistic. Moreover, managers can incorporate a feature in the system that enables users to define themselves as experts in certain products or problems. Therefore, new inquiries can directly be passed to those who have identified themselves as experts in that product or problem. Such a feature thus facilitates altruistic behavior which then likely contributes to the development of social networks.Third, this study found that social intelligence is positively related to interdependence and network convergence, and thus important in the development of social networks. Social intelligence is the ability to understand others (Yeh, 2013). Therefore, this finding implies the importance of understanding others. It is suggested that managers of virtual communities design an exemplar question format that assists users to provide necessary information for others to understand, interact with, and answer. Moreover, it is suggested that managers provide clear labels that show the specific usage/intention of each posting. Such labels could help users viewing the postings understand them. Furthermore, managers may provide archives of frequently asked questions and important information to ensure clear understanding. via clear understanding of others, members of a social network can develop stronger relations (i.e., increased interdependence) and make friends in friends’ social networks (i.e., increased network convergence), i.e., facilitating development of social networks.This study adopts a cross-sectional design, which is useful and valid in examining correlations. However, such a design is limited in directly confirming causality. Confirmation of causality may require experimental and longitudinal designs. Thus it is suggested that future studies further examine causality among the constructs included in this study.This study adopts a psychological assessment approach widely used in various areas (e.g., Lin and Liu, 2012; Teng et al., 2012). Given the usefulness of such an approach, the behavioral outcomes can still provide additional evidence for supporting psychological theories. Therefore, future studies may measure network convergence using the number or the proportion of commonly owned friends, i.e., the magnitude of network overlap.This study chose to adopt the weak/strong tie theory as the theoretical foundation to identify relevant constructs and develop hypotheses. Moreover, it includes frequently used demographics, such as gender, age, education, and income, as well as relevant usage variables, such as years of playing and hours of playing per week. However, one study can never include all relevant variables, demonstrating the limitations of this study and research opportunities for future studies, which could use other social or psychological theories to identify additional novel constructs to enrich the framework herein.This study collected a large sample and asked participants to rate the social networks rather than rate all individuals in the social networks. This approach summarizes the perceptions (or ego properties) of all participants and thus can be an aggregate view of the social networks. However, such an approach is limited from assessing each link (or dyadic properties), restraining this study from providing a direct assessment on the weak/strong tie theory. In the big data era, future researchers are encouraged to cooperate with system providers to collect links (or strength of ties) among all users. Such cooperation would likely provide a more complete picture of the development of social networks.This study is one of the first exploring—with the use of the perspective of weak/strong tie theory—how individuals form social networks in virtual environments. It initiates the identification of three vital factors (i.e., the need for affiliation, altruism, and social intelligence) and their interplay in contributing to the formation of interdependence and network convergence, and subsequently the social networks. Previous studies have demonstrated the influences of social networks in various areas. The findings of this study provide insights into how the formation of social networks can be facilitated, increasing the usefulness of findings in previous studies. Future research can aim to develop and examine a comprehensive framework including a large number of antecedents and consequences of social networks, with the present study as a partial foundation.