@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Paraphrase Extraction using fuzzy hierarchical clustering

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Fuzzy hierarchical clusters are processed by SVM classifier to detect paraphrases.Agglomeration on verbs is by followed by division on nouns.A novel fuzzy grouping strategy has been utilized for merging clusters.Better performance than existing k-means clustering and other approaches such as cosine similarity and FCM clustering.Applying Word Sense Disambiguation has been found to be beneficial.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fuzzy Agglomerative Clustering,Divisive clustering,Paraphrase Recognition,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Paraphrase Extraction involves the discovery of equivalent text segments from large corpora and finds application in tasks such as multi-document summarization and document clustering. Semantic similarity identification is a challenging problem which is further compounded by the large size of the corpus. In this paper a two-stage approach which involves clustering followed by Paraphrase Recognition has been proposed for extraction of sentence-level paraphrases from text collections. In order to handle the ambiguity and inherent variability of natural language a fuzzy hierarchical clustering approach which combines agglomeration based on verbs and division on nouns has been used. Sentences within each resultant cluster are then processed by a machine-learning based Paraphrase Recognizer to discover the paraphrases. The two-stage approach has been applied on the Microsoft Research Paraphrase Corpus and a subset of the Microsoft Research Video Description Corpus. The performance has been evaluated against an existing k-means clustering approach as well as cosine-similarity technique and Fuzzy C-Means clustering and the two-stage system has consistently demonstrated better performance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Vast amounts of natural language text are available on the web as well as in large-scale repositories; much of which is redundant. The task of Paraphrase Extraction focuses on identification of text units which convey the same meaning. The detection of similar text is complicated due to the rich variability of natural languages. The large scale of the corpora is another factor which poses hurdles in Paraphrase Extraction. Performing one-on-one matching of sentences is practically ruled out, even if it is assumed that a suitable Paraphrase Recognition system is available. Therefore, efficient techniques are required to identify possibly similar candidates from large scale corpora and then subject them to further processing to detect exact matches. An effective Paraphrase Extraction system will benefit various Natural Language Processing applications such as multi-document summarization, plagiarism detection, question answering and document clustering.The significant aspect of this work is that a novel two-level fuzzy clustering technique has been proposed for sentence-level Paraphrase Extraction. As similar sentences tend to describe the same or similar actions, Fuzzy Agglomerative Clustering based on verbs is performed initially. Divisive clustering is then applied to identify sub-groups of sentences which center on the same nouns. A Support Vector Machine (SVM) based Paraphrase Recognizer is then used to identify the paraphrases within each cluster. The performance of the Paraphrase Extraction system has been evaluated using the Microsoft Research Paraphrase Corpus (MSRPC) and a subset of the Microsoft Research Video Description Corpus (MSRVDC).The outline of the paper is as follows: Section 2 contains an overview of previous work related to Paraphrase Extraction and Hierarchical Clustering. Section 3 describes the methodology adopted for extracting paraphrases using a fuzzy hierarchical clustering approach and machine learning based Paraphrase Recognizer. Section 4 presents the results of experiments conducted using two different corpora. Possible directions for future work and applications are discussed in Section 5, which concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A two-stage approach centered on fuzzy clustering followed by Paraphrase Recognition has been proposed for Paraphrase Extraction. The significant aspects of the approach are: usage of a soft hierarchical clustering which has scope for parallelism and the ability to perform incremental clustering. Further a novel fuzzy grouping strategy has been utilized for merging clusters which ensures faster clustering and flatter hierarchies. The system has been evaluated on two different paraphrase corpora and has exhibited good performance in comparison to a cosine similarity technique as well as k-means and FCM Clustering approaches. The effect of applying WSD has also been investigated and is found to improve the performance. In future, the performance of the two-stage approach on larger corpora can be probed. The supervised classifier used in the second stage for Paraphrase Recognition can be replaced by suitable paraphrase evaluation metrics enabling the entire process to work in an unsupervised fashion. The approach can also be adapted for tasks such as tweet clustering, plagiarism detection and multi-document summarization.