@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new fuzzy linear assignment method for multi-attribute decision making with an application to spare parts inventory classification

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new fuzzy linear assignment model for fuzzy MADM problems is developed.The model can also be used in group decision making environments.The model is applied to a real life problem namely spare parts inventory classification.Detailed explanations and numerical examples are provided to enable a better understanding of the model.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Linear assignment method,Fuzzy multi-attribute decision making,Spare parts inventory management,Multi-criteria ABC analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a novel fuzzy linear assignment method is developed for multi-attribute group decision making problems. Since uncertain nature of many decision problems, the proposed method incorporates various concepts from fuzzy set theory such as fuzzy arithmetic and aggregation, fuzzy ranking and fuzzy mathematical programming into a fuzzy concordance based group decision making process. Fuzziness in the group hierarchy and quantitative type criteria are also taken into account. In order to present the validity and practicality of the proposed method, it is applied to a real life multi-criteria spare part inventory classification problem. The case study has demonstrated that the proposed method is easy to apply and able to provide effective spare parts inventory classes under uncertain environments. In addition to the practical verification by the company experts, the proposed method is also compared with some of the commonly used fuzzy multi-attribute decision making methods from the literature. According to the comparison of the results, there is an association between classes of spare parts obtained by the proposed method and the benchmarked methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Linear Assignment Method (LAM) is one of the less known members of Multi-Attribute Decision Making (MADM) approaches in the literature. LAM is mainly depends upon concordance concept and linear programming technique to determine the ranking order of alternatives. The crisp version of LAM was first introduced by Bernardo and Blin [1] for consumer choice among multi-attributed brands by using a set of attribute-wise rankings and a set of attribute weights. In LAM, a preference ranking order which best satisfies a given concordance measure can be generated. LAM also features a linear compensatory process for attribute interaction and combination. Furthermore, it utilizes only ordinal data rather than cardinal data as inputs in the decision making process [2,3]. Thus, it is not required to scale the qualitative attributes. For this reason, performance rankings needed by LAM are easier to obtain than the performance ratings required by the other MADM methods available in the literature [4]. In spite of being practical and easy to apply in various problems, LAM was implemented by relatively few researchers in the literature so far. In this research the focus is on the fuzzy version of LAM. A brief literature review on LAM for MADM problems can be presented as follows. A crisp LAM was employed by Jahan et al. [5] in a material selection process to rank and choose the best materials for a given engineering component. The comparison of that method was also carried out with the other MADM methods such as ELECTRE, VIKOR, graph theory-matrix approach and gray-relational analysis. Additionally, developing a group decision making approach based on the linear assignment concept was scheduled as a future work by the authors. In order to deal with the imprecise information in the decision making process, Liu and Liu [6] presented a fuzzy LAM by utilizing trapezoidal fuzzy numbers. However, that method involves uncertain evaluations only into the decision matrix and assigned crisp weights for each rank of the individual alternatives. In detail, after obtaining attribute-wise ranking matrix, all of the linguistic evaluations was transformed into the crisp equivalents which lead to deterministic weighted and concordance matrices. Therefore, the resulted assignment model will also be a deterministic linear program which may result in information losses into the decision making process.A fuzzy interactive LAM with a group decision making procedure was proposed by Bashiri and Badri [7] in order to allow decision makers to modify their preference information within the decision making process. In the first phase of that procedure, an initial order of alternatives was determined based on fuzzy decision and weighted matrices by solving the crisp equivalent form of a fuzzy LAM. However, the weighted matrix and importance weights of the criteria were defuzzified and a final linear programming model was obtained with crisp binding constraints. According to decision makers’ preference information, ranking order of the alternatives were revised and improved during the interactive process. Unfortunately, the relative importance of the decision makers and the hierarchy between the group members were not taken into account.This method was also implemented by [8] for selecting the optimum maintenance strategy. The maintenance experts interacted with the immediate solutions to revise these solutions progressively within the interaction process until the final ranking satisfies them and remains unchanged. That method also assumed that the decision makers have equal importance weights and the same defuzzification procedure was applied for the weighted attribute-wise matrix. An interval type-2 fuzzy LAM was proposed by Chen [9] to capture the imprecise or uncertain decision information into the MADM problems. In order to generate criterion-wise ranking matrix, signed-distance method which is one of the defuzzification based ranking technique was used to rank the alternatives in terms of each criterion. After obtaining the weighted rank frequency matrix which consists of fuzzy weights, the signed distance method was used again so as to produce the crisp permutation (concordance) matrix. Therefore, a crisp LAM was provided at the final step of that method.An extended LAM with interval-valued intuitionistic fuzzy sets was developed by Chen [10] for better reflection of the ambiguous nature of the subjective judgements and assessments. Thus, the imprecision in the degrees of membership could be handled. In fact, that method incorporated score and accuracy functions, membership and hesitation uncertainty indices so as to obtain attribute-wise preference of the alternatives. In order to determine the best preference ranking, a modified weighted-rank frequency matrix was employed to construct the linear programming model. However, since the usage of score and accuracy functions in certain cases, that method also produces crisp concordance matrix and a LAM with crisp objective function coefficients. Additionally, these methods [9,10] were not able to produce results for MADM problems under group decision making environments.Based on these observations, the present paper presents a new fuzzy LAM which combines various fuzzy logic concepts for multi-attribute group decision making problems. The proposed method is able to model uncertain evaluations of alternatives with mixed qualitative and quantitative criteria. To this end, the fuzziness embedded in performance ratings of the alternatives, importance weights of the criteria and hierarchy between the group members is taken into account. In order to show the validity and practicality of the proposed method, it is applied to a real-life multi-criteria ABC analysis for spare parts inventory classification considering multiple decision makers. Additionally, an extensive comparison is also carried out with some of the popular fuzzy MADM methods from the literature to support the practical verification by company experts.In the present paper, the following contributions are made: (i) apart from the existing literature, the proposed method utilizes different concepts of fuzzy set theory along the whole solution procedure. In detail, the fuzziness is also preserved in the weight and concordance matrices and reflected to the mathematical formulation of the LAM in order to overcome the deficiencies which may be resulted from possible information losses. In other words, the proposed method does not use any defuzzification procedure while generating the weight and concordance matrices. The uncertainty of the examined problem is reflected to the LAM whose objective function coefficients are also stated as fuzzy numbers, (ii) a group decision making process considering uncertainty related to hierarchy between the group members and their relative importance is presented based on the fuzzy linear assignment concept. In the literature, most of the papers assign fuzzy weights to reflect the relative importance of the decision makers without any well-reasoned explanation. However, since the uncertain hierarchy between the group members, the decision makers may also have uncertain importance/weights in the decision making process. For this purpose, these fuzzy weights are derived from the uncertain hierarchy between the group members by using a subjective preference based weighting method, (iii) since the LAM for MADM problems primarily uses the attribute-wise rankings of the alternatives to construct the weight and concordance matrices, selection of an appropriate ranking procedure is so crucial in terms of the accuracy of the results. The available fuzzy LAMs in the literature employ defuzzification based ranking procedures to construct the attribute-wise ranking matrix. Although defuzzification based ranking procedures are computational efficient, they have many deficiencies in relation to “fuzzy preference representation”, “the rationality of preference ordering”, “robustness” and “accuracy”. In the present paper a fuzzy preference based ranking procedure is employed and incorporated into the proposed fuzzy LAM in order to eliminate these deficiencies.Due to all of these capabilities, the proposed method can be considered as a useful tool for a better reflection of the real-life multi-attribute group decision making problems under uncertain environments. The remaining part of this paper is organized as follows: a detailed algorithmic procedure of the proposed method is described in Section 2. Section 3 illustrates the computational procedure of the proposed method along with an application to a real life multi-criteria ABC analysis for spare parts inventory classification. The comparison of the proposed method with some of the recently developed fuzzy MADM methods is also presented in the same section. Finally, conclusions and future research directions are given in Section 4.In this section, the fundamentals of the proposed fuzzy LAM are presented which consists of thirteen steps. The proposed method incorporates the following concepts from the fuzzy set theory which are depicted in Fig. 1. The main steps of the proposed method are described in the following sections.At first the fuzzy decision matrices are constructed for each decision maker. In fact, the decision makers need to assign the appropriate fuzzy numbers or linguistic values to each criterion regarding to all alternatives based on their own judgements. For the evaluation of the qualitative type criterion, the linguistic expressions can be defined as a variable whose values are words or phrase in natural or artificial language [11]. In Table 1, the linguistic variables and fuzzy ratings for both criteria and alternatives are presented. In addition, the membership functions of these linguistic terms which are related to the importance of different criteria are also demonstrated in Fig. 2. In this figure, μLrepresents the membership functions of each linguistic value, whereμL∈0,1.Finally, the fuzzy decision matrix(D˜k)with fuzzy evaluations of decision maker k for the alternatives with regard to the predefined criteria can be constructed as follows:(1)Fuzzy ratings of the kth decision maker are presented byx˜ijk=(aijk,bijk,cijk)where i=1,2,…, M for alternatives; j=1,2,…,N for criteria and k=1,2,…,K for decision makers.The proposed method requires aggregation, averaging and normalization process of the fuzzy decision matrix. Before the normalization process, fuzzy ratings which are assigned by different decision makers should be aggregated into a single rating. The aggregation procedure can be described as follows [12]:(2)aij=minkaijkbij=1K.∑k=1Kbijkcij=maxkcijkwherex˜ij=(aij,bij,cij)present the aggregated fuzzy numbers. Thus, new fuzzy decision matrix will be generated which is composed of fuzzy aggregated evaluations.After the aggregation procedure, the normalized aggregated fuzzy decision matrix should be computed. In fact, a normalization method should be conducted so as to deal with alternatives on different scales. Actually, this procedure preserves the ranges of normalized triangular fuzzy numbers to [0,1] [13]. Specifically, the aggregated fuzzy decision matrixD˜can be normalized as in the following performance matrix,P˜p˜ijm×n:(3)P˜ijxij1M,xij2M,xij3MN=maxi{xij3}for maximizing criterionN−xij3N,N−xij2N,N−xij1NN=maxi{xij3}for minimizing criterionIn this section, the ranking order of the alternatives for each criterion is determined by using a fuzzy ranking method. In this context, the choice of the fuzzy ranking method is very important in terms of the accuracy of the obtained results. There are many alternative fuzzy ranking methods in the literature. These methods can be categorized into two main classes which correspond to the “fuzzy preference relation based methods” and “defuzzification based methods”. According to Lee [14], a good ranking method should have some important characteristics, i.e., fuzzy preference representation, the rationality of preference ordering, robustness and efficiency. Although the defuzzification based techniques are generally efficient, they do not satisfy the other important characteristics. Moreover, robustness and accuracy may be seen as more essential characteristics since the recent advances in rapid computation methods. For all of these reasons, we employed the fuzzy ranking method of Barajas and Agard [15] which is based on the original method of Tseng and Klein [16]. In that method, the Hamming distance approach is utilized to obtain the fuzzy preference relations. Additionally, a four criteria ordering scheme is presented into the pseudo-order preference model with the aim of ranking more than two normal fuzzy numbers. Briefly, the fuzzy preference relation between the two normal and convex fuzzy numbersA1˜=(a,b,c)andA2˜=(x,y,z)can be determined as follows [16]:The area of overlap between these fuzzy numbers should be first determined. This intersection area represents the relation whereA1˜andA2˜are indifferent.Then, the non-overlap areas between the two fuzzy numbers should be provided. To do this, the Hamming distance approach depending on the number of intersection points can be utilized since it requires relatively fewer computational time. These non-overlaps present the areas whereA1˜dominatesA2˜andA2˜dominatesA1˜, respectively. For instance, the Hamming distanceD(A1˜,A2˜)can be calculated for the following case as in Fig. 3where it is possible to have only one point of intersection.(4)D(A1˜,A2˜)=∫xεμA1(u)−μA2(u)du+∫εεμA1(u)−μA2(u)duwhere a≥x, b>y, c≥z, a≤z and ɛ is an intersection point.The overall areas of these fuzzy numbersA1˜andA1˜should be computed.Finally, the fuzzy preference relationsR(A1˜,A2˜)andR(A2˜,A1˜)will be as follows:(5)R(A1˜,A2˜)=(area whereA1˜dominatesA2˜)+(area whereA1˜andA2˜areindifferent)(area ofA1˜)+(area ofA2˜)(6)R(A2˜,A1˜)=(area whereA2˜dominatesA1˜)+(area whereA1˜andA2˜areindifferent)(area ofA1˜)+(area ofA2˜)Apart from the ranking of two normal fuzzy numbers, the ranking of multiple alternatives for each attribute is needed in the proposed method. To this end, the four criteria ordering scheme is applied. In this scheme, the fuzzy preference relations between all of the possible pairwise comparisons for these fuzzy numbers should be computed. Then, the types of the fuzzy relations are determined based on the threshold values of preferences and indifferences. For better understanding, there may arise three different types of fuzzy preference relations, i.e., strict (S) and weak (W) preference relations and indifference (I) situation.Finally, the frequency and type of the fuzzy relation is utilized within this four criteria multi-ranking scheme. According to the frequency and type of the fuzzy relations, final fuzzy raking order of alternatives for each attribute can be obtained. Then, crisp complete attribute-wise ranking matrix (CA) which includes the ranking orders of alternatives with respect to each criterion can be generated based on the used fuzzy ranking method.Before evaluating the importance of the criteria, hierarchy between the group members should be determined. Actually, there may not an exact hierarchy between the decision makers in most of the real-life situations. Additionally, the relative importance or hierarchy of the decision makers may change over time and so may have some sort of ambiguity. For this purpose, the decision makers are ranked in a fuzzy way in this paper. Then, the relative importance or fuzzy weights of the decision makers can be determined by using a subjective method such as “Rank Reciprocal” which is solely based on preference information given by an expert. After calculation of the reciprocal fuzzy weights of the decision makers, they should be normalized by using previously formulated method in Section 2.2. Thereafter, the linguistic assessments for all of the criteria are provided by the decision makers. The linguistic assessments are multiplied by the normalized fuzzy weights of the decision makers before performing aggregation procedure. Let us considerw˜ijk=(wjk1,wjk2,wjk3)is fuzzy rating of criterion j assigned by decision maker k andwe˜k=(wek1,wek2,wek3)is the fuzzy relative importance weight of decision maker k. Firstly, the fuzzy rating of each criterion is multiplied by fuzzy weights of decision makers. Fuzzy multiplication operation can be defined for two non-negative triangular fuzzy numbers:(7)wc˜jk=w˜ijk⊗we˜k=(wjk1.wek1,wjk2.wek2,wjk3.wek3)=(wcjk1,wcjk2,wcjk3)Then, the resulted fuzzy numbers are aggregated by applying the aforementioned aggregation procedure which is given in Section 2.2.After determining the fuzzy weights of the criteria, the proper fuzzy weights can be assigned for each rank of the individual alternative based on the obtained crisp complete attribute-wise matrix. These aggregated fuzzy weights are assigned to the first rank of the individual alternatives. In order to calculate the weights of other rankings, normalized aggregated fuzzy decision matrix is used to determine proportion of the alternative for each criterion. In other words, the fuzzy numbers in the normalized aggregated fuzzy matrix related to alternatives, except the first rank, are divided into the fuzzy number of the alternative(s) which is assigned to the first rank. Then, the obtained fuzzy number is multiplied by the relevant fuzzy weight of the criterion. Fuzzy division operator is described here for two triangular fuzzy numbersA˜=(a,b,c)andB˜=(x,y,z)as follows:(8)A˜B˜=A˜⊗1B˜=az,by,cxx,y,z∉0Therefore, the previously obtained crisp complete attribute-wise matrix will become the following fuzzy weighted matrix (WM) since all of the values for each rank of individual alternative are stated as fuzzy numbers:(9)Thereafter, the fuzzy weighted matrix is converted into the following fuzzy concordance matrix(F˜)whose elements, i.e.,fe˜ijare the summation of the fuzzy weights for all attributes where alternative i is ranked as j.(10)In order to compute the elements of this fuzzy concordance matrix, fuzzy addition operation is utilized. For instance,∑W1˜(A1)represents summation of fuzzy weight values into the weighted matrix (WM) for alternative-1 which is assigned to the first rank.After computing the elements of the fuzzy concordance matrix, a fuzzy mathematical program in which all of the objective function coefficients are stated as fuzzy numbers can be formulated. This mathematical program represents a fuzzy linear assignment model which determines the final ranking orders of the overall alternatives. The fuzzy objective function coefficients of this model are obtained from the fuzzy concordance matrix(F˜). In fact, this model including the assignment constraints aims at maximizing the overall fuzzy concordance values provided by the overall ranking.(11)maxZ=∑i=1M∑j=1Nfe˜ij⊗yij(12)Subject to;∑i=1Myij=1j=1,2….,N(13)∑j=1Nyij=1j=1,2….,Mwhereyij∈0,1is a binary variable which presents the assignment of alternative i to overall rank j.yij=1, if alternative i is assigned to overall rank j; 0, otherwise.In order to solve the present fuzzy linear assignment model, it may be transformed into the crisp equivalent form. In this paper, we used the method of Zhang et al. [17] which transforms the mathematical programming models with fuzzy objective function coefficients into a crisp multi-objective optimization model [18]. In that method, the objectives of the multiple-objective optimization model are obtained from the boundary values of the used fuzzy numbers. According to Zhang et al. [17], the optimal solution to this multi-objective linear programming problem will be the optimal solution to the fuzzy linear assignment model. The membership function of the fuzzy coefficients can be formulated as in Eq. (14).(14)μfeij˜=(x−feij1)(feij2−feij1),feij1≤x≤feij2(x−feij3)(feij2−feij3),feij2≤x≤feij30,OtherwiseBy using the bounds of the membership functions, the present fuzzy mathematical program can be transformed into the crisp equivalent as in Eq. (15)–(17).(15)maxZg=∑i=1M∑j=1Nfeijg.yijg=1,2and3(16)Subject to;∑i=1Myij=1j=1,2….,N(17)∑ij=1Nyij=1i=1,2….,Myij∈0,1is a binary variable. The index g is used to present crisp equivalent LP problem with multiple objectives. In this study, since dealing with triangular fuzzy numbers, the fuzzy mathematical programming model is decomposed into three crisp LP models (g=1, 2and3).In order to solve the crisp multi-objective optimization model, we employed compromise programming technique which was introduced by Zeleny [19]. This technique does not require any subjective information from the decision maker(s). In other words, the decision maker does not need to release preferences and weights about the objectives. Additionally, this method does not require any information on the target values of the objectives and relatively smaller number of computational runs since it chooses a unique optimal solution from the set of Pareto efficient solutions. For all of these reasons, it is an appropriate multi-objective optimization technique to utilize into the proposed method. This technique mainly depends on the selection of a unique solution which is the closest one to the ideal point. The closeness is measured by the following distance function [20]:(18)d(x,y)=∑g=1G|fg(x)−zg*|p1/pwhere fg(x);g=1, …, G are real valued objective functions andzg*represents the reference or ideal point. The value of parameter p specifies a particular distance metric. For instance, when p=1, it corresponds to the Pythagorean distance between any given two points. When, p=2, it presents the Euclidean distance. Actually, p=1andp=∞ presents the longest and shortest distances between these two points. The most widely provided compromise solutions are for p-values of p=1andp=∞ because of their linear forms. However, other p values 1<p<∞ need to solve a non-linear mathematical programming model [21]. For example, in the case of p=2, the compromise program will be a quadratic program. Based on all of this information, the compromise program for the MOLP model given in Section 2.6.1 can be formulated as follows:(19)Min∑i=1M∑j=1Nfeij1⋅yij−Z1*p+∑i=1M∑j=1Nfeij2⋅yij−Z2*p+∑i=1M∑j=1Nfeij3⋅yij−Z3*p1/pSubjectto;∑i=1Myij=1j=1,2…,N∑j=1Nyij=1i=1,2…,Myij∈{0,1}isabinaryvariableSummary of the main steps of the proposed fuzzy LAM is presented in Table 2and Fig. 4.In order to illustrate the usefulness and validity of the proposed method, a real-life multi-criteria ABC analysis for spare part inventory classification problem is presented in a large-sized textile company. The company is one of the world's leaders in its sector by producing wide variety of suits, shirts, women's clothing etc. One of its production plants operates in Izmir, Turkey with the manufacturing capacity of approximately 500,000pieces/suits and one million pieces/shits in every year. Additionally, there are approximately 3000 employees in that production plant.ABC analysis is an inventory classification approach which facilitates the companies to classify their inventory items into three classes, i.e., A – very important, B – moderately important and C – least important, based on the monetary value and the usage rate of these items [22]. In addition to the classical ABC analysis for the finished goods inventory classification, companies should also perform ABC analysis for classifying their spare parts of machinery in order to avoid production disruptions. In other words, effective and efficient management of spare part inventory is very crucial because of facilitating maintenance activities in the case of machine breakdowns. This is also useful in practice to improve companies’ production performance and reduce investments in finished goods inventory. High costs may be incurred and/or customers may be loosed in the case of a critical spare part shortage [23]. In the spare part inventory management and control, there is still a gap in the literature in terms of both methodological developments and industrial practices [24]. The gap between research and practice in spare parts management was investigated by Bacchetti and Saccani [25] with a comprehensive literature review on spare parts classification and demand forecasting.The top management of the company consisting of inventory manager, financial director and purchasing manager needs to perform ABC analysis for classifying the spare parts. In advance, only total annual cost criterion was considered for this analysis by the financial director. On the other hand, top management recognized that this may not produce reliable and efficient classes. For this reason, a multi-criteria group decision making approach is intended to apply under an uncertain environment. First of all, three qualitative (subjective), i.e., durability, availability, criticality and two quantitative (objective) criteria, i.e., replenishment time, total annual cost were identified for evaluation. In addition to the subjective evaluations, objective criteria are also stated as fuzzy numbers. The frequently used twenty spare parts in the company are depicted in Fig. 5. Furthermore, there may be two categories of criteria, i.e., maximizing criterion (benefit-type) and minimizing criterion (cost-type). In this paper, durability and availability are considered as the cost type criteria. Because, when a spare part is sufficiently durable and available, the ranking order of this spare part will decrease. On the contrary, criticality, replenishment time and total annual cost are the benefit type criteria. Thus, the critical spare parts with high total annual cost or replenishment time will be classified as top class. In order to compare the ranking order of the spare parts which are generated by the proposed method, we also performed the mono-criterion ABC analysis with the data given in Table 3.The result of the mono-criterion ABC analysis is presented by the Pareto curve in Fig. 6. It should be emphasized that when only total annual cost criterion is taken into account, contributions of C-class parts to total annual cost value is very close to each other. However, some of these low class spare parts may be crucial in terms of their availability and criticality conditions despite their low cost contribution. Therefore, multi-criteria ABC analysis may be more appropriate way of inventory classification in order to provide more reliable results. Additionally, while performing the ABC analysis, verbal evaluations for subjective criteria should be made by the group members so as to avoid personal biases in decision making process. In this study, spare parts are evaluated linguistically with regard to each subjective criterion by the top management consisting of three decision makers.The fuzzy decision matrix is presented in Table 4. The aggregated fuzzy decision matrix is computed and results are presented in Table 5. Specifically, only the fuzzy ratings for subjective criteria may change from one group member to another. The fuzzy ratings for objective criteria do not vary according to the assessments of the group members. After fuzzy aggregation procedure, the aggregated fuzzy decision matrix is normalized. The normalized aggregated fuzzy decision matrix is presented in Table 6.In order to provide the ranking order of all these parts for the “durability” criterion, the fuzzy preference relations between the spare parts are computed as shown in Table 7. The same computations should also be performed for other criteria. Thereafter, the types of fuzzy preference relations for each pairwise among all of the spare parts are also determined as presented in Table 8. Apart from the study of Barajas and Agard [15], the preference and indifference threshold values of pi=0.55andqi=0.45 are utilized in order to determine the types of fuzzy preference relations for the qualitative criteria. Because, it is more appropriate to use relatively soft threshold values for ranking this kind of criterion where nearby fuzzy relations exits between the alternatives. On the other hand, much strict threshold values (pi=0.85andqi=0.25) can be used to rank quantitative type criterion as in the study of [15]. Subsequently, the frequency and type of fuzzy preference relations for each spare part are given in Table 9. By applying the four criteria procedure, the final rankings of the spare parts for the “durability criterion” can be as follows: SP-18 and SP-19≻SP-4, SP-5, SP-6, SP-12, SP-14≻SP-15≻SP-2, SP-11 and SP-13≻SP-17 and SP-20≻SP-7>SP-3≻SP-8 and SP-9≻SP-1≻SP-16≻SP-10.Then, the crisp complete attribute-wise ranking matrix is derived as shown in Table 10with the help of the final rankings for all of the other criteria which are obtained from the fuzzy ranking procedure applied on the normalized aggregated fuzzy decision matrix. In order to calculate the fuzzy weights of the group members, the hierarchy between the decision makers is determined by the board chairman of the company. In fact, these decision makers are ranked in fuzzy way as1˜,2˜and3˜. These fuzzy ranks of the group members can be portrayed as in Fig. 7. While determining the fuzzy weights by ranking, a subjective method namely “Rank Reciprocal” which is solely based on preference information is given by an expert evaluation is utilized [26].After assigning the fuzzy ranks and calculating the reciprocal fuzzy weights, normalized weights of the decision makers are provided as presented in Table 11. The linguistic assessments for all of the criteria are obtained from the decision makers as given in Table 12. The aggregated fuzzy weights should be calculated for each criterion by taking into consideration the hierarchy between the group members. To this end, these linguistic assessments are multiplied by the normalized fuzzy weights of the decision makers. Then, the aggregated fuzzy weights of the criteria are acquired as shown in Table 12.After that, the proper fuzzy weights can be assigned for each rank of individual spare part based on the obtained crisp complete attribute-wise matrix as shown in Table 11. For instance, the fuzzy weight of first and third rank for “durability” criterion is computed as follows: The weight of the first rank is equal to the aggregated fuzzy weight of this criterion, WM (SP-18, SP-9)=(0.004, 0.08, 0.45). Furthermore, the weight of the third rank is calculated for the relevant spare parts as follows: WM (SP-4, SP-5, SP-6, SP-12, SP-14, SP-15)=[(0.55,0.79,0.95)∅(0.55,0.84,1)]⊗(0.004,0.08,0.45)=(0.0022,0.0752,0.777). The provided complete fuzzy weight matrix is presented in Table 13.Based on the fuzzy weight matrix, the fuzzy concordance matrix can be constructed for each rank of the spare parts as shown in Table 14. Then, the fuzzy concordance values will be used as objective function coefficients in the linear assignment model. The objective function of this model with the assignment constraints is to maximize the overall fuzzy concordance values provided by the overall ranking. The mathematical programming model with fuzzy objective function coefficients is transformed into its crisp equivalent form by utilizing Zhang et al.’s approach [17].The generated fuzzy LAM; its crisp equivalent form and the corresponding compromise program whose solution presents the final ranking orders of the overall spare parts are presented in Table 15. The solution of the crisp MOLP model is provided by making use of compromise programming technique with different distance metrics as shown in Table 16. The provided linear and non-linear (quadratic) compromise programs are solved by using the appropriate solvers of LINGO 14.0 optimization software. Before solving the quadratic program, the model aims to minimize total distances, reference or ideal points should be found. To this end, the crisp equivalent version of the fuzzy linear assignment model is solved for each objective function separately. Then, ideal points are achieved as Z1=0.523, Z2=2.722 and Z3=26.494. Thereafter, the overall ranking of the spare parts are obtained as shown in Table 16 from the solution of the linear and quadratic compromise programs.The inventory classifications related to the spare parts are also indicated in Table 16. In addition to the mono-criterion ABC analysis, the proposed method is also compared to four recently proposed fuzzy MADM methods, i.e., TOPSIS, ARAS, VIKOR and ELECTRE. During the comparison process, the normalized aggregated fuzzy decision matrix given in Table 6 is utilized as the final decision matrix into the computational procedure of the benchmarked methods. On contrary to the fuzzy VIKOR method [27] in which all of the decision makers were considered as equally important, the different importance weights of the decision makers are also considered. Additionally, in contrast to the extended fuzzy TOPSIS method of [28], fuzzy ELECTRE method of [29] and fuzzy ARAS method of [30], the relative importance weights of the decision makers are derived from a fuzzy hierarchy between the group members. The fuzzy weights obtained by the subjective weighting method are used as the importance weights of the decision makers into the benchmarked methods.According to the comparison of the results, different inventory classes may occur for the spare parts when multi-criteria ABC analysis is performed instead of applying a mono-criterion approach. According to Table 16, SP-6 and SP-5 are ranked as the first and second orders by all of the used MADM methods. Additionally, all of these methods provided identical inventory classes for most of the spare parts namely SP1, SP-5, SP-6, SP-10, SP-11, SP-12, SP-13, SP-15, SP-16, SP-18 and SP-19. The comparison of the ranking orders and inventory classes for different MADM methods are depicted by the radar charts in Fig. 8. Actually, these charts show the variation of the ranking orders and classes among the different MADM methods. According to Fig. 8, although some dissimilar ranking orders may arise by these methods, same inventory classes are assigned to majority of the spare parts.In order to measure the association/correlation between the ranks by the proposed method and benchmarked fuzzy MADM methods, Spearman rank correlation coefficient (ρ) which can be formulated by Eq. (20) is utilized [31,32].(20)ρ=1−6∑a=1ADa2A(A2−1)where A represents the total number of alternatives and Dais the difference between the ranks obtained by the different MADM methods for the same alternative a.In order to further investigate the similarity of the rankings provided by different fuzzy MADM methods, a pictorial representation is given in Fig. 9for comparison of the Spearman's rank correlation coefficients. This figure presents the Spearman's rank correlation coefficients which are calculated by the results of the proposed method from the solution of linear/non-linear compromise programs with different distance metrics. When the proposed method is compared to other fuzzy MADM methods independently, maximum and minimum correlation coefficient values are provided as 0.462–0.483 (fuzzy VIKOR and mono-criterion ABC analysis) and 0.753 (Fuzzy ELECTRE method) for p=1, respectively. Furthermore, maximum and minimum correlation coefficient values are provided as 0.451–0.465 (fuzzy VIKOR and mono-criterion ABC analysis) and 0.693 (Fuzzy ELECTRE method) for p=2. Finally, these values are yielded as 0.173 (fuzzy VIKOR) and 0.498 (fuzzy TOPSIS) in case of p=∞. These values supported the similarity of the results and indicated that the proposed method has moderate correlation or substantial relationship with the other fuzzy MADM methods. Additionally, it is obvious that the maximal correlation values can be provided by the solution of compromise programs with p=1 and p=2. It should also be noted that the proposed method has maximum association with the fuzzy ELECTRE method which is also another concordance/discordance based method. On the other hand, when the proposed method is compared to all of these methods in an aggregated manner in which the minimum rank difference is used, the correlation coefficient will be calculated as 0.923, 0.95 and 0.85 when the p-value is taken as 1, 2 and ∞, respectively. This reveals that there is a very strong relationship or close to perfect association between the ranking orders of spare parts obtained by the proposed method and the other benchmark methods.This paper presents a novel fuzzy linear assignment method by incorporating different concepts from fuzzy set theory to deal with uncertain nature of multi-attribute decision making problems in a group decision making environment. In addition to the subjective evaluations for the qualitative type criteria, the quantitative type criteria are also stated as fuzzy numbers in the proposed method. Moreover, in order to calculate the reciprocal fuzzy weights of the group members, they are ranked in a fuzzy way by taking into account the uncertainty related to the hierarchy between the group members.In order to show validity and practicality of the proposed method, it is applied to a real-life multi-criteria inventory classification problem of a multinational textile company in Turkey. The results of the case study have shown that the proposed method is able to handle multi-attribute decision making problems effectively under uncertain environments. The feedbacks gathered from the company experts have also indicated that acceptable inventory classes are provided by the proposed method. The proposed method is also compared with some other well established fuzzy MADM methods from the literature.It is observed that there is considerable correlation between the generated results. In order to assign alternatives to the ranking orders with a specific membership degree, the decision variables of the fuzzy linear assignment model may also be considered as fuzzy numbers in the future studies. Furthermore, application of the proposed method to other decision making problems may also be scheduled as a future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
