@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A fuzzy recommender system based on the integration of subjective preferences and objective information

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study proposed a framework which integrates subjective and objective information to generate recommendations for an active consumer.The proposed algorithm applied a fuzzy linguistic model.The proposed algorithms were evaluated by a real dataset.The proposed algorithm performed excellent with the traditional algorithms.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data mining,Recommender system,Collaborative filtering, fuzzy sets,Objective evaluation,Subjective evaluation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study proposes a novel collaborative filtering framework which integrates both subjective and objective information to generate recommendations for an active consumer. The proposed framework can solve the problem of sparsity and the cold-start problem which affect traditional CF algorithms. The fuzzy linguistic model, which is a more natural way for the consumer to present their preferences, is adopted within the proposed framework. Based on these concepts, two algorithms, a simple aggregated (SA) algorithm and aggregated subjective and objective users’ viewpoint (ASOV) algorithm are developed. A series of experiments is performed, the results of which indicate that the proposed methodologies produce high-quality recommendations. Finally, the results confirm that the proposed algorithms perform better than the traditional method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
E-commerce has been growing rapidly over the last decade, and consumers have become accustomed to purchasing products from online stores. Recommender systems have proven to be a successful way to assist customers by reducing redundant information and offering advice on finding suitable products to facilitate online decision-making [22–26]. The most successful technologies for recommender systems, known as collaborative filtering (CF) systems, have already been applied by several well-known commercial web sites such as Amazon.com, Netflix, and so on [1,2,16,17].Prior studies about recommender systems have ignored the fact that expert opinion plays an important role in the consumer's decision-making process [25]. After the customer perceives the need to purchase something, they will refer not only to information given by producers and sellers, but also to opinion leaders and acquaintances that have had similar experiences [10–12]. This study proposes a novel CF system which integrates subjective and objective information to generate recommendations for an active consumer. The subjective information is comprised of opinions solicited from domain experts and opinion leaders [11,13,20,29]. The objective information clarifies the active user's preferences based on those of similar users and past experience. The proposed framework can overcome the weaknesses of traditional CF systems including the sparsity problem and the cold-start problem [15,18]. Another advantage of the proposed algorithm method is the adoption of a fuzzy linguistic model which makes it more natural and simpler for the consumer to present their thinking.The CF systems use historical data related to user preferences or behavior to predict how new users will act [15,19]. The idea is that the user will receive recommendations based on their personal profile gleaned from previous transactions and those of other similar customers. However, the traditional CF systems have some common limitations, including cold-start and sparsity problems [15,18,27] which generally prevent the system from providing better quality recommendations. The cold-start problem means that the CF system cannot find similar users or user preferences from which to make predictions, for a new user or a new item that has just entered the system. This occurs when the CF system has no information about the new item and no knowledge about personal profile of the new user. The sparsity problem occurs when available data are insufficient to identify similar users. Collaborative filtering cannot generate useful recommendations for previous situations (cold-start and sparsity) because of the lack of a sufficient number of previous ratings or purchases. The current generation of recommender systems still requires further improvement to solve these serious problems [15].Several studies have also suggested that information about expert opinions and other types of consumer evaluations should be included in the recommender systems [12,31]. To provide this kind of combined information can increase users’ trust in and satisfaction with the recommender systems [12]. Whenever a new product has been launched, opinions are always solicited from domain experts and opinion leaders. Based on this subjective information, the proposed system can still provide the new user with a recommendation list, which may contain new items if the expert comments are good. In addition, if user preferences provided to the system are insufficient, the proposed method can still give recommendations based on subjective information alone. In this way the proposed system can solve the sparsity and cold-start problems.Generally speaking, user preference representation for recommender systems can be classified into two types: crisp and fuzzy models [33]. The former allow users to express their preferences on a 5-point Likert-type scale while linguistic assessment is based on words rather than numbers. For example, a user perceives that he/she likes a product very much and scores this product somewhat higher than 4 points but lower than 5 but the user chooses 4 points to represent his preference. However, the result might be affected by personal differences in scoring behavior. It would be better if a user can choose a linguistic option such as “strongly like” that closely represents his/her opinion about the product. The linguistic term, “strongly like”, can be adequately tackled by fuzzy modeling, since the member function can allow 80% as belonging to scale 5 and 20% belonging to scale 4. A fuzzy linguistic method, modeled on human perception, makes it easier to evaluate qualitative problems [21,35,36]. Accordingly, we adopt a fuzzy theoretical method for the proposed recommender system.Since this is an initial study of the proposed framework concept, we develop only two algorithms, a simple aggregated (SA) algorithm and an aggregated subjective and objective users’ viewpoint (ASOV) algorithm for comparison. To evaluate the proposed algorithms, we compare it with the traditional CF system. The effectiveness of fuzzy modeling can be proven by comparison with the other two approaches, CSA and CASOV, based on the crisp value. This illustrates that employing linguistic terms is a better way to understand the users’ preferences. We carried out a series of detailed experimental evaluations with a real dataset to demonstrate how the proposed methods improve recommendation quality for very sparse datasets and cold-start users.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we briefly review previous research studies. We formally define the problem in Section 3 and discuss the proposed algorithms in Section 4. Then, we evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed methods in Section 5. Finally, some conclusions are stated in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
