@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multimodal fusion of the finger vein, fingerprint and the finger-knuckle-print using Kernel Fisher analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We proposed the fusion of the finger vein, fingerprint and the finger-knuckle-print.We used the fusion of these three biometric modalities in the feature level and also the decision level.The proposed approach contains three phases: enhancement, feature extraction and classification.We used the feature selection for enhance the feature fusion level by reducing the space and also enhancing the recognition performances.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Biometrics,Multimodal fusion,Finger vein,Fingerprint,Finger-knuckle-print,Kernel Fisher analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Unimodal biometric have improved the possibility to establish systems capable of identifying and managing the flow of individuals according to the available intrinsic characteristics that we have. However, a reliable recognition system requires multiple resources. This is the main objective of the multimodal systems that consists of using different resources. Although multimodality improves the accuracy of the systems, it occupies a large memory space and consumes more execution time considering the collected information from different resources. Therefore we have considered the feature selection, that is, the selection of the best attributes that enhances the accuracy and reduce the memory space as a solution. As a result, acceptable recognition performances with less forge and steal can be guaranteed. In this paper we propose an identification system using multimodal fusion of finger-knuckle-print, fingerprint and finger's venous network by adopting several techniques in different levels for multimodal fusion. A feature level fusion and decision level is proposed for the fusion of these three biological traits. An optimization method for this multimodal fusion system by enhancing the feature level fusion is introduced. The optimization consists of the space reduction by using different methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nowadays, biometric identification systems are widely spread since the reliability of these systems has been proven. They exhibit a large number of advantages when compared to other traditional identification systems such as key and password that are subject to falsification and loss. Although biometric techniques seem to be very powerful, they are incapable of currently guaranteeing a high recognition rate with unimodal biometric systems based on a unique biometric signature or on a unique resource. In addition, these systems are often affected by the following problems [1,2]: noise generated by the sensor, non-universality, lack of individuality, lack of invariant representation and sensitivity to attacks.To prevent these problems, several biometric modalities within a same system can be utilized. Multimodality consists of a multitude of possibilities, such as the multi-sensor, multi-instance, multi-algorithms, multi-samples, and multi-biometrics. In this article, we propose the fusion of the biometrics, the finger vein (FV), fingerprint (FP), and finger-knuckle-print (FKP). A few existing research works proposed the totality fusion of these modalities [3–5]. They proposed the use of a big sensor that acquires the three modalities. The fingerprint and the finger-knuckle-print are imaged by the reflected lights, and the finger veins are imaged by the near infrared light. These works focus on the use of the Granularity that can solve problems using knowledge at different levels of information. The images are fused on the data level, for the experiments a database composed of 600 images for each biometric trait from 60 individuals have been used. Even though the best results were acceptable in terms of Equal Error Rate (EER %), 0.135 [4] using a big sensor with a bad quality of the images.Other researches opted for the partial fusion of these proposed modalities like the finger veins and fingerprint [6,7,9,10], the combination of the fingerprint and finger-knuckle-print was proposed in [8]. We can also find the fusion of four modalities that consist of the finger veins, fingerprint, finger-knuckle-print, and the finger shape in [11]. These fusions were proposed because they consist of the most acceptable modalities about the users; yet, these modalities are on a different part of the finger. Moreover, it is clear that the finger's veins are totally under the skin and inside the body, so the falsification is extremely difficult. This characteristic allows a better covering for the major inconvenience which consists of the latent print.The second modality consists of the fingerprint, which is the most widely used technique. Thus, it is well known by the users and from this point we can cover the finger-knuckle-print inconvenient that is considered as new biometric modality. The finger-knuckle-print refers to another part of the finger, which can add a new texture information that is considered to give high discrimination. This modality has the merit of user high friendliness. The proposed methods focus not only on the fusion of the three modalities in different levels but also on the space reduction and the features fusion optimization. For this reason, we used different methods for the space reduction as the PCA (Principal Components Analysis) and the KFA (Kernel Fisher Analysis). Also different methods for the unimodal decisions focusing on the KNN (K Nearest Neighbors) and the SVM (Support Vector Machines) have been adopted. The crystal fusion was on the enhanced features level fusion by using the KFA. The recognition in this stage was performed by a few attributes (105) that represent the individuals based on different images (fingerprint, finger vein, finger-knuckle-print) comparing to the all three image sizes.In the following sections, we present in detail our proposed algorithm. Generalities on the multimodal systems in Section 2. We demonstrate the proposed multimodal architectures in Section 3. The experimental results on different multimodal architectures and discussion are presented in Section 4. Finally, conclusion is given in Section 5.Recently, multimodal biometric systems have intensively been considered in the literatures. In 1995, the first work of fusion of face and voice was proposed; since then, a large number of studies have been conducted by combining different modalities and considering different levels of data fusion and several fusion rules [03].There are five types of multimodal systems which are capable of reducing several problems encountered in unimodal systems. The multi-sensor, multi-instance, multi-algorithm, multi-sample systems combine the information resulting from a single modality able to improve the performances of the recognition by reducing the effect of intra-class variability. However these systems are not able to deal with the problem of the non-universality of certain biometrics as well as resistance to the frauds. In contrary to the multi-biometrics systems which use several biometrics, they are able to build a more flexible system. In case of any failure in any method, the system can rest on the other methods in order to provide an acceptable recognition rate.The multimodal system architecture is the sequence in which the modalities are acquired and treated. Typically, the information level fusion is divided in two steps: fusion prior to matching (sensor level fusion and feature level fusion) and fusion after matching (the score level, decision, rank level and dynamic selection of classifiers). Generally, the integration of information in earlier stage gives more effectiveness, because it takes more information from the data or the images [13].The information fusion, at the data level, needs compatible data or homogenous images. Hence, the best use of this level is to combine images’ issues from the same modality, which is good for the multimodality of multi-instances type [13]. Additionally, the feature stage needs certain homogeneity of the information that represents here the characteristics extracted from the modalities [01]. Among the methods used, in this stage there are weighted average fusion and the concatenation of the features. However the most used level for the fusion is the score level that can be attended after the matching stage. The multimodal version is the combination of the scores that correspond to the modalities. There are two ways to solve this problem. One is considering the problem as a classification, by using the methods for the classification in the machine learning, and the other by combination with the average, the product, the minimum, maximum, median, the sum and the weighed sum. For the decision level a simple method like AND, OR is utilized. Majority voting was used in the literature for fusing the decisions obtained by the different unimodal biometric systems.In this part, the implemented architecture is presented to demonstrate the efficiency of the fusion in the stage pre-matching and comparing to the post-matching phase. We focused on the feature fusion level and the decision level fusion by using different methods on the fusions and also on the processing.Even if there isn’t any real multimodal database available that contains the three modalities (FP, FV, and FKP). There is no multimodal database corresponds to the collection of these three modalities from the same individual. To do so, we built multimodal database from the existing unimodal biometric system, by using the images of the uni-modals existing databases. There are a few databases on the newest trait finger-knuckle-print including the Hong Kong Polytechnic University database [13] and the IIT Delhi finger-knuckle-print database [14].The Poly U database consists of a big database for the research. This database contains a total number of 7920 images in total composed by 165 individuals with left index, left middle finger, right index and right middle finger, 660 fingers in total with 12 catches for each finger. Therefore, it can be considered a reliable database for this modality. This database is considered in the present research work.We used the most extensive finger vein and fingerprints databases SDUMLA-HMT [15]. The SDUMLA-HMT which consist of a new homologous multimodal biometric database. This database includes 106 individuals.The finger vein database is composed of 3816 images in total. Every image is stored in bmp format with 320*240 pixels in size. The total size of the database is around 0.85GB. Each fingerprint image is saved in 256 gray-level “bmp” format. The capture was for 6 fingers with 5 different type of sensors. Fig. 1depicts some images from the different databases.Because of the necessity of the homogeneity for the fusion, we propose the use of the same preprocessing on different modalities, The Gabor filter 2D [2] is applied on different original images. This Bi-dimensional filter has shown great efficiency for the finger vein image enhancement fusing the phase and direction features to identify the finger vein [2,16,17]. In the unimodal finger-knuckle-print systems [18] and also for [19,20], the Gabor filter 2D for the fingerprint enhancement is used. The 2D Gabor filters are widely used for extracting the features of textured images. This version of the 2D Gabor filter is basically a bi-dimensional Gaussian function centered at origin (0, 0). Figs. 3–5 depict the finger vein, fingerprint and finger-knuckle-print original images and the corresponding enhanced images with the Gabor filter, the codes obtained by the bank of Gabor filter and also the selected features. Fig. 2recapitulates the general multimodal recognition proposed system. Figs. 4–8 represent also the proposed general architecture in the feature level fusion, the enhanced feature level fusion and also on the decision level fusion.Fig. 2 represents also the steps or the procedure to realize the multimodal recognition with different levels fusion. These steps consist of the pre-processing, feature extraction, feature selection with KFA, classification with SVM, cosine distance and the KNN. A detailed pseudo codes for each architecture are presented in the next paragraphs.It consists of a combination of the three modalities after feature extraction or in another way, the parameters of this fusion are the characteristics vectors obtained by the feature extraction stage. The advantages of using the same method for the feature extraction are to obtain homogenous features. We propose the concatenation of the features fusion. Considering thatX={X1,X2,…,Xn},Y={Y1,Y2,…,Ym}} andZ={Z1,Z2,…,Zp}denote three feature vectors representing the information extracted from the three feature sets (finger vein, fingerprint, finger-knuckle-print) in order to build a new feature vector W, that would better represent an individual. The vector W of dimensionalityk,k=n+m+p, represents the concatenation of the three features vectors. The construction process of W is obtained by the following formula (1):(1)W=[X1,X2,…,Xn,Y1,Y2,…,Ym,Z1,Z2,…,Zp]This obtained feature vector represents the three modalities. These multimodal vectors will be classified by the Support Vector Machine (SVM), the K-Nearest Neighbors and the cosine distance. Fig. 3represents the pseudo code for the feature fusion level.Fig. 4represents the general architecture proposed in the feature level fusion.The major drawback of the previous architecture was the large dimension of the multimodal features n+m+p. In this architecture, so we proposed the feature selection of the best attributes fromW. This space reduction can improve the discrimination of these features by reducing the features vectors obtained by different existing methods such as: PCA (Principal Component Analysis) and the LDA (Linear Discriminant Analysis). The next pseudo code (Fig. 5) for this fusion show the only difference between the architectures. This difference consists of space reduction after the matrix concatenated features construction (Fig. 6).In this case, the same unimodal system previously used for the three modalities is used. When we obtain the decisions with the SVM and the KNN, the fusion was applied with simple existing methods based on the decisions of the FKP unimodal system, since the FKP unimodal system gives a good performance compared to the other two unimodal systems. The pseudo code in Fig. 7focus on the decisions fusion (Fig. 8).The Gabor bank filters was used for image filtering. The latter had already shown a good performance on the facial images [22] by constructing a bank of 40 Gabor filters. For the implementation we used the PhD toolbox [21]. The codification with the filter mentioned above is to compute the magnitude responses of the filtered images, by applying all filters to the original input images. For each magnitude response the corresponding down-samples are represented then, the features vector is constructed by concatenating the down-sampled magnitude responses into a single vector. These codes are used in the next stage that represents the reduction dimension or the feature selection. The Gabor filter used by [22] is presented by the following mathematical formula:(2)ψ(x,y)=fu2πkηe−fu2k2x′2+fu2η2y′2ej2πfux′,As mentioned earlier, one of the inconveniences of the multimodality is the use of different data which require a large memory space. This huge space needs a space reduction or the selection of the best attributes. For this, we propose the use of the most common methods on the unimodal traits that is the KFA (Kernel Fisher Analysis) that consists of the application of the LDA (Linear Discriminant Analysis) on the PCA (Principal Components Analysis) space. The main methods used in the system, based on the Subspace, are the PCA, LDA, ICA (Independent Component Analysis) [23], OLDA (Orthogonal Linear Discriminant Analysis) [24], KPCA (Kernel Principal Components Analysis) [25] and also Fisher Analysis which consists of the fusion of the PCA with LDA [26]. In [27] a finger vein recognition system was proposed by the wavelet moment fused with the PCA. However the dimensionality has been reduced by PCA and LDA in [28].Despite the fact that the PCA reduces the redundancy and minimizes the noise, it doesn’t take into consideration whether these features are in the same database. However the LDA covers this point by focusing on the discrimination between the classes for the feature selection. So the LDA does not reduce only the space but also it preserves as much the class information discrimination as possible.To classify the features, we propose the use of a mathematical model that consists of the Support Vector Machines (SVM), the KNN (K Nearest Neighbors) and the Cosine distance. The SVMs are groups of learning techniques that are designated to resolve a discrimination or regression problem. The success of this method is defined by solid mathematical bases. The main objective of the SVM is like the perceptron principle not only to find a hyper plan that separates perfectly the classes but also to find the optimal one that can separate perfectly the classes by maximizing the margin. The SVM-multiclass has already shown a great efficiency on the finger vein unimodal recognition in the [2].Although the distance computations is a simple method, it is the most commonly used for the biometrics recognition, for this reason, we suggest the use of a simple distance that consists of the cosine Mahalanobis (or whitened cosine) similarity measure. The following formula represents the distance calculation between two vectorsX=(x1,…,xn)tandY=(y1,…,yn)t:(3)D(Xn,Yn)=(Xn−Yn)Tcov(Xn−Yn)−1where,XnandYnis the normalized or the means of two groups of data.(Xn−Yn)Tis the transpose of mean difference.cov(Xn−Yn)−1is the inverse of the covariance.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
