@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Structural damage detection based on posteriori probability support vector machine and Dempster–Shafer evidence theory

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Proposed a stable structural damage detection method based on information fusion.Improved the accuracy and stability of the damage detection than using single sensor.Solved the bad impact of any sensor failure and give more robust detection results.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Damage detection,Information fusion,Support Vector Machine,DS evidence theory,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
An intelligent detection method is proposed in this paper to enrich the study of applying machine learning and data mining techniques to building structural damage identification. The proposed method integrates the multi-sensory data fusion and classifier ensemble to detect the location and extent of the damage. First, the wavelet package analysis is used to transform the original vibration acceleration signal into energy features. Then the posteriori probability support vector machines (PPSVM) and the Dempster–Shafer (DS) evidence theory are combined to identify the damage. Empirical study on a benchmark structure model shows that, compared with popular data mining approaches, the proposed method can provide more accurate and stable detection results. Furthermore, this paper compares the detection performance of the information fusion at different levels. The experimental analysis demonstrates that the proposed method with the fusion at the decision level can make good use of multi-sensory information and is more robust in practice.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Buildings encounter structural damage of varying degrees inevitably throughout their lifetime by natural or artificial factors, which, if not handled appropriately in time, may cause immense physical destruction and enormous economic loss. Hence, how to detect the structural damage in advance has become an important issue in both academic studies and engineering applications. The damage is commonly defined as changes of the material or geometric properties of the structure system, including changes of the boundary conditions and system connectivity or the reduction of stiffness, etc. [1]. Identifying the damage accurately is then a critical task for the follow-up maintenance, repair, and rehabilitation.Recently, data mining techniques have been widely used in structural health monitoring. One successful focus is detecting the structural damage through structural responses. The typical process of structural damage detection based on structural responses usually can be described as follows. First, a vibration monitoring system with sensors is installed inside the building and the features are extracted from the dynamic sensor signal. Second, a classifier is employed to train and predict the structural damage using the labeled samples (where the labels are the category of damage). In other words, the structural damage detection is formulated as a supervised learning problem.A variety of machine learning and data mining methods, including Artificial Neural Network (ANN) [2,3], Genetic Algorithm [4,5], CART [6], and Support Vector Machines [7,8] are applied to damage detection. Among these methods, SVM-based methods show superior performance in generalization and accuracy.The previous methods often use each sensor signal independently but recent research has found that information fusion (also named data fusion) is very useful to improve the identification accuracy [9]. For instance, Dempster–Shafer (DS) evidence theory, a common tool in data fusion, has been applied in detecting aircraft structure and traffic incident [10,11]. In principle, fusion of multi-sensory data provides significant advantage over single source data [12,13]. In detecting building structural damage, there are generally three kinds of level of information fusion: raw data level fusion, feature level fusion, and decision level fusion. Raw sensor data can be directly combined if the sensor data from different sources are commensurate. One example of raw data level fusion is fusing the structure vibration velocity/acceleration by cross-correlation function [14]. In feature level fusion, features are first extracted from multiple sensor observations, and then combined into a single concatenated feature vector which is input to damage detection approaches based on ANN, SVM or Random Forest [3,15]. Finally, decision level fusion involves semantic fusion of sensor information, after each sensor has made a preliminary determination of a structural damage location and extent.In practice, a fusion of sensor data may actually produce worse results than those could be obtained by tasking the most appropriate sensor in a single source. This is often due to the attempt to combine accurate (i.e., good data) with inaccurate or biased data, especially if the uncertainties or variances of the data are unknown [16]. Once the inaccurate data is fused (for example, some sensors failure or installed in an inappropriate place), there is no simple way to eliminate the bad effect in the first two fusion approaches (e.g., raw data level fusion and feature level fusion). Furthermore, how to choose the appropriate algorithms or techniques to improve the stability of identification are also the key problems in structural damage detection.In this paper, we propose an improved SVM-based detection method to increase the applicability and precision of building structural damage detection. Moreover, the augmented SVM will be combined with the DS evidence theory to provide a decision level information fusion. Our experimental study demonstrated that the decision level fusion can provide a more accurate and stable performance than commonly used SVM-based method.The remaining of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the wavelet package decomposition (WPD) which is used in the feature extraction from the sensor signals. Subsequently, we introduce the basic idea of the posterior probability SVM and the DS evidence theory. The core of our proposed method with the detailed description of the application is illustrated in Section 4. The experiment is shown in Section 5 and we conclude in Section 6.WPD is an extension of the discrete wavelet transform by a generalization of the link between multiresolution approximation and wavelets, where, in addition to dividing the approximations of the signal, the details are also divided [17].For N levels of decomposition, WPD produces 2Ndifferent band signals DNj, (j=0, 1, 2, ..., 2N−1) from the low frequency to the high frequency. The energy for each frequency band of signals is calculated as Eq. (1).(1)ENj=∫|DNj(t)|2dt=∑k=1n|djk|2where djkis the kth discrete point's amplitude of the reconstructed signal DNjand n is the number of discrete points.According to Eq. (1), the energy for each frequency band is first calculated and then used as elements to construct a feature vector SN(2)SN=[EN0,EN1,...,ENj,...,EN(2N−1)]Normalizing the above feature vectors by column, the new feature vectorS′Ncan be obtained as follows:(3)S′N=[E′N0,E′N1,...,E′Nj,...,E′N(2N−1)]The standard SVM in classification cannot give the posterior probability of the sample which may be very useful in uncertainty problems. Platt [22] proposed utilizing the Sigmoid Function to map the outcome of standard SVM to a probabilistic value, as shown in Eq. (4):(4)P(y=1|f(x))=11+exp(Af(x)+B),where f(x) is the output of standard SVM, A and B are two parameters that can be attained by solving the following optimization problem:(5)minz=(A,B)T−∑i=1l[tilog(pi)+(1−ti)log(1−pi)]wherepi=11+exp(Af(xi)+B)andti=N++1N++2ifyi=11N−+2ifyi=−1,i=1,2,…,l,in which N+ and N− are the number of the positive and negative samples, respectively.With the modification of the output of standard SVM, more information about the sample could be preserved which plays an important role in the subsequent processing.The DS evidence theory is a kind of reasoning and processing method handling uncertainty problems [18,19]. It combines evidence from different sources and arrives at a degree of belief (represented by a belief function) that takes into account all the available evidence.Assuming the possible solutions to a judgment problem constitute a set, denoted as Θ, which is also named as the framework of identification. Given the evidence, we can get a belief function on the framework, reflecting the true value assigned by the evidence of the possible proposition on the framework. Assuming that there are multiple kinds of evidence acting on the framework, which leads to multiple belief functions, we can utilize the Dempster Fusion Rule to combine these results to generate a unique belief function. The result then can illustrate the probability of the true value in some set.Definition 1:Basic Probability Assignment (BPA)Assuming Θ denotes a set containing all possible values of X, it is the framework of identification of X, and the elements in Θ are incompatible. Define a functionm:2Θ→0,1meeting the following conditions:(i)m(Φ)=0;(ii)∑A∈2Θm(A)=1;Then m is the basic probability assignment, and m(A) is the basic probability value of A. When A≠Θ, m(A) represents the precise level of trust and when A=Θ, m(Θ) represents the assignment to the unknown.Belief FunctionThe belief function of the proposition A is defined as(6)Bel(A)=∑B⊆Am(B),∀A⊆ΘIt is also named as the lower bound, meaning the least probability that the proposition holds. If a number of evidence supports one proposition, then it should also support the inference of the proposition similarly. Hence, the belief on one proposition equals the sum of the belief on its all premises by evidence. From the definition of BPA, we know Bel(Φ)=0, Bel(Θ)=1.Plausibility FunctionThe plausibility function of proposition A is defined as(7)pl(A)=1−Bel(A¯)=∑B∩A=Φm(B)The plausibility function is also named as the upper bound, giving an uncertainty measure for the proposition holding.We can utilize the belief function and the plausibility function to measure the uncertainty of one proposition while both functions are defined based on BPA. But in some cases, more than one BPA can be obtained. To integrate them effectively, Dempster proposed the Dempster Fusion Rule.Assuming m1, m2, …, mndenote different BPA derived from multiple evidences and their orthogonal sum m=m1⊕m2⊕⋯⊕mnis determined by Eqs. (8) and (9).(8)m(Φ)=0(9)m(A)=K∑∩Ai=A∏j=1nmj(Ai),A≠ΦwhereK−1=1−∑∩Ai=Φ∏j=1nmj(Ai). The value of K reflects the conflict of the evidence: the larger K means the more serious conflict and the worse effect of fusion.Using the aforementioned fusion formulae, multiple evidences could be combined from different sources and we could extract more accurate information.In a multisensory monitoring system, each sensor can reflect different information of structural damage according to its location and environment. In principle, fusion of multisensory information provides significant advantages over single source data. However, in practice, once the inaccurate data is fused, there is no simple way to eliminate the bad effect in the raw data level and feature level fusion approaches.To overcome this difficulty, we propose a new detection method to fuse the information effectively on the decision level, combining PPSVM and DS evidence theory. First, the energy of WPD extracted from the each sensor data are regarded as the training samples to construct multiple standard SVM models whose outcomes will be mapped to a posterior probability, thus the respective basic probability function is attained. Then, the DS evidence theory is adopted to obtain the probability assignment of the test sample. Finally, the class label with the highest probability is assigned to the sample. The whole process is illustrated in Fig. 1:Given some structural damage samples of k(k>2) classes, the class labels constitute a set, namely the framework of identificationΘ=C,1C2,…,Ck. For the model with n(n>1) sensors, n standard SVM classifiers are constructed. The fusion includes the following steps:Step 1For any test sample xi,i∈1,2,…,l(l is the number of test samples), the class probabilityPstis computed according to the Eq. (4), where A and B are attained by solving the optimization problem (5).s∈1,2,…,nandt∈1,2,…,kstand for the sth classifier and tth target class, respectively. For every SVM classifier, there is BPA:Ps1,Ps2,…,Psk.SinceDi=P11P12⋯P1kP21P22⋯P2k⋮⋮⋱⋮Pn1Pn2⋯Pnkis the probability assignment of the sample i on n sensors, i=1, 2, …, l, then for l test samples, we haveD1,D2,…,Dl.For any Di, it is integrated based on the Eqs. (8) and (9) after which we can obtain the probability of the sample xifalling into every class. The final result is the label with the highest probability.Repeat the above procedures to obtain all the classification results of the test samples, and make a statistical analysis to obtain the final accuracy.The proposed damage detection method was verified on a benchmark structure model which was established in the Earthquake Engineering Research Facility at the University of British Columbia (UBC, Canada) [20]. The model is a four-storey, two-bay-by-two-bay steel frame scale model structure; the size of each plane is 2.5m×2.5m, the height of each floor is 0.9m, and each floor has eight braces. The benchmark model is shown in Fig. 2and the locations of sensors are shown in Fig. 3.The experimental steps are as follows.The experimental data were simulated by software DataGen2e from the IIe stage of the research in benchmark model [21] which includes 11 types of damage pattern as illustrated in Table 1.The corresponding frame of identification isΘ=C,1C2,…,C11. For any kind of the damage, 9 samples were collected, thus every sensor corresponding 99 damage samples. These samples were transformed to frequency bands by 5-level WPD using the Db4 wavelet basis. The total energy in each band was calculated then the 32 quantities were generated as the eigenvectors after normalization.In the experiment, only eight sensors along the X-axis direction (denoted as 1–1, 1–3, 2–1, 2–3, 3–1, 3–3, 4–1, and 4–3) were considered because all the damages occurred in the X-axis direction. Constructing eight standard SVM modelsS1,S2,…,S8, for each SVM model Si, we randomly selected 6 samples from each type of damage as the training set. So there were total 66 samples as the training set and the remaining 33 samples as the test set. The Gaussian radial basis function was chosen as the kernel function in SVM and the parameter C and gamma were determined by 10 fold cross-validation.The outputs of SVM on all test samples were mapped to the corresponding posterior probability to enhance the classification accuracy. As examples, the basic probability assignments of three test samples x1, x2, x3 corresponding to damage pattern 1–3 are given in the Tables 2–4. The last column records the label given by a single SVM, that is, the label with the highest probability was chosen as the prediction result.The above tables show that different sensors may give different results for a same sample. As Table 2 displays, the correct label of sample x1 is 1, but the sensor 3–1 and sensor 3–3 predicted the label as 5. Meanwhile, it can also be observed that the sample x3, although predicted correctly on the sensor 1–3 and sensor 2–3, but the credibility on signal sensor is only 0.222 and 0.256, respectively; and although the prediction on the sensor 1–1 is wrong, the credibility as class 3 (0.160) and class 6 (0.162) is very close. The same problem occurs on other sensors, which illustrates that damage detection result obtained from a single sensor is unstable and unreliable.The basic probability assignments from the models were fused using DS evidence theory on the decision level according to Eqs. (8) and (9). Taking the same samples x1, x2, x3 as examples, the detection results are illustrated in the Table 5. Table 5 shows that using decision level data fusion the classifiers could give more accurate prediction with higher credibility than single sensor: the credibility both for sample 1 and sample 2 is beyond 0.98 and the credibility of sample 3 which was misclassified by single sensor also increases to 0.53. These results show that our data fusion can make full use of the complementary information from different sensors and improve the accuracy and credibility of damage identification significantly.Fig. 4shows the average accuracy of eight sensors and the average accuracy after data fusion with the DS evidence theory on all test samples. From Fig. 4 we can see that the average accuracy in single sensor is between 60% and 85% while using the proposed method the accuracy is beyond 90%.Meanwhile, we compared our approach with the majority voting which is a commonly used decision approach in ensemble learning. The rule of majority voting is defined in Eq. (10).(10)ylabel≡argmaxi−1,...,kfi(x)where fi(x) is the decision of each base classifier and ylabelis the final decision of multi-classifier. The average accuracy using majority voting on 8 sensors is 84.8%, which is lower than that of our approach nearing 90.91%. The results show that majority voting as a simple rule may cause large loss of information. In addition, in some cases, “majority” may not exist and the prediction has to be chosen randomly among two or more candidates. The data fusion rule, instead, could make full use of the information provided by the base classifier and convert it to the basic probability assignment which ensures that more information could be preserved and as a result, the accuracy is improved.Note that our proposed method adopts the information fusion at the decision level. To further demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method, another experiment was performed on the benchmark model. Specifically, we compared the performance of damage detection at three different levels: raw data level, feature level, and decision level. In raw data level fusion, original sensor data were directly combined. In feature level fusion, features were extracted from multiple sensor observations, and combined into a single concatenated feature vector. Besides, we also compared the result with no fusion.To verify the robustness of different methods, a small perturbation of the input was added to the original signal. Specifically, in our experiment, we perturbed the original signal of some sensors randomly to simulate some sensors failure or installed in an inappropriate place. Then we detected the structural damages according to the above three approaches of information fusion as well as no information fusion approach. The results are presented in Fig. 5and Table 6.Fig. 5 and Table 6 demonstrate that information fusion could improve the multisensory damage detection performance compared with single sensor. In the case of perturbation, the detection accuracy of raw data level and feature level information fusion method will decrease remarkably while decision level information fusion method can still keep the original accuracy almost unharmed. The results indicate that in a certain case, if some sensors are unable to work normally, the incorrect information would be fused into the input variables in using the first two fusion methods and could affect the identification accuracy. In contrast, the decision level fusion is performed in the last step and the effect of incorrect information can be eliminated.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper introduces a building structural damage detection method based on decision level information fusion. Posteriori probability support vector machines are used to generate a more precise output and the DS evidence theory is adopted to combine the decision information. The integration of these two methods overcomes the limitations of using only each one of them. The proposed method was tested on a 4-storey benchmark building structure. From the results of our empirical study, the following conclusions could be drawn:(1)Using the proposed information fusion method could improve the accuracy and stability of the building structure damage detection.Compared with common SVM and majority voting approach, the proposed method can make full use of the information provided by the base classifier and the detection accuracy is improved.Compared with the raw data level and feature level information fusion, the proposed decision level information fusion approach can avoid the effect of any sensor failure and give more robust results.