@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-class fault diagnosis of induction motor using Hilbert and Wavelet Transform

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Two powerful signal processing tools CWT and HT used for feature extraction.A novel approach to find the important fault frequencies using GA.Seven important fault frequencies found to exist in frequency range 50–300Hz. A new method of selecting CWT scales according to the fault frequencies found.Only vertical frame vibration found sufficient for multi-class fault diagnosis.Six induction motor faults considered and successfully detected.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Induction motor,Vibration monitoring,Hilbert Transform,Continuous Wavelet Transform,Genetic Algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The information extraction capability of two widely used signal processing tools, Hilbert Transform (HT) and Wavelet Transform (WT), is investigated to develop a multi-class fault diagnosis scheme for induction motor using radial vibration signals. The vibration signals are associated with unique predominant frequency components and instantaneous amplitudes depending on the motor condition. Using good systematic and analytical approach this fault frequencies can be identified. However, some faults either electrical or mechanical in nature are associated with same or similar vibration frequencies leading to erroneous conclusions. Genetic Algorithm (GA) is proposed and used successfully to find the most relevant fault frequencies in radial (vertical) frame vibration signal which can be used to diagnose the induction motor faults very effectively even in the presence of noise. The information obtained by Continuous Wavelet Transform (CWT) was found to be highly redundant compared to HT and thus by selecting the most relevant features using GA, the fault classification accuracy has considerably improved especially for CWT. Almost similar fault frequencies were found using CWT+GA and HT+GA for radial vibration signal.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Induction motors (IM) are extensively used in industries because of its simple structure, reliability, ruggedness, cost effective design and ease of control [1,2]. The faults in induction motors may be due to mechanical and electrical stresses. Mechanical stresses caused by overloads and abrupt load changes can produce bearing faults, rotor bar breakage and rotor unbalance. On the other hand, electrical stresses usually associated with the power supply like voltage unbalance cause stator faults like winding fault and external fault. Induction motor can be energized from constant frequency sinusoidal power supplies or from adjustable speed ac drives. However, induction motors are more susceptible to fault when supplied by adjustable speed drives. This is due to the extra voltage stress on the stator windings, the high frequency stator current components, and the induced bearing currents, caused by ac drives [3]. Therefore condition monitoring is essential for reducing the maintenance cost and the unexpected failure of the induction motors [4].There are various monitoring techniques including vibration, current, thermal, chemical and acoustic emission [4]. The different signal processing techniques such as Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) [5], Short Time Fourier Transform (STFT) [6], Wavelet Transform (WT) and Hilbert Transform (HT) have been extensively used to analyze both vibration and current signals to diagnose the faults of induction motor. Traditional techniques like FFT are easy to implement but not suitable for analyzing vibration signals having transitory characteristics. Moreover, the analysis is mostly load dependent and the correct classification of very closed fault frequencies requires very high resolution data [5]. Martin has demonstrated the limitation of using FFT approach for vibration signal analysis. The traditional treatment of vibration spectrum fluctuations is the averaging, which may tend to hide some features of short duration. The alternative approach to such non-stationary vibration signal is the Wavelet Transform (WT), which can provide the useful information about any signal in time domain with different bands of frequencies. WT gives variable time resolution for different frequency bands rather than short term FT (STFT), which gives constant resolutions [7]. Although Short-Time Fourier Transform (STFT) can be used for analyzing transient signals using a time–frequency representation, it can only analyze the signal with a fixed sized window for all frequencies, which leads to poor frequency resolution [6].Hence, in recent years a significant amount number of research works are reported in literature on Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) [8–12] and Continuous Wavelet Transform (CWT) [13–15] based approaches for analyzing vibration signals. Wavelet analysis has certain limitations like selection of mother wavelet and scale/level [15] which plays a crucial role for capturing the inherent features corresponding to the characteristic frequencies of the signal under inspection. Moreover, due to the limitation of Heisenberg–Gabor inequality [16] the Wavelet Transform cannot achieve fine resolution in both time and frequency domain simultaneously. Recently, other time–frequency analysis methods named Hilbert Transform and Hilbert–Huang Transform (HHT) have become more and more popular because of their better time–frequency resolution [17–19]. However, automatic multi-class fault diagnosis of induction motor using Continuous Wavelet Transform (CWT) and Hilbert Transform (HT) is not attempted yet and still remains an open area of research. It is pertinent to mention that since Continuous Wavelet Transform (CWT) requires proper selection of scale and Hilbert Transform (HT) is applicable only to mono-component signal, prior information of the most important and relevant fault frequency components are required. These fault frequencies can be identified using systematic and analytical approach. It is also found that some faults either electrical or mechanical in nature may be associated with same or similar vibration frequencies leading to erroneous conclusions. Identifying the most characterizing features (or attributes) is also critical to minimize the classification error in any artificial intelligence based automatic fault diagnostic strategy. One of the most popular approaches of feature selection is maximal relevance wherein the features with the highest relevance to the target class are selected. It is likely that features selected according to Max-Relevance could have rich redundancy, i.e., the dependency among these features could be large. Thus, the combinations of randomly selected good features do not necessarily lead to good classification performance since the redundant features overshadow the actual information. A good feature selection tool is needed to remove redundant and irrelevant features and extract useful knowledge with minimum information loss. Genetic Algorithm (GA) is one of the well-known data mining tool, quite extensively and widely used to reduce the number of features for fault classification [21,22]. It has been successfully used by Rafiee et al. [23] to find the order of ‘daubechies’ wavelet function, decomposition level of Wavelet Packet and number of hidden layer of the Neural Network for detection of gearbox fault. However, the feature extraction capability of GA has never been used to find most relevant CWT scales or the fault frequencies which can be used to extract the important fault related information to effectively diagnose different induction motor faults.Keeping the above viewpoints in mind, the proposed investigation aims to develop an automatic multi-class fault diagnosis of induction motor using Continuous Wavelet Transform (CWT) and Hilbert Transform (HT) as signal processing tools. Radial (vertical) frame vibration is used for analysis since vibration analysis is one of the most successful techniques used for condition monitoring of rotating machines. Genetic Algorithm (GA) is used to find the most relevant fault frequencies which can be used to effectively diagnose the multiple induction motor faults even in the presence of noise, consequently, reducing the dimension of the feature space without affecting the overall classification accuracy along with significant reduction in computation time.The motor condition monitoring science is moving toward an automated computerized scheme, trying to remove human experts from the condition monitoring process. The development of automatic diagnostics methods for electrical machine condition monitoring is still in its infancy and despite the considerable amount of work in this field, there is still much scope of work especially in the area of feature extraction from vibration signals using powerful signal processing tools.Vibration in induction motors is an important and complex subject [23]. It is very important to realize that vibration signals are always a compound of forcing function effects (the source) and transfer function effects (the structural transmission path). Motor torque is produced where balanced forces exist on either side of the rotor. Vibration results whenever the forces of attraction are not balanced. This can be related to current or air-gap variations in induction motors. There are two major types of vibration sources in induction motors: mechanical and electromagnetic. The major vibration sources of mechanical origin in induction motors are: rotor unbalance, bowed rotor, broken rotor bar and discrepancies in bearing. Electromagnetic vibration in induction motors is a result of effects of the electromagnetic forcing functions onto the motor rotor and stator. There are two major sources of electromagnetic vibration in induction motors: radial electromagnetic forces and tangential electromagnetic forces. Well designed, normally operating modern induction motors do not have a significant amount of variable components of electromagnetic forces. However, due to internal motor faults or external issues, such as low power supply quality and type of load, electromagnetic vibration may create serious problems to a normal motor's operation [1].When a vibration problem occurs due to a fault, finding all the possible causes for the particular identified fault frequency of vibration needs good systematic and analytical approach. Moreover, some faults either electrical or mechanical in nature can cause vibration at the same or similar frequencies like the 1× RPM component and for a 2-pole induction motor, 2× line frequency and 2× RPM are very close especially on light load. Thus, identification of the root cause of vibration becomes elusive [24,25]. Further analysis is needed to distinguish such faults having same vibration signatures like bowed rotor and rotor unbalance. Research being carried out in this aspect is still in infancy.Another important aspect in analysis of induction motor vibrations is that there are many harmonic components present in the electromagnetic force caused by electrical motors along with the slot frequency components. Thus, the motor vibration contains all the components arising from the cross products of the fundamental wave with itself and its harmonics and with slot frequency components. These harmonic components also induce the structural vibration and noise.In a recent literature survey it is reported that induction motor condition monitoring using vibration analysis provides reliable detection of electrical problems in motors and no other technique can, as effectively, detect mechanical problems in all types of rotating machines. It is possible to see some kind of mechanical problems by using motor current analysis, but this technique cannot replace the vibration analysis for fault detection (revealing an excessive machinery vibration) and diagnosing vibration problems. Vibration analysis has been used to successfully identify mechanical and electrical faults and offers the most accurate fault diagnosis compared to any other technique.In the signal processing field wavelets have proved themselves to be an indispensable addition to the analyst's collection of tools and continue to enjoy a burgeoning popularity even today. Wavelet analysis is capable of extracting local as well as global information from a signal which is not possible using other signal analysis techniques. Wavelet analysis is capable of revealing important aspect like trends, breakdown points, discontinuities in higher derivatives, and self-similarity that characterizes a signal. Continuous Wavelet Transform (CWT) and Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) are two ways by which Wavelet Transform can be implemented.Continuous Wavelet Transform (CWT) is one of the ways by which Wavelet Transform can be implemented. Given a wavelet mother function ψ the Continuous Wavelet Transform of the signal x(t) is defined by Eq. (1):(1)CWTxψ(τ,s)=Ψxτ(τ,s)=1s∫x(t)ψ∗t−τsdtwhere ψ* represents the conjugated transpose of the mother wavelet function ψ. ‘s’ is a scale factor, ‘τ’ is the translation factor and the factor |s|1/2 is for energy normalization across the different scale. Energy normalization ensures that the transformed signal has same energy at every scale. Scaling a wavelet simply means stretching (or compressing) it.CWT realizes the transformation of the signal x(t) from time domain to the time–frequency domain. The decomposition coefficients thus obtained reflect the original signal in some particular aspects and can be used to extract informative information for induction motor fault diagnosis. Calculation of continuous wavelet coefficients at every possible scale requires a lot of time and space. If scales are not selected properly or selected at random, the resulting scales may emphasize one original aspect of data, but other aspects are inevitably lost. Thus, the selection of CWT scales that offers the optimum results is a challenging task [26].In Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) the signal is passed through a series of high pass filters to analyze the high frequencies, and through a series of low pass filters to analyze the low frequencies. Thus, a signal is completely decomposed into its detailed version (high frequency components) and smoothed/approximated versions (low frequency components). DWT is considerably easier to implement when compared to CWT.DWT only concerns the information on some discrete time-scale domains, whereas, CWT extracts detailed information more efficiently by choosing the proper scale parameter ‘a’. DWT uses a set of orthogonal wavelet bases to obtain the most compact representation of the data mainly useful for image compression. The information obtained using CWT is highly redundant but wavelet coefficient at each analysis scale can be obtained allowing us to characterize the local information content. CWT is easier to interpret since its redundancy tends to reinforce the traits and makes all information more visible which is especially true for very subtle information [27]. Thus, CWT analysis gains in readability and ease of interpretation and makes it more suitable for the feature extraction task in which one expects to obtain some transformation features which can significantly differentiate different classes.The Hilbert transform can be used to create an analytic signal from a real signal. The ±π/2 phase-shift operator is the basic property of Hilbert Transform. Thus, the Hilbert Transform of a real signal: f(t)=cos(ω0t) is given by:fˆ(t)=sin(ω0t).Together they form an analytic signal where the instantaneous amplitude is [28]:A(t)=f2(t)+fˆ2(t)=cos2(ω0t)+sin2(ω0t)=1The instantaneous frequency can be calculate from the phase:φ(t)=arctanfˆ(t)f(t)=ω0t,that is: ω(t)=ω0.Healthy and faulty motor vibration signal are found to be associated with unique predominant frequency components and unique instantaneous amplitudes. These frequencies and amplitude information can be used for the detection of common faults, such as broken rotor bar, unbalanced rotor, bowed rotor, bearing defect, voltage unbalance and stator faults.Hilbert Transform (HT) can provide complete information about the signal only if signal is mono-component. Here a brief graphical comparison is made for clear understanding of the suitability of HT as compared to widely used FFT and WT. Let us consider a non-stationary sinusoidal mono-component test signal that contains sinusoid of frequency 50Hz for 0≤t<0.2 and 200Hz for 0.2≤t<0.4s and same amplitude as shown in Fig. 1(a). FFT of the test signal is shown in Fig. 1(b). The corresponding CWT scalogram is shown in Fig. 2.It is clear that the exact amplitudes of the frequencies could not be determined from FFT or CWT scalogram. The time–frequency and frequency–amplitude plots of the test signal obtained using HT are shown in Figs. 3 and 4respectively. Accurate fine time–frequency–amplitude information of the test signal is obtained using HT.The vertical frame vibration of the induction motor was acquired using piezo-electric accelerometer probe (sensitivity 100mV/g) through data acquisition system (DAS) at a sampling frequency of 5120Hz under no-load (0.05649Nm), 1-unit load (0.22596Nm), 2-unit load (0.45193Nm), 3-unit load (0.67790Nm) and 4-unit load (0.90387Nm). The load was given with the help of brake-clutch mechanism and belt pulley system [29]. The supply frequency was set to 50Hz. Spectra Quest's Machinery Fault Simulator (MFS) [29] as shown in Fig. 5is used to extract the vibration signatures of common machinery faults.The Machinery Fault Simulator (MFS) initially fitted with a healthy motor is fitted with faulty motors of same specification but with various faults. Fault classes which include both mechanical and electrical faults are supplied with Spectra Quest Machinery Fault Simulator [29]. Six types of Faulty motors were considered: bowed rotor, rotor unbalance, broken rotor bar, faulty bearing, stator fault and voltage unbalance.Typical vertical frame vibration for healthy motor and a motor with faulty bearing are shown in Fig. 6.The parameters needed for Wavelet Transform are proper selection of mother wavelet and corresponding scales/level. In this investigation ‘db8’ was used as mother wavelet to obtain improved frequency resolution [27]. Since, the selection of scales is a challenging task in CWT all scales corresponding to the pseudo-frequency range 50–300Hz was selected. Root Mean Square (RMS) value was evaluated from the coefficients obtained for every scale and used as features for diagnosis of motor condition with the help of a classifier. The optimum scale selection was attempted using Genetic Algorithm (GA). For DWT the signal was decomposed up to level 7. Root Mean Square (RMS) value was evaluated from the coefficients obtained at each level. Further, subsets are obtained by discarding the attribute corresponding to Level-1, Level-2 and Level-3 to reject the information corresponding to high frequency range.The schematic representation of the proposed scheme using Continuous Wavelet Transform (CWT) is shown in Fig. 7and the typical CWT scalograms obtained are shown in Fig. 8.For successful application of Hilbert Transform, it is necessary to have mono-component signal. Empirical Mode Decomposition (EMD) method can be used to extract these mono-components. However, since the main objective of this work is to extract knowledge and identify only the relevant fault frequencies using data-mining, to reduce the complexity and for the ease of understanding the mono-components are extracted with the help of filters.To obtain mono-component signals the predominant frequency components were identified using FFT. 36 predominant frequencies components (f1 to f36) were obtained in the range 50–300Hz. Kaiser windowed FIR band pass filter [30] was designed for each predominant frequency components with a pass band of ±5Hz. The vibration signal was passed through each of these filters and finally mono-component signals were obtained. Hilbert Transform was applied to each of these mono-components. Root Mean Square (RMS) value was evaluated from the Hilbert coefficients obtained for every mono-component and used as features for the diagnosis and detection of motor fault with the help of a classifier. The most relevant frequency components needed for fault diagnosis were attempted using Genetic Algorithm (GA).The schematic representation of the proposed scheme using Hilbert Transform is shown in Fig. 9.The frequency–amplitude plots obtained for healthy motor and faulty motors with faulty bearing, bowed rotor and rotor unbalance are shown in Fig. 10.An on-line fault diagnosis system should be fast and computationally efficient. Extracting hidden information from vibration signal using signal processing tools is one of the most important steps in any fault diagnosis algorithm and it demands good signal processing tools too. In spite of attractive feature extraction capability, the computational complexity and longer processing time make CWT unsuitable for real time applications such as monitoring. The heavy computations involved with the CWT belong to the convolution operations in the time domain, which grows according to the length of the signal. Moreover, large information generated due to continuous scales produce redundant information. It may create additional burden to machine learning tools. If scales are not selected properly or selected at random, the resulting scales may emphasize one original aspect of data, but other aspects are inevitably lost. Similarly, a large number of mono components generated by HT may cause unnecessary burden to the classifier. Thus, using data mining the most relevant CWT scales and most useful mono components of HT need to be selected that offers the optimum results with minimum information loss. Thus, the computation time and space can also be considerably reduced making CWT and HT suitable for on-line applications like monitoring. In this work Genetic Algorithm (GA) is used to select the most relevant CWT scales and the most important mono-components for HT. Thus, this research work aims to demonstrate the feasibility of on-line application of CWT and HT with successful use of GA as data mining technique.A Genetic Algorithm (GA) is an adaptive heuristic search technique based on evolutionary ideas of natural evolution and “survival of fittest”. By simulating the natural evolution process, GA can be effectively used to solve any complex problem [31]. They employ a population of competing solutions – evolved over time – to converge to an optimal solution. Since GA represent an intelligent random search of a solution space to solve an optimization problem, to avoid local optima, historical information is exploited to direct the search into the region of better performance within the search space. Roulette wheel selection scheme is used as the selection operator. Candidate solutions with a higher fitness value have greater chance of being selected [32].The GA used in this experiment is a standard simple genetic algorithm proposed by Goldberg [33]. The best feature subset is determined using Correlation based Feature Subset (CFS) Evaluator. The flowchart of the Genetic Algorithm used for Feature selection is shown in Fig. 11.The feature/attribute selection using GA was done in WEKA with the following parameter settings [34]:–Population size: 20 [Number of individuals in the population]Number of generation: 20 [Number of generations to evaluate]Probability of crossover: 0.6 [Probability of crossover occurring]Probability of mutation: 0.033 [Probability of mutation occurring]Since the number of generation is fixed and GA being a heuristic search technique to avoid local optima, feature subset selection was done based on 10-fold cross-validation. The steps are narrated below:1.Attribute ranking according to the number of occurrence in 10-fold cross-validation.Fix a cut-of ranking and evaluate the feature subset set by selecting the attributes having rank greater than threshold.Output the feature subset.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper Continuous Wavelet Transform (CWT) and Hilbert Transform (HT) were used as signal processing tools for extraction of information from non-stationary vibration signal for the development of a multi-class fault diagnosis approach. Only vertical (radial) frame vibration signal was found sufficient for detection of fault. Both the signal processing tools analyse a signal in frequency domain and were found equally useful for extraction of hidden features from vibration signal. HT has a better resolution than CWT. Although CWT has good time resolution in high frequency region, it often cannot separate those impacts, where time interval between them is very small.From the implementation point of view each have there own shortcomings. For Hilbert Transform (HT) pre-processing of the signal is needed to extract mono-components using Empirical Mode Decomposition (EMD) or by using filters. On the other hand although CWT can be directly applied to the signal under analysis for feature extraction, proper selection of mother wavelet and scale is extremely important.Based on the overall accuracy of the three classifiers (MLP, RBF, SVM) it was found that on an average 19 attributes are required for diagnosing and detecting induction motor faults accurately for both Continuous Wavelet Transform (CWT) and Hilbert Transform (HT).The information obtained from CWT is found highly redundant whereas, that obtained from HT contains a lot of irrelevant information. To develop an efficient multi-class fault diagnosis algorithm using minimal number of features, data mining was needed to extract the useful knowledge from the information obtained using CWT and HT. Interestingly, seven fault frequencies components were found to be of utmost importance and also found to be almost same for both HT and CWT. These fault frequencies were found to be in the frequency range of 50–300Hz. Thus, to get improved frequency resolution data sampled at low sampling frequency is preferred. However, using CWT the electrical faults were little difficult to diagnose whereas using HT bearing fault could not be diagnosed properly.Genetic Algorithm (GA) was successfully used for dimensionality reduction with minimal information loss. Consequently, the most relevant fault frequencies were found which can be used to design the Kaiser windowed FIR band pass filter required for HT and select the scales for CWT. Thus, CWT which is unsuitable for real time applications due to its computational complexity and longer processing time can now be used for on-line applications such as monitoring. The computational efficiency of the classifiers has also improved due to selection of most relevant features. GA was found to be extremely useful for removing the redundant and irrelevant information.The performance of the proposed method is very encouraging and consistent even in the presence of high level of noise as compared to other research papers [20,21,35,36] presented in Table 10. Moreover, the previous research works have used three accelerometer probes along with three current probes. Thus, the proposed scheme provides a better alternative for multi-class fault diagnosis of induction motor with drastic reduction in computational time and instrumentation (since only a single sensor is required to acquire the vertical frame vibration signature).