@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-objective backtracking search algorithm for economic emission dispatch problem

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Economic/emission dispatch problem (EED) is solved.Transmission network loss and valve-point effects are considered.Multi-objective backtracking search algorithm (MOBSA) is developed.Weighted sum method (WSM) and non-dominated approach (NDA) are employed.The proposed method is able to solve EED problems efficiently.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Environmental concerns,Economic dispatch,Non-convex,Transmission loss,Backtracking search algorithm (BSA),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents the application of backtracking search algorithm (BSA) for solving an economic/emission dispatch (EED) problem as a multi-objective optimization problem. BSA is a newly developed evolutionary algorithm with one control parameter to solve numerical optimization problems. It utilizes crossover and mutation operators to advance optimization toward the optimal. The multi-objective BSA developed and presented in this paper uses an elitist external archive to store non-dominated solutions known as pareto front. The problem of EED is also solved by weighted sum method, which combines both objectives of the problem into a single objective. Three test systems are the case studies verifying the effectiveness of BSA. The results are compared with those of other methods in literatures and confirm the high performance of BSA.number of generating unitscost function coefficients of generating unit iemission function coefficients of generating unit iminimum and maximum production limits of the ith generatoroutput power of the ith generatorpower demandtransmission network lossvector for power outputs of N generating unitsloss coefficientsgeneration cost of generating unit itotal generation cost of N generating unitsemission amount of generating unit itotal emission amount of N generating unitsobjective vectorcombined objective of several objectivesweighting factorprice penalty factorstandard uniform distributionstandard normal distributionamplitude control function of search-direction matrixfeasible search space of optimization problemBSA's control parameterpopulation sizepopulation matrix in iteration tindividual i of population X in iteration thistorical population matrix in iteration tfinal and trial population matricesbinary matrixnumber of objectivesnumber of non-dominated solutionsobjective function jmaximum and minimum values of the jth objective functionsolution number icrowding distance of solution imembership function of solution i for objective jnormalized membership function of solution i

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Solutions to traditional power dispatch problems aim for economic operation of the generating units of power system to minimize the cost of power generation. When environmental concerns are considered, the power dispatch may not produce the best results. This calls for a multi-objective optimization approach that considers both generation cost and emission minimization.Reducing the emission of power plants requires proper planning. One approach is to invest in new power plants that produce low emissions or to use renewable energy technologies, however, can be costly and thus are suitable as long-term options. Another way of reducing emission is to optimize power system operation by considering the emission amount as a constraint or as an objective function [1]. This paper presents the latter.Consideration of emission in power dispatch problem is a multi-objective economic/emission dispatch (EED) problem, which can be formulated in several ways. One way, known as ɛ-constraint technique, is to consider one objective as the constraint and minimize the other objective. Another way, known as the scalarization method, is to convert the multi-objective problem to a single objective problem [2], by goal programming, goal attaining, and so on. The problem can also be solved as a multi-objective problem in which a trade-off curve between all the objectives has been found. This curve is known as the pareto front and proposes all the optimal solutions to the problem [3]. In multi-objective approach, if an optimal solution has to be defined, a decision maker that assigns a merit order to any solution of the pareto front selects the best compromise solution from the whole pareto front solutions [4].Methods of solving EED problems are categorized into three groups: classical, metaheuristic, and hybrid. In problems with convex objective function, the classical methods can be employed. An analytical solution is proposed in [5] for solving convex economic dispatch problem in a basic form without considering the transmission network loss. Another analytical approach is presented in [6] for solving the EED problem by incorporating the transmission loss. However, it has not produced accurate results because of an approximation technique used in the power balance equation. So, it is improved in [7] and is combined with an iterative method to produce the exact solution to the convex EED problem. Quadratic programming [8] and linear programming [9] are other examples of classical methods addressing the convex EED problems. In problems having nonlinear objectives or constraints, finding the optimal can be difficult by classical methods [10]. The difficulties can be handled by metaheuristic methods but at the expense of computation time during optimization. Hybrids combine methods so they perform better than they do individually. The metaheuristic and hybrid methods include genetic algorithm (GA) [11], particle swarm optimization (PSO) [10], some derivatives of GA and PSO such as non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm (NSGA-II) [12,13] and fuzzified multi-objective particle swarm optimization algorithm (FMOPSO) [14], modified harmony search algorithm (MHSA) [15], differential evolution (DE) [16], glowworm swarm optimization [17], interactive honey-bee mating optimization (IHBMO) [18], multi-objective differential evolution (MODE) [19], ant-colony optimization and steady state genetic algorithm (ACO-SSGA) [20], differential evolution with biogeography-based optimization (DE-BBO) [21], and hybrid bacterial foraging algorithm with Nelder–Mead method (BF-NM) [22].In this paper, a new evolutionary method called backtracking search algorithm (BSA) is used to solve the multi-objective power dispatch problem. It considers valve-point loading effects in the generator cost functions and uses feasible search space exploration in constraints handling mechanism. Its performance is analyzed on three test systems. The rest of paper is organized as follows: Section 2 formulates the problem, Section 3 discusses the solution methodology for the multi-objective problem, Section 4 presents the optimization procedure, Section 5 discusses the BSA approach to solve the multi-objective problem and presents the optimization results on the test systems, and Section 6 concludes.Satisfying power demand while minimizing objective functions, emission and generation cost, requires treating the challenge as the multi-objective economic/emission dispatch problem. The components of the problem including its objective functions and constraints are as follows.The production cost of a generating unit is usually modeled by a quadratic function as in Eq. (1). The more accurate cost model considers the valve point loading effects of steam turbine generators by adding a sinusoidal term to the quadratic function as in Eq. (2).(1)Fc,i(Pi)=aiPi2+biPi+ci,Pimin≤Pi≤Pimax(2)Fc,i(Pi)=aiPi2+biPi+ci+|ei×sin(fi(Pimin−Pi))|,Pimin≤Pi≤PimaxThe total generation cost of N generating units is defined by Eq. (3).(3)Fc(P)=∑i=1NFc,i(Pi),P=[P1,P2,…,PN]The emission functions of all the pollutants including CO2, NOX, SO2 are usually represented by quadratic functions. However, the combination of both quadratic and exponential functions is considered in determining the total emission caused by the generators. Eq. (4) shows the total emission level of the pollutants.(4)Fe,i(Pi)=αiPi2+βiPi+γi+ξieλiPiThe total emission level of N generating units is defined by Eq. (5).(5)Fe(P)=∑i=1NFe,i(Pi),P=[P1,P2,…,PN]The power dispatch constraints are as follows:The total power generated should meet the power demand and the transmission network loss, as in Eq. (6).(6)∑i=1NPi−Ploss=PDThe transmission loss (Ploss) is usually determined by Kron's loss formula as in Eq. (7)[23].(7)Ploss=∑i=1N∑j=1NPiBijPj+∑i=1NB0iPi+B00Each generator should produce power within lower and upper limits, as in Eq. (8).(8)Pimin≤Pi≤Pimax,i∈{1,2,3,…,N}There are different methodologies to solve the EED problems. In this study, the weighted sum method and non-dominated approach are employed for dealing with the EED problems. The concept of pareto front optimal set needs to be explained at first.In the multi-objective optimization approach, several functions need to be optimized simultaneously. Eq. (9) shows the general form of a multi-objective problem subjected to equality and inequality constraints.(9)MinimizeX∈ΩY=(f1(X),f2(X),...,fk(X))=F(X)whereΩ={X∈Rn:g(X)≤0,h(X)=0}F:Rn→RkWhen it comes to multi-objective optimization, there is no unique solution corresponding to the optimal value of each objective. Instead, there is a set of solutions known as the pareto optimal set. Assuming that Φ=(Φ1,…,Φn) and Ψ=(Ψ1,…,Ψn) are two solutions included in the pareto optimal set and correspond to the objectives F(Φ)=(f1(Φ),…,fk(Φ)) and F(Ψ)=(f1(Ψ),…,fk(Ψ)), the solutionΦdominates the solution Ψ, denoted by Φ≺Ψ or F(Φ)≺F(Ψ), if and only if the following conditions of Eq. (10) are satisfied. In this case, the solution Φ is the non-dominated solution.(10)∀i∈{1,...,k}:fi(Φ)≤fi(Ψ)∃i∈{1,...,k}:fi(Φ)<fi(Ψ)In Fig. 1, the circled points represent the pareto optimal set of two objectives. The black circles represent the non-dominated solutions and the connected line of these points is the pareto front. The set of pareto front represented by P is described mathematically by Eq. (11).(11)P(Y)={Y1∈θ:{Y2∈θ:Y2≺Y1,Y2≠Y1}=0}whereθ={Y∈Rk:Y=F(X),X∈Ω}The weighted sum method transforms a set of objective functions into a single objective [24,25]. Each objective is multiplied by a user-supplied weight which is usually in proportion to the importance of the objective. It is thus assigned a different order of magnitude in the combined economic/emission dispatch problem. Eq. (12) is the combined objective function that considers the price penalty factor σ ($/ton) necessary to reflect the different ranges of values of each objective.(12)F=wFc+(1−w)σFeWeighting factor w can be any number between 0 and 1. The factor σ is determined by Eq. (13), which represents the ratio of the maximum generation cost to the maximum emission amount.(13)σ=Fc(Pmax)Fe(Pmax)The objective function is written as a vector of both objectives and neither is inferior to the other, i.e., the generation cost and emission amount are minimized simultaneously. This method of optimization is called non-dominated approach (NDA), detailed in Section 4.4. Eq. (14) specifies the objective function F as the objective vector to be minimized. NDA aims to find the dispatch that satisfies the constraints and minimizes the vector function F[26,27].(14)F=(Fc,Fe)Metaheuristic optimization methods are widely applied in searching for optimal solutions in large-scale problems of engineering, computer science, business, and even chemical processes. They work by guiding the searching in a solution space to find the optimal [28]. An evolutionary algorithm (EA) as a subset of the metaheuristic methods emulates the evolutionary process in nature to solve the optimization problems [29]. It uses techniques inspired by natural or biological evolutions to generate superior solutions through optimization. Such techniques include mutation, crossover, and selection, to be applied to each individual of a population. Among these algorithms, BSA is a new evolutionary method developed by Civicioglu [30] to solve multimodal optimization benchmarks and to overcome the complexities of highly nonlinear optimization problems.BSA starts with a population of individuals, generated randomly in the search space. It leads to a better population specified by a fitness function in the next iteration. It uses one control parameter and several operators in the optimization process. The five major steps of BSA, described briefly next, are initialization, selection-I, mutation, crossover, and selection-II. Each iteration begins from the selection-I step and ends in the selection-II step. Note that the mutation and crossover operators of BSA are completely different from those of DE and its advanced versions [30].Let us assume Ω⊂Rnto be the search space of the problem. BSA uses np individuals as the population in each generation of the algorithm. The population and each individual are represented byXt=[X1tX2t⋯Xnpt]'andXit=[xi1txi2t⋯xint]'where t and i respectively denote the iteration and the individual number. The population is initialized randomly so the individuals are uniformly distributed in the search space.Step 1: InitializationThe iteration number is set as t=0, randomly initializing the population X in the search space Ω.Step 2: Selection-IThe historical population (histXt) is generated in this step. It is initialized the same way that population X is initialized. The histXtis then redefined through a simple “if-then” rule according to Eq. (15).(15)ifa<b|a,b∼U(0,1)→histXt=XtNote that the historical population histXtis initialized randomly in this step. If the rule of Eq. (15) is satisfied, then the value of histXtis changed to Xt.Finally, a permuting function is applied to the historical population to change the order of the individuals randomly. A random shuffling function is used as the permuting function in Eq. (16).(16)histXt=permuting(histXt)Step 3: MutationThe mutation operator generates the initial form of the trial populationVt+1=[V1t+1V1t+1⋯Vnpt+1]'through Eq. (17). Each individual of Vt+1is relevant to an individual of Xt.(17)Vt+1=Xt+ρ⋅(histXt−Xt)where ρ is a function to control the amplitude of the term (histXt−Xt) as the search direction matrix. The function of ρ=3.randn, where randn∼N (0,1) is used in this paper.Step 4: CrossoverThe initial trial population Vt+1 (as the mutant matrix) is finalized in this step by applying the crossover operator. In the process, BSA uses a control parameter called mixrate to determine the number of elements of each individual of Vt+1 to be engaged and manipulated. A random binary matrix ‘map’ with the same size of Vt+1 is generated. The parameter ‘mixrate’ controls the maximum number of elements in each row of matrix ‘map’ with the value of 1. The final trial population Ut+1 is then determined through Eq. (18).(18)Uijt+1=Vijt+1ifmapij=1Xijtifmapij=0where i and j denote the element of the ith row and the jth column of the matrices; Ut+1 is the finalized form of the trial population.After the crossover, some individuals of Ut+1 might violate the boundaries of the optimization variables, so they need to be checked and modified by an appropriate mechanism.Step 5: Selection-IIIn the selection-II step, each individual of population Ut+1 is compared in terms of fitness value with its counterpart in Xtto update Xt. The global minimum within the individuals is also updated. The optimization process again repeats from step 2 unless the stopping criteria are satisfied. Common criteria are to set a limit on number of objective function evaluation or iteration number [31]. In this paper, the algorithm stops when the number of iterations is reached a predetermined value.In the context of multi-objective optimization by evolutionary algorithms, there have been different methods of retaining the non-dominated solutions found along the evolutionary process. Since Goldberg [32] suggested a non-dominated sorting as the selection strategy in multi-objective optimization, a number of non-dominated sorting methods have been developed over the past years. Deb et al. [33] adopted the non-dominated sorting in NSGA for multi-objective optimization. As an improved version of NSGA, Deb et al. [34] proposed more efficient non-dominated sorting method called fast non-dominated sort. Another method named deductive sort was proposed in [35] which outperformed the fast non-dominated sort. An efficient non-dominated sorting strategy (ENS) is proposed in [36] and two strategies including sequential search (SS) and binary search (BS) are employed for searching within the ENS. Both ENS-based non-dominated sorting approaches have shown to be more efficient than the aforementioned sorting methods. However, the efficiency of these methods decreases as the number of objectives increases. Another approach proposed in [37] is to use an archive with an elitism reservation mechanism to retain the non-dominated solutions found within the optimization. The main motivation for this approach is that a solution which is non-dominated to other solutions in its current population is not necessarily non-dominated with respect to all other solutions that the algorithm has produced so far [38]. Many researchers have adopted similar reservation mechanism to store and update the non-dominated solutions in each iteration of the evolutionary algorithm.In this paper, an elitist reservation mechanism is also adopted and an external archive is used to store and update the non-dominated solutions in each iteration. The external archive, initially empty, stores the non-dominated solutions as the optimization progresses. The archive has three rules for when a new solution (the trial vector) enters it: (1) the trial vector dominates some of the archive members so the dominated ones are deleted from the archive; (2) the trial vector is dominated by at least one member from the archive so it is rejected from inclusion in the archive; (3) the trial vector is not dominated by the archived members and the archived members are not dominated by the trial vector, i.e., the trial vector belongs to the archive so it enters the archive as a collection of the latest non-dominated solutions. The number of archive members increases as the optimization progresses. When the population of the elitist archive reaches its maximum capacity, a measure called crowding distance removes extra members to keep the archive to its maximum size.The crowding distance is a quality measure for pareto front distribution. When the external elitist archive overloads, the extra member of the archive can be removed according to the value of the crowding distance. The measure estimates the density around a solution in the pareto front. It usually is the average distance of two neighbor points around the solution. It is calculated by Eq. (19) for the ith solution of the pareto front [39].(19)CDi=∑j=1kfj(i+1)−fj(i−1)fjmax−fjminSince there is only one neighbor point for the boundary solutions (solutions with the smallest and largest objective values) of the pareto front, the value of the crowding distance is set to infinite for the boundaries. The solution with the greater CD is preferred to be in the archive, i.e., the solution with the lowest crowding distance value is subject to deletion when the archive unloads.As mentioned, BSA deals with the populationXt=[X1tX2t⋯Xnpt]', whereXt=[xi1txi2t⋯xint]', in each generation of the evolution process. The mutation and crossover operators are first applied to produce the offspring population Ut+1, then the individuals of Xtand of Ut+1 are compared in the selection-II step of the algorithm. To extend BSA to multi-objective optimization application, the comparison needs to be modified according to the concept of pareto dominance. When the individualXitis compared with the individualUit+1, up to three situations may occur: (1)Xitis dominated byUit+1(Uit+1≺Xit); (2)XitdominatesUit+1(Xit≺Uit+1); and (3) neitherXitdominatesUit+1norUit+1dominatesXit(Xit⊀Uit+1andUit+1⊀Xit). In the first situation,Uit+1is selected as the individual of the next populationXit+1but in the second and third situations,Xitis selected. The following steps represent the procedure of multi-objective BSA with an external elitist archive and crowding distance measure.Step 1: Set the iteration number t=0, randomly initialize the population Xtin the search space Ω.Step 2: Evaluate the fitness function of each individual of Xtand save the non-dominated solutions from among the population members into the external elitist archive.Step 3: Initialize the historical population (histXt) similar to Xtand redefine and modify it through Eqs. (15) and (16).Step 4: Apply the mutation operator to the population to determine the trial population[V1t+1V2t+1⋯Vnpt+1]'through Eq. (17).Step 5: Apply the crossover operator to the trial population Vt+1 to obtain the final trial populationUt+1=[U1t+1U2t+1⋯Unpt+1]'through Eq. (18) and then check and modify it by considering the constraints.Step 6: Compare each individual of Ut+1 with its counterpart from Xtto determine the individuals of Xt+1. Use Eq. (20) for the comparison.(20)Xit+1=Uit+1Uit+1≺XitXitotherwiseStep 6: Update the external elitist archive through its three aforementioned update rules. If the archive exceeds its capacity, remove the less crowded solutions one by one from the archive.Step 7: Set t=t+1 and then check the stopping criteria, If algorithm needs to be repeated, return to step 3.Multi-objective optimization yields pareto front as a set of optimal solutions rather than a single optimal. Any solution in the pareto front is not inferior to another, and improvement to one objective cannot be achieved without sacrificing another. There should thus be a mechanism of choosing a solution that satisfies each objective to some extent. A trade-off between solutions should lead to the best compromise solution.A challenging way of selecting the best compromise solution is to use fuzzy set theory to determine the best candidate among the pareto front efficiently. Usually a member function is assigned to each objective function according to Eq. (21)[4].(21)μi,j=1fj(Xi)≤fjminfjmax−fj(Xi)fjmax−fjminfjmin≤fj(Xi)≤fjmax0fj(Xi)≥fjmaxwhere f(Xi) is the value of the jth objective function for the ith solution Xi. The membership function represents the objective function's degree of optimal achievement ranging from zero to one. The values of μ=1 and 0 correspond to completely satisfactory and unsatisfactory conditions, respectively. Fig. 2shows the membership function for the objective function f. To specify the best compromise solution among the non-dominated solutions, a normalized membership function needs to be calculated first by Eq. (22).(22)μi=∑j=1kμi,j∑i=1m∑j=1kμi,jThe solution with the highest value of μ is selected as the best compromise solution.Three case studies including IEEE 30-bus 6-unit system, 10-unit system, and IEEE 118-bus 14-unit system are used to validate the performance of the proposed algorithm for solving the optimal economic/emission dispatch (EED) problems. The total transmission network loss is considered. Matlab software is used for code programming and the program is run on a personal computer with Pentium 2.70GHz processor and 2GB RAM.Since the method of optimization is metaheuristic using random number generations in the optimization process, 50 runs are considered for each problem and robustness is checked by statistical indices of the optimal results. For achieving the high quality results, the value of the control parameter mixrate is tuned in each system.Transmission loss coefficients are considered in all the test systems. In the first case study, optimization is done with/without considering transmission network loss. For solving the EED problem, three methodologies are considered to demonstrate the high performance and effectiveness of the proposed method. The results are compared with those reported in the literature.Methodology 1 – Solution to EED problem by minimizing generation cost and emission separately;Methodology 2 – Solution to EED problem by weighted sum method (BSA-WSM);Methodology 3 – Solution to EED problem by non-dominated approach (BSA-NDA).In the first methodology, the problems of economic dispatch and emission dispatch are solved to achieve minimum generation cost and minimum emission separately. In the second methodology, the problem of EED is solved by weighted sum method, which combines both objectives of the problem into a single objective. Finally, the third methodology is used to minimize both objectives of EED problem simultaneously. It uses an elitist external archive to store non-dominated solutions generated within optimization and produces the pareto front as the optimal solution set.This test system is the IEEE 30-bus power system with 6 generating units with a power demand of 283.4MW. The data is taken from [39] and listed in Tables 1 and 2. For comparison, optimization of the system is performed with/without total transmission network loss.As mentioned before, BSA has one control parameter named mixrate which affects the quality of optimal solution. The best value of control parameter should be determined to achieve the best optimal. In this case, the economic dispatch and emission dispatch problems are solved with different values of mixrate. The maximum iteration and population size are set to 500 and 10, respectively. The economic dispatch and emission dispatch problems are run 50 times for this test system with/without considering the transmission network loss. The statistical indices of optimal objective and computation time within these trials are calculated to determine the best value of control parameter. Table 3shows the results of economic dispatch and emission dispatch for this system without transmission network loss. According to this table, the standard deviation of each objective (generation cost or emission amount) is the lowest when the mixrate is equal to 1 so the mixrate=1 is selected. The same situation occurs for this system when the transmission network loss is considered. So the mixrate=1 is selected for this system with/without considering the transmission network loss as it leads to the best quality of solutions.The total generation cost and total emission are minimized separately by single-objective BSA. Table 4shows the best solution for the test system with/without transmission network loss. When generation cost is the only objective function, BSA reaches the optimal values of 600.1114 ($/h) and 605.9984 ($/h) for lossless and lossy systems, respectively. In emission minimization, the optimal values are 0.194179 (ton/h) and 0.194203 (ton/h) respectively for with/without transmission loss.To check the robustness of the proposed method, 50 runs are taken into account. Their statistical indices listed in Table 5show the proposed method producing high quality solutions in the test system.The results of the proposed method are compared with those of other methods including NSGA-II [40], BB-MOPSO [40], PSO [41], GSA [41], MBFA [42], and MODE [43], as listed in Table 6.Fig. 3shows the convergence characteristics of both generation cost and emission amount, when the transmission network loss neglected. The figure confirms the speedy convergence of BSA in solving the power dispatch problem. The approximate optimal occurs at around iteration numbers 50 and 100, respectively for emission and generation cost minimizations. The maximum iteration of 500 is considered enough to achieve high quality solutions among 50 trials. Fig. 4demonstrates the convergence characteristics when the transmission loss considered.The problem of EED is solved by combining the objectives to create a new objective function according to Eq. (12). The weighting factor w is set between 0 and 1 and the value of σ for this test system is calculated by Eq. (13). The parameters of optimizer are set to maximum iteration=500, population size=10, and mixrate=1. Different values are assigned to w and the optimal is achieved through the weighted sum method. All the optimal results building the pareto front are depicted in Fig. 5for lossless Test System 1 and Fig. 6is a similar graph for lossy Test System 1.Table 7reports the pareto front solutions for this test system. The best compromise solution needs to be specified among the pareto front solutions. The values ofμFc,μFe, and μ are calculated first and then the solution corresponding to the highest μ is chosen as the best compromise solution (shown in bold).Table 8is the generation schedule of Test System 1 for the best compromise solutions with/without transmission network loss. The results show that the best compromise solution is achieved by assigning w=0.6 to lossy/lossless networks, but still optimization is needed to find the value of w that gives the best compromise solution.The EED problem is solved by the non-dominated approach in this part. The pareto front solutions are generated and updated as the optimization progresses. The best compromise solution to the EED problem is obtained from the pareto front by the fuzzy-based decision maker which evaluates the solutions and picks the solution with the highest index of μ. For setting the parameters, the maximum size of the external elitist archive is set to 50 non-dominated solutions and the control parameter mixrate is set to its maximum to obtain the best objective values. The maximum iteration number and population size are also set to 1000 and 20, respectively. Figs. 7 and 8show the pareto front solutions for Test System 1, respectively with the transmission loss ignored and considered. The best compromise solution is determined by the index μ of the non-dominated solutions. Table 9is the generation schedule and lists the objectives’ values that correspond to the best compromise solutions.In order to compare the qualities of optimal solutions obtained by BSA-WSM and BSA-NDA, the pareto front sets of these two methodologies are shown in Figs. 9 and 10for lossless/lossy Test System 1. The pareto front set of BSA-WSM includes 11 points corresponding to different values of weighting factor (w) but the pareto front of BSA-NDA has 50 points. Comparison between the pareto front sets of BSA-NDA and BSA-WSM confirms that BSA-NDA can produce optimal solutions with the same qualities of BSA-WSM.This test system consists of 10 generating units. The power demand is 2000MW. The valve point loading effects are modeled in the cost functions and the transmission loss is considered through loss coefficients. The generator data is taken from [19] and listed in Tables 10 and 11. The transmission loss coefficients are listed in Table 12.Although the performance of BSA is not over sensitive to its control parameter, the economic dispatch and emission dispatch problems are run with different values of mixrate to find its best value. Again, the maximum iteration and population size are set to 500 and 10, respectively. The values of 0 to 1 with steps of 0.2 are selected for mixrate and the problems of economic dispatch and emission dispatch are run 50 times with each value of this parameter. The statistical indices of optimal results and computation time within the trials are obtained for the analysis. Table 13shows the indices including minimum, average, maximum, and standard deviation values of optimal results and computation time for this test system. According to the table, the value of mixrate=1 is again selected since it produces the optimal solutions with lowest standard deviation. However, other values of this parameter lead to almost the same results.As with the preceding test system, three methodologies are considered for this system and their results analyzed in each part.Table 14lists the best solutions in Test System 2 for individual minimizing of generation cost and emission. BSA reached the values of 111,497.6276 ($/h) and 3932.2432 (lb/h) as minimum generation cost and emission, respectively.Table 15lists the statistical indices of 50 independent runs. BSA reached the optimal values of the generation cost and emission with very low standard deviations, proving the high robustness of the proposed method.A comparison between the proposed method and others from literature, i.e., with TLBO [44], QOTLBO [44], and RCCRO [45], is made in Table 16. The results confirm high performance of the proposed method. The convergence characteristics of both objectives are achieved separately and shown by Fig. 11. Again, high-speed convergence to the optimal is demonstrated.In this method of solving the EED problem, the general settings are same as the first methodology (maximum iteration=500, population size=10, mixrate=1). The combined objective function is minimized in this case study and the pareto front solutions are obtained by running the optimization for different values of w. The value of w=0 corresponds to the minimum emission while the value of w=1 is set to minimize the generation cost. Fig. 12shows the pareto front for this test system and the best compromise solution is selected among these solutions based on the fuzzy-based decision maker. Note that the points corresponding to the values of w between 0 and 0.4 are so close to each other. Table 17shows the generation cost and emission amount for all the pareto solutions. The parameter μ is calculated to determine the best compromise solution among the pareto front set. The best compromise solution corresponds to w=0.8 (shown in bold) and the generation schedule is shown in Table 18.The non-dominated approach is applied to the test system and the pareto front is generated as the optimization product. The population size is set to 20 and the control parameter of BSA is set to its maximum value. The maximum iteration number is also set to 1000.Fig. 13shows the pareto front solutions for Test System 2. The best compromise solution is selected among the pareto members according to the fuzzy decision maker. This solution corresponds to the generation cost of 112,807.3733 ($/h) and emission of 4188.0926 (lb/h). The generation schedule of this solution is shown in Table 19. The 50 non-dominated solutions of the pareto front are listed in Table 20with the index μ and the best compromise solution is shown in bold.Pareto front solutions of BSA-NDA and BSA-WSM are shown in Fig. 14to compare these two methods. Although number of solutions in the pareto front are set differently, the figure confirms that BSA-NDA produces the same solutions as BSA-WSM does.The system is an IEEE 118-bus 14-unit test system with a power demand of 950 (MW). Its data is taken from [43] and listed in Table 21. The transmission loss coefficients, obtained from [15], are listed in Table 22. As in the other test systems, three methodologies of solving the EED problem are considered in this system.The economic dispatch and emission dispatch problems are solved for this test system with different values of mixrate. The maximum iteration and population size are set to 500 and 10, respectively and mixrate is changed from 0 to 1 with the step of 0.2. Table 23shows the statistical indices of the optimal results of both economic dispatch and emission dispatch problems. As shown in the table, the value of mixrate=0 corresponds to the optimal solutions with lowest computation burden while the value of mixrate=1 produces the highest quality of solutions (minimum objective with lowest standard deviation).Single objective optimizations to minimize generation cost and emission are performed in the test system. The transmission network loss is considered in the problem formulation. The emission dispatch and economic dispatch are run separately and the results are listed in Table 24. The minimum generation cost and emission are 4303.5111 ($/h) and 25.2372 (ton/h), respectively.Owing to the stochastic nature of BSA, the optimization is run 50 times with various initial populations. The statistical indices of the optimal solutions are then obtained to check the robustness of the proposed method. Table 25lists the statistical indices of the optimal generation cost and emission for 50 trials proving BSA's high robustness. The low values of the standard deviations of both objectives confirm that BSA achieves the same optimal in any run, i.e., it is a highly robust method whether for economic or emission dispatch.The performance of the proposed method is compared with another method from the literature according to Table 26. The comparison between MHSA [15] and BSA reconfirms that BSA solves the problem better.The convergence characteristics of both generation cost and emission objectives are shown by Fig. 15.The second approach for solving the EED problem is the use of weighted sum method, which is also performed in the third test system. The values of w are selected from 0 to 1 with steps of 0.2 and the combined objective is minimized. The generation cost and emission corresponding to each optimal for each value of w represents a member of the pareto front set as the output of the optimization. The maximum iteration, population size, and mixrate are set respectively to 500, 10, and 1. Fig. 16illustrates the pareto front of the third system including the minimum generation cost and emission. The best compromise solution, however, is not the minimum of one objective but of two objectives and is chosen by the fuzzy-based decision maker.Table 27lists the generation cost, emission, and μ values of all the pareto front members. The solution with the highest μ is the best compromise solution, i.e., the one with the generation cost of 4372.1966 ($/h) and emission of 122.8286 (ton/h) as shown in bold.Table 28is the generation schedule for the best compromise solution. It shows the optimal solution to the EED problem in Test System 3 by weighted sum method.The solution to the EED problem is done by the non-dominated approach in this test system. Pareto front members as non-dominated solutions are generated in each iteration of the algorithm. As the optimization progresses, the non-dominated solutions are updated and the pareto members are stored in an elitist external archive. The archive capacity is set to 20 non-dominated solutions and the extra members are removed from the archive according to the crowding distance measure. The maximum iteration and population size are set to 1000 and 20, respectively. Fig. 17shows the pareto front of the test system.Table 29is the generation schedule for the best compromise solution known as the optimal of the EED problem. The optimal generation cost and emission of this solution are respectively 4405.8321 ($/h) and 88.8972 (ton/h), as selected from the pareto front. Table 30lists the 20 non-dominated solutions of the pareto front with the index of μ for the selection of best compromise solution shown in bold.In this test system, the pareto front solutions of BSA-NDA and BSA-WSM are compared to those solutions of MHSA [15] method. Fig. 18shows the pareto front solutions of these three methods confirming that both BSA-NDA and BSA-WSM produce higher quality of optimal solutions than MHSA. Almost all the pareto front solutions of BSA-NDA and BSA-WSM dominate the solutions obtained by MHSA validating the high performance of BSA for solving the EED problem in this test system.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
