@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Nature-inspired optimal tuning of input membership functions of Takagi-Sugeno-Kang fuzzy models for Anti-lock Braking Systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
New Takagi-Sugeno fuzzy models dedicated to Anti-lock Braking Systems (ABSs) are proposed.A set of three optimal fuzzy models is derived by an original fuzzy modeling approach.The approach involves Simulated Annealing or Particle Swarm Optimization algorithms.The models are tested and compared against experimental data on ABS laboratory equipment.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Anti-lock Braking Systems,Operating point selection algorithm,Particle Swarm Optimization,Simulated Annealing,Takagi-Sugeno-Kang fuzzy models,Real-time experimental results,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper suggests a synergy of fuzzy logic and nature-inspired optimization in terms of the nature-inspired optimal tuning of the input membership functions of a class of Takagi-Sugeno-Kang (TSK) fuzzy models dedicated to Anti-lock Braking Systems (ABSs). A set of TSK fuzzy models is proposed by a novel fuzzy modeling approach for ABSs. The fuzzy modeling approach starts with the derivation of a set of local state-space models of the nonlinear ABS process by the linearization of the first-principle process model at ten operating points. The TSK fuzzy model structure and the initial TSK fuzzy models are obtained by the modal equivalence principle in terms of placing the local state-space models in the rule consequents of the TSK fuzzy models. An operating point selection algorithm to guide modeling is proposed, formulated on the basis of ranking the operating points according to their importance factors, and inserted in the third step of the fuzzy modeling approach. The optimization problems are defined such that to minimize the objective functions expressed as the average of squared modeling errors over the time horizon, and the variables of these functions are a part of the parameters of the input membership functions. Two representative nature-inspired algorithms, namely a Simulated Annealing (SA) algorithm and a Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) algorithm, are implemented to solve the optimization problems and to obtain optimal TSK fuzzy models. The validation and the comparison of SA and PSO and of the new TSK fuzzy models are carried out for an ABS laboratory equipment. The real-time experimental results highlight that the optimized TSK fuzzy models are simple and consistent with both training data and validation data and that these models outperform the initial TSK fuzzy models.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The development of accurate models for nonlinear processes is challenging as they contribute to high control system performance in many applications. The nonlinearity of the processes specific to Anti-lock Braking Systems (ABSs) and the importance of the ABS control systems in the safety subsystems of modern cars justify the development of fuzzy models in the framework of the model-based design of fuzzy control systems.A systematic way to obtain accurate fuzzy models is the optimization in terms of optimization problems with variables represented by the parameters of fuzzy models. Nature-inspired algorithms are involved in solving the optimization problems, and they ensure the optimal tuning of fuzzy models.Building upon our previous fuzzy modeling results given in Refs. [1–5], the main contribution of this paper with respect to the state-of-the-art is an approach to fuzzy modeling of ABSs using nature-inspired optimization algorithms. Our approach starts with the derivation of an initial discrete-time TSK fuzzy model of the process specific to ABS by the modal equivalence principle. This fuzzy model is characterized by a set of local linearized state-space models of the nonlinear ABS process obtained by the linearization of the first-principle process model at a set of operating points, and these state-space models are placed next in the rule consequents. Optimization problems targeting the minimization of objective functions expressed as the average of squared modeling errors over the time horizon are defined, and the vector variables in these problems are a part of the parameters of the input m.f.s. The optimization problems are solved by the implementation of two representative nature-inspired algorithms, namely an SA algorithm and a PSO algorithm that finally give novel optimal TSK fuzzy models for ABSs. Concluding, this paper proposes a nature-inspired-based approach dedicated to the computation of optimal TSK fuzzy models.This paper addresses fuzzy modeling. The fuzzy models will next be used in the model-based design of stable and optimal fuzzy control systems. Attractive nonlinear process models including fuzzy ones that can be treated by our approach are presented in Refs. [6–11]. The Tensor Product (TP) model transformation [12–14] can also be considered in combination with TSK fuzzy models because, as mentioned in Ref. [15], the product decision operator-based TSK fuzzy models and the function of the TP model are generally the same. The main difference is that the TSK fuzzy model originally can be represented as a combination of locally linearized Linear Time-Invariant (LTI) models, where the locality is expressed by the shapes of the input m.f.s. However in case of TP model the weighting functions (which correspond to the m.f.s in the fuzzy models) may not have locality, they spread in the whole interval of interest, so the LTI components of the model cannot readily be assigned to a definite operation point.The paper is organized as follows. The next section gives the background. The section following the Background section presents the fuzzy modeling approach with focus on ABS process models. The optimization problem is defined and the new operating point selection algorithm is formulated. Nature-inspired optimization algorithms section gives details on the two nature-inspired algorithms, namely PSO and SA, involved in the computation of the optimal TSK fuzzy models produced by the fuzzy modeling approach. Experimental results section offers the experimental validation of the proposed TSK fuzzy models for a laboratory ABS systems and offers a discussion of the results. Although the laboratory process is nonlinear and time-invariant, it models real-world automotive applications which are characterized by parametric disturbances that justify the computation of TSK fuzzy models. Conclusion section points out the concluding remarks.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper has suggested a set of TSK fuzzy models dedicated to ABSs. The models are derived by the synergy of fuzzy logic and nature-inspired optimization in terms of the nature-inspired optimal tuning of the input membership functions of TSK fuzzy models in the framework of appropriately defined optimization problems which target the minimization of objective functions expressed as the average of squared modeling errors over the time horizon. Our synergy is formulated as a novel fuzzy modeling approach based on the combination of the modal equivalences principle and on the optimal tuning of a part of the input m.f. parameters in terms of two nature-inspired algorithms The fuzzy modeling approach is assisted by a new operating point selection algorithm to guide modeling.The main advantages of our approach are the simplicity of TSK fuzzy models, their consistency with both training data and testing data, and the simplicity and transparency of the fuzzy modeling approach. These advantages should be also emphasized in other suggestive applications.Our fuzzy modeling approach is different and advantageous with respect to the popular sector nonlinearity approach [75]. The difference concerns the fact that the bounds of the domains of the scheduling (variables) are not accounted for, but the important operating points are taken into consideration. Therefore, our approach offers better highlighting of system's behavior in the important operating regimes.The TSK fuzzy models are validated against experimental data which correspond to an ABS laboratory equipment as a representative nonlinear dynamic system. The comparison of experimental results shows the performance improvement ensured by the proposed TSK fuzzy models after the application of the nature-inspired algorithms. The comparison can continue accounting for other state-of-the-art algorithms for evolving fuzzy systems [60–63] and for other nature-inspired algorithms accounting for several constraints [31–35,76,77].Future research will deal with the extension of the fuzzy modeling approach to the modeling of Multi Input-Multi Output nonlinear dynamic systems. The experiment-based estimation of the gradients of the objective functions will be included in order to ensure the online identification of closed-loop fuzzy control systems in order to next carry out the model-based design of stable and optimal fuzzy control systems.