@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-objective design of

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We design an control chart which is suitable for process with fuzzy parameters.The control chart is effective for different ranges of processes parameters.This design is considered as a multiple objective decision making problem.We use hybrid epsilon constraint PSO algorithm for solving our problem.Proposed methods extract Pareto sets for different cuts on fuzzy input parameters.We compare algorithm in crisp status with results reported in the literature.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multicriteria decision making (MCDM),Epsilon constraint,PSO,Fuzzy number,X,¯,control chart,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Control charts are the most useful tools for monitoring production and service processes. Their design involves the selection of such design parameters as sample size, control limits, and sampling frequency. This paper considers the design ofX¯control charts as a multiple objective decision making problem (MODM) which is identified by three criteria: expected hourly cost, in-control average run length, and detection power of control chart. To solve the MODM problem, we propose a hybrid method based on an evolutionary algorithm. In this method, an epsilon constraint is integrated with PSO (particle swarm optimization) as a multi-objective framework. Also, we consider the magnitude of the process shift and the occurrence rate of an assignable cause as fuzzy numbers. Hence, the fuzziness is modeled using both minimax and maximin approaches. Generally, we present a control chart which is suitable for processes with fuzzy parameters and is effective for a range of values of process parameters. A numerical example from the literature is used to illustrate the procedure used for solving the proposed hybrid algorithm.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Statistical process control is a collection of tools for monitoring process characteristics. Control charts are well investigated by researchers as the most powerful tool. However, the main issue in using them for monitoring process stability and variability is the requirement that their parameters such as: sample size, n; sampling interval, h; and control limit, k must be determined control chart design involves the determination of these parameters. The first economic design ofX¯control charts was proposed by Duncan [1] in which the total cost function was formulated by the design parameters (n, h, and k). In this model, the process failure mechanism was exponentially distributed. This was later extended using the Markovian shock model by other authors, such as Gibra [2], Montgomery [3], and Vance [4]. Rahim and Banerjee [5] assumed a Weibull distributed process failure mechanism when failure rate increased and the sampling scheme was non-uniform. They also considered the possibility of age-dependent repair before failure. Chen and Yang [6] applied Banerjee and Rahim's model to design a moving average control chart.Woodall [7] maintained that the economic design of control charts focuses on cost aspects rather than statistical ones. Saniga [8] was the first to propose the economic-statistical design ofX¯and R charts by introducing statistical constraints into the economic model. Al-Oraini and Rahim [9] presented an economic-statistical design ofX¯charts for a process with Gamma failure mechanism. Chen and Liao [10] formulated the optimal design of control charts as an MODM problem. They extended Saniga's model by adding two statistical criteria including in-control average run length and detection power of control charts. Afterwards, Asadzadeh and Khoshalhan [11] added ATS (Average Time to Signal) to Chen and Liao's model with multiple assignable causes considered. Bashiri et al. [12] extended previous models by adding ATS and expected cost as an objective and a constraint, respectively. Then, they proposed an MOGAESD algorithm to obtain the optimal design of anX¯control chart with multiple assignable causes.The main assumption underlying the models in these papers is the point estimation of such input model parameters as cost and process. Precise estimation of input parameters is essential since the design of control charts is sensitive to them [13]. Point estimates, however, do not show the true nature of these parameters. Sometimes, these values may be larger or smaller than true values. Therefore, the design of control charts based on inaccurate parameter values leads to increasing redundant costs [14]. Keats et al. [15] believed most designed charts are not effective because they are not robustly sensitive to the imprecision of input parameters. Vommi and Seetala [14] presented the economic design ofX¯control charts in which the input parameters are declared as ranges such that they include the true parameters. They employed GA (Genetic Algorithm) as a search tool and a risk-based approach to find the optimum parameters of theX¯control chart. Chen et al. [16] presented a procedure for designing control charts with vagueness in process shifts and used the minimax decision criterion and a genetic algorithm for finding the optimal solution. Linderman and Choo [17] developed the concept of robust economic design of control charts. They believed that their design was more practical for industrial implementation. Zarandi et al. [18] designed the multi-objective design ofX¯charts with fuzzy parameters and used the Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS) to solve the model. They also presented a new hybrid method using Fuzzy Adaptive Sampling Rules and fuzzified sensitivity criteria which make the control charts more sensitive with low false alarm rates [19]. Employing a Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm (NSGA), Safaei et al. [20] proposed a multi-objective design ofX¯control charts considering Taguchi loss function. Galbuy and Kahraman [21] presented the concept of fuzzy control charts and employed a Direct Fuzzy Approach (DEA).In the literature on statistical process control, some authors have used this evolutionary algorithm to obtain the optimal design for control charts. For instance, Chih et al. [22] obtained optimal economic and economic-statistical designs forX¯control charts using PSO based on Rahim and Banerjee's cost model [5]. They compared this algorithm with GA and concluded that although both algorithms find the optimal solution, PSO converges to the optimal solution more quickly. Niaki et al. [23] also solved the economic and economic-statistical design problems of MEWMA control charts by PSO. Chen et al. [24] proposed a novel hybrid algorithm based on PSO. They compared this algorithm with other meta-heuristics and showed that their algorithm based on PSO does not trap in to the local optimum comparing with the other algorithms.In this paper, we develop PSO to obtain the optimal design ofX¯control charts with fuzzy process shifts.The present research deals with the multi-objective economic-statistical design ofX¯control charts with fuzzy process parameters. Thus, we propose a new multi-objective PSO based on the epsilon constraint framework to obtain the Pareto front. In this framework, the Pareto set of multi-objective optimization problems can be generated or approximated by solving a sequence of constrained single objective problems. In this method, one objective function will appear as the objective of the model, while the remaining ones will be considered as constraints. Then, PSO is used for optimizing the single objectives of the epsilon-constraint sub-problems. The goal of this algorithm is to optimize different continuous nonlinear functions. It is like a random search while attention is also paid to the positions of other neighboring and near optimal solutions [22].The present study involves two main novelties. First, fuzzy process parameters are employed to introduce uncertainty in the multi-objective design of control charts model. A second novelty involves a new solution approach based on PSO and epsilon constraint proposed for solving the multi-objective model. In real cases, process parameters are not determined as crisp values, so the corresponding control charts designed with crisp values cannot be employed in real-life situations. Further, the effectiveness of our control chart is improved by assuming process parameters in a fuzzy environment. In other words, we propose a method to design a control chart which is applicable in processes with uncertain parameters.Meanwhile, we suppose that the magnitude of the process shift (δ) and the occurrence rate (λ) of assignable causes are not precisely known. Therefore, we consider them as fuzzy numbers with a triangular membership function. They take a range of values from the fuzzy cut set as possible values. Then, the PSO algorithm uses the minimax and maximin approaches to design the optimum parameters that, in turn, optimize the objective functions.Table 1presents the recent literature on this topic and the position of the present research in relation to them. Clearly, none of the previous works considered the design ofX¯charts with both multiple objectives and vagueness in process parameters simultaneously.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, the multi-objective model based on fuzzy process parameters as well as Duncan's cost function are reviewed. Then, Section 3 introduces the proposed PSO and hybrid algorithm (PSO and epsilon constraint) as a solution procedure. In Section 4, a case study is used to illustrate the performance of the proposed hybrid algorithm and compares the results obtained from the proposed model with those obtained from other models. Concluding remarks and trends for future research will be presented in the final section.Identifying all the criteria of interest to the QC (Quality Control) manager is a most important prerequisite to the decision making process. In this paper, a multi-objective model is proposed as an extension of Saniga's [8] and Chen and Liao's models [10]. ATS is also integrated into the model as a constraint in order to detect an out-of-control state in the desired time period. The model is based on fuzzy process parameters which, compared to crisp ones, make it more similar to the real world situation. Adopting this approach, we design a control chart that is capable of handling uncertain process parameters. One advantage of this multi-objective model is that it assists the QC manager to choose any solution from the Pareto set according to a predefined or practically desirable fuzziness degree. When a control chart is designed in its crisp status of λ0 and δ0, the optimal parameters only suit these values. The optimal parameters ofλ˜andδ˜in a fuzzy situation, however, suit all the values within the ranges ofλ˜andδ˜. This design will help the QC manager in his/her choice of design parameters for situations in which they have uncertainties about process parameters.(1)max   ARL0(s)maxp˜(s)minE˜HC(s)s.t.p˜(s)≥p˜Lα(s)≤αUATS˜(s)≤A˜U∀designs=(n,h,k)nispositiveintegerh,k≥0,where, ARL0 is the in-control average run length according to Type I error (α) and p is the detection power of the control chart. These values are computed using Eqs. (2) and (3), respectively.(2)ARL0=1α=2∫−∞−ke−z2/22πdz−1(3)p=∫−∞−k−δ√ne−z2/22πdz+∫k−δ√n∞e−z2/22πdzIn multi-objective model (1), EHC is the expected cost per hour which is based on the economic model a detailed description of which will be presented in the next subsection [1]. αU and pU are the predetermined upper bound of Type I error and the lower bound of control chart power, respectively. ATS is the average time to signal when an assignable cause occurs, which is obtained from Eq. (4). And finally, s is a possible combination of design parameters.(4)ATS=hpIn Eq. (3), δ is the magnitude of shift which drives the process mean to the out-of-control state. Note that the process shift occurrence follows an exponential distribution with the parameter λ. Traditionally, process parameters are estimated as crisp values based on historical data. Since the design of control charts is performed based on these parameters, inaccurate estimations could lead to misleading results. Moreover, as design of control charts is performed once but applied over a long horizon of time, suboptimal chart designs may impose redundant costs. In a nutshell, point estimates do not show the true nature of the parameters involved. Therefore, we assumed the input process parameters (λ, δ) to be fuzzy numbers with a triangular membership function in order to achieve a practical control chart. Since the power of the control chart, the related cost function, and the average time to signal depend on process parameters, they should be considered as triangular fuzzy decision variables.There is a balancing relationship among the three objectives. Decreasing in Type II error will increase the power of the control chart, and it will, thereby, decrease the in-control average run length. The high power of the control chart leads to the higher quality of the outgoing product, which will, in turn, win a greater customer satisfaction. However, a low in-control average run length will decrease the confidence in the control mechanism. One possible way to solve this problem is increasing the sample size [10]. But it must be noted that increasing the sample size will increase the expected hourly cost as well. Therefore, finding a possible combination of design parameters which optimizes the objectives can be considered as an MODM problem. In the next section, a solution procedure is proposed to obtain a multi-objective optimal design with fuzzy process parameters.In this paper, we use the Duncan's [1] cost model. The four average cycle length components considered in this model are as follows:1.In-control period, 1/λ, which is the mean time that the process remains in control.Out-of-control period: when the assignable cause occurs, the time required to observe an out-of-control alarm will be:(5)hp−τwhere, τ is the expected time of occurrence of the assignable cause between the uth and u+1st sample.(6)τ=∫uh(u+1)hλe−λt(t−uh)dt∫uh(u+1)hλe−λtdt=1−(1+λh)e−λhλ(1−e−λh)The time to take samples and interpret the results is a constant g proportional to the sample size n.The time required to find the assignable cause is D.Thus, the expected length of a cycle is:(7)ECT=1λ+hp−τ+gn+DAnd the expected cost per hour is:(8)EHC=(a1+a2n)h+a5((h/p)−τ+gn+D)+a3+(a4αe−λh/1−e−λh)ECTwhere, a1, a2, a3, a4 and a5 are the fixed component of the sampling cost, the variable component of the sampling cost, the cost of finding the assignable cause, the cost of investigating a false alarm, and the hourly penalty cost associated with production in the out-of-control state when the assignable cause occurs, respectively. So, the expected hourly cost of the control chart depends on a proper combination of n, h, and k. More about this model may be found in Ref. [1].In this section, our proposed method for solving the multi-objective economic-statistical design of an control chart with fuzzy process parameters is presented The related concepts of this method are PSO, fuzzy PSO algorithm, tuning PSO parameters, and the hybrid epsilon constraint PSO algorithm. In the following, PSO is first explained as an optimization tool which is followed by a fuzzy PSO algorithm proposed to tackle the imprecise parameter estimation. To improve the performance of the optimization method, the parameters of PSO are then tuned by designing a relevant experiment. Finally, a hybrid PSO based on the epsilon-constraint is developed for the multi-objective framework.PSO is a population-based optimization technique developed by Kennedy and Eberhart [25] that is inspired by the social behavior of animals like birds. In PSO, particles refer to a potential solution and a collection of particles is called a ‘swarm’. All the particles have fitness values that are evaluated by the fitness function to be optimized. This algorithm is initialized with a population of random solutions and searches for optimal solution by updating generations. Particles serve three functions [26]:•Every particle searches for the optimal solution.Every particle has a velocity for searching.Every particle remembers the best velocity achieved so far.In these functions is hidden the role of swarm intelligence. Three factors determine the orientation of each particle [26]:•The current velocity of each particle can be a suitable velocity for it.The best fitness velocity achieved by that particle so far can be a suitable velocity for it (pbest).The latest best velocity, which is obtained by any particle in the population, can be a suitable velocity for it (gbest).Therefore, every particle updates its velocity and position according to the following equations [26]:(9)v→k+1=a→⊗v→k+b→1⊗r→⊗1(p→1−x→k)+b→2⊗r→2⊗(p→2−x→k)(10)xk+1→=xk→+vk→In the above equations,a→is the inertia weight,b→1is a cognition learning factor,b→2is a social learning factor, and finallyp→1andp→2are the pbest and gbest, respectively.In economic and economic-statistical designs ofX¯control charts, one discrete parameter (n) and two continuous ones (h, k) need to be determined. Therefore, PSO involves the simultaneous use of discrete and continuous decision variables. The initial values for all the particles are randomly generated. For discrete variables, randomization is used with a rounding and ceiling concept. As mentioned earlier, we consider the magnitude of the process shift and the occurrence rate of assignable causes as fuzzy numbers with a triangular membership function for a process with an assignable cause. The triangular membership function of process shift and occurrence rate of the assignable cause cuts horizontally with a c-confidence level which ranges between 0 and 1. By this cut, a range of values are taken as possible shifts and occurrence rates in the control chart. Then, for the possible interval, the minimax decision criterion is applied to optimize the cost function until the maximum value of the cost function is minimized for all the values of process shift and occurrence rate. Similarly, for the possible interval, the maximin decision criterion is applied to optimize the detection power of the control chart until the minimum value is maximized for all the values of process shift and occurrence rate.In order to face the fuzzy constraints related to the power of an average time to signal, we use the large degrees of two triangular fuzzy numbers relative to each other [27]:(11)v(M1≥M2)=1ifm1≥m2u1−l2(u1−l2)+(m2−m1)o.wThe pseudo-code of the proposed PSO algorithm is as follows (Fig. 1):Presented multi-objective model (1), in Section 2, included one economic objective and two statistical objective functions. For solving the model, we used particle swarm optimization to optimize one or two objective functions in each iteration.In other words, when solution converges to the pbest and gbest, the design parameters (n, h, and k) changes in such way that economic function or statistical functions improve in each iteration and generally multi-objective function improved. Fig. 2, shows a schematic of PSO for the economic design of x-bar control chart.The five control parameters of the proposed PSO, i.e., inertia weight (a), learning factor(b→1,b→2), iteration number (IN), population size (Ps), and the number of reputations on the candidate interval process shift for achieving max/min of the objective function (N), have to be tuned before implementing the algorithm. In this paper, Taguchi [28] L27 orthogonal array experiment is used to determine these parameters. According to this experiment, three levels of each parameter should be determined initially. Table 2shows the most recommended range for these parameters at three levels.The five control parameters are individually assigned to the five columns of L27 array. In the L27 orthogonal experiment, 27 different level combinations of the five control parameters are replicated m times. Then, according to the results of the experiments (denoted as yi), their values will be used for computing the signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio in each treatment through Eq. (12).(12)SN=−10⋅log1m∑i=1myi2The optimal level combination of the five control parameters in the PSO is determined based on a maximum of each individual S/N ratio at each level for each control parameter because the S/N ratio is a the-larger-the-better index.Among the different methods available for solving MODM models, one is the epsilon constraint which is a multi-objective optimization technique proposed by Haimes et al. [29] for generating the Pareto optimal set. This method generates one point of the Pareto front at a time using a single objective optimization. It also converts the multi-objective problem into several single objective problems while also considering constraints. The following procedure (assuming minimization for all the objective functions) is used for implementing this technique:(13)minimizefl(x)subjectto:fj(x)≤fj*+εforallj=1,2,...m,j≠l,x∈Swhere, l∈{1, 2, ...m} and S is the feasible region. The feasible region can be defined by any equality and/or inequality constraint. The vector of target,f*=(f1*,f2*,...,fm*), defines the minimum value that each objective can have. Then, by changing the ɛ value, a point of the Pareto set will be distinguished. The value of ɛ is increased with the unit of δ at each step as in Eq. (14) in which δ is calculated by Eq. (15). Therefore, ɛ varies from the best to the worst value in the constraints related to the objective functions in order to obtain the Pareto set.(14)ε=i*δ;∀i=1,2,…N(15)δ=fmax−fminNThe epsilon constraint framework is applied in other areas of research as well. For example, Laumanns et al. [30] presented a metaheuristic scheme for generating the Pareto set of MODM problems based on the epsilon-constraint method. Berube et al. [31] showed that the Pareto set of bi-objective problems could be generated effectively using the epsilon constraint method. Their proposed approach was used to find the Pareto front of the TSP (Traveling Salesman Problem). Mavrotas [32] implemented the epsilon constraint method for approximating the Pareto front of the multi-objective mathematical programming (MOMP). In this study, an augmented epsilon constraint method (AUGMECON) was presented that generated strong Pareto optimal solutions and catalyzed the whole process by avoiding redundant iterations. Esmaili et al. [33] proposed a method called ‘the modified augment epsilon constraint’ which is a hybridized method of the epsilon constraint and the weighting method.In the present study, we extend this method to the multi-objective economic-statistical model presented in model (1). In this model, the statistical objectives have a maximization form. To justify the epsilon constraint with this model, some alterations need to be made in optimization model (13). Optimization model (16) shows the epsilon constraint model for the multi-objective economic-statistical design ofX¯control charts with fuzzy constraints.(16)minEHC(s)subjectto:ARL0(s)≥ARL0*−εp(s)≥p˜*−εp(s)≥p˜Lα(s)≤αUATS≤A˜U∀designs=(n,h,k)Hybridizing the epsilon constraint with an evolutionary algorithm is called CMEA [34]. In this paper, we propose an epsilon constraint method hybridized with PSO which solves constrained single objective optimization problems. In order to change the ɛ values, we use Eqs. (14) and (15). For this reason, the power of the control chart is assumed to be changed from 1 to its lower bound in the statistical constraint. Also, the best and worst values of ARL are obtained by PSO and the upper bound of α, respectively. In N iterations, the Pareto set is obtained by optimizing the proposed epsilon constraint mathematical model presented in model (16) using the fuzzy PSO. The pseudo-code of the proposed hybrid epsilon constraint PSO algorithm in the control chart design problem will be as follows (Fig. 3):In this section, the performance of the proposed procedure is evaluated through an industrial case reported in Chen and Liao [10]. The case is related to an electronic company in Taiwan which supplies various kinds of capacitors. A sample of the finished capacitors is monitored by anX¯control chart. The process randomly shifts with an average of 4h (i.e., λ=0.25) and the magnitude of one standard deviation. The fixed and variable costs of sampling are $1.00 and $0.1 per capacitor, respectively. The time spent to measure and record the capacitance is 0.01h and the time required to investigate an out-of-control signal is 2h. The cost of searching an assignable cause is $50.0, while the measurable portion in cost to investigate a false alarm is $50. The process is assumed to continue producing the part during investigation and elimination of out-of-control signals, and the measurable penalty cost during this period is about $200 per hour.The scope for the decision variables are 1–50, increased by 1 for the sample size (n), 0–2 for the sampling interval (h), and 0–4 in terms of standard deviation (σ) for the control limit width (k). Also, the statistical constraints in the mathematical model are considered as:αU=0.005,P˜L=(0.91,0.95,0.99),A˜U=(0.01,0.25,0.5)To define the case in a fuzzy environment, we assumed λ=(0.01, 0.25, 0.5) and the value of δ=(0.5, 1, 1.5).According to the solution procedure, a parameter tuning is applied to PSO to improve the performance of the optimization tool. Table A1 shows the results of L27 Taguchi experimental design with three replications. Also, the optimal levels are reported in Table 3based on the maximum S/N ratio at each level. Thus, the parameters of PSO algorithm are 0.5, (0.7, 0.15), 70, 40, and 800 for a,(b→1,b→2), Ps, IN, and N, respectively.After parameter tuning, the fuzzy PSO algorithm based on the epsilon constraint framework is applied to obtain the Pareto optimal front for the multi-objective economic-statistical design of anX¯control chart with fuzzy process parameters. More explanation about applying the optimization technique steps are described as follows:1.Initializing the initial population with randomization property and choosing a confidence level (c),Feasibility checking of every particle considering of constraints in model (16) and then moving of particles toward pbest and gbest using swarm intelligence according to the candidate interval of the process shift (δ) and occurrence rate (λ). It is worth to mention that randomization and swarm intelligence are two main factors which improved our solution in each iteration.Searching optimal solution by each particle separately. All particles converge to the optimal solution after maximum number of iterations.Meanwhile, the optimal set is computed for three different fuzzy cuts (c) including 0.8, 0.95, and 1. Note that the fuzzy cut at the level of 1 produces the crisp state or the point estimate. Tables B1–B3 in Appendix B show the results for membership functions from 0.8 to 1. Also, Figs. 4–6show the Pareto front for these same membership functions. For the fuzzy cost and the fuzzy power, we assume their triangle center in the relevant figures.The results in Tables B1–B3 indicate that the optimal design parameters for the fuzzy process parameters are fuzzy numbers. Also, the design parameters are fuzzy numbers and their membership degree is the membership degree (c) of the process parameter. However, by increasing the membership degree, fuzziness will reduce and the results will be closer to the crisp state. This analysis was applied to two different cases and similar results were obtained. In other words, the decision maker can choose any of the solutions in the Pareto set according to the desirable fuzziness degree. Also, the decision maker may choose any one of the solutions based on the importance of each objective.To evaluate the efficiency of our proposed method, comparisons were made between the proposed method using PSO and the hybrid epsilon constraint Genetic Algorithm. To evaluate the performance of PSO with multiple objectives as compared with the genetic algorithm, the number of dominating solutions of GA obtained by the PSO algorithm was counted. The results are presented in Table 4. Clearly, PSO obtained better results than did the genetic algorithm in designing the x-bar control chart. Previously Chih et al. [22] had shown PSO to be more efficient than GA in designing x-bar control charts.For a better analysis of the proposed approach, we compared the results of our proposed algorithm with those of Chen and Liao [10] and Asadzadeh and Khoshalhan [11]. For this purpose, the efficiency of the optimal design was computed in the crisp status. DEA proposed by Chanes et al. [35] is one of the most commonly used MCDM (multi criteria decision making) tools in this area [10,11]. In this method, the expected hourly cost is the input criterion with the detection power of the control chart and the in-control ARL being the output. So, as in the studies mentioned above, two of the most efficient points of the Pareto archive in the crisp status are selected and reported in Table 5. Clearly, all these optimal designs are non-dominated solutions. Moreover, our proposed optimization method, in addition to its many benefits, is capable of generating optimal designs comparable with Asadzadeh and Khoshalhan's solutions [11].Compared to the mathematical model developed by Chen and Liao [10], the one proposed by Asadzadeh and Khoshalhan [11] had ATS added as a constraint. They concluded that by assigning a value less than 0.5 to ATS, better ATS's are obtained with simply a few more costs. However, using our proposed optimization approach and considering the continuous region, the optimal designs obtained can not only satisfy the ATS constraint but will also have a significantly lower expected cost, even less than that of Chen and Liao's model [10].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
