@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Repairing the crossover rate in adaptive differential evolution

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The behavior of the crossover in differential evolution (DE) is analyzed.A crossover rate repair technique for the adaptive DE algorithm is proposed.The crossover rate in DE is repaired by its corresponding binary string, i.e. by using the average number of components taken from the mutant.Experimental results indicate that our proposed crossover rate technique is able to enhance the performance of JADE.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Differential evolution,Parameter adaptation,Crossover rate repair,Binary string,Numerical optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Differential evolution (DE) is a simple yet powerful evolutionary algorithm (EA) for global numerical optimization. However, its performance is significantly influenced by its parameters. Parameter adaptation has been proven to be an efficient way for the enhancement of the performance of the DE algorithm. Based on the analysis of the behavior of the crossover in DE, we find that the trial vector is directly related to its binary string, but not directly related to the crossover rate. Based on this inspiration, in this paper, we propose a crossover rate repair technique for the adaptive DE algorithms that are based on successful parameters. The crossover rate in DE is repaired by its corresponding binary string, i.e. by using the average number of components taken from the mutant. The average value of the binary string is used to replace the original crossover rate. To verify the effectiveness of the proposed technique, it is combined with an adaptive DE variant, JADE, which is a highly competitive DE variant. Experiments have been conducted on 25 functions presented in CEC-2005 competition. The results indicate that our proposed crossover rate technique is able to enhance the performance of JADE. In addition, compared with other DE variants and state-of-the-art EAs, the improved JADE method obtains better, or at least comparable, results in terms of the quality of final solutions and the convergence rate.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Differential evolution (DE), proposed by Storn and Price in 1995 [1,2], is a simple, efficient, and versatile population-based evolutionary algorithm (EA) for the global numerical optimization. The advantages are its simple structure, ease of use, speed, and robustness. Due to these advantages, DE has been successfully applied in diverse fields, including data mining, pattern recognition, digital filter design, etc. [3,4]. In addition, recent studies demonstrate the highly competitive performance provided by DE in constrained optimization problems, multi-objective optimization problems, and other complex problems. More details on the state-of-the-art research within DE can be found in two surveys [5,6] and the references therein.There are three algorithmic parameters in the original DE algorithm, which are (i) the population size NP; (ii) the crossover rate CR; and (iii) the scaling factor F. Originally, these parameters are user-specified and kept fixed during the run. However, recent studies indicate that the performance of DE is very sensitive to the parameter setting and the choice of the best parameters is always problem-dependent [7–9]. In order to obtain acceptable results, we need different parameter settings for different problems at hand. Even for the same problem, different parameters are required at different stages of evolution. Thus, some researchers investigated the parameter adaptation techniques to adaptively choose the parameters for the DE algorithm, including jDE [9], SaDE [10], JADE [11], and so on. These adaptive DE variants obtained very promising results in the DE literature.In this paper, we first analyze the behavior of the crossover operator. Then, we propose a crossover rate repair technique for the adaptive DE algorithm. The crossover rate in DE is repaired by its corresponding binary string, i.e. by using the average number of components taken from the mutant. As it will be explained in the following sections, we can see that the crossover rate repair technique is very simple. In order to evaluate the efficiency of our proposed technique, it is combined with an adaptive DE variant, JADE [11], which is a highly competitive DE variant. Experiments have been conducted on 25 benchmark functions presented in CEC-2005 competition [12] on real-parameter numerical optimization. In addition, the proposed crossover rate repair technique is also incorporated into SaDE [10] and EPSDE [13]. Experimental results indicate that this technique is able to enhance the performance of JADE, SaDE, and EPSDE in the test functions at D=30 and D=50. Moreover, compared with other DE variants and state-of-the-art EAs, the improved JADE method obtains better, or at least comparable, results in terms of the quality of final solutions and the convergence rate.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly introduces the original DE algorithm and the related work. In Section 3 we present our proposed crossover rate repair technique in detail. In Section 4, we comprehensively evaluate the performance of our approach through different experiments. In Section 5, we conclude the work of this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
With the aim of enhancing the performance of adaptive DE algorithms based on successful parameters, in this paper, we propose a very simple technique for repairing the crossover rate according to its corresponding binary string, i.e. by using the average number of components taken from the mutant. Furthermore, this crossover rate repair technique does not add any additional parameter when integrating into adaptive DE algorithms. In order to evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed technique, it is integrated into two representative adaptive DE variants, i.e. JADE, SaDE, and EPSDE. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed crossover rate repair technique is capable of enhancing the performance of JADE and SaDE. Moreover, compared with other state-of-the-art DE and non-DE approaches, one of the improved JADE (Rcr-JADE-s4) obtains better, or at least comparable, results in terms of the quality of final solutions and the convergence speed. In addition, extensive experiments on the influence of moderate-dimensional problems, different population size, and different initial μFvalues indicate that crossover rate repair technique consistently enhances the performance of the original JADE algorithm.Ensemble of multiple strategies is able to to improve the performance of DE [10,13,35,47], we will try to incorporate the repaired JADE into multiple-strategy DE variants in our future work.Large-scale optimization has been one of the most interesting trends in recent years [43], some DE variants have obtained promising results (see [48–50]). Thus, another future direction is that the repaired JADE algorithm will be combined with cooperative coevolution [51,52] or other local search techniques for the large-scale continuous optimization problems. The application of GPGPU-aided DE variants [53] for complex real-world problems is also an interesting future work.