@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A decision support system based on fuzzy reasoning and AHP–FPP for the ecodesign of products: Application to footwear as case study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An Ecodesign Index (EcoInd) is proposed to integrate the information coming from Environmental Risk Assessment and Ecological Footprint.A decision support system (DSS) integrating the criteria provided by the environmental indicators was developed based on Fuzzy Preference Programming method and fuzzy logic reasoning.The developed DSS is very useful to aid the ecodesign of products.The DSS was tested with the ecodesign of footwear as case study.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fuzzy Preference Programming,Decision support system,Ecodesign,Ecological Footprint,Environmental Risk Assessment,Fuzzy logic,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The design stage represents one of the most critic steps for product development. Here, a great number of considerations have to be borne in mind, e.g., technical, functional, aesthetic or economic criteria. More recently, the increasing concerns on environmental aspects have added complexity to the process, known as ecodesign. In this respect, a framework to integrate the criteria provided by quantitative environmental indicators has been proposed on the basis of Fuzzy Preference Programming method features and fuzzy logic reasoning. As a result, an integrated Ecodesign Index (EcoInd) is obtained. This idea enables the decision making at process and product level taking into account different indicators at a time. The ecodesign of children's footwear was taken as case study and an ecodesign tool (decision support system) that included the estimation of environmental indicators and their integration was developed. Different models of shoes were analyzed to identify the most environmentally friendly design and to test the tool. In this case, the Ecological Footprint and two Environmental Risk Assessment indicators, namely Hazard Quotient and Cancer Risk, were selected as relevant environmental indicators and they were computed from data provided by a shoes manufacturer. Then, these indicators were integrated in the ecodesign tool and the EcoInd values were appraised for the children's footwear models analyzed. According to these figures, they were ranked as Red Leather>White Leather>White Synthetic>Pink Synthetic, from best to worst.Adherence Factor (mgcm−2)Analytic Hierarchy ProcessFuzzy Preference Programming MethodBenzylbutylphthalateMean Body Weight (kg)Center – One Side Gaussian Membership Function ParameterConsistency IndexConsistency RatioCancer RiskConcentration of a Contaminant in the Shoes (mgkg−1)Contact Time (hday−1)Dermal Absorption FactorDibutyl PhthalateDi(2-Ethylhexyl) PhthalateDi-Isononyl PhthalateDecision MakerExposure Dose to the Chemical (mgkg−1day−1)Ecoquality Function DeploymentEcodesign IndexMaximum Ecodesign IndexEcological Footprint (gm2/Pair of Shoes)Ecological Footprint by Subcategory (gm2/Pair of Shoes)Elimination and Choice Expressing Reality MethodEnergy Productivity by Subcategory (GJha−1y−1)Environmental Risk AssessmentConsumption/Generation of Energy for Each Subcategory r (GJ)A User-Friendly Software [16] for the Development of Multivariable IndicesFuzzy EcoDesign Index [19].Equivalence Factor (**)Fuzzy Hazardous Waste IndexFuzzy Water Quality IndexGeneralized Reduced GradientResult of a Fuzzy Aggregation MethodHazard QuotientIndicates the Corresponding Design to be EvaluatedIndicates the Corresponding Environmental IndicatorIndicates the Corresponding Ecological Footprint (EF) CategoryIndicates the Corresponding Kinds of Land (EF)Fuzzy Number Lower ValueLife Cycle AssessmentLower Bound of the jth Environmental Indicator (*)Fuzzy Number Center ValueMonte Carlo SimulationMultiple Objective ProgrammingNumber of Considered Environmental IndicatorsNatural Productivity (tha−1y−1)Probability Distribution FunctionPreference Ranking Organization Method for Enrichment EvaluationIndicates the Corresponding Ecological Footprint (EF) SubcategoryReference Doses for Non-Carcinogenic Effects (mgkg−1day−1)Consistency Index of a Randomly Generated Reciprocal MatrixSustainability Assessment by Fuzzy EvaluationMean Surface Area for Feet (m2)Slope Factors for Carcinogenic Effects (kgdaymg−1)Fuzzy Number Upper ValueUpper Bound of the jth Environmental IndicatorVisual Basic for ApplicationsConsumption/Generation for Each Subcategory r/Pair of Shoes (t)jth Environmental Indicator (*)Normalized jth Environmental IndicatorParameter of the Aggregation MethodConsistency Factor of AHP–FPP MethodStandard Deviation – One Side Gaussian Membership Function ParameterMaximum Eigenvalue of AHP MatrixMembership Degree (score) for the jth Environmental IndicatorDepends on the Type of Environmental Indicator.Equivalence Factors 2003 [42].

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In real life, decisions are usually made by comparing different options with respect to several, often conflicting, criteria. In these cases, there is generally no best overall option, as switching from one option to another is likely to result not only in an improvement in some criterion but also in the deterioration of other criteria. Similarly, ecodesign may be defined as the systematic introduction of environmental concerns during product design and development [1] and thus several environmental indicators could be used to evaluate the performance of a product design; hence, some indicators could lead to choose a product while other indicators could indicate the preference for another. Therefore, when more than one indicator is handled at a time, the difficulty arises when a decision has to be made based on the information provided by all of them [2].There are two major types of Decision Support Systems: (i) those based on Multi-criteria Decision Making (MCDM) methods and (ii) those whose aim is to obtain a set of optimal solutions and therefore are based on Multiple Objective Programming (MOP) methods. In this sense, methodologies of multi-criteria analysis have proved to be efficient in the definition of integrative frameworks, but their application requires processing imprecise, uncertain, qualitative or vague data [3,4]. Fuzzy logic techniques are commonly used to address uncertainty matters [5–10]. Their use allows obtaining a quantitative approach using a qualitative representation [11].Fuzzy logic techniques have been applied in a number of studies in the environmental field: to derive a Fuzzy Water Quality (FWQ) index [12]; to estimate aggregative risk of various environmental activities, pollution sources and routes in a given process [13]; to create a model called Sustainability Assessment by Fuzzy Evaluation (SAFE) in which ecological and human inputs were treated individually and then combined with the aid of fuzzy logic to provide an overall measure of sustainability [14,15]; to create a user-friendly software framework (F-IND) for the development of multivariable indices [16]; or to derive an integrated Fuzzy Hazardous Waste Index (FHWI) as a measure of hazardousness of a given composite waste derived from the crisp inputs of its component's flammability, corrosivity, toxicity and reactivity attributes [17]. Another example of application is the fuzzy multi-objective model proposed by Kuo et al. [18] that aimed at considering not only environmental criteria through a LCA (Life Cycle Assessment) but also the customer needs and cost considerations in the ecodesign of products. They developed an Ecoquality function deployment (Eco-QFD) to aid product design teams in seeking the overall customer satisfaction. Herva et al. [19] obtained a Fuzzy EcoDesign Index (FEcoDI) to identify the most environmentally friendly option among different packaging materials for beverage bottles. Furthermore, several applications of fuzzy systems have been developed in other fields such as service systems [20] and supply chain management [21–23]. The environmental burdens can be quantified by means of several indicators such as LCA indicators, ecological footprint and water footprint among others. These indicators represent complementary key aspects of sustainability in the environmental dimension of a design. Consequently, their combined application is advisable to achieve more comprehensive analyses [24]. In this sense, the designers require to evaluate the performance of prototypes with regards to several environmental indicators at the same time. The application of different environmental indicators provided by LCA or design for the environment tools and their relationships adds complexity to the product design process making necessary the participation of environmental experts in product briefing [25]. In this sense, simplified frameworks that permit to integrate the indicators into an effective composite index (composite indicators) are considered as an innovative approach for evaluating sustainable development [26]. Such user friendly eco-product development tools, designed to be used by engineers as an integral part of the product design process, may be a more reasonable approach to overcome these problems.In the literature, there exist some applications that use multi-criteria analysis methods, where outranking methods such as ELECTRE (ELimination and Choice Expressing Reality method) and PROMETHEE (preference ranking organization method for enrichment evaluation) were identified as those more broadly employed [24]. However these methods are difficult to understand by the designers which posses an important drawback for their application. Decision support systems based in more simple and similar to human thinking approaches (i.e., fuzzy reasoning) are preferred by designers. Nevertheless, fuzzy reasoning approaches based on Mamdani and Sugeno inference systems have also important drawbacks in ecodesign applications as the higher the number of environmental indicators the higher the number of rules to be implemented and thus the complexity of the tool. Therefore, it could be difficult to refine the decision tree and the definition of the accurate number of categories in the universe of discourse of variables [19]. In the present work, a framework based on the integration of environmental indicators was proposed. The framework is able to manage several kinds of indicators related to environmental, social and economic aspects in product ecodesign and it avoids the use of a decision tree of rules. This approach was built on the basis of fuzzy logic reasoning and Fuzzy Preference Programming (AHP–FPP) features. The AHP–FPP method is a fuzzy modification of the AHP [27], capable of tackling the uncertainty and imprecision of the environmental evaluation process. This method permits taking into account that decision makers are usually unsure of the level of importance (weight) of different environmental indicators, and therefore they might be reluctant or unable to assign exact numerical values to the weights. The objective was to obtain a final Ecodesign Index (EcoInd), with a simple interpretable scale from 0 to 10, for evaluating and ranking options considering environmental sustainability and safety criteria. The ecodesign of children's footwear was taken as case study. For this case, the Ecological Footprint (EF) and two Environmental Risk Assessment (ERA) indicators, namely Hazard Quotient (HQ) and Cancer Risk (CR), were selected as relevant environmental indicators. Hence, the ecodesign tool included the methodologies for their evaluation, as well as the decision support system that allowed to integrate the three scores into a single index.The general protocol followed for the development of the ecodesign tool (decision support system) is presented in Fig. 1. The indicators xj, those obtained directly through measurements (e.g., water consumption, tons of waste, etc.) and those that are the result of a calculation process, thought the application of different environmental evaluation methodologies (e.g., LCA, ERA, EF, etc.), are integrated by means of a fuzzy inference engine in a series of steps: normalization of the indicators, membership evaluation using fuzzy sets, calculation of the weights of each environmental indicator, aggregation of the scores, and defuzzification. As a result, an Ecodesign Indicator (EcoInd) that aggregates the information from the different environmental indicators is obtained. The environmental evaluation methodologies and the environmental indicators integration framework were implemented in an ecodesign tool.The ecodesign tool was developed in an Excel® spreadsheet environment and using objects and code of visual basic for applications (VBA®). The linear programming problem of the FPP method was solved using nonlinear generalized reduced gradient (GRG nonlinear) algorithm provided by Excel Solver. Among the available methods and approximations, the Cholesky factorization was selected to compute the maximum eigenvalue (λmax) with Matlab® Spreadsheet Link™ EX. Regarding the sensitivity analysis, it required the capacity to propagate uncertainties through models using random sampling techniques (i.e., Monte Carlo Simulation – MCS). Thus, this task was carried out in the Excel® spreadsheet using a commercial add-in named Crystal Ball.A detailed description of the steps followed for the development of the ecodesign tool and its application to the case study is provided below.Environmental indicators are usually quantified in different units and scales; therefore, their prior normalization is advisable making the original values (xj) dimensionless (x¯j). The normalization process starts by establishing the upper and lower bounds for each jth indicator analyzed. The lower bound (lbj) of an indicator represents the minimum acceptable value, which is zero for most environmental indicators, being this value the minimum achievable. Meanwhile, the upper bound (ubj) represents the maximum acceptable value, for instance a threshold limit value of exposure to a chemical substance could be considered as a maximum acceptable value. However, some parameters that can be used as environmental indicators have a positive effect the higher they are (e.g., percentage of recycled material). Thus, in these cases the meaning of upper and lower bounds change from an environmental point of view. If any indicator is outside the range determined by lower and upper bounds the ecodesign tool will show a warning alarm. In the case of threshold limits of exposure to chemicals it indicates that the design is inappropriate for its commercialization. Eq. (1) shows the linear formula proposed for the normalization procedure.(1)x¯j=xj−lbjubj−lbjA scoring function μj(xj) (i.e., membership function) was defined for each indicator. For convenience, the degrees of membership (μj) were ranged over the unit interval [0,1]. Thus, the higher the μjvalue is (i.e., μj→1), the closer to “ideal environmental conditions” is (i.e., environmental friendly) with regards to the jth environmental indicator. On the contrary, the lower the μjvalue is, the further from “ideal conditions” is (i.e., μj→0). In other words, μjis a goodness function that permits to evaluate the sustainability of a product quantifying its proximity to ideal environmental friendly conditions for the jth indicator. Then, the contribution of each environmental indicator can be conveniently aggregated to obtain the final Ecodesign Indicator (EcoInd).In the ecodesign tool, the membership functions were specified as Gaussian functions. This type of function depends on two parameters, σjand cj, and on the value of the input variable, as can be seen in Eq. (2).(2)µj(x¯j)=e−(x¯j−cj)2/2σj2where cjrepresents the center and σjestablishes the width of the Gaussian curve. These parameters for different variables were defined according to the ideal environmental friendly conditions, technical criteria and the scopes of the environmental indicators. Specifically, the cjvalues were defined in each case considering the scope and the desirable trend of the environmental indicator. In general, the value of cjwas defined equal to zero when the j environmental indicator was desirable to be reduced such that the maximum value of μj(i.e., μj=1) was obtained withx¯jequal to zero. For instance, Ecological Footprint is an indicator that is desirable to be reduced with a minimum value of zero by definition; therefore, the center (cj) was defined equal to zero such that the maximum value of μj(i.e., μj=1) was obtained withx¯jequal to zero. On the other hand, the value of cjshould be defined equal to one when the indicator is desirable to be increased from an environmental point of view. For instance, the percentage of recycled material should have a cjvalue of one such that a μjvalue of one can be obtained when a 100% of the waste material is recycled. The σjvalues were defined according to threshold limits of exposure to chemicals.Aggregation is the procedure where the elements of a collection of fuzzy sets are combined in a desirable way by the application of fuzzy operators to produce a single fuzzy set. In general, many types of fuzzy operators may be performed on fuzzy sets. Nevertheless, the averaging operators have been successfully used in decision-making problems [28].The averaging operators are a class of aggregation operators lying between the min operator and the max operator [29]. In this kind of operators, a bad score on one criterion can be compensated by a good one on another criterion, so that the result of combination will be medium.One typical parametric averaging operator is the generalized means, which is defined by the following equation.(3)hiα(µ1,µ2,…,µn)=µ1α+µ2α+⋯+µnαn=∑j=1nµj(x¯ji)αnwhere {μ1,μ2,…,μn} are the obtained score values from fuzzy sets, n is the number of considered environmental indicators and α>0.An important extension of the generalized means is the weighted generalized means, which is defined by Eq. (4).(4)hiα=∑j=1nwjµj(x¯ji)αwhere wjis the weight of the jth environmental indicator. The weights permit that the decision makers (DM) establish different degrees of importance on each jth indicator.Combining both aggregation methods – Eqs. (3) and (4) – and multiplying the result by 10, the criteria values and its weights were joined-up to quantify the score for each option (i.e., design proposal for the product). The aim of mixing the generalized means (i.e., all environmental indicators have the same importance) and the weighted generalized means (i.e., DMs try to establish a degree of relative importance for each indicator) was to produce a kind of compensation between criteria. The EcoInd was multiplied by 10 because a 0–10 scale was preferred by the end-users of the ecodesign tool instead of the original scale from 0 to 1. Thus, the aggregation method in Eq. (5) was used to determine the value of the EcoInd and to integrate the environmental indicators.(5)EcoInd=10∑j=1nwjµj(x¯ji)α⋅∑j=1nµj(x¯ji)αnwhere all wj≥0, ∑wj=1, and the parameter α>0.x¯jirepresents the jth environmental indicator for the ithoption (i.e., design proposal), and wjis the weight of the jth environmental indicator. Each environmental indicator has a membership function μj, as defined by Eq. (2) that expresses its score and acts as a goodness function. EcoInd is the aggregated index for the ith design proposal for a product.After the aggregation process, the options can be ranked with respect to their EcoInd value; the preferred option is the one attaining the maximum score in a scale of 0–10.To map the environmental quality of a design, some critical values of EcoInd were defined according to the evaluation of several shoe models [30] and several simulation scenarios as follows:•Excellent: if EcoInd>8, the environmental indicators considered indicates that the design is environmentally friendly.Good: if 6>EcoInd≥8, the design is considered as appropriate to be commercialized. However, the poorly or worst evaluated indicators should be revised in order to explore the possibility of improving the design.Unacceptable: if EcoInd≤6, a correction in the design must be made because of its impacts on the environment.The defuzzyfication procedure described in this section was applied for the ecodesign of children's footwear and can be used for guidance in other applications. However, it must be selected and adjusted in each case according to the design goals and/or preferences of the decision makers (DMs).Each DM is likely to have a different perception of importance of the environmental indicators used for evaluating the design options analyzed. As a consequence, each DM is likely to produce a different set of preference weights, but only one can be used at a time to compute the EcoInd. Therefore, it was necessary to select a method to calculate the weights (wj) associated to each environmental indicator taking into account a range of uncertainty for the DM preferences.The Fuzzy Preference Programming (AHP–FPP) method [27], which is an extension of the standard Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) method to a fuzzy hierarchical analysis, was used to estimate the weights (wj) that expressed the relative importance of the aggregated sets μj– see Eq. (5). This method avoids the limitations associated to standard AHP method where the discretized ratio scale (i.e., Saaty's scale) is problematic as it severely restricts the range and distribution of possible priority vectors. Furthermore, standard AHP method cannot straight forwardly be applied to solve uncertain decision-making problems [27].The FPP method consists in expressing the comparison ratios (wi/wj) as triangular fuzzy numbers that express the judgments of the DMs, and then derive a consistent priority scale. The triangular fuzzy numbers are defined by Eq. (6) and Fig. 2according to AHP–FPP method [27].(6)ϕijwiwj=(wi/wj)−lijmij−lij,wiwj≤mijuij−(wi/wj)uij−mij,wiwj≥mijwhere the parameters uijand lijlocate the feet of the triangle and the parameter mijlocates the peak. The indexes i and j refers to each indicator. Furthermore, uij>mij>lijare assumed to avoid division by zero. The triangular representation of each can be seen in Fig. 2.The AHP–FPP method is based on the maximin decision rule where the solution to the prioritization problem is transformed into a linear programming problem. Then, weights are determined after solving Eq. (7).(7)maximizeζ=min(ϕij)Subjectto(mij−lij)⋅ζ⋅wj−wi+lij⋅wj≤0,(uij−mij)⋅ζ⋅wj+wi−uij⋅wj≤0,∑k=1nwk=1,wk≥0,k=1,2,…,n,i=1,2,…,n−1,j=2,3,…,n,j>iwhere the optimal value of ζ (consistency factor) permits to establish the consistency of the FPP method. Thus, if positive, it indicates that all solution ratios completely satisfy the fuzzy judgments (i.e., lij≤(wi/wj)≤uij), which means that the initial set of fuzzy judgments is consistent. Meanwhile, a negative value of ζ means that the fuzzy judgments are strongly inconsistent and, therefore, a new set of fuzzy numbers must be provided by the DMs. Besides, a natural measure of the consistency in AHP methods, the consistency ratio (cr), was proposed by Saaty [31] which is defined by the following equation.(8)cr=CIRIwhere CI represents the consistency index which is computed from Eq. (9) and RI is the consistency index of a randomly generated reciprocal matrix from the scale of 1–9 [31].(9)CI=λmax−nn−1where λmaxis the maximum eigenvalue of the judgment matrix and n is the number of indicators to be considered. A value of the consistency ratio lower than 5% is considered acceptable. Larger values of cr require the DMs to revise their judgments. The ecodesign tool checks the consistency criteria (ζ and cr) automatically. Further details of the AHP–FPP method can be seen in the literature [27].Footwear manufacturing had an important growth in recent decades, increasing the industry's impact on the environment [32,33]. Furthermore, the environmental perception from consumers is of major relevance for the shoemaking industry since the environmental criteria are also awaking the interest of customers. Regulations also exist that limit the content of certain hazardous substances in footwear: e.g., dimethyl fumarate [34,35], phthalates [36] or azo colorants [37].In this work, a decision support system based on the EcoInd described in Section 2.1 was developed and applied for the ecodesign of footwear. Given the major concern on children's products, four shoe models of size 20EU were evaluated: Leather Red, Leather White, Synthetic Pink and Synthetic White. The former two and the latter two were only differentiated by the color (this aspect may pose a significant difference regarding the presence of toxic substances from the different dyes employed). On the basis of a pair of shoes as functional unit, inventory data regarding the production process was provided by a factory located in Elche (Alicante, SE, Spain). These are collected in Tables 1 and 2. The production process and the case study are explained in further detail in Herva et al. [30].A proper set of environmental indicators was selected for the case study. Hence, the sustainable use of materials was assessed by means of the Ecological Footprint (EF). This indicator aggregates most input and output flows into a single index expressing area requirements (to provide resources or to absorb wastes), thus facilitating its tracking and understanding [30,38]. In spite of these benefits, the methodology fails at evaluating the impact of substances not naturally provided or absorbed by ecosystems. As a consequence, the limitation of substances harmful for health and the environment was incorporated by means of the Hazard Quotient (HQ) and Cancer Risk (CR), both resulting from the characterization stage of Environmental Risk Assessment (ERA). The combination of EF and ERA methodologies results, then, beneficial and offers a more comprehensive analysis of the case study.For the EF appraisal the component approach based on life cycle inventory was employed [39]. Thus, individual EFs were calculated using the ecodesign tool for each material and energy flow in the inventory data – Eq. (10) – [40] as well as for the solid waste produced according to [40,41]. These individual EFs were aggregated to estimate the total EF of a pair of shoes according to Eq. (11).(10)EFr=∑lVrNPrFl+∑lEVrEPrFl(11)EF=∑rEFrwhere EFris the area required for the component r; NPr, EVrand EPrare the natural productivity, embodied energy and energy productivity (associated to fossil fuel) for element r; Flis the equivalence factor for land type l. Equivalence factors translate a specific land type (i.e., cropland, pasture, forest, fishing ground) into a universal unit of biologically productive area, generally a global hectare – gha [42]. Four different types of land were included in this work, namely area for the absorption of CO2, fossil energy, arable land, pasture land and forest.ERA is a standardized process for the estimation of the magnitude, probability and uncertainty of adverse effects on health derived from the exposure to substances present in the environment [43,44]. Risk assessment comprises hazard identification, exposure assessment and risk characterization, from which two relevant indicators, Hazard Quotient (HQ) and the Cancer Risk factor (CR), can be obtained as indicated in Eqs. (12) and (13).(12)HQ=DoseRefD(13)CR=Dose⋅SFwhere HQ is the Hazard Quotient, Dose (mgkg−1day−1) is the exposure dose to the chemical, CR is the Cancer Risk factor, RefD (mgkg−1day−1) and SF (kgdaymg−1) are Reference Doses for non-carcinogenic effects and Slope Factors for carcinogenic effects, respectively. These parameters were obtained from the Risk Assessment Information System (RAIS) [43]. HQ and CR are dimensionless.In the case study being considered, the dermal route was considered to estimate the exposure to contaminants due to the use of footwear by children. Total doses were calculated under the worst case scenario approach, i.e., considering direct contact skin-shoe (this may be more close to reality during warm seasons). Daily doses of exposure to contaminants via dermal absorption were computed using Eq. (14)[45].(14)Dose=CS⋅SAfeetBW⋅AdhF⋅CT⋅DAF⋅0.01where Dose (mgkg−1day−1) is the estimated daily dose of each contaminant due to dermal contact with shoes CS (mgkg−1) is the concentration of the contaminant in shoes, SAfeet (m2) is the mean surface area for feet, BW (kg) is the mean body weight, CT (hday−1) is the contact time, DAF is the dermal absorption factor and AdhF (mgcm−2) is the adherence factor. In the particular case of shoes, feet were considered to be totally in contact with the components and the values of surface densities of materials were used as adherence factors. The factor 0.01 is the result of the homogenization of units to make the equation consistent. CS values were determined by an external laboratory (Table 3). The other parameters required for the dose estimation and risk characterization are collected in Tables 4 and 5.During the evaluation of the designs proposed and the development of the ecodesign tool, representatives from the company and the university were in continuous communication to facilitate the flow of information and expertise. Hence, the team for the establishment of preferences and weights was composed by 8 members, 5 from the company and 3 from the technical team of the university in charge of the development of the tool. Therefore, sector-specific and technical knowledge on the environmental evaluation tools and fuzzy systems were joined to enrich the tool and make it more robust.In the literature, uncertainty in decision making is mostly handled by using sensitivity analysis [48]. Therefore, a sensitivity analysis of the fuzzy model with regards to its parameters was evaluated by means of Monte Carlo Simulation (MCS). Two sources of uncertainty affecting Eq. (5) were considered: (i) uncertainty in the parameters (i.e., the fuzzy set parameters – θi); and (ii) uncertainty due the different DMs preferences (i.e., weights – wj) for criteria. The two sources of uncertainty were simulated individually and combined. The aim of this analysis was to evaluate the effects of uncertainty on the ecodesign tool and to validate the AHP–FPP methodology proposed to calculate the weights associated to the environmental impacts.According to MCS methodology [49], all the uncertain parameters were defined using Probability Distribution Functions (PDFs). In other words, instead of using one value for each parameter, a set of possible values and the corresponding probabilities were considered. Based on the PDFs, different random instances of parameters were generated. For each instance an EcoInd value was obtained, thus the uncertainty was propagated to the output of the fuzzy model. Then, mean and standard deviation for the EcoInd were calculated from the output PDF. Besides, when two or more options were evaluated at the same time, a probability was obtained for each one quantifying the level of uncertainty for the corresponding option. Then, the option with the highest EcoInd mean was selected as the preferred one.For the case study, the criteria weights were modeled using triangular PDFs, because these distributions are commonly used when the minimum, maximum and most likely values are known. Later, weights were normalized (i.e.,∑j=1nwj=1) to avoid inconsistency in the analysis. The uncertainty in the parameters of input fuzzy membership functions (i.e., σj) were also analyzed using triangular PDFs.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Based on fuzzy and AHP–FPP methods, an Ecodesign Index (EcoInd) was proposed to integrate the complex information contained in various individual environmental indicators. Moreover, an effective decision support system was developed to evaluate the environmental sustainability and safety of children's footwear. The EcoInd indicates the departure of a design or product from ideal conditions, from an environmental point of view. The examination of the EcoInd values of different designs or products permits to compare them in a decision making process. Particularly, in the case study, the constructed decision support system seemed to work properly. The four designs of children's shoes were ranked as Red Leather>White Leather>White Synthetic>Pink Synthetic, in agreement with a priori perception. This type of tools could be used as part of a strategy to obtain an ecolabel or an environmental certification and to improve the marketing strategy of new eco-friendly shoe designs. Additional environmental indicators could be used to improve the environmental evaluation of the designs.