@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Boosted SVM for extracting rules from imbalanced data in application to prediction of the post-operative life expectancy in the lung cancer patients

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We generalize the learning task for SVM by introducing individual penalty parameters for each example.We propose hybrid approach which is based on combining AdaBoost algorithm with SVM for imbalanced data phenomenon. We call this boosted SVM.The proposed hybrid approach minimizes weighted exponential error function.Once the boosted SVM obtains high predictive accuracy, it seems proper to use it as an oracle to re-label examples and use the new dataset for the rules induction in order to obtain an interpretable model.We present the application of the boosted SVM to the medical domain, that is, the prediction of the post-operative life expectancy in the lung cancer patients.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Imbalanced data,Boosted SVM,Decision rules,Post-operative life expectancy prediction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we present boosted SVM dedicated to solve imbalanced data problems. Proposed solution combines the benefits of using ensemble classifiers for uneven data together with cost-sensitive support vectors machines. Further, we present oracle-based approach for extracting decision rules from the boosted SVM. In the next step we examine the quality of the proposed method by comparing the performance with other algorithms which deal with imbalanced data. Finally, boosted SVM is used for medical application of predicting post-operative life expectancy in the lung cancer patients.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The main difficulty in learning classification models is the character of data. Usually, raw data gathered from many sources cannot be used directly in the training process due to various circumstances, i.e., missing values of some attributes [1], sequential nature of delivering data [2], or disproportions in class distribution [3]. In the literature, the third issue is known as imbalanced data problem. In general, each dataset with unequal class distribution can be considered as imbalanced. In practice, the problem of disproportion between classes occurs when the classifier trained with typical methods has a tendency to make decisions biased toward majority class. Extreme imbalance data problem is observed when the classifier trained using traditional methods is classifying all objects only to the majority class, independently on the vector of features. Applying techniques which deal with the problem of unequally distributed data is essential for learning decision models with high predictive accuracy.The problem of imbalanced data is widely observed in medical decision making, particularly in post-operative risk evaluation domain. Considering the short period of planning (1 year) the number of patients surviving the assumed interval is often significantly higher than the number of deceases. Moreover, the misclassification related to treating deceases as survivals is much more troublesome than the decision mistake made in opposite direction.The second important issue connected to the problem of post-operative life expectancy prediction is the interpretability of the decision model. Using so-called “black box” models in the considered application is not recommended. It is mainly caused by the patient's fear about being treated by machines with hidden and difficult-to-understand inference process and distrust among doctors of being supported by vaguely-working models. To dissipate the doubts it is necessary to propose a method to extract knowledge in the form of decision rules or trees from “black box” models.The main goal of this paper is to propose a general decision model which obtains high predictive accuracy in case of imbalanced data and use this model for extraction of interpretable knowledge in the form of decision rules. The core of our proposition is a generalization of the learning task for SVM by introducing individual penalty parameters for each example, and then application of AdaBoost-like algorithm to learn ensemble of SVMs. We call this approach boosted SVM for imbalanced data. At the end, we apply boosted SVM as an oracle to re-label examples and use the new dataset for the rules induction in order to obtain an interpretable model.Additionally, we aim at using thoracic surgery clinical diagnostics and treatment issues as an important application of the boosted SVM proposed in this paper. Our approach may contribute current clinical treatment twofold. First, to support decisions on patient selection for surgery made by clinicians. Second, to identify the cases of higher risk of patient's death after surgery by extracting decision rules.The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we review approaches that are applied to imbalanced data and solutions used to extract rules from uninterpretable models. In Section 3 we present the ensemble SVM classifier (boosted SVM) for imbalanced data and describe the method of extracting decision rules from the model. Section 4 contains the results of an experiment showing the quality of the proposed approach for imbalanced data and presents post-operative life expectancy rules extracted using boosted SVM. This paper is briefly summarized in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we have proposed a novel boosted SVM method for imbalanced data problem which was further used for rules extraction. We have evaluated the quality of the proposed approach by comparing it with other solutions dedicated for imbalanced data problem. Next, we have used the proposed method to solve the problem for prediction of the post-operative life expectancy in the lung cancer patients. We have shown that our approach can be successfully applied to the problem by making additional experimental comparison on real-life dataset. Finally, we extracted decision rules using oracle-based approach.