@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Online double auction mechanism for perishable goods

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We investigate mechanism design for a spot market of perishable goods.We explain that failures of trading in the perishable goods damage social utility.We develop an online double auction that prioritizes time-critical bids.Multiagent simulations show the auction realizes efficient and fair allocations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Market design,Online double auction,Perishable goods,Multi-agent simulation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
One-sided auctions are used for market clearing in the spot markets for perishable goods because production cost in spot markets is already “sunk.” Moreover, the promptness and simplicity of one-sided auctions are beneficial for trading in perishable goods. However, sellers cannot participate in the price-making process in these auctions. A standard double auction market collects bids from traders and matches the higher bids of buyers and lower bids of sellers to find the most efficient allocation, assuming that the value of unsold items remains unchanged. Nevertheless, in the market for perishable goods, sellers suffer a loss when they fail to sell their goods, because their salvage values are lost when the goods perish. To solve this problem, we investigate the suitable design of an online double auction for perishable goods, where bids arrive dynamically with their time limits. Our market mechanism aims at improving the profitability of traders by reducing trade failures in the face of uncertainty of incoming/departing bids. We develop a heuristic market mechanism with an allocation policy that prioritizes bids of traders based on their time-criticality, and evaluate its performance experimentally using multi-agent simulation. We find out that our market mechanism realizes efficient and fair allocations among traders with approximately truthful behavior in different market situations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Most perishable goods such as fish and vegetables are traded mainly in the spot market because their yield and quality are unsteady and unpredictable by nature. In the spot markets, which by definition occur after production, the variable production costs of the goods are typically sunk costs and these costs are irretrievable for perishable goods when the goods remain unsold and the value of the perishable goods evaporates.1In other words, their salvage value reduces to zero.1Therefore, sellers of perishable goods may suffer large losses if the trade fails in the markets (Bastian et al. 2000; Wang and Webster 2009).To prevent sellers’ goods from perishing without being traded, the markets need to bring together a large enough number of potential buyers and process a large amount of transactions as quickly as possible. Electronic commerce (a.k.a., e-commerce) is a suitable candidate for the markets of the perishable goods because advanced information technologies improve communication, search, monitoring and information sorting capabilities and thus succeed in reducing transaction costs. The reduced transaction costs stimulate the market (Ribbers et al. 2002). Therefore, several agricultural products have been traded in the e-commerce markets for various types of transactions, raging from retail in B2C (business-to-consumer) markets to wholesale in B2B (business-to-business) markets (Bogaardt et al. 2001).In those B2B e-commerce markets as well as in traditional wholesale markets for perishable goods, one-sided auctions such as a Dutch auction are widely used (Ribbers et al. 2002; Krott 2003) because of their simplicity and promptness, vital for smoothly dealing with large volume transactions of perishable goods with many participating buyers (Krishna 2010). In the one-sided auction, a seller can influence price-making only indirectly in the following ways:(i)By declaring a reserve price, below which the goods are not to be sold, in advance of the transactions (Myerson 1981).By limiting the quantity of goods to be traded.Nevertheless, sellers cannot always maximize their profit by selling the optimum amount of goods at the best price because finding the optimal price and quantity is difficult for sellers in real auctions where precise demands are unknown to them.Fig. 1shows the effects of sellers’ actions in the one-sided auction: the left figure shows the case where a seller sets a reserve price, and the right figure shows the case where a seller adjusts quantity. As shown in Fig. 1, these manipulations by sellers not only raise the competitive equilibrium price of the market, but also cause deadweight loss (which is represented as gray triangles in the figures) and thus reduce the efficiency of the market.Consequently, traditional markets of perishable goods have the following problems:(i)Sellers suffer loss in the trade when(a)their goods are sold at a price below the production cost, ortheir goods perish without being sold (because salvage value of perished goods is zero).The markets lose social surplus when sellers try to avoid the above losses and make profits by manipulating prices and quantities of goods to be traded.We develop a prototypical market for the perishable goods, which adopts online double auction (DA) as a market mechanism (Friedman and Rust 1993) to solve the problems by realizing fair price-making among traders while reducing allocation failures. In the online DA, multiple buyers and sellers arrive dynamically over time with their time limits. Both buyers and sellers tender their bids for trading commodities. The bid expresses a trader’s offer for valuation and quantity of the commodity to be traded. The arrival time, time limit, and bid for a trade are all private information to a trader. Therefore, the online DA is uncertain about future trade. It collects bids over a specified time interval, and clears the market on expiration of the bidding interval by applying pre-determined rules.In the market for durable goods, sellers never lose their utility on failing to sell the commodity. Therefore, in the DA market for durable goods, the utility of the traders can be maximized by using a price-based mechanism that matches the highest buyer’s bid and the lowest seller’s bid iteratively until no matchable bid remains. However, in the online DA market for perishable commodities, the market mechanism should decide the bids with different prices and time limits that should be matched to increase the utility of traders and reduce trade failures in the face of uncertainty about future trade. The online market also presents the tradeoff for clearing all possible matches as they arise versus waiting for additional buy/sell bids before matching. Although waiting could engender better matching, it can also hurt matching opportunities because the time limit of some existing bids might expire.Double auction mechanisms in the spot market have been investigated in the fields of agricultural economics (Krogmeier et al. 1997) and experimental economics (Mestelman 2008). These studies observed the behavior of human subjects in the experimental periodic market and found that their decisions are influenced by the inability to carry unsold goods from one trading period to the next period.Until recently, not much work had addressed online double auction mechanisms (Blum et al. 2006; Bredin et al. 2007; Zhao et al. 2011; Chang et al. 2011; Gerding et al. 2013). These studies examine several important aspects of the problem: design of matching algorithms with good worst-case performance within the framework of competitive analysis (Blum et al. 2006), construction of a general framework that facilitates truthful dynamic double auctions by extending static double auction rules (Bredin et al. 2007), and development of computationally efficient matching algorithms using weighted bipartite matching in graph theory (Zhao et al. 2011). Chang et al. (2011) developed the online double auction mechanism for the TAC Market Design Tournament and showed their adaptive market strategies achieved stable and efficient performance. Gerding et al. (2013) applied the online double auction mechanism to an imaginary market for advance reservation of electric vehicle charging facilities. Although their research results are theoretically significant, we cannot straightforwardly apply their mechanisms to our online DA problem because all of their models incorporate the assumption that trade failures never cause a loss to traders, which is not true in our spot market for perishable goods.In the field of revenue management (Talluri and van Ryzin 2004), several methodologies have been studied to increase the revenue of sellers in services industries such as airlines and accommodation, which provide perishable services to customers. Their objective is maximizing seller revenues since in the industries where revenue management is typically practiced, the capacity cost is sunk and the variable production cost is negligible (Vulcano et al. 2002). These techniques are difficult to apply to “non-service” markets, where the variable production cost of perishable goods has a large influence on the profit of sellers.In this paper, we advocate a heuristic online DA mechanism for the spot markets of perishable goods, which improves revenue of the traders by reducing allocation failures in the market. And as a preliminary step of developing the real field application, we study computational simulations of the designed DA mechanism in an imaginary market.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces our market model and presents desiderata and objectives of the market. Section 3 proposes the allocation policy to prevent trading failures in the online DA market. Section 4 explains the settings of multi-agent simulations used to evaluate the developed market mechanism. Section 5 experimentally studies the effectiveness of our allocation policy in two types of markets using multi-agent simulations. Section 6 analyzes the performance of various types of agents in the markets and investigates the market equilibria. Section 7 concludes the paper and discusses future research directions.In our model of a market, we consider discrete time rounds,T={1,2,…}, indexed by t. For simplicity, we assume the market is for a single commodity. Agents are either sellers (S) or buyers (B), who arrive dynamically over time and depart according to their time limit. In each round, the agents trade multiple units of the commodity. The market is cleared at the end of every round to find new allocations.Each agent i has private information called type,θi=(vi,qi,ai,di), wherevi,qi,ai,diare non-negative real numbers,viis agent i’s valuation of a single unit of the good,qiis the quantity of the goods that agent i wants to trade,aiis the arrival time, anddidenotes the departure time. The duration between the arrival time and the departure time defines the agent’s trading period[ai,di]indexed by p, and agents can repeatedly participate in the auction over several trading periods.We model our market as a wholesale market for B2B transactions. In the market, seller i brings her goods by arrival timeai. At departure timediof seller i, the salvage value of the goods evaporates because of its perishability unless it is traded successfully. Therefore, seller i incurs production cost before the trade starts and considers the production cost together with its associated opportunity cost as valuationviof the goods until they perish at departure timedi, when she leaves the market. Because of advance production and perishability, sellers face the distinct risk of failing to recoup the production cost in the trade. Buyers in our market procure the goods to resell them in retail markets. For buyer j, valuationvjrepresents the expected payment of her customers for the goods in a retail market, which regulates her maximum budget for bidding to procure the goods. Arrival timeajis the first time when buyer j values the item. Furthermore, buyer j is assumed to gain some profit by retailing the goods if she succeeds to procure them before departure timedj. In other words,djdenotes the due time for the buyer to procure the goods for a coming retail opportunity.Agents are self-interested and their types are private information. At the beginning of a trading period, agent i submits a bid by making a claim about its typeθˆi=(vˆi,qˆi,aˆi,dˆi)≠θito the auctioneer. Furthermore, in succeeding rounds in the trading period, the agent can modify the value of its unmatched bid.2When we must distinguish between claims made by buyers and claims made by sellers, we refer to the bid from a buyer and the ask from a seller.2However, once agents depart from the market, they are not allowed to reenter the same bid.An agent’s self-interest is exhibited in its willingness to misrepresent its type when this will improve the outcome of the auction in its favor. As explained in Table 1, misrepresenting its type is not always beneficial or feasible for the agent. As for quantity, it is impossible for a seller to report a larger quantityqˆi>qibecause the sold goods must be delivered immediately after trade in a spot market. Moreover, it is unreasonable for a buyer to report a larger quantityqˆj>qjbecause excess orders may produce dead stocks for her. Reporting an earlier arrival time is infeasible for a seller and a buyer because the arrival time is the earliest timing that they decide to sell or buy the goods in the market. Reporting a later arrival time or an earlier departure time can only reduce the chance of successful trade for the agents. For a seller, it is impossible to report a later departure timedˆi>disince the goods to be sold in the market perish by the timedi. For a buyer, misreporting a later departure timedˆj>djmay delay retailing the procured goods.Additionally, Table 1 shows that a seller can misreport a smaller quantityqˆi<qiwith the intention of raising the market price, but in that case, she needs to throw out some of the goods she produced for sale. If a buyer misrepresents a smaller quantityqˆj<qjto lower the market price, she loses a chance of retailing more goods. Although these misreports might create larger profits for sellers and buyers, finding the optimal quantity values for increasing their profits is not a straightforward task. Therefore, in this paper, we assume that the agents do not like to misrepresent a quantity value in their type. On the other hand, we suppose that an agent has incentives to misreport its valuation for increasing its profit because it is the most instinctive way for the agent to influence market prices. When agents do not care about trade failures, sellers have an incentive to report a higher valuation and buyers like to report a lower valuation. However, in a spot market for perishable goods, a seller may report a lower valuationvˆi<viwhen she desperately wants to sell the goods before they perish.Consequently, in this paper, we consider that agent i can misrepresent only its valuationvifor improving its utility among all the components of its type informationθi.In our market model, an agent can place bids in the auction over several trading periods that may overlap with each other. In order to simplify the notation hereafter, we assume that the agent’s trading periods do not overlap and each agent has a unique bid in any round t.3In the simulation settings explained in Section 4 the trading periods of sellers’ asks overlap each other, because the ask is submitted every 24h and its matching duration is set at 72h in the simulation.3Letθˆtdenote the set of all the agent’s types reported in round t;θˆ=(θˆ1,θˆ2,…,θˆt,…)denote a complete reported type profile; andθˆ⩽tdenote the reported type profile restricted to the agents with reported arrival no later than round t. In each trading period p, agent i has a specific typeθip=vip,qip,aip,dip. Reportθˆit=vˆit,qit,aip,dipis a bid made by agent i in round t within trading period p (i.e.,t∈aip,dip). The report represents a commitment to trade at mostqitunits of goods at a limit price ofvˆitin round t within trading period p.4Successful trade in previous rounds of period p make the current quantity of goods reduce toqit⩽qip.4As discussed previously, we assume agent i reports truthful values about quantityqi, arrival timeai, and departure timediat any round t.In the market, a seller’s ask and a buyer’s bid can be matched when they satisfy the following condition:Definition 1Matching conditionSeller i’s askθˆit=(vˆit,qit,aip,dip)and buyer j’s bidθˆjt=vˆjt,qjt,ajp,djpare matchable when(1)vˆit⩽vˆjt∧aip,dip∩ajp,djp≠∅∧dip>djp∧qit>0∧qjt>0.The third term in the matching condition (1) (i.e.,dip>djp) requires that seller’s goods must not perish before the buyer’s due date.In an online DA mechanism,M=(π,x)is composed of an allocation policy π and a pricing policy x. Allocation policy π is defined as{πt}t∈T, whereπi,jt(θˆ⩽t)∈I⩾0represents the quantity traded by agents i and j in round t, given reportsθˆ⩽t. The pricing policy x is defined as{xt}t∈T,xt=(st,bt), wheresi,jt(θˆ⩽t)∈R⩾0represents the payment seller i receives from an auctioneer as a result of the trade with buyer j in round t, given reportsθˆ⩽t. Furthermore,bi,jt(θˆ⩽t)∈R>0represents a payment made by buyer j to the auctioneer as a result of the trade with seller i in round t, given reportsθˆ⩽t. In this paper, the auctioneer is supposed to make neither profit nor loss in the trade, so thatbi,jt(θˆ⩽t)=si,jt(θˆ⩽t).Most studies on DA mechanisms assume agents with simple quasi-linear utility,∑j(si,j-πi,jvi), for seller i and∑i(πi,jvj-bi,j)for buyer j. However, in order to represent idiosyncratic motivation of agents in a wholesale market for perishable goods, we define the utility for sellers and buyers as follows:(i)For seller i, whenπi,jtunits of goods are sold to buyer j at pricesi,jtin round t within period p, then seller i obtains incomessi,jt. Since the production cost of the seller isvip, seller surplus issi,jt-πi,jtvip. If a unit of goods perishes in round t without being traded, seller i loses valuationvip.Definition 2Seller’s utilitySeller i’s utility at time round t is(2)Ui(θˆ⩽t)=∑{p|aip⩽t}∑t′∈aip,dip∑j∈Bsi,jt′(θˆ⩽t)-πi,jt′(θˆ⩽t)vip-∑{p|dip⩽t}qip-∑t′∈aip,dip∑j∈Bπi,jt′(θˆ⩽t)vip.The second term in Eq. (2) represents the loss of unsold and perished goods, which are calculated dynamically at the bid’s departure time (i.e., whendiP⩽t). With the effect of the second term, sellers are motivated to lower their valuation in the bid when the departure time approaches.When buyer j receivesπi,jtunits of goods at pricebi,jtin round t within period p, buyer j obtains surplusπi,jtvjp-bi,jt.Buyer j’s utility at time round t is(3)Uj(θˆ⩽t)=∑{p|ajp⩽t}∑t′∈ajp,djp∑i∈Sπi,jt′(θˆ⩽t)vjp-bi,jt′(θˆ⩽t).Agents are modeled as risk-neutral and utility-maximizing. As Eq. (2) shows, a seller gains profits by selling low-value goods at high prices but loses money if the goods perish without being sold. The seller’s bidding strategy on valuation of the goods is intricate because she can enhance her utility in the trade by either raising the market price with higher valuation bidding or increasing successful trades (i.e., preventing the goods from perishing) with lower valuation bidding. Eq. (3) reveals that a buyer makes profits by procuring high-value goods at lower prices and retailing the procured high-value goods. Therefore, in this market, the buyer also has difficulty to find the optimal bidding strategies since she can improve her utility by either bringing down the market price with lower valuation bidding or by increasing successful trades (i.e., enhancing retail opportunities) with higher valuation bidding.Based on the utility for sellers and buyers in our online DA market, utility maximization as the design objective of the market is defined as follows:Definition 4Utility maximizationAn online DA,M=(π,x), is utility maximizing, when among a set of functions π and x that satisfy the other constraints, the mechanism selects π and x that maximize(4)U(θˆ⩽t)=∑i∈S∑j∈B∑{p,p′|aip⩽t,ajp′⩽t}∑t′∈aip,dip∩ajp′,djp′πi,jt′(θˆ⩽t)vjp′-vip-∑{p|dip⩽t}qip-∑t′∈aip,dipπi,jt′(θˆ⩽t)vip.Eq. (4) suggests that our market’s objective is not only maximizing social surplus produced by trade (i.e.,πi,jt′vjp′-vip) but also reducing loss to sellers from unsold and perished goods (i.e.,qip-∑πi,jt′vip).We also require that the online DA satisfies budget balance, feasibility, and individual rationality. Budget balance ensures that in every round the mechanism collects and distributes the same amount of money from and to the agents, implying that an auctioneer makes neither profit nor loss. Feasibility demands that the auctioneer takes no short position on the commodity traded in any round. Individual rationality guarantees that no agent loses by participating in the market.In spot markets for perishable goods, sellers raise their asking price and buyers lower their bidding price as a rational strategy to improve their surplus as long as they can avoid possible losses caused by trade failures. In such markets, agents have to misreport their valuation carefully for obtaining higher utilities. Our goal is to design a market mechanism that secures desirable outcomes for both individual agents and the whole market without the need for strategic bidding by the agents.The well-known result of Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983) demonstrates that no Bayes-Nash incentive-compatible exchange mechanism can be simultaneously efficient, budget balanced, and individually rational. Therefore, we aim to design an online DA mechanism that imposes budget balance, feasibility, and individual rationality while promoting reasonable efficiency and moderate incentive-compatibility. Since an auction mechanism consists of an allocation policy and a pricing policy, we discuss our design for each policy in the following sections.Many studies on the DA mechanism investigate a static market and use social surplus from successful trade as the objective function, with the assumption that agents never suffer a loss from trade failures. A common goal of the allocation policy is to compute trades that maximize social surplus, which is the sum of the difference between bid prices and ask prices for all matched bids. The ratio of achieved social surplus against the maximal social surplus at the competitive equilibrium is called allocative efficiency.The allocation policy that maximizes allocative efficiency in a static DA market arranges the asks according to the ascending order of the seller’s price and the bids according to the descending order of the buyer’s price, and matches the asks and bids in order. We refer to this allocation rule as a price-based allocation policy.The price-based allocation policy is efficient for the DA markets that assume trade in future markets or trade in durable goods, in which agents do not lose their utility even if they fail to trade. However, sellers of perishable goods in the spot market can lose the value of perished goods when they fail to sell the goods during the trading period. Consequently, in addition to increasing social surplus from trade, increasing the number of successful trades is also important in the spot market for perishable goods.For static DA markets, several maximal matching mechanisms have been developed (Zhao et al. 2010; Niu and Parsons 2013). The basic idea of these papers is not to simply match high-valuation bids and low-valuation asks, but to match low-valuation asks with low-valuation bids that are priced no lower than the asks, and match high-valuation bids with high-valuation asks that are priced no higher than the bids. However, these methods cannot address the problem of the spot market for perishable goods, which is inherently an online market where each bid is valid only in its limited trading period. In the allocation policy of online DA mechanisms, criticality of bids must be evaluated and taken into consideration properly to increase the bids that can be traded successfully within their fixed trading period.In this paper, we define criticality of bids and asks as follows:(i)LetMtrepresent a set of all the pairs of bids that are matchable at time round t. At this time, buyers that are matchable with seller i’ s askθˆithave as many as∑{θˆjt|(θˆit,θˆjt)∈Mt}qjtquantity of bids. And each buyer j has as many as∑{θˆi′t|(θˆi′t,θˆjt)∈Mt}qi′tquantity of asks from its matchable sellers. These values are used as the estimated matchability of the ask in calculating its criticality. Furthermore, at time round t, seller i has a slack time as long asdip-tuntil the unsold goods perish.We first define unsatisfiability of the ask as quantitative unbalance of supplies against demands as follows:Definition 5Ask unsatisfiabilityUnsatisfiability of seller i’s ask at time round t in trading period p is(5)uip(θˆ⩽t)=1∑{θˆjt|(θˆit,θˆjt)∈Mt}(qjt/∑{θˆi′t|(θˆi′t,θˆjt)∈Mt}qi′t)Taking temporal limitation of the ask into consideration, we define criticality of the ask as follows:Definition 6Ask criticalityCriticality of seller i’s ask at time round t in trading period p is(6)cip(θˆ⩽t)=uip(θˆ⩽t)dip-t.At time round t, sellers that are matchable with buyer j’s bidθˆjthave as many as∑{θˆit|(θˆit,θˆjt)∈Mt}qitquantity of asks. And each seller i has as many as∑{θˆj′t|(θˆit,θˆj′t)∈Mt}qj′tquantity of bids from its matchable buyers. Additionally, at time round t, buyer j has a slack time as long asdjp-tfor trading period p.Unsatisfiability and criticality of bids are similarly defined as asks as follows:Definition 7Bid unsatisfiabilityUnsatisfiability of buyer j’s bid at time round t in trading period p is(7)ujp(θˆ⩽t)=1∑{θˆit|(θˆit,θˆjt)∈Mt}(qit/∑{θˆj′t|(θˆit,θˆj′t)∈Mt}qj′t)Criticality of buyer j’s bid at time round t in trading period p is(8)cjp(θˆ⩽t)=ujp(θˆ⩽t)djp-t.In the price-based allocation policy, bids and asks are sorted according to the value of claimed valuation and matched in the sequence. In other words, in the price-based allocation policy, the priority of bid isvˆjtand that of ask is1.0/vˆit, and bids and asks with larger priorities are matched accordingly. In our allocation policy, the priority of bid and ask is determined based on their unsatisfiability as follows:We call the above threshold as unsatisfiability threshold and search for its appropriate valueUexperimentally using multi-agent simulation in Section 5.In our allocation policy, we use the priorities of bids and asks as follows:When the unsatisfiability threshold is set at ∞, the allocation policy is same as the price-based allocation policy. When unsatisfiability threshold is set at 0, we designate the allocation policy as a criticality-based allocation policy.Because the criticality-based allocation policy does not consider the surplus produced in matching, the resultant allocations are not guaranteed to be allocative efficient. However, considering the possible loss that agents might suffer when they fail to trade using the price-based allocation policy, the criticality-based allocation policy is expected to earn more profit for the agents by increasing successful trades in certain market situations.The criticality-based allocation policy tends to give a higher priority to a bid with a shorter trading period. But agents have a smaller chance of having matchable bids in the market within a shorter trading period as explained in Section 2.1. Hence, agents have an incentive to divide their bid into multiple consecutive bids with shorter trading periods, whose priority should be higher than that of the original bid. This strategic behavior of agents is undesirable for the market, but we can easily prevent it by charging an entry fee for bidding on the agents. Therefore, in this paper, we do not assume the agents adopt such bid-dividing strategies.In a static market, all the bids and asks to be matched should exist in the market simultaneously, and hence, combinatorial optimization methods can find the allocation that maximizes the social utility. In online DA markets, the number of bids in the market changes dynamically and cannot be predicted in advance. Therefore, if every bid is matched immediately when a matchable counter bid arrives in the market, the number of bids remaining in the market might always be insufficient for finding more desirable allocations that can produce larger utility. Because incoming bids have a possibility of producing a better matching result with existing bids in the market, quality of the allocation can be improved if we accumulate the bids without matching them immediately and decide the allocation from the aggregated bids. At the same time, deferring allocation decisions might prevent the existing bids from being matched, and hence, increase trade failures.In order to investigate the effectiveness of deferred allocation decisions in the online DA market, we define elapse rate as follows:Definition 9Elapse rateThe elapse rate of agent i’s bid at time round t in trading period p is(9)eip(t)=t-aipdip-aip.Using the elapse rate, the third step of our priority based allocation policy described above is enhanced to wait for additional bids before matching the existing bids and avoid expiration of the bids in the market as follows:Priority based allocation policy enhanced with elapse rate.(iii)The ask and the next bid in the sorted queue are matched only when both their elapsed rates are not smaller than a predetermined threshold valueE. This process continues in this sequence until a bid is matched with the ask or there are no matchable bids in the queue.We call the above threshold the elapse rate threshold and search for its appropriate valueEexperimentally using multi-agent simulation in Section 5.The pricing policy is important to secure truthfulness and prevent strategic manipulation by agents, which should promote stability of agent bidding and increase the efficiency of a market. Nevertheless, obtaining truthfulness in DA markets while guaranteeing other desirable properties such as efficiency, individual rationality, and budget balance is impossible (Myerson and Satterthwaite 1983).In a static DA, several pricing policies have been developed and analyzed, as shown in Table 2. Presuming n buyers and m sellers are matchable,b̲nis the lowest matched bid anda‾mis the highest matched ask. The above rules are outlined as follows:(i)The k-double auction (k-DA) (Satterthwaite and Williams 1989) decides the clearing price askb̲n+(1-k)a‾m, where k is a parameter between 0 and 1. It converges to being strategy-proof as the number of traders increases and truthful bidding in the k-DA engenders efficiency.In McAfee’s rule (McAfee 1992), if(a‾(n+1)+b̲(m+1))/2is betweena‾nandb̲m, then(n+m)agents are matched to trade at the price.(n-1)sellers are paid amounta‾nand(m-1)buyers pay amountb̲mif that is not the case. This achieves strategy-proofness and weak budget-balance (i.e., the mechanism never incurs loss, but it might make profit), but sometimes loses efficiency by prohibiting the least valuable trade.In Vickrey’s mechanism (Vickrey 1961), n matchable buyers pay amountmax(a‾m,b̲(n+1))and m matchable sellers receive amountmin(b̲n,a‾(m+1)). It achieves both efficiency and strategy-proofness but does not satisfy budget-balance.We impose budget-balance and promote reasonable efficiency in our online DA market, so we adopt k-double auction as our pricing policy.In this paper, we set the value of k at 0.0 because of the following reasons:(i)Seller i does not have an incentive to overstate her true valuationvip, because it does not change the clearing price without losing matching opportunities. She does not have a strong incentive to understate her valuation either, if our allocation policy defined in Section 3.1 can reduce the risk of loss caused by perished goods.The bid-ask gaps are usually small in competitive B2B transactions. In such cases, buyer j may make bigger profits in retail markets than her surplus in wholesale markets. Therefore she has an incentive to increase the possible number of matchingπi,jt′(i.e., enhancing retailing opportunities) in the wholesale markets by reporting high valuation under a budget constraint.With the above defined allocation policy and pricing policy, we think that our mechanism can make the online DA market for perishable goods yield a high utility with moderate incentive-compatibility while maintaining properties of budget-balance and individual rationality. Since our market model and mechanism are much more complex than traditional continuous double auctions, even for which theoretical analysis is intractable, we perform experimental evaluation of the market mechanism using multi-agent simulation.We evaluate the market mechanism by running simulations with specific settings. In the simulation, five sellers and five buyers participate in the market. For the simulations, we use two types of market depicted in Figs. 2 and 3, which have a common supply curve and different demand curves. Fig. 2 depicts the market with a high risk of trade failures, where buyers’ valuation of the goods distributes equally with sellers’ valuation (i.e., the valuation of sellers and buyers ranges from 45 to 65). Fig. 3 depicts the market with a low risk of trade failures, in which the average valuation of goods by the buyers is higher than that by the sellers (i.e., valuation of sellers ranges from 45 to 65 and that of buyers ranges from 54 to 78).Table 3summarizes the experimental settings in this paper. Each simulation runs for 12days and the market is cleared every hour. Every day, when the agents arrive at the market, they submit one bid or ask, each of which has 24units of demands or supplies for the homogeneous perishable goods. Each unit of bid and ask is matched according to priority of the bid and ask. Arrival time of the agents is picked up randomly for every bid submission. The seller’s ask departs the market 72h after its arrival, which implies that a seller’s goods lose their value in the market three days after their production because of perishability. The departure time of a buyer’s bid is 24h after its arrival, which simulates the situation of buyers procuring goods for retail sales of the next day. In the time interval of arrival and departure of bids, agents can freely modify their reported valuation in the bid. For each result shown in the following sections, 300 randomized trials are executed to simulate diversified patterns of agents’ arrival and departure.Experimental analyses of complex markets necessarily focus on a restricted set of bidding strategies (Jordan et al. 2010). In this paper, we prepare several types of bidding strategies for both sellers and buyers to simulate the behavior of different agents in reporting their valuation, and investigate agent behavior in different market situations. For this purpose, we model the strategies of agents based on typical behaviors of human traders in the market for perishable goods.Seller agent i reports her valuation in the bids based on her true valuationvip. And buyer agent j reports the valuation based on her budget, which is determined by deducting prospective retail profits from her expected customers’ valuationvjp.5We assume costs for retailing the goods is fixed.5We model buyer j’s budget asγjpvjp, assuming that it is proportional to the expected customers’ valuationvjp. When the value ofγjpis small, buyer j has a strong incentive to increase successful matchings. On the other hand, if buyer j plans a small profit from retailing, the value ofγjpbecomes large. Then, buyer j has a strong incentive to bid aggressively for earning a large surplus because she cannot make big money by retailing the procured goods. In such a situation, it is difficult for sellers to make profits by avoiding trade failures. In this paper we set 0.5 as the value ofγjp.The bidding strategies of agents used in the simulations are as follows:(i)Modest strategy (MOD)This strategy is only for seller agents. With this strategy, seller i always reports her valuation as(10)vˆit=0.This strategy is developed to simulate one-sided auction markets where only buyers submit their bids, which are popular in real-world markets for perishable goods such as fish and vegetables.Truth-telling strategy (TT)With this strategy, an agent always reports its valuation truthfully.(a)Seller i’s reported valuation at time round t is(11)vˆit=vip.Buyer j’s reported valuation at time round t is(12)vˆjt=γjpvjp.Monotonous strategy (MONO)With this strategy, an agent monotonously tunes its report on valuation along with the elapsed time after the arrival of the bid in the market.In trading period p, seller i and buyer j report their valuation as follows:(a)Seller i’s reported valuation at time round t is(13)vˆit=vip(1.0+δ)dip-tdip-aip.Buyer j’s reported valuation at time round t is(14)vˆjt=γjpvjp1.0-δdjp-tdjp-ajp.where δ is a parameter to control aggressiveness of the agent’s bidding behavior. With a larger value of δ, the agent tends to report greedier valuation. In this paper, we set 0.2 as the value of δ, assuming that the trade surplus equivalent to 20% of its valuation is a reasonable target for the aggressive agent.As the bid’s departure time gets closer, the seller’s reported valuation monotonously decreases fromvip(1.0+δ)to 0, and the buyer’s reported valuation monotonously increases fromγjpvjp(1.0-δ)to its true budgetγjpvjp. Since this is a very intuitive behavior for traders, this strategy is widely used in the field of revenue management as a dynamic pricing rule.Zero-intelligent aggressive strategy (ZIA)With this strategy, by reporting the valuation randomly within a certain range, an agent tries to obtain a larger surplus when there is little risk of trade failures and gives up making a profit when there is little time left until its departure.In trading period p, seller i and buyer j report their valuation as follows:(a)Seller i’s reported valuation at time round t is(15)vˆit=randvip(1.0+δ)dip-tdip-aip,vip(1.0+δ).Buyer j’s reported valuation at time round t is(16)vˆjt=randγjpvjp(1.0-δ),γjpvjp1.0-δdjp-tdjp-ajp.In the above equations, rand(x,y) is a function to produce a random value in between x and y.Seller i’s bidding starts with valuevip(1.0+δ)when she arrives in the market, and ends within a range of[0.0,vip(1.0+δ)]when she leaves the market. Buyer j’s bidding starts with valueγjpvjp(1.0-δ)and ends within a range of[γjpvjp(1.0-δ),γjpvjp]. Thus, ZIA strategy is a randomized variation of MONO strategy.We experimentally evaluate the performance of an online DA market with different values assigned to two parameters in the allocation policy. These parameters are defined in Section 3.1 as unsatisfiability thresholdUand elapse rate thresholdE. In the experiments, we ran a set of simulations assuming that all the agents in the market report truthfully (i.e., all the traders adopt TT strategy for bidding).To evaluate the effects of two threshold values on the performance of the online DA mechanism, we tested six values of the unsatisfiability threshold – 0.0, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 4.0, and ∞6WhenUis set at 0.0, the allocation policy is called criticality-based, and whenUis set at ∞, the allocation policy is called price-based.6– and ten values of the elapse rate threshold – 0.0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, and 0.9. We examined the effects of changing threshold values in the two markets. One of them has a high risk of trade failures (shown in Fig. 2) and the other has a low risk of trade failures (shown in Fig. 3).Fig. 4presents average matching rates of online DA in the market with a high risk of trade failures. The graph shows the rates of successful matching along with the corresponding values of the elapse rate threshold. Each of the six lines in the graph represents the result by the allocation policy with different unsatisfiability threshold values.From the graph, we find that the allocation policies with a small unsatisfiability threshold value, which prioritize more critical bids in the matching, improve matching rates as the elapse rate threshold value increases. This occurs because of the following reasons:(i)The large elapse rate inhibits instant matching of bids and builds a pool of bids as candidates from which the allocation policy can find better matching.The pool of bids developed by the large elapse rate also increases accuracy of estimated matchability used in Eqs. (5) and (7) for calculating unsatisfiability of bids in the allocation policy.The graph also reveals that allocation policies with a large unsatisfiability threshold value, which prioritize matches with larger surplus in the allocation, initially improve but later deteriorate matching rates as the elapse rate threshold value becomes larger. The intuitive explanation of the results is as follows:(i)The pool of bids created by the elapse rate gives low-price bids (or high-price asks) a bigger chance of being matched with low-price asks (or high-price bids) while it restrains high-price bids (or low-price asks) to be matched. As a result, the small elapse rate reduces trade failures.When the pool of bids developed by the big elapse rate becomes large, it promotes price-based allocation policies to find matches with larger surplus instead of avoiding trade failures.Fig. 5presents average clearing prices of online DA in the market with a high risk of trade failures. Our pricing policy defined in Section 3.2 decides the clearing price as the lowest buyer’s valuation in the matching bids. Therefore, higher average clearing price in the market indicates that the low-valuation bids by buyers cannot be matched with sellers’ asks. The graph shows that allocation policies with a small unsatisfiability threshold value clear the market with lower prices when the value of elapse threshold increases. Additionally, the graph also reveals that allocation policies with a large unsatisfiability threshold value produce higher clearing prices when the value of elapse threshold increases.The results in Figs. 4 and 5 suggest that when the allocation policy is allowed to defer matching decisions in the high-risk market, criticality-based allocation policy achieves higher matching rates by lowering the average clearing price. This implies that a large elapse rate threshold enables criticality-based allocation policy to avoid missing the opportunity of matching low-valuation bids with low-valuation asks. In other words, criticality-based allocation policy prevents the high-valuation bids from matching with low-valuation asks, and results in producing allocations with smaller surplus.Fig. 6shows the total utilities of sellers in the high-risk market with different elapse rate threshold values. We find that sellers can obtain a larger utility using the allocation policy with a small value of unsatisfiability threshold in the high-risk market. Allocation policies with a large unsatisfiability threshold deteriorate utility of the sellers with an increase in elapse rate threshold, because lower matching rates in these conditions (as shown in Fig. 4) cause great losses to the sellers through the perished goods.Fig. 7shows the total utilities of buyers in the high-risk market. This graph reveals that buyers can obtain much larger utilities than sellers. It is also shown that allocation policies with a small unsatisfiability threshold value can improve buyers’ utility with larger elapse rate threshold values. However, allocation policies with a large unsatisfiability threshold value degrade buyers’ utility with larger elapse rate threshold values because low matching rates in these conditions cause loss of resale opportunities for buyers.Fig. 8presents the social utilities in the high-risk market. Since sellers’ utilities are much smaller than buyers’ utilities in the high-risk market, this graph is similar to that of buyers’ utilities.With these results shown in the above graphs, we setUat 0.0 andEto 0.9 for maximizing the utilities of sellers and buyers in the high-risk market.Fig. 9presents average matching rates of online DA in the market with a low risk of trade failures. In comparison with Fig. 4, it is clear that matching rates in the low risk market are higher than those in the high-risk market. From the graph, we find that allocation policies with a small unsatisfiability threshold value achieve perfect matching rates when the elapse rate threshold value is larger than 0.3. The graph also reveals that allocation policies with a large unsatisfiability threshold value deteriorate matching rates as the elapse rate threshold value becomes larger.Fig. 10presents average clearing prices of online DA in the market with a low risk of trade failures. The graph shows that for allocation policies with a small unsatisfiability threshold value, the market-clearing price is stable at the low price range without regard to the values of elapse threshold. This suggests that in the low risk market, criticality-based allocation policies can easily match low-valuation asks with low-valuation bids without keeping a pool of bids waiting to be matched.Fig. 11shows the total utilities of sellers in the low-risk market with different elapse rate threshold values. We find that the sellers’ utilities are similar for all allocation policies and various elapse rate threshold values in the low-risk market, except the case of price-based allocation with large elapse rate threshold values. The possible reason for these results is that in the low-risk market sellers do not suffer from the loss of perished goods and clearing prices of the market are stable as shown in Fig. 10.Fig. 12shows the total utilities of buyers in the low-risk market. This graph reveals that buyers can obtain much larger utilities than sellers. It is also shown that allocation policies with a large unsatisfiability threshold value reduce buyers’ utility with larger elapse rate threshold values. These damages to the buyer’s utility are larger than those to the seller’s utility because the buyers suffer from both the increase in clearing prices, as shown in Fig. 10, and loss of resale opportunities caused by trade failures.Fig. 13presents the total utilities of all the agents in the low-risk market. Since sellers’ utility is much smaller than buyers’ utility in the low-risk market, this graph is similar to that of the buyers’ utility.With these results shown in the above graphs, we setUat 0.0 andEat 0.9 for maximizing the utilities of sellers and buyers in the low-risk market. It should be noted that these settings are the same as those in the high-risk market, implying that in the spot market for perishable goods, the allocation policy should take the criticality of bids into consideration and save matching judgments until the departure time of the bids.Understanding the interaction among agents with various bidding strategies is important in market design to ensure favorable market properties such as efficiency and stability. The Nash equilibrium is an appropriate solution concept for understanding and characterizing the strategic behavior of self-interested agents. However, computing the exact Nash equilibria is intractable for a dynamic market with non-deterministic aspects such as our online DA market. Therefore, we evaluate the market design by computing the Nash equilibria across the restricted strategy space through simulations (Walsh et al. 2002).Sellers and buyers in the B2B market for perishable goods have different utilities (as explained in Section 2.2) and adopt different bidding strategies (as shown in Section 4.1) for maximizing their utility. In the experiments, we perform a limited strategic analysis by looking for Nash equilibria between restricted types of sellers and buyers based on the simplified market model in which five agents on the seller and buyer side are homogeneous and follow the same pure strategy. The results obtained in the experiments are not comprehensive, but the degree of success achieved in predicting agent behavior and market outcomes can be used as a benchmark against which more sophisticated mechanisms of online DA can be judged.Tables 4 and 5show the payoff matrix between sellers and buyers in the high-risk market and the low-risk market, respectively. In the experiments, we set the value of parameters in the allocation policy as decided in Section 5:Uto 0.0 andEto 0.9. Seller agents adopt four biding strategies—MOD, MONO, TT, and ZIA, and buyer agents use three strategies—MONO, TT, and ZIA. Each cell in the tables represents the result of interaction between the sellers and buyers with the corresponding strategy. The cell is separated into two parts: the upper part of the cell shows the average matching rate and the average clearing price, and the bottom left corner in the lower part of the cell reveals the average and standard deviation (inside parentheses) of the utility of seller agents (refer to Eq. (2)) and the top right corner shows those of utility of buyer agents (refer to Eq. (3)).Table 4 shows the payoff matrix in the high-risk market shown in Fig. 2. In this market, when the sellers use the MOD strategy – claiming 0 valuation for their goods as they do in the conventional market, the matching rate is 100% and the total utility is 79,200.0 regardless of the buyers’ strategy.In Table 4, two cells in gray, which correspond to the strategy profiles (MONO, ZIA) and (TT, TT) can be considered to be Nash equilibria in the market, when the value of standard deviation is taken into account. Between them, Nash equilibrium (TT, TT) achieves the higher total utility on average (i.e., 79,088.3 vs 75,603.6), which is close to the result when sellers adopt the MOD strategy (i.e., 79,200.0). Although it is difficult for the sellers to make profits in the high-risk market, Nash equilibrium (TT, TT) achieves much larger sellers’ utility (i.e., 47.6) than the other Nash equilibrium (MONO,ZIA) (i.e., −15,623.3). Hence, Nash equilibrium (TT, TT) is preferable to the other Nash equilibrium (MONO, ZIA) not only because it saves the agents the cost of reporting strategically for more profits in the market, but also because it achieves a higher total utility and fairer utility distribution among sellers and buyers.Table 5 shows the payoff matrix in the low-risk market shown in Fig. 3. The payoff matrix shows that considering the value of standard deviation, the three strategy profiles (MONO, ZIA), (TT, MONO) and (TT, ZIA) can be regarded as Nash equilibria. Among the strategies in those Nash equilibria, sellers prefer the TT strategy because it can achieve higher utility for them regardless of buyers’ strategy. And when sellers use the TT strategy, buyers lose incentive to adopt the ZIA strategy due to the resultant low utility and large deviation. Therefore, the best strategy for the sellers in this market is the TT strategy, and the best response of the buyers to the sellers’ TT strategy is adopting the MONO strategy. It should be noted that considering the value of standard deviation, buyers’ utility in the strategy profile (TT, MONO) does not significantly differ from the buyers’ utility in the adjacent cell corresponding to the strategy profile (TT, TT). Hence, the buyers have a large possibility of choosing the TT strategy in the low-risk market.From the results of above experiments, we find that our market mechanism for perishable goods succeeds in leading the sellers and buyers to behave truthfully for maximizing their utilities in both the high-risk market and the low-risk market.We evaluate effectiveness of the criticality-based allocation policy by comparing the experimental results with those of the conventional price-based allocation policy.Tables 6 and 7present the payoff matrices between sellers and buyers when the price-based allocation rule is adopted to the high-risk market shown in Fig. 2 and the low-risk market shown in Fig. 3, respectively. We implement the price-based allocation policy by setting the value of the unsatisfiability thresholdUto ∞ and the value of the elapse rate thresholdEto 0.0.Table 6 shows that the strategy profile (MONO, MONO) is the only Nash equilibrium in the payoff matrix. In comparison with the most prospective Nash equilibrium (TT, TT) of the criticality-based allocation rule with the high-risk market in Table 4, Nash equilibrium (MONO, MONO) of the price-based allocation rule achieves a lower total utility (i.e., 75,603.6 vs 79,086.3) and less fair utility distribution among sellers and buyers with a lower matching rate (i.e., 93% vs 100%).The payoff matrix in Table 7 shows that considering the value of standard deviation, the two strategy profiles (MONO, MONO) and (TT, TT) can be regarded as Nash equilibria and there is no explicit superiority among them. In comparison with the most prospective Nash equilibrium (TT, MONO) of the criticality-based allocation rule with the low-risk market in Table 5, both Nash equilibria of the price-based allocation rule achieve a lower total utility (i.e., 108,080.9 and 108,173.4 vs 110,875.8) and one of them results in less fair utility distribution among sellers and buyers with a lower seller utility (i.e., 1,295.1 vs 14,326.3).From the above results, we find that our market mechanism with the criticality-based allocation rule outperforms the conventional market mechanism with the price-based allocation rule in terms of market efficiency and fair utility distribution in both the high-risk market and the low-risk market.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We developed an online DA mechanism for the spot market of perishable goods to achieve efficient and fair allocations among traders by considering the loss from trade failures. We explained that sellers have a high risk of losing money by trade failures because their goods are perishable and must be produced in advance to compensate for their unsteady yield and unpredictable quality. To reduce trade failures in the spot markets for perishable goods, our DA mechanism prioritizes the bids that have a smaller chance of being matched in their time period. Experimental results using multi-agent simulation showed that our DA mechanism was effective in promoting truthful behavior on the part of traders for realizing efficient and fair allocations between sellers and buyers in both the high-risk market and the low-risk market.The experiment results reported in this paper are very limited for any comprehensive conclusion on the design of online DA for perishable goods. For this purpose, we need to investigate other types of bidding practices such as lotting strategies and test them in a wider variety of experimental settings. Additionally, behavior of human subjects in the market must be examined carefully to evaluate the effectiveness of the designed mechanism. Furthermore, the current mechanism can be improved by incorporating some knowledge about future bids statistically predicted from past bidding records.As an application of our online DA mechanism, we are currently developing an e-marketplace for trading fishery products in Japan (Miyashita 2013). Fishery trades in Japan is a billion-dollar market, but only local traders participate in the fishery markets because the highly perishable nature of the fishery products prevents their trade from being open to wider participants (Guillotreau and Jiménez-Toribio 2011). This leads to low incomes for the fishermen and collapse of the local fishery industries. We hope our online DA mechanism will contribute in promoting the successful deployment of electronic markets for fisheries and improve the welfare of fishermen by attracting more traders from all parts of the world. To develop a real-life market, we still need to extend our market model with regard to practical aspects of trading: enabling a market maker to make proper profits, making volume discounts for buyers, handling limited supplies by sellers, building traders’ loyalty and so on (Standing et al. 2010). We are investigating whether some assumptions in our model may impact the external validity of the mechanism by applying the developed system to the experimental fishery trades. It is our future work to develop the market mechanism that can be applied to realistic trades of fishery products.