@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Dynamic security consideration in multiobjective electricity markets

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Presenting a new multi-objective model for electricity energy market clearing.Considering dynamic security aspect of the power system.Offer cost of generating units and Corrected Transient Energy Margin (CTEM) are considered as objectives.Multi-Objective Genetic Algorithm (MOGA) is utilized to solve the multi-objective market clearing problem.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Electricity energy market clearing,Multi-Objective Genetic Algorithm (MOGA),Corrected Transient Energy Margin (CTEM),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
After electricity energy market clearing, the network may be operated with a low transient stability margin because of hitting security limits or increasing the contribution of risky participants. Therefore, a new multi-objective model for electricity energy market clearing, considering dynamic security aspect of the power system, is proposed. Indeed, in addition to the economical aspects of electricity markets, i.e. offer cost of generating units, linearized Corrected Transient Energy Margin (CTEM) of system is also considered as new objective function of market clearing problem. A Multi-Objective Genetic Algorithm (MOGA) is utilized to solve the multi-objective market clearing problem. The New England test system is used to demonstrate the performance of the proposed method.indices of busnumber of system busesnumber of system unitsindex for Pareto optimal solutionindex of objective functionsa binary variable indicating that the unit of ith bus accepted or not in the energy marketenergy output of the unit at ith busbid price of the unit at ith bus for energynumber of credible contingenciesthe sensitivity of CTEM with respect to the generation of unit j (PGj)the system CTEM at the base casethe system CTEM after a little change ΔPGjapplied in the generation of the unit j with respect to the base casevoltage magnitude of the ith busupper and lower limits of voltage magnitude of ith bus, respectivelyreactive power output of the unit at ith busupper and lower limits of active power of the unit at ith bus, respectivelyupper and lower limits of reactive power of the unit at ith bus, respectivelyactive and reactive loads of ith bus, respectivelydifference between voltage angles of buses i and jmagnitude of element located in ith row and jth column of the admittance matrix of the power systemangle of element located in ith row and jth column of the admittance matrix of the power systemmagnitude of apparent power flow of branch between ith and jth busesapparent power flow capacity of branch between ith and jth buses

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Electricity market emergence has basically reformed the situation for maintaining reliable and secure power supplies. Growing inter-regional trade has placed new demands on transmission systems, creating a more integrated and dynamic network environment with new real-time challenges for reliable and secure transmission system operation. These operational challenges are increased as additional transmission capacity is absorbed [1]. Due to increasingly more vital role of electric energy in all over the world, its security remains to be the most important feature of power systems operation which cannot be compromised in a market-driven approach [2]. Accordingly, management of system security needs to keep improving to maintain reliable electricity services in this more dynamic operating environment. The challenges raise fundamental issues for policymakers. An effective policy response should also consider how best to employ market-based approaches to match regulatory arrangements to strengthen system security at least cost.Power system security assessment refers to analysis and methods used to security evaluation of a system, based on pre-established criteria. Depending on modeling and used techniques, security assessment can be classified as static or dynamic. Static security is related to a stability point of the system, where voltage of buses and thermal limits of transmission lines are in an acceptable range while considering N−1 contingency states. Regularly, static security is assessed using load flow algorithms. Dynamic security is a more complicated issue and it consists of different types of stability, including transient, voltage and small-signal [3]. This paper implements a methodology for power systems dynamic security assessment in market environment focusing on transient stability. Traditionally, transient stability assessment has been performed using full time-domain simulations from the pre-contingent state to the post-contingent state [4]. Regarding static security considerations in electricity market clearing tools, different indices (including voltage security margin, voltage drop and overloading index) have been incorporated in the market clearing framework to account for static security using multiobjective optimization in [5]. In [6,7], security-constrained models including the line flow constraints with pre-specified nodal or area reserves, concerning static security, are considered. Also, Arroyo and Galiana [8] proposed a formulation for market clearing process in the form of an optimization problem that accounts for transmission flow limits (using DC load flow) and two types of reserves offered by both generators and loads. In [9], a multi-objective approach based on interior point method is used in an optimal power flow to optimize social welfare and the voltage security margin, simultaneously. It is noted that, considering static security cannot guarantee system security. Indeed, the power system may lose its stability in the transition period. On the other hand, many advances on dynamic security assessment have been observed on the last years, especially on methods associated to real-time [10,11]. There are two classifications for dynamic security assessment: time domain simulation [12,13] and direct methods [14]. Time domain simulation method is implemented by solving the state space differential equations and then it determines transient stability. Results of time-domain simulation are the most accurate and reliable ones with respect to other methods with the cost of higher computational burden and low speed. Also, time domain simulations method does not reveal any information about the degree of stability of the system [15]. In contrary, direct methods, such as the transient energy function (TEF) method, profit by high computational speed and ability of providing a security margin or index to evaluate the degree of stability. However, the method sometimes fails to yield a practical result because of non-convergence problems encountered in attempting to compute the relevant “unstable equilibrium point,” especially in the case of stressed systems [15]. To cope with this shortcoming, the hybrid approach which combines time-domain simulation and transient energy analysis has been proposed in [16]. However, as shown in [15] sometimes the hybrid approach may lead to unreliable results. Accordingly, the corrected hybrid method merging time-domain simulation and corrected transient energy function (CTEF) has been proposed in [15–17] to present a dynamic stability index called Corrected Transient Energy Margin (CTEM). An important feature of the CTEM is its linear relationship in the wide range of control variables such as generator power exchanges [15–17].Multi-objective mathematical programming (MMP) models in the deterministic framework [18] and stochastic framework [19] have been proposed for energy market clearing in our previous works. In these works, the objective functions of the MMP model consist of generation offer cost and static security indices including overload index, voltage drop index, and voltage security margin. Moreover, the epsilon-constraint method is used to solve the MMP problem in all of these works [18,19]. The new contribution of this paper with respect to our previous works and the other ones (especially [14]) is proposing multiobjective energy market clearing considering dynamic security aspect of power system. For this purpose, a linearized form of Corrected Transient Energy Margin (CTEM) of system is implemented as dynamic security index. Furthermore, multiobjective market clearing is solved using MOGA.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: in Section 2, the proposed MMP model for the market clearing problem, considering dynamic security aspects, is formulated in the form of a Mixed Integer Non-Linear Programming (MINLP) problem. Section 3 introduces MOGA approach for the MMP problem. In the next section, obtained results for the New England test system are presented and discussed to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed scheme. Some relevant conclusions are drawn in Section 5.To better illustrate the underlying ideas of the proposed MMP solution method, deterministic formulation is adopted in this paper. Also, we consider single-period scheduling without inter-temporal constraints (including ramp rate limits and minimum up/down time constraints), as this model is simpler to describe and analyze. However, the proposed model can be easily extended to the stochastic formulation with inter-temporal constraints based on the procedures presented in our previous work [19]. Considering these assumptions, the objective functions and constraints of the proposed MMP model are presented in the following subsections, respectively.In the energy market clearing, the objective function is to minimize energy offer cost(1)f1=∑i=1NBρie⋅PGiDue to the responsibility of ISOs in secure operation of power systems, it is an essential mission for ISOs to prevent the generation of critical generators to keep the transient stability of the power system after market clearing. Indeed, if the effect of generating units’ patterns on transient stability issues of power system is considered, the output results of market clearing would be more secure from transient stability viewpoint. Particularly, for the most probable contingencies and faults, the power system should be able to encounter with the faults without losing synchronism. In order to consider transient stability issues of power system, in the proposed energy market clearing framework, Corrected Transient Energy Function (CTEF) as a well-known and widely used transient stability index is utilized. Mathematical details and formulation of CTEM for the dynamic security enhancement in power-market systems can be found in [20].In theory, it is proved that CTEF is of conservation during post-fault transient period and there is no erratic nonlinearity exhibited on the variation of CTEM both for plant and inter-area mode disturbances [16]. Consequently, CTEM establishes a linear and proper criterion to evaluate transient stability. To derive the sensitivity of the CTEM with respect to each generation in the proposed multi-objective framework, the first order approximation (linear approximation) of the Taylor series around the operating point of the power system is used. In this paper, only the effect of generators on the CTEM is modeled. Since the CTEM retains linearity in a wide range with respect to several operating parameters such as fault clearing time, pool generation rescheduling, and curtailment of a bilateral transaction [20], the applied first order approximation yields enough accuracy. Using this approximation, the change in CTEM due to the generation shifts of congestion management can be expressed as follows:(2)ΔCTEM(PG1,PG2,…,PGN)=∑j=1N∂CTEM∂PGj⋅ΔPGj=∑j=1NSFj⋅ΔPGjwhere SFjrefers to the sensitivity of CTEM with respect to the generation of unit j (PGj). To obtain the sensitivity of the system CTEM with respect to each generation shift, the first order approximation of the Taylor series for the CTEM around the operating point of the power system is used. In other words, each sensitivity factor is approximated by its first order term based on the approximate linear relationships of CTEM with respect to generation shifts. To compute the sensitivity of the CTEM with respect to the generation of unit j, a small perturbation is applied to this generation. Then the change in CTEM is calculated. The CTEM sensitivity with respect to the generation of unit j (SFj) is obtained as:(3)∂CTEM∂PGj≈ΔCTEMΔPGj=CTEMj−CTEM0ΔPGj=SFjwhere CTEM0 is the network CTEM at the base case (before applying new market clearing results). Also, CTEMjshows the system CTEM after a little change ΔPGjin the generation of the unit j due to the new results of the market clearing with respect to the base case. It should be noted again that, CTEM0 and CTEMjare calculated on the basis of formulation presented in [20]. Hence, the final CTEM after changes in the results of energy market clearing with respect to the previous status of units can be given by:(4)f2=CTEM=CTEM0+ΔCTEMwhere CTEM0 is the CTEM value of power system before applying the new energy market clearing results. f2 is the second objective function that is maximized in the proposed MMP framework for market clearing problem such that the dynamic security is maximized. It should be noted that the power system model used for the proposed method is the AC model, which is more accurate than the DC model. Furthermore, there is no limitation for the degree of detail in dynamic modeling of power system components such as generators in time domain simulation.(5)PGi−PDi=∑j=1NBViVjYijcos(δij−θij)i=1,…,NB(6)QGi−QDi=∑j=1NBViVjYijsin(δij−θij)i=1,…,NB(7)Zi⋅PGmin,i≤PGi≤Zi⋅PGmax,i(8)Zi⋅QGmin,i≤QGi≤Zi⋅QGmax,iEqs. (5) and (6) refer to AC power flow equations. Also, inequalities (7) and (8) permit PGiand QGito be either zero (Zi=0) or at a value between the minimum and maximum range of the unit output (Zi=1). In other words, Zibinds generating units output to their operating limits.(9)Sij≤S¯ijFor all branches(10)Vmin,i≤Vi≤Vmax,iFor all busesIn the above constraints voltage of buses and branches’ flows can be calculated using AC power flow formulations.Considering the binary variables Ziin (7) and (8) results in a MINLP problem which can be solved, for instance, by using the Standard Branch-and-Bound algorithm [21]. The main decision variable of multi-objective optimization problem is PGi. It is noted that the proposed MINLP formulation for the energy market clearing includes the objective functions (1) and (4) subject to constraints (5)–(10). Also, the decision variables of the multiobjective optimization problem can be listed as: PGi, QGi, Zi, Viand δi.In Multi-objective Mathematical Programming (MMP) there is more than one objective function and there is no single optimal solution that simultaneously optimizes all the objective functions. In these cases, the decision makers are looking for the “most preferred” solution. In MMP, the concept of optimality is replaced with that of efficiency or Pareto optimality. The efficient (or Pareto optimal, non-dominated, non-inferior) solution is the solution that cannot be improved in one objective function without deteriorating its performance in at least one of the rest.A general multi-objective optimization problem can be expressed by (11). It is assumed that there exist k objective functions which will be minimized [22,23].(11)MinX∈SF(X)=(f1(X),f2(X),…,fk(X))TA general form of problem, F is non-linear and multi-modal, and S might be defined by non-linear constraints containing both continuous and discrete decision variables.Definition 1DominatingVector y will be dominated by vector w, if:Vector X∈S is a Pareto-optimal solution, if and only if there is no vector Y∈S, for which F(Y)=(f1(Y), f2(Y), …, fk(Y)) dominates F(X)=(f1(X), f2(X), …, fk(X)).The space in Rkis well-known as the Pareto optimal frontier ρ, and is formed by the objective vectors of Pareto-optimal solutions. Obviously any solution needs to belong to the Pareto optimal set if possible. Other terminologies such as non-dominated or efficient solutions are also used in literature instead of Pareto optimal solutions. A graphical representation of this concept is illustrated in Fig. 1.In Fig. 1,f1∗andf2∗will be used to denote the individual minima of each corresponding objective function, and the utopian solution is defined asF∗=(f1∗,f2∗)T. It is noted that for the case of k objective functionsf1∗,f2∗,…,fk∗will be used to denote the individual minima of each objective function, and the utopian solution isF∗=(f1∗,f2∗,…,fk∗)T. As F* simultaneously minimizes all objectives, it is an ideal solution that is rarely feasible.Pareto optimal front solutions, for compromising between conflicting objectives, can be obtained using Multi-Objective Genetic Algorithm (MOGA). A genetic algorithm is a search technique based on a specific class of evolutionary algorithms. It is capable of solving various kinds of constrained/unconstrained optimization problems in which the objective function is discontinuous, non-differentiable, stochastic, or highly nonlinear. Standard optimization algorithms such as gradient based methods are not appropriate for such problems. GAs use operators inspired by evolutionary biology such as mutation, natural selection, and crossover [24,25].GA-based multi-objective optimization approaches can generally be categorized as non-Pareto and Pareto-based methods. Although non-Pareto techniques usually converge to a subset of the Pareto-optimal frontier, a significant portion of the Pareto set is left unexplored. The so-called Pareto-based techniques are generally categorized as non-dominated and Pareto storing approaches.The concept of the non-dominated sorting for ranking a search population based on Pareto optimality has been presented in [25]. In this approach, the non-dominated individuals in the populations are identified, given the rank 1 and purged from the population. At the next stage of the algorithm, the same procedure is repeated for the reduced population, which means the non-dominated individuals in the reduced population are found, given the rank 2 and eliminated from the population. This process, as shown in Fig. 2, is repeated until all the individuals are ranked.On the other hand, Fonseca and Fleming [26] have proposed the so-called Pareto-optimal storing procedure in which ranking is carried out based on the degree of dominance of each individual. In other words, the number of population members that dominate an individual defines the ranking of the individual (see Fig. 3). The rank 1 is given to those non-dominated individuals. In order to score individuals in the population, the rankings need to be scaled. To reduce the solution set to those that satisfy certain attribute values, goal levels can also be utilized.Advantages of the Pareto storing procedure related to the non-dominated sorting approach are the fast selection and convergence. Therefore, Pareto storing procedure in [26] has been implemented in this paper.Here, two-point crossover and roulette wheel selection [25] have been utilized to generate the next generation. Additionally, in order to prevent fast convergence of the population to a specific value and getting stuck in a local optimum, adaptive mutation rate Pmhas been used. For the better illustration of the MOGA procedure, the flowchart of the approach is illustrated in Fig. 4. It should be noted that the MOGA procedure will be terminated when a fixed number of generations is reached.After obtaining the Pareto optimal solutions using MOGA, the decision-maker needs to choose one best compromise solution according to the specific preference for different applications. Goal attainment method is a powerful tool for finding the best compromise solution among Pareto set in multi-objective optimization problems and can be used in non-convex as well as convex problems [27–33]. In this method a weighted vector w depends on the direction movement toward the predetermined objectives and also goal vector y for optimization are considered. To find the best compromise between conflicting objectives the following problem needs to be solved [34],(13)minαsubject to:y+αw≥f(z)w∈Λε,z∈χwhere α is the scalar variable without any sign limit and χ is the set of feasible (Pareto) solutions and(14)Λε=w∈Rmwi≥ε,∑i=1mwi=1,ε≥0The mechanism of goal attainment method for a case with two objectives has been depicted in Fig. 5. Goal vector y and direction of vector w are obtained from the selected values of decision maker. The direction of vector y+αw can be obtained using known vectors y and w. Therefore, problem (13) means finding an acceptable point on this vector in the objective space in such a way that the obtained point is the closest point to the origin. It is obvious that the optimum solution of Eq. (13) is a point in which the vector y+αw reaches the solution region F* in objective space F.In order to calculate the goals of each objective function in the goal attainment approach, the single objective optimization results are needed. In other words, to calculate the goal of each objective function for a MMP problem with p competing objective functions, the individual optima of the objective functions is calculated.The proposed method is examined on the New-England power system, a well-known test system with 39 buses, 34 lines, 2 shunt capacitors, 12 transformers, 19 loads, and 10 machines, since its static and dynamic data are available. The single line diagram of the test system is illustrated in Fig. 6. Data of the test system are taken from [35]. Table 1shows the additional data of the New-England test system including units bid data and their operating limits. Total system demand is 61.505pu [35]. Here, Sbase=100 MVAR. In simulations, all loads are considered as 50% constant current and 50% constant impedance. Also, generator reactive limits are taken into account.The dynamic behavior of the test system (for CTEM calculations) is investigated using the PSS/E 30.00 software package [36], developed by the PTI Inc., USA. To get more accurate results, the integration time step is reduced to 0.1ms. The MOGA-based multi-objective optimization problem is modeled in MATLAB software package. Parameter setting for this method is presented in Table 2.In order to calculate CTEM one contingency is considered, as described in [20]. It is noted that in the proposed framework, multiple faults and different most probable faults of the system can be modeled as extra objective functions. Indeed for each probable fault, CTEM calculation can be implemented in the PSS software. Based on the results of each fault, different CTEM objective functions can be made. Here, dynamic security is evaluated for a three-phase short circuit fault at bus 26 cleared by tripping line 25–26 as proposed in [15]. The fault is applied at t=1s and cleared at tcl=1.2s with the duration of 0.2s. In this situation, generators at buses 31 through 38 are determined as advanced ones while generators at buses 30 and 39 are non-advanced [20]. Using the mentioned approach in [20], the CTEM for base case (refers to the generation dispatch results in [37] as shown in Table 3) is determined as 0.12828pu. To get the sensitivity of CTEM to each individual generator, based on the procedure described in Section 2.1, a little change of ΔPGj=−10MW=−0.1pu is applied to each generator and CTEM is again calculated. It should be noted that the Gen. 39 as the slack generator compensates the generation shift and losses. The results are shown in Table 3, where SFjrepresents the sensitivity of CTEM with respect to generation of unit j. As seen in Table 3, the sensitivity of CTEM is negative for the advanced generators 31–38. This means that the CTEM is improved if the generated power is shifted from generators 31–38 to generator 39. Among the advanced generators, generator 38 is the most sensitive with the sensitivity of −4.9374 that is also confirmed by [17], too. No CTEM sensitivity is considered for the slack bus 39 (in other words, any change in the generation of bus 39 is compensated by itself).In order to study the proposed MMP solution, the results of the multi-objective market clearing of energy are compared in three cases as follows:Case I: Using the single-objective optimization considering offer cost as objective function.Case II: Using the single-objective optimization considering CTEM as objective function.Case III: Using multiobjective framework implementing MOGA along with goal attainment approach.It is noted that for cases I and II, Genetic Algorithm (GA) is adopted to solve optimization problem. Also, for different values for w, case III is studied.Using the GA, the single objective optimization results for cases I and II are shown in Table 4. The results of the first row in terms of $ relates to the objective function f1. The second row values, in terms of pu, refer to the obtained results for f2. As seen from Table 4, the single objective market clearing with f1 as the objective function results in the minimum cost. However, low stability margin (CTEM=28.5pu) is obtained in case I. By the individual optimization of f2, much better stability margin (45.82pu) is obtained but with more cost (195,988$). The convergence characteristics of two objective functions have been shown in Fig. 7.Scheduling of units is shown in Fig. 8for different cases. From Fig. 8, it can be observed that the units with low bid prices for energy (i.e. units located at buses 34, 35, and 36) are fully committed in the energy market.The number of efficient solutions of the multiobjective programming obtained by MOGA is 36 Pareto optimal solutions (which 6 Pareto solutions of them are dissimilar and 30 Pareto solutions are similar) over 100 iterations for initial population size of 1000. Based on the results of the MOGA, the Pareto set is illustrated in Fig. 9and Table 5. It is noted that the number of Pareto optimal solutions can be increased by increasing the MOGA iterations. For instance, there are 27 different Pareto optimal solutions over 500 iterations for initial population size of 1000.For the sake of conciseness, a more detailed comparison between the single objective problem (cases I and II) and multiobjective case (case III), based on the most preferred solution obtained by goal attainment approach, is presented in Table 4. It is noted that among 6 efficient solutions in the multiobjective case, one of these solutions is the most preferred for the MMP problem considering the importance degree of each objective functions. The goal attainment method optimally selects this most preferred compromise solution among the Pareto optimal solutions of each case. To compare the cases I, II and III, two sets of weight factors including w1=w2=0.50 (the same importance for all objective functions) as state 1 and w1=0.1, w2=w3=0.9 (nine times more importance for f1 compared with f2) are considered in Table 4 as state 2. It should be noted that the 1/w is considered as weighting factors in the goal attainment approach. The scheduling results of the generating units for the multiobjective problem are depicted in Fig. 8 for two states of case III.Some interesting observations can be inferred from Table 4 and Fig. 8 as follows:-The CTEM f2 in case III is greater than case I (45.78 and 44.19 for states 1 and 2 of case III versus 28.5 for case I), indicating significant enhancement of the system dynamic security level with considering the dynamic security index as an extra objective function in the multiobjective optimization problem.It is noted that the market clearing in the form of multiobjective optimization framework changes the outputs of generating units as indicated in Fig. 8. In this regard, the capacity of some units (such as units 1, 3,7 and 9) are decreased due to the security concerns which reflect the negative effect of these units on the CTEM value (note to the negative sensitivity factors of these units in Table 3). On the other hand, due to increase in the energy output of units 2, 5, 8 and 10 with high bid price, total cost of energy in the case III-1 is increased compared with case I (137,124$ against 104,614$ for cases III-1 and I, respectively).while dynamic security index of case III-1 is improved with respect to the case I (28.5 against 45.78 for cases I and III-1, respectively).The augmented offer cost in case III is slightly more than that of case I, reflecting the additional cost of considering dynamic security index as the extra objective function. In other words, the additional cost of case III with respect to the case I can be considered as the cost of enhancing the dynamic security level of the power system.With the both sets of weight factors, the proposed MMP solution method outperforms MOGA technique. Although the different values for the objective functions, the most preferred solution of case III-1 has better CTEM value with respect to the case III-2. In contrast, the offer cost of case III-2 is much lower than case III-1 because of increasing the importance of the offer cost of case III-2.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
After using the results of single objective market clearing optimization problem, the system security level may be low because of hitting security limits or increasing the share of critical participants in the market. To deal with dynamic security concerns of power systems, the multiobjective market clearing framework is adopted in this paper. Using the proposed multi-objective programming, competing objective functions of generating units’ offer cost and dynamic security index are concurrently optimized. The Corrected Transient Energy Margin is employed as index to be incorporated into the multi-objective market clearing of electricity energy auction. Finding the most preferred solution is a vital issue for the MMP problems. In this paper, a MOGA is implemented to handle multiobjective optimization problem for obtaining Pareto set. Using the proposed framework, the system operator can both enhance economical signal of energy market and technical index of the dynamic security and offer more efficient solutions. Furthermore, the goal attainment approach is considered to select best compromised solution among Pareto optimal solutions. The research work is under way in order to enhance more security indices (e.g., small signal stability margin and frequency stability margin) in the multi-objective model and extend the proposed multiobjective optimization problem to stochastic framework. Besides, a significant portion of the Pareto set can be explored by using hybrid multiobjective optimization techniques such as GA+ANN, GA+PSO, GA+SA or GA+HS and others. Accordingly, in the future works, hybrid multiobjective algorithm is considered.