@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The race to dominate the mobile payments platform: Entry and expansion strategies

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Investigates various factors that determine the success of a mobile payments solution.Builds a framework to analyze the entry and expansion strategies of digital payment solutions providers.Reports that the timing of entry of the first-mover speeds up the time of entry of the early followers.Shows that the timing of expansion is of equal importance as the timing of entry.If the expansion is not executed within an appropriate amount of time, the firm-level competitive advantage will be weakened.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Digital payment platforms,Entry strategies,Expansion strategies,Financial services,Lock-in effects,Mobile payments,Multi-sided platforms,Network effects,Technology strategy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The payment market has been stable for a number of decades with well-defined roles (acquirers and issuers), profitable business models (the card schemes) and a dominant design in which the merchants absorb the costs associated with payments. However, numerous digital payment solutions, which rely on new disruptive technologies, are emerging on the payment market, transforming the payment area from being established into a state of flux. In this article, we investigate the various factors that determine the success of a given solution. To this end, we build a framework to analyze the entry and expansion strategies of the digital payment solutions. We claim that the timing of entry of the first-mover speeds up the timing of entry of the early follower, thus determining the order of entry. We also argue that the timing of expansion is of equal importance as the timing of entry. If the expansion is not executed within the optimal time, the previously gained competitive advantage can be annulled.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Disruptive innovation has been relative rare in the area of financial services with very few innovations remaining unique for long time (Gardner 2009). Only a small portion of financial services innovations have generated competitive advantage and been sustainable, as most of them were easily replicated by other banks.To illustrate the rapid imitation, consider the following examples. When the first credit card, Charg-IT, was introduced in 1946, it revolutionized the payment industry. It was soon replicated by Diners Club though, which offered its own Diners Club Credit Card in 1949. When Barclays Bank in the U.K. successfully introduced automated teller machines (ATMs) in 1967, the ATM was considered to be a potential source of competitive advantage for individual banks (Batiz-Lazo 2007). Soon, however, other banks also introduced ATM machines, annulling any competitive advantage for Barclays. History repeated itself when Security First Network Bank introduced for the first time Internet-based banking services (Cronin 1998). Although this was a breakthrough that significantly transformed the banking sector, the bank failed to obtain sustainable competitive advantage, as other banks entered the same market just a few months after.The next revolution in the financial services was heralded by the rapid spread and adoption of smartphones, which absorbed music players, navigation devices, and cameras, and now are set to incorporate payments. Mobile payments function as a digital platform (Kazan and Damsgaard 2013) and thus possess characteristics quite different from previous innovations in the finance area. The digitalization of services lowers significantly the barriers of entry, as digital solutions have significant economies of scale and are very easy to replicate and less costly. The digital platform’s scalability intensifies the competition between the different payment providers and makes the task of obtaining and maintaining competitive advantage in the digital payment area challenging.If innovative solutions can be replicated easily by competitors, the key determinant of success will be managing innovation with regard to the competitive dynamic environment and the ability to find additional sources of competitive advantage. Thus, in order to gain maximum value from the innovation, a platform owner should take into account some strategic implications with regards to entry and expansion strategies. The decision to enter the market either as a first-mover, or a late-follower is a strategic one and it influences the future ability to attract customers. Thus, we formulate the following research question: How do market entry and growth strategies determine the success of digital multi-sided payment platforms?To this end, we investigate the entry and growth strategies of three alternative digital payment platforms that were launched in the Danish market in a time span of just eight months. (See the Appendix for a general overview of the Danish payment market.) The three similar solutions have managed to achieve an adoption rate of approximately 40% of the adult population with one solution much bigger than the other two combined. Since the three players offer almost identical functionality and compete for the same customers (both consumers and merchants), their initial success or failure was determined by how and when they entered the market and how fast they managed to achieve a critical mass of adopters.Next, we outline the theoretical foundations of this research. Then we present briefly the three investigated solutions and apply to them our theoretical framework. In the final sections, we discuss our findings, offer some conclusions, and suggest promising areas for further research.A mobile payment involves the transfer of money from one party to another using some digital means via a mobile phone. Mobile payment apps typically are downloaded to a smartphone, and once they are set up with a bank account or attached to a credit card or a debit card, the solutions work seamlessly using a phone number as identifier and a PIN code to authorize the payment. For the purposes of this research, we make a distinction between a person-to-person payment (P2P) and a retail payment (C2B).Digital payment solutions function as digital platforms thta facilitate the direct interaction between multiple customer types affiliated with them (Hagiu and Wright 2011, Kazan and Damsgaard 2013, Staykova and Damsgaard 2014). Multi-sided platforms (MSPs) reduce search costs, create audiences, and save on shared costs by providing an infrastructure that can be used for many transactions between the different sides of the platform (Hagiu 2006). An important feature of platforms is that they exhibit network effects. With network effects, the value that users gain from a platform depends on the number of other users of the same type who join the same platform. This is known as same-side network effects. In addition, the number of users of a different type that join the platform create cross-side network effects (Hagiu and Halaburda 2013, Shapiro and Varian 1999).Platforms are also characterized by homing costs related to the adoption, operation, and other costs incurred due to platform affiliation (Armstrong 2006). Low homing costs presuppose that the offered systems are easy to use and adopt. Low homing costs imply that users will often multi-home. A good example of this is the payment card. Most people hold several credit and debit cards. Using the card (swiping, entering the PIN) is the same for the different card products, but each one of them brings with them different value in terms of charges, loyalty points, etc. High homing costs imply that users are more likely to stick to only one or a limited number of platforms. Thus, homing costs are tightly related to the concept of switching costs, which is anchored around lock-in effects. When users face high costs of switching from one technology to another, users are locked in (Shapiro and Varian 1999). Payment markets are usually characterized as markets with low switching costs. As lock-in is a dynamic concept, the switching costs can grow and shrink with time: they are not static.Although platforms have been around for hundreds of years, such as farmers markets (Evans 2009), the rapid spread of digital technologies and their integration in the everyday life has led to the development of digital platforms. Digital platforms are different from non-digital analog platforms, as they have unique characteristics (Tilson et al. 2013), such as platform generativity (Zittrain 2008) and evolvability (Sandberg et al. 2013). Digital payment platforms are scalable with high development costs and low marginal costs. Costs are almost fixed and operating margins increase with the platform adoption (Eisenmann 2002). This means that once the payment platform is developed, it costs very little to add and service additional users. Thus, payment platforms exhibit lower acquisition costs and economies of scale, as the fixed development costs can be spread over a growing revenue user base. Once a payment service has entered the market, the challenge is to attract as many users as possible and as fast as possible. The achievement of critical mass is important to ignite the growth of the platform as it provides a “thick enough” market (Evans 2009).The existing literature on platform entry strategies is rather scarce. Kim et al. (2013) investigate the platform entry strategies between an incumbent and a new entrant. Zhu and Iansiti (2012) examine the relative importance of platform quality, indirect network effects, and consumer expectations on the success of entrants in platform-based markets, whereas Seamans and Zhu (2013) analyze the responses to entry in multi-sided markets by studying the impact of Craigslist on local newspapers. Our study complements these studies by investigating the competitive entry of several digital payment platforms which are engaged in race to launch and win in a single market. Thus, we seek to explain the factors which determine the timing of entry of the first-mover as well as the impact of the first-mover’s entry on the timings of entry of its rivals. We also analyze how the timing of entry influences the mode of entry of a digital payment solution.Timing is considered to be the key for successful market entry (Thomas 1985). Estimating the most opportune time to enter a market is of vital importance, as it can bring significant competitive advantage. A firm’s ability to launch a product faster, before its competitors, is regarded as a source of competitive advantage as companies can use entry timing as an additional dimension to differentiate themselves from their rivals (Bhaskaran and Ramachandran 2006). A firm’s decision to enter a market can be attributed to different factors such as changes in the general economy, changes in customer preferences and evolution of the industry’s life cycle (Lilien and Yoon 1990).Entry decisions also depend on beliefs about how many rivals will enter the market (Linder 2013). For the purposes of this article, we try to define the strategic factors that drive entry-timing decisions under competition. We assume there are several solutions which are being developed simultaneously and are competing to enter the market. As timing decisions tend to be highly situation-specific (Thomas 1985), the timing of entry in a market with several rivals will reflect the competitive dynamics of the market. Competitive dynamics are conceptualized as the exchange of actions and responses between defender and attacker and are related to the likelihood and speed of a response (Chen et al. 2009, Young et al. 1996).The competitive market dynamics is shaped by the market signals sent by the various competitors. A new product preannouncement, an announcement that precedes an actual new product introduction, can be used as a tool to signal different intentions to the market (Robertson et al. 1995, Su and Rao 2010). A new product preannouncement provides information about a new product to competitors, who will then know the strategic direction of future competition (Rao and Su 2010). A study conducted by Heil and Robertson (1991) finds that competitive behavior is indeed influenced by signals sent by competitors.A new product preannouncement can be seen as an attempt to thwart competitive actions (Rabino and Moore 1995), but it can also encourage competitive reactions (Kohli 1992). Bhaskaran and Ramachandran (2006) argue that by committing to launch early, a firm can force a rival with similar technological expectations to reconsider its launch (accelerate or postpone). In this article, we investigate what signals the potential competitors in a market send to their rivals, and how these signals impact the behavior of the market actors, and in particular the timing of entry decisions.A new product preannouncement may have particular importance in markets characterized by network effects and switching costs (Eliashberg and Robertson 1988). When introducing a network effects product, preannouncing can lead to higher performance than not preannouncing as it can build an early lead to stimulate the positive feedback of network effects (Lee and O’Connor 2003). NPPs can also be used for cooperative purposes (seeking alliances, encouraging competitors to follow a specific product standard or encouraging complementary product design) (Lee and O’Connor 2003, Robertson et al. 1995). Thus, new product preannouncement actions may encourage indirect network effect in particular in connection to the development of complimentary products. new product preannouncements can also have the effect of gaining a faster takeoff by managing consumers’ expectations and thus, leading to rapid growth of an installed user base.New product preannouncements may also relate positively to the level of customer switching costs incurred in adoption (Eliashberg and Robertson 1988). If a consumer wants to switch from an old to a new product, the new product preannouncement may reduce the switching costs as customers will be aware of the new product launch and decrease their engagement with the old product. In a situation where several solutions compete to launch simultaneously, if a consumer has information about a possible release of rival’s solution, he or she may not be locked-in in the first-mover solution, thus keeping the consumer switching costs relatively low.The competitive dynamics can stir the market towards a race to launch with several digital payment platforms competing to enter the market. Thus, we try to explain whether the competitive dynamics may influence the timing of entry of the first-mover by reading the different signals which competitors send and analyzing their impact. We also argue that the timing of entry of the first-mover can send a signal to the other competitors, having an impact on the actual order of entry. Thus, we outline the impact of the first-mover’s entry into a digital payment market on the timing of entry of its rivals. In order to do that, we analyze the response times of entry of the early follower and late follower to the first-mover’s timing of entry. We assume that the timing of the early follower differs from the timing of the late followers. As late followers can rely on targeting only a limited market segment, they will be more likely to maximize consumer preferences (Vakratsas et al. 2003).The entry of the first-mover often triggers a response from its competitors who face a strategic choice when to enter into a market. Followers respond either by trying to reduce lead times of the first-mover by entering the market soon after the pioneer (Bowman and Gatignon 1995, Vakratsas et al. 2003), or by delaying their market entry in order to optimize performance (Levesque and Shepherd 2004). The greater the perceived threat posed by the first mover, the faster the follower’s response (Kuester et al. 1999).We investigate the order of entry in terms of whether the first-mover can gain substantial competitive advantage and whether it can sustain them over time or they can be nullified by later entrants.A follower’s response depends on whether a first-mover can enjoy significant competitive advantage upon entry. Thus, we assume that if a follower estimates that the pioneer accumulates competitive advantage, it is more likely to enter the market sooner. Scholars tend to disagree whether pioneers enjoy first-mover advantage when they enter a new market as some studies have found that late entrants have significant competitive advantage over pioneers. This includes fine-tuning the product as customers’ needs become more certain, learning from the mistakes of the first-mover and not spending too much resources on educating the customer about the new product (Christensen 1997, Evans 2003, Freeman 1997).In network industries, due to the presence of network effects, it makes sense for a company to invest heavily to gain first-mover advantage in order to get a significant lead (Eisenmann 2002, McIntyre and Subramaniam 2009). As Schilling (2002) points out, industries which exhibit network effects demonstrate strong path dependency effects, thus if a first-mover manages to get a large installed base which exhibits strong network effects, it will have a significant first-mover advantage over its rivals.In a network market, late entrants face a large installed user base of the first-mover, which often turns to be too difficult to compete with. As the digital platform markets are characterized by essential economies of scale, the large installed base of the pioneer will prevent its rivals from achieving the scale economies necessary to compete with the first-mover (Shapiro and Varian 1999). We argue that as the presence of strong network effects constitutes a barrier to entry for the followers and increased installed base can lead to less market entry (Norback et al. 2010), the timing of entry of the first-mover should send a signal to the competitors that they have to enter as soon as possible in order to prevent the first-mover from gathering a large installed base faster.Chatterjee and Wernerfelt (1991) argue that delayed entry is likely to reduce early-mover advantage in markets where switching costs or brand loyalty locks in customers. Delayed entry of the followers gives the first-mover a greater opportunity to lock in customers. First-mover advantage has a direct impact on the switching costs (Capone et al. 2013). High switching costs put late entrants at a disadvantage, because they must invest more resources into attract customers away from earlier entrants (Lieberman and Montgomery 1988). At the same time, low switching costs exhibiting by the solution offered by the first-mover may reduce the first-mover advantage of a pioneer.On the other hand, Evans (2003) argues that many early entrants in platform-based markets ultimately do not retain their leadership positions, thus giving evidence against first-mover advantage in network markets. He claims that, despite network effects, many platform industries have several overlapping competing platforms and most have multi-homing on at least one side. Zhu and Iansiti (2012) also found that an entrant with any quality advantage can gain market share over time, even when competing with an incumbent with a very large installed-base advantage.A pioneer is subject to advantage and disadvantage by being the first in the market (Porter 1985). The key is whether the advantage gained by the first-mover is sustainable over time (Lieberman and Montgomery 1988). By mapping out the different response times to the pioneer’s market entry, we will seek to provide evidence for the presence of first-mover advantage in a digital payments market, whether it can be annulled, and whether and how such advantage can be sustained over time.Rodríguez-Pinto et al. (2008) argue that, apart from deciding on the timing of the entry, a company has also to decide on the product’s positioning (what to launch) and the scope of the market that it aims to cover (where to launch it). In this article, we focus primarily on product positioning, by trying to analyze what the design of the platform upon entry is and how this influences its evolution.Hagiu (2014) defines the design of a platform in connection to the number of functionalities and features it offers as well as the ability to maintain the right trade-off between the features, in order not to be at odds with the different sides of the platform. Kazan and Damsgaard (2013) identified three digital payment platform designs: platform design (closed versus open), technology design (evolutionary versus revolutionary) and business design (envelopment versus Schumpeterian innovation). The design of the digital payment platforms also evolves with the development and maturity of the platforms. Staykova and Damsgaard (2014) suggest that digital payment platforms transform from one-sided to two-sided and multi-sided throughout the course of their evolution.For the purposes of this article, we adopt the distinction made in the DPIE model (Staykova and Damsgaard 2014) between one-sided, two-sided and multi-sided platforms. We argue that new digital payment solutions should enter as one-sided, and then transform into two-sided and eventually into multi-sided platforms. If a company enters a completely different market from its current business, it may start by selling a product on a one-sided platform. As Hagiu (2006) points out, it is not unusual to observe a one-sided business being transformed into a multi-sided platform. Thus, a platform owner may enter the market by offering a solution as a completely new one-sided platform or extend the already existing solution by turning it from a one-sided business (service, product) into a one-sided platform.A one-sided platform consists of the platform provider and just one distinctive group of users who are subject to strong same-side network effects. Thus, the value for one user who participates in the platform increases when more users join the platform. One-sided platforms also allow the incumbents to mobilize their already existing user base and engage them. As Evans (2009) points out on platforms with same-side effects, users can easily change roles. User A can today send a fax to user B. The next day user A can be the receiver and user B the sender. Even though it seems there are two groups, namely the user and the sender, they can switch their roles easily. Thus, it is not possible to conclude that they form two distinct groups. As one-sided platforms cater to a specific closed group, they do not offer a large number of functionalities. However, unlike two-sided platforms, which have to bring together the two sides on the board (e.g., consumers and merchants simultaneously), the one-sided platforms are easier to manage. Thus, they are considered a good entry strategy especially in an uncertain market. Due to their limited functionality and low switching costs, they are also easier to attack, making it vital for them to continue evolving with a regular speed.In the above sections, we hypothesized that the competitive dynamics can have an impact on the timing of entry of the first-mover, as well as that the entry of the first-mover can impact the timing of entry of the other competitors. (See Fig. 1.)We also investigate whether there is a connection between the timing of entry and the design of entry. If a first-mover is pressured to enter as soon as possible, the pioneer may enter with a simplistic solution. At the same time, if a follower decides to enter shortly after the pioneer’s entry with a short response time, it may not have the time to develop a complex solution. The follower’s dilemma is whether to imitate all or a portion of the first-mover’s innovation (Semadeni and Anderson 2009).Many platforms that have entered multi-sided markets have pursued get-big-fast strategy (Eisenmann 2002). The main logic behind the strategy is to target empty territories, which are currently not serviced by anyone, rather than try to capture it later when others will have already settled there. Thus, the strategy is associated with aggressive customer acquisition where the platform owners have tried to acquire customers that are not yet targeted by existing solutions.A critical threshold for the survival of a digital payment platform after its launch is its ability to achieve a critical mass of users (Staykova and Damsgaard 2014). If a critical mass of installed users is not reached, the specific payment solution will not be deemed viable and probably will be phased out. Evans (2009) also recognized this problem. He states that critical mass is necessary for achieving a substantial growth of a platform. In order to reach critical mass, a platform first has to solve the so-called chicken-and-egg problem – to bring both sides of the platform on board. Many platforms try to solve this problem simultaneously by directly launching two-sided platforms. This, however, creates problems, as the price-side with the merchants usually has to invest in the proposed decision without knowing whether the consumers will adopt the solution, thus driving high homing costs.Get-big-fast strategy is successful when the network effects are strong, scale economies are significant and retention rates are high (Eisenmann 2002). Network effects alone do not guarantee high barriers to entry though; high switching costs are also necessary on one or all sides of the MSPs (Hagiu and Halaburda 2013). The successful growth of a platform is also attributed to the presence of high lock-in effects (Shapiro and Varian 1999). In this article, we argue that the survival of digital payment platforms also depends on the timing of expansion and growth of the platform itself.Staykova and Damsgaard (2014) argue that the growth of digital payment platforms should be incremental, as it is recommended for a platform to enter as one-sided and then to evolve into two-sided and multi-sided form. Due to its one-sided nature, initially the digital payment platform offers limited number of features, which implies the presence of low switching costs and low lock-in effects during the initial entry stage. In this case, the timing of expansion is critical for ensuring the success of the platform as the platform has to gain strong lock-in effects by introducing new features and new sides.The expansion strategy has to be executed with the right speed in order for a company not to lose its competitive advantage. Entering a market as a one-sided platform helps to gain momentum, but staying as such for too long is not only costly, but also has the potential to stagnate the growth of the platform. If the platform owners miss the optimal time during which they have to expand the platform, they will miss an opportunity to reinforce their market supremacy, and that may neutralize their first-mover advantage.The expansion, by adding new sides and features, by the first-mover sends a signal to its competitors, who will most likely respond to the pioneer’s move. By measuring the response time of the followers to the expansion of the pioneer, we will be able to analyze whether the first-mover can sustain its first-mover advantage. At the same time, we will also be able to outline the strategy that the followers choose to adhere to – either imitation or innovation – when expanding. We then compare the response times of the follower to both entry and expansion of the first-mover to detect any potential difference. This may signal a change in the follower’s strategy.If the timing of entry of the first-mover can lead to the presence of competitive advantage, it is worthwhile observing whether the timing of expansion can be a source of competitive advantage as well. If the timing of entry and expansion can bring competitive advantage, this creates a much more dynamic evolutionary path with the opening of several strategic windows of opportunities. If a digital platform can attract a second side, say the merchants first, it can gain competitive advantage over the other competing platforms. The pioneer may miss the right timing for expansion and thus lose its first-mover competitive advantage to late entrants who spot the window of opportunity first. At the same time, even if the first-mover expands within the optimal time, the late entrant may be able to leverage its large user base or add an innovative feature, which will give the follower a considerable advantage. Thus, previously gained first-mover advantage upon entry in a new market can be neutralized during the time of expansion, if contenders plan and execute their strategy well. This assumption indicates about the vital importance of the design of expansion.Digital platforms are characterized by their evolvability, the ability to evolve over time by adding new features and sides to their initial value proposition. Thus, digital platforms rely on a dynamic growth. If executed right, it can lead to significant lock-in effects for both consumers and merchants.To be successful, a digital payment platform should enter a market as one-sided and then be transformed into two-sided and multi-sided (Staykova and Damsgaard 2014). By first trying to establish a platform with a strong user base consisting of only one distinct group which can switch roles easily, the platform providers do not have to bring two distinctive groups of users on board simultaneously – the consumers and merchants. One-sided platforms, however, are characterized by low lock-in effects and tuse low switching costs. After successfully establishing same-side network effects, the platform can expand by attracting the revenue side and adding more functionality to its initial value proposition. Thus, the size of the installed base and the presence of strong same-side network effects are used to attract a second distinctive group, the merchants. The success of a new platform is dependent on the indirect network effects that occur between the groups of consumers and merchants (Zhu and Iansiti 2012). Thus, we argue that the strength of the indirect network effects is positively correlated with the strength of the same-side network effects that a digital payment platform initially exhibits.By identifying not only the timing of the follower’s response to the expansion of the first-mover, but also the follower’s design of expansion, we seek to analyze whether there are any visible changes in the strategy of the follower. A follower can either imitate the design of expansion undertaken by the first-mover, or respond by adopting a completely new design of expansion. We believe that the design of the response of the follower will help us measure the ability of the follower to compete with the first-mover. Imitative design of expansion will signal for weak ability to compete. On the other hand, innovative design of expansion will help the follower achieve strategic differentiation from the first-mover and increase its competitive power. (See Fig. 2.)

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
